Mr. Backus's DISCOURSE On Faith and its Influence, etc.

True Faith will produce good Works. A DISCOURSE, Wherein are opened The Nature
of Faith, and its powerful Influence on the Heart and Life; together with the
contrary Nature and Effects of Unbelief: And Answers to various Objections.

To which are Perfixed A brief View of the present State of the Protestant
World, with some Remarks on the Writings of Mr. Sandeman.

By ISAAC BACKUS. Minister of the Gospel in Middleborough.

Purifying their Hearts by Faith,

Act. 15.9. It was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you that you
should earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered unto the Saints,

Jude 3. BOSTON: Printed by D. KNEELAND, for PHILIP FREEMAN, opposite the
Cornfields in Union Street. 1767.

The Introduction, containing a brief View of the present State of the
Protestant World; with some particular Remarks on the Writings of Mr. Sandeman.
WHEN men see a new book, it is natural for them to enquire the occasion of its
appearance, especially now when the world is so full of them. The request of
friends is a common excuse, and may truly be alleged here; yet that is not the
chief motive. And what encouragement can the present face of things give to
such a work as this? For the language of booksellers in our country for some
years has born a near resemblance to that of one described in the London
Magazine for April 1763. Who refused to print a poem, because the subject was
too moral and religious; and said, "Had your poem been garnished with modish
chit chat,
How Fanny said this, and how Cloe did that;
Laced with baudry and smut, had you published a play,
I could sell off two thousand at least the first day.
For whatever you may fancy, you live in an age,
When the church do not pay half so well as the stage;
Dear Doctor, though skilled both in Hebrew and Greek,
You had much better preach for five Shillings a week
Than publish such verse -- for whatever is in it,
If serious, it never pays for paper and print".


Yet (strange as it may seem) a heart affecting view of this deep sleep which
we are fallen into, is the principle motive to this attempt, toward stiring
souls up to a living and practical regard to divine truth: The neglect whereof
has brought this lethergy upon us. And while it was coming on, various things
have diverted our minds from a sense of our danger. Sometimes our thoughts were
prying into futurities, to the neglect of present living unto God; and then
every thing that could be met with of a prophetical nature was published and
spread: Not only such as were serious calculations or conjectures from
scripture, but also romantic visions and dreams. At other times, witty or angry
controversy employed our minds in various shapes: yea, instead of living by
faith as we ought, many have contended (as hard as Job and his friends did)
about what faith is.

And I believe counsel has been darkened with words without knowledge, as much
in this controversy as in that. As long as Job viewed God in all that befell
him, he did not sin with his lips; but when he turned to dispute with his
friends, each party misapplied excellent truths, and retorted their mistaken
conclusions till their spirits were wearied out: yet when the Lord appeared he
made them all ashamed of their conduct; and doubtless his appearance now would
have the same effect upon some of our late disputants. The neglect of right
conduct in many who have made great professions of faith, has given occasion
for the builders on works to exert themselves afresh; and the writings of a
religious nature which have had the most current spread in this land for some
years past, were such as, under a pretense of promoting morality and good
order, have been levelled against many of the peculiar doctrines of
christianity; yea some of them even against the true deity of its great author.

In the mean time we have one Mr. Robert Sandeman, who came from Scotland in
autumn 1764. and after traveling into various parts of the country he gathered
a church at Portsmouth; but that was scattered last fall, and he has a small
society now in Boston.
who makes a show of appearing for those great doctrines, and to stir people up
to look into them, that yet has artfully mixed such a potion, as tends to
settle men in a dead sleep. And since his writings have been a means of
hardening many in iniquity, and of entangling or perplexing some serious minds,
I shall attempt to point out some pernicious principles, which he has
interspersed among many choice truths.

He has set down a charming description, of the Apostle's manner of preaching
in these terms, viz. As they exhibit no allurements to the passions of men; so
neither do they enter into any parley of capitulation with his presumptuous
reasonings; but storming and demolishing these, they press forward to his
conscience, charge him before God, and converse with him there. They clear up,
and present in a striking view before him, the half defaced reasons of duty,
naturally imprinted in his heart, and show at once, how unsuitable to them his
thoughts and actions have been. They unshakle his conscience, and make it speak
out, and, with the highest demonstration, enforce every thing it speaks. And
while they shut up all his imagined sources of light and hope, they furnish him
with a supernatural reason of hope stamped with the divine character. Letters
on Thereon and Aspacio 3 Editon Vol I. page 226.


Such fine passages as this, will induce some to take down all that such a
writer says, almost wishout examination. But if we observe the divine caution,
Take heed what you hear, we may soon find things of another nature; for the
Apostles are dead, and this writer has raised a stately monument for them, and
inscribed thereon, PAUL'S GOSPEL. And now he will not allow any man to call
himself Christ's ambassador, and to beseech souls in Christ's stead to be
reconciled to God: 2. Cor. 5.20.
and for no better reason that I can find than this, viz. that many have abused
that character since the Apostle's days. See Letters Vol. I. page 45. etc.
Therefore now when one minister says to his hearers, Let me tell you, the Lord
has sent me at this time to proclaim liberty to the captives that are in this
sad, bitter, and (to their thinking) desperate condition; liberty God has
given thee, if thou will come freely; nothing in the world shall hinder thee.
This author says that in this passage, "His lofty self conceit may be seen".
And when another minister expostulates with his hearers thus, Can none of my
exhortations, none of my friendly entreaties prevail with you to rouse up, and
look into your own hearts, and examine your state and condition etc. This man
cries observe with what dignity this gentleman struts in his pulpit. Letters
Vol. 2. page 203, 204, 208.
And he concludes his book with this advice to his readers, viz. After you have
heard the orthodox so plainly affirming, that justification is an act of God's
free grace, -- suffer them not to put the change upon you. Whenever they begin
to talk to you of any act you are to exert in order to acceptance, and call it
a justifying act, which you are to exert by the help of God's grace, be you
ready to reply, Avaunt; none of your tricks! If you would preach gospel to us,
you must tell us something fit to give us joy as we presently stand unconscious
of any distinguishing qualification.

Here reader, only look back to his description of the Apostle's way of
preaching the gospel, and judge for thyself, if he does not teach sinners to
gainsay just such preaching now as they delivered, when they pressed forward to
the sinners conscience, charged him before God, and conversed with him there;
and shut up all his imagined sources of light and hope while they called him to
believe in the Lord Jesus and ye shall he saved: yea he teaches them to resist
such preachers now as they would the devil, by crying, "Avaunt! none of your
tricks"!

It is readily granted that this writer has pointed out many dark strokes in
the writings of our most noted divines; and if he could clear off all their
mistakes, he should be as welcome thereto, as any crow could be to take all the
carrion out of our pleasant fields; but who would abandon their fruitful
fields, because some crow's meat was found there? Yet he bends all his wit this
way; for after naming Mr. Flavel, the Erskine's and many others, under the name
of popular preachers, he says, I would be far from refusing even to the popular
preachers themselves, what they so much grudge to others, the benefit of the
one instance of an hardened sinner finding mercy at last: For I know of no
sinners more hardened, none greater destroyers of mankind than they. Letters on
Thereon etc. Vol. 2 page 138.
And afterward, speaking of the writings of Messirs. Guthrie, Marshal, Boston
and Doddridge, he says, If any profane Person, who desires to be converted,
shall take pains to enter into the spirit of these books, it will be easy to
show, from the new testament, that he thereby becomes twofold more the child
of hell than he was before Ibid page 191. Epistolary Correspondence between S.
P. and R. S. page 20.
And he tells Mr. P. that he was "particularly fond" of these two passages; Not
(says he) that these passages contain any thing but what is aimed at in every
page. Thus we happen to have his own account of what he aimed at through all his
writings, even against such as he allows do plainly enough set before "us many
articles of the apostolic doctrine". Yea who assert almost all the articles
belonging to the sacred truth. Letters Vol. I. page 271 and Vol. 2. page 246.
Vol. 2 page 194.
Now compare this with what he says of others: Many, says he, trusting in
themselves, that they are more eminently godly than others, look down with a
solemn pride on the rest of mankind. -- Many have their pride not a little
gratified, by complaining of the defections of the church whereof they are
members. Yet there is scarce one protestant author that he names without
complaining of his defections; and where he could find nothing to complain of,
he conceals their names; for he says, I have as I found occasion, freely
adopted the observations, and even the words of the friends of the doctrine
contained in these sheets, without seeing any necessity of quoting them or
mentioning their names. But why not their names on one side as well as the
other? Why he says There was no attacking the popular doctrine to any purpose,
without making an honest essay toward profaning the divinity of those
demigods Letters Vol. 2 page 245, 246.


Now my dear friends, behold! this man is so humble that he exclaims aloud
against every bodies pride but his own! and he is so honest that he exerts all
his wit to expose the nakedness of protestant fathers; but adopts their good
observations, while he conceals their names that they may pass for his own!

Yet he would not have us think that he is moved to this conduct by the
prejudices of education; because he tells us he was trained up from his infancy
under such teaching, and long sought to form his heart thereby: But, says he I
am far from thinking I say any thing extravagant, or in the least injurious to
my conscience, when I affirm, that I might have been as profitably employed,
and even with as much christian piety, in attending the levee of the lady of
Loretto. Vol. 1 page 121.

Here observe, Loretto is a city in Italy, where Roman Catholics say they have
the holy house that the virgin Mary was born in, which they pretend was carried
through the air from Gallilee by angels: -- therefore many thousands yearly
resort there, to pay their devotions to the Ladies image, with the infant on
her arm. Universal Gazeteer at the word Lorotto.
So that he had as good have said, There is are profitable means to promote
christian piety in attending the worship of the virgin Mary, in the depths of
popery, as there are under such teachers as Mr. Boston, the Erskins's etc.

Let this be kept in mind, and we will turn and enquire what more profitable
means are to be had under his teaching. If we ask how a soul comes to believe
in Christ, his reply is that Faith comes not by human endeavors, or the use of
any means, even under the greatest advantages that men can enjoy. But says he,
The conveyance of the salutary truth to them for their relief, as much prevents
every motion of their will, -- as did the divine gracious purpose before the
world was. Letters Vol. 2 page 67.136.
Now what can have a more natural tendency to guard against a sense of the
guilt of unbelief, than this has? to illustrate his meaning he says, Let us
learn from the words of Jesus, how infants at the beginning of Life, and how
condemned fellons at the end of it, enter into the kingdom of God. Thence we
will see how little account the deity makes of all the mighty bustle of our
thoughts through all the busy scene of life. Ibid page 40.


In order to establish his notion of these two cases, he puts a false
construction upon others sentiments concerning them. As to the first, he speaks
of some dissenters, and afterward of Dr. Gill by name, whom he represents as
holding that adult persons are entitled to baptism, and so to the kingdom of
Heaven on account of something which they can do more than infants toward
obtaining a part therein. Letters Vol. 2 page 41 205.
Whereas that controversy is not concerning what any can do toward obtaining,
but it is about manifesting their interest in the kingdom. We have no account
who the parents of them children were which were brought to Jesus, Mat. 19.13,
14. Neither does he say all such, but of such is the kingdom of Heaven. Mr. S.
holds that Epistolory Corespond. page 30.
justification comes to a parent, and his house at the same time; and says, The
parent then believing, according to what is spoken, is justified together with
his house. If this were true, it would prove that parents can do a great deal
for others, if not for themselves. The text he refers to for the support of
this notion, asserts fully that the word was spoken to all that were in the
jailor's house, and that all rejoiced believing in God, as it does that all
were baptized, Act. 16.31 -- 34. None speaks more plainy against national
churches than this author pretends to do; yet how vain are all such pretenses,
while he holds things thus? For all know that families are the foundation of
nations: the old national church all sprang from one eminent believer.

Upon the other case viz. the thief on the cross, he takes some passages from
Messirs. Flavel, Boston, and Willison; wherein they warn souls against
neglecting the great salvation because of that instance of one who found mercy
at the last: and because they say, that was an extraordinary time, such as will
not happen again, and that the thief never had an offer of grace before. This
author, catching at such expressions, metamorphoseth their discourse, till he
would make their meaning to be That the pardoned sinner had extraordinary
merit, namely, of the negative kind, yea, that he had within him a very lively
spark of goodness; and strains it even to this, that, extraordinary mercy was,
upon an extraordinary occasion, shown to extraordinary worth. Vol. 2 p 46, 47.
And having changed their meaning in such a wretched manner, he then compares
them to Proteus, who, the poets said would change his shape at his pleasure.
And then brings in some of the most false sentiments he could find on that
subject; and so spends eighteen pages, and all to try to make out his position,
That the deity makes little account of our thoughts through all the busy scene of
life.

Yet Jehovah calls the heavens and earth to give ear to what he has spoken,
because his people does not CONSIDER Isai. 1.2, 3. The reason this man gives
why these divines cannot mean right, is that it can never do to say, a person
delays believing a testimony now, in hopes of finding it to be true hereafter:
and so ridicules the notion of men's delaying their faith. But God's word
informs us that when Felix heard Paul concerning the faith in Christ; so that
truth made him tremble, and his immediate answer was, go thy way for this time.
And as we are expressly told that faith comes by hearing; so the danger of
neglecting it, is often warned against in these terms, To day if ye will hear
his voice hardened not your hearts. And though he treats them with contempt for
holding forth that the thief had not outstood such calls as presumptuous
sinners now do! yet Paul says, I obtained mercy because I sinned IGNORANTLY, in
unbelief. 1 Timothy 1.13.

At the same time this writer would be so far, from being accounted an enemy to
good works, that he gives it as Paul's mind, intimated to true Christians, that
they could not warrantably be assured of their happy state by any exercise or
mind, without the self denied works of obedience. And he takes pains to
distinguish between the assurance of faith, and the assurance of hope, and
refers the first to the truth believed, the other to our interest therein. And
he says, No man can be charged with the sin of disbelieving the gospel for
doubting if he be a good Christian: his chief hazard lies on the other side. Of
the assurance of faith he says, They obtain it without their using any
endeavors in search of it: -- whereas the assurance of hope is enjoyed only by
those who give all diligence to obtain it. Letters Vol. 2 page 140, 141.
Now compare this with his essay to detect others artifice, in confounding
grace and works together, where he says, Must we not say, that all the good
works which shall be recompensed at the resurruction of the just, are produced
by the influence of the divine Spirit dwelling in the hearts of those who
believe? yet such is the connection betwixt every good work and its reward,
that according to scripture, the justice of God, not to say his grace, is
concerned to make it good. Ibid page 96.


Were this true then, he that gives all diligence to perform the self denied
works of obedience, and so obtains the assurance of hope; God's justice, not to
say his grace, would be concerned to reward him for those good works at the
resurrection of the just. Whereas according to the gospel, justice is as much
concerned to forgive the penitent, and to cleanse him from all unrighteousness,
as to reward his good works: It Is all through grace in Christ Jesus, Romans 5.17. 1
John 1.9. Rev. 8.3, 4.

Though this author abounds with criticism, yet this, and other scriptural
distinctions he labors to explode. As, 1. The distinction between doctrinal
and experimental knowledge; between right notions of truth in the head, and
knowing them in the heart. When Mr. P. had professed a full concurrence with
his sentiments concerning faith, and then made an attempt to explain his
difinition of it, as a bare belief of the bare report of the gospel, so as to
make it mean more than what is commonly called speculative, notional, or dead
faith: Mr. S. replys, that "any attempt to render my language on this head less
offensive, is enough to alarm me and awaken "suspicion". Epist. Correspond.
page 62* And though Mr. P. expressed his thankfulness for the help he had
received from our author's writings to clear his views, and relieve his mind;
yet because he adds his persuasion that he had, truly known and preached,
trusted and loved the Lord Jesus Christ for many years, and therefore could not
join in his severity against other preachers and writers; Mr. S. tries hard to
detect Mr. P. of hypocrisy, and concludes that there must be some defect or
mistake in his faith, though he could not pretend to point out wherein it lay, p.
61. But if this distinction was excluded, how would it strengthen the deists
when they hear Jesus declare to his disciples that they knew, what they
asserted that they did not know; Joh. 14 4 -- 9. The glory of God in the face
of Christ had shined into their heart, though they had not as yet, distinct
notions thereof in their heads. And though they truly believed in him as the way
to the Father, yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again from
the dead, John 20.9. But after he arose, he opened their understandings, so
that they could distinctly and boldly preach the forgiveness of sins, to Jews
who are gathered from among all nations Luke 24.45. -- 47. Act. 2. Yet still it
was a long time before they had so much head knowledge as to preach this gospel
freely to the gentiles. All which shows that distinct notions in the head, and
a knowing the truth in the heart are quite different things.

2 Mr. S. makes no just distinction between a slavish and a child like fear,
but labors to confound them together. He declares that no fixed judgment can
be formed of any man's state, but a patient continuance in well doing to the
end. No mortal, says he, can attain any such assurance of hope but that he
still finds himself occasionally in hazard of losing it. page 85. And he
asserts that, one can scarce do a greater hurt to professors, than by indulging
them in the thought that they are at bottom possessed of some inherent good
principle. A teacher, says he, runs no risk of exceeding in urging the motives
to fear. page 92. But Paul says, ye have not received the spirit of bondage
again to fear: And Zacharias blessed God that Christ would deliver us from our
enemies, so that we might serve him WITHOUT FEAR, in holiness and righteousness
before him, all the days of our life, Romans 8.15. Luk 1.74.75.

Now I defy him or any other man to reconcile these matters, without carefully
distinguishing between that bondage through fear of death which souls are subject
to before Christ delivers them; and the reverence and godly fear, whereby
gracious persons serve God. Heb. 2.15 and 12.28. I come to his dislike of a
third distinction, which he delivers thus. Hence we may see how unfit the
common addresses at the end of Sermons to believers, as distinguished from
careless and unconcerned, are to promote the business of true edification. page
84. Who can refrain from comparing these things with what God says to false
prophets? viz. With lies have ye made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I
have not made sad; and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not
return from his wicked way, Ezekiel. 13.22. Yea he says, they do it by their lies,
and by their LIGHTNESS. Jer. 23.14, 32. This may turn us to look at the line of
practice which this man is laboring to promote; as it is pointed to in various
parts of his Letters; but is more clearly described in a pamphlet printed last
year, called. A plain and full account of the christian practices observed by
the church in St. Martin's-le-grand, London, and other churches in fellowship
with them. In the edition of it at Boston, the churches from him are called
"SANDEMANIAN". The professed design of it, is chiefly to give a full account of
those practices wherein they differ from others. page 4. Note, the quotations
are from the London edition.
And the first article of such difference which they name is their having the
Lord's Supper every Sabbath, for which they cite Act. 20 7. And because the
disciples met with that design on that day, when Paul was there; they would
have it, that these churches brake bread every first day, p. 6. Another
practice they express thus. In the interval between the morning and afternoon
service, we have our love feasts; of which every one partakes; by dining at the
houses of such of the brethren who live sufficiently near, -- that the poor may
have a comfortable meal at the expense of the more wealthy. -- We cannot allow
any member to be absent from the feast, either through indifference or mere
inconvenience, page 4.8. To prove this they quote three texts, viz 1 Cor.
11.20.21. 2 Pet. 2 13 Jude 12. Wherein we may observe, that Paul calls the
Corinthians feasts, their own supper, in distinction from the Lord's Supper;
and Jude calls them your feasts. Thus three Apostles reproved the disorders
which attended those feasts; and we have no account that one apostle ever
practiced them. It Is most likely that they were taken up in imitation of the old
Jewish feasts, without any divine warrant at all.

The next particular of their practice is; at their feast, and at the admission
of members, and at other opportunities they salute each other with a kiss of
charity page 9 10. And they say, we account all objections against it, and all
attempts to set it aside, by substituting any other form of salutation in its
room, to proceed from a disregard to the authority of the new testament.
However I would ask, is there no difference between customs of expressing our
respects to each other, and ordinances of worship toward God? And is it as
criminal to alter the mode of expressing our love to one another, as to change
his ordinances? The deists make a handle of what Paul speaks of another custom,
against all revelation: one of them once said to me, Paul was mistaken in some
things, for he says, Does not nature it self teach you, that if a man have long
hair, it is a shame unto him; he mistook nature for custom. But I think Mr.
Edward's remark is a good reply to this; which is that it is custom which
establishes any outward sign, as a token of inward sentiment; therefore when it
had established the wearing of long hair, as the sign of a female, nature it
self taught that it was a shame for a man to appear in the known garb of a
woman. So here, those precepts which they refer to, undoubtedly require to
salute the saints with sincere tokens of love: But I am not convinced that they
require us to salute with a kiss, as a token of spiritual love, among people
who scarce ever knew it used, to manifest any other than natural or carnal love

Washing of feet, was a needful kindness in old times, to travelers, because
their manner or dress left their feet exposed to the dust; but it seems this
people are conscious that custom has made some alteration in these things now!
for they hold that John 13.14. makes it our duty to wash a brothers feet, only
when it can be an act of kindness to do so, p 13. And doubtless that example of
our Lord, ought to make us all ready to do the lowest act of kindness to each
other: but to wash feet only as a religious ceremony; this we are told has long
been annually practiced by the Pope, and by several Kings of Europe.

This people often profess their strict regard to scripture; yet they declare
that they find neither express precept nor precedent therein, for family
prayer, while they say, it seems necessary for maintaining the fear of God in a
family. page 14. But what fear of God would they maintain, without precept or
precedent from him? I believe there is precept, and precedent too in the word
for family prayer; but as my views on that subject were published last year, I
shall not repeat them here.
However their design immediately appears, by their proceeding to judge those
who insist upon the practice of family prayer, and the first day sabbath, but
disregard the feasts of charity, the holy kiss, etc as persons, influenced to
their religious practices, not by the fear of God, the authority of Christ, or
the spirit of truth page 15. Thus they judge others: and as to their own
members, they say, In every church transaction* whether it be receiving,
censuring, or expelling members, choosing officers, or the like; we esteem
unanimity to be absolutely necessary: Nothing is decided by the vote of the
majority -- In some cases indeed there are dissenting voices: The reasons of
the descent are thereupon proposed and considered; if they are scriptural, the
whole church has cause to change its opinion; if not, and the person persists
in his opposition to the word of God, the church is bound to reject him. page
24.25. What monstrous things are here!

1 Here is a self contradiction; for the first part of the paragraph assers
that nothing is decided by the vote of a majority, while the last part declares
that the church rejects a person that dissents; i. e. the major rejects the
minor.

2 Here is cruel tyranny, to oblige every member, to believe as the church
believes in every act, on pain of being rejected.

3 Here is an awful assuming of the prerogative of the most high; for the
churches opinion which the dissenting person persisting in opposition to, is,
without reserve, called "the word of God". This is the church which does not
pretend to have any express direction for the precise day, in which their
feasts should be observed page 8 who yet have chosen the Lord's Day for it, and
cannot allow indifference or mere inconvenience to keep one member therefrom.
And they have gone so far toward forbiding to marry, as possitively to deprive
a minister of his office, if he should marry a second wife. page 18 yea, this
is the church that makes void the divine rule concerning forgiveness, so far as
absolutely to refuse to receive a person again, if he should incur their
censure after they had restored him twice. And yet they call this a solemn
check put upon all disobedience to the gospel of Christ: yea, and to strike the
rejected man's conscience to bring him to repentance! page 23 O strange! bring
him to repentance, but never receive him again!

Yet after all their solemn checks, they tacitly brand all with the odious name
of Pharisees, who are against encouraging all diversions public or private
which are not "connected with circumstances really sinful". page 15, 16.
compare this with Eccles. 7. 2 -- 4. Phil 4.5. 1 These. 5.8 and many other
Scriptures.

Methinks I hear some say, We are tired of hearing such things, and why do you
spend so much labor against so mean a person, who is pleased with being taken
notice of, though it be in a way of opposition? I grant these remarks to be true;
and the meanest thing I can see in him, is the deceitful methods which he has
taken to promote his designs; yet as I was convinced that hereby he has imposed
upon many, I thought it duty to point out some of those deceptions, and so to
warn my fellow men of their danger; otherwise I should think this labor very
unbecoming.

He and his followers make great professions of appearing for despised truth.
The doctrine of the cross, and Paul's Gospel; and have accordingly raised their
standards in the capitals, both of old and New England: And instead of Paul's
motto, in fastings often they have set up the baits of feastings often, and a
free encouragement of both public and private diversions; as if inclination
did not lead people fast enough that way, without the sanction of religion to
put them forward therein. And instead of keeping under the body, their scheme
would keep many from divine worship, every Lord's day, to provide for feasting
the body. And though they say, We are utterly against aiming to promote the cause
we contend for, either by creeping into private houses, or by causing our voice
to be heard in the streets. page 29. yet they do it by that art,

"Whose softest notes outstrip loud thunders sound, And spread their accents
through the world's vast round" Stennet's Aenegma on writing.
And as creeping, is the opposite of going upright; therefore all who walk not
uprightly according to the truth of the gospel! let it be to get into private
or public houses, are justly said to creep in.

Paul's weapons were used for casting down imaginations and every high thing
that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. But this pretender to
Paul's gospel encourages sinners to hope that either they were justified in
infancy, or else may be at the close of life; and teaches them that the deity
makes little account of our thoughts through all the busy scenes of life: and
instead of pulling down satan's strong holds, he has used his art to fortify
them, so that now, if a preacher makes a close address to their thought and
conscience, and calls them in Christ's name to surrender into his hands; to
believe on him etc. the imagination of a dead body is brought up, and the
preacher is ridiculed as if he was absurdly talking to a senseless corpse; though
probably the same image, was in the sinners thoughts in the other part of the
discourse, to guard against any conviction that he was spiritually dead,
because he is naturally alive. Yet after this man has exerted all his wits to
cast contempt upon such address, as if the preacher certainly meant that there
was some good principle in the sinner's will; he is so inconsistent, that he
labors much to move professors to, what he calls, the self denied works of
obedience, without allowing them to think that they are possessed of any
inherent good principle at all. He says, A person by being brought to the
knowledge of the truth, is not thereby led to think himself possessed of some
good principle, by which he stands more nearly related to God than he was, or
than other men. His comfort does not lie in thinking on any change he has
undergone, but he is comforted in thinking on what is without him, on what is
absent from him, even on what is in Heaven. So Balaam said, I shall see him but
not now: I shall behold him, but not nigh: whereas Paul says, Jesus Christ is
IN you, except you be reprobates. Again, this writer says, We must not consider
the person advancing to the assurance of hope as engaged in certain round of
duties, so as his comfort should arise from a consciousness of his performing
or desiring to perform them from right motives.

Thus the christian profession would become a pharisaical scheme. We must
rather consider him, as, at the risk of all other evils, seeking of shelter
from the greatest in the society of Christ and his disciples. Epistolary
correspond. p 82, 83., and 86.
What contradiction is here to Romans 8.15. Gal. 4.6. 2 Cor. 1.12. and great
numbers of other places? And what does all Mr. S's religion come to at last,
more than speculative notions about the truth, and some outward doings, without
thinking he is possessed of any good principle by which he stands more nearly
related to God than other men; and without being conscious of having
experienced any inward change, so as to act from right motives, or desiring so
to do! Yet when he goes on in feasting, laughter, and diversions, he still
hopes to have shelter from the greatest of evils, in the society of Christ and
his disciples. Now if we remember Loretto, and how he has treated protestant
writers in general, and observe that he declares our writers, upon the steps of
the spirits work in conviction and conversion, to be much more hurtful to
mankind, than writers of romances; and plainly signifies that the pulpit at
present does more hurt than the stage: And he says, When we hear one describing
to us how he first obtained peace with God, if we find him taking pains to
inform us of the influences of Grace he felt in his heart, and the operations
of the Spirit leading him on to conversion, we may safely say, This is a spirit
that speaks of it self; this is not the true grace of God. Letters on Thereon
etc. Vol. 2 page 61.103. 243. I am far from thinking that our writers on these
subjects are free from errors: The following discourse will show the contrary;
yet to treat Mr. Hervey, and many other excellent authors as he has done, is
monstrous; though his treatment of the work of God's Spirit is much more
abominable.
And if we reflect again that his plan of church government, disallows the
distinction between circumstantial, and essential points, which is so general
with protestants, and rejects every member that dare be so bold as to judge
otherwise in any case, than the church does; and yet that this very church
reserves liberty to her self to correct mistakes, and alter her ways as other
matters may occassionally be presented. page 24.; Lest thou should ponder
the path of life, her ways are moveable, that thou can not know them. Prove. 5
6. Epist. Correspond. page 15.
These and other things would be apt to make us think of an old story which
they used to tell, of persons taking sanctuary in the bosom of the church,
whose head is called Christ's, vicar on earth.

And though this man and his followers appears contemptible to many, and he
glories in it, and would not have any think there is any danger of their making
head as a faction or party of this world. yet a due consideration in the light
of truth might give us another view of our state. For though few have received
his model of church affairs; yet many are pleased with his crafty cants upon
our most awakening preachers and writers; and instead of mortifying the deeds
of the body, they are strongly attached to the pleasures of sense. And if we
realize how much professors of religion value themselves, upon their nice
distinctions and refined speculations, with some polite forms; while they give
sad proofs of unacquaintedness with heart exercise, and a living conformity to
God: and observe how many inventions they are seeking out to ease their minds,
in neglect, if not contempt, of this good old way; these, and many other things
might justly alarm us all. For let men please themselves never so much with
their refined sentiments, and a bare belief of the truth; yet he who cannot
lie, says, Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved, God shall send them strong delusions, that they may believe a lie; that
they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. 2 These. 2.10 -- 12. What did the counsel of Balaam do, after
he had spoken many bright truths? Feasting under the name of religion, and
carnal embrace, involved Israel in such iniquity, as Phinehas and other princes
said, they were not cleansed from, even when settled in Canaan, although there
was a plague which swept off twenty four thousand of them, Number. 25.9. and
31.16. Joshua. 22.17. See also Rev. 2.14.

The apostle Paul not only says, It is high time to awake out of sleep, but he
also warns us against this, and other snares which tend to lull us to sleep
again; for we are told that the word Comus, which is translated rioting, in
Romans 13.13. is with the heathen the God of feasts: Vide Dr. Gill on the place,
and Mr. Edwards's life and remains published 1765.
And surely that God who must have feasting and kissing, upon every day that is
set a part for his worship, is more properly called Comus than Christ; or Baal
signifies Lord.
Lord Peor than Lord Jesus. I doubt not but many are now drawn into these ways
in their simplicity, as those were who followed Absalom, when he pretended he
was going to pay his vow unto the Lord, 2 Samuel 15.7, 11. Who then can hold his
peace under such apprehensions? No man's station is so low but if he discovered
a lurking enemy, or kindling fire ready to spread slaughter and desolation all
around, ought to alarm others of their danger: He, who would excuse him from
guilt, if he neglected so to do? And though false alarms ought not to be made,
yet a mistake in that would be more easily excused, than a neglect to give
notice of real danger. Therefore none may justly blame so weak an attempt as
this is, if I have truly pointed out any snares and dangers which at present
attend us, that my brethren and fellow mortals were not sufficiently a ware of
before; for when the apostle Jude found it needful to write unto us, and exhort
us to contend earnestly for the faith; the reason he gives therefore is, that
there are certain men crept in unawares, who under a pretense of grace, with
great swelling words, use all their art to cover and gratify the fire of lusts,
which exposes to the just vengeance of eternal fire: And he plainly directs to
one method of help, that is now craftily guarded against, namely close and
moving addresses to men's souls, for their deliverance from ruin. After
exhorting saints to a close walk with God, he says, And of some have
compassion, making a difference: and others save with fear, pulling them out of
the fire; having even the garment spotted by the flesh. He had already spoken
of dreamers, and here he has a plain allusion to persons in a deep sleep, when,
though they may have fine dreams and notions in their heads, yet the flames are
just ready to consume them. Who can observe this emblem and not renounce and
detest that cold, and general way of speaking upon the great concerns of
eternity, that is so much in vogue at this day! John was burning as well as a
shining light.

Some sense of the importance of these things has carried me beyond my first
design; but now I leave the foregoing and following remarks both upon our
misery and the gospel remedy, to the readers judgment, desiring each one to be
as noble as the Bereans were, and search the scriptures daily, whether these
things are so If any thing is found to disagree therewith, let it be rejected
in welcome: but it any scorn to regard the truth, he alone must bear it. On the
other hand, if any shall receive the least benefit hereby, it is hoped they will
neither neglect to give all the glory to God, nor to pray for their unworthy
servant in the gospel.

ISAAC BACKUS.
Middleborough, May 4th 1767.
Faith wrought with his Works.
JAMES II. 22. See thou how Faith wrought with his Works, and by works was
Faith made perfect.


SOME have thought that there was a difference in sentiment between Paul and
James, because one insists so much upon justification by faith without works;
and the other asserts that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only.
But if the scope and occasion of their writings be duly attended to, this
seeming contradiction will vanish. Paul labored chiefly upon laying the
foundation of christianity, where Christ had not been named; and scarce any
thing is more natural than for souls when awakned to think, that as by breaking
the law they exposed themselves to divine wrath; so that the way to appease
that wrath, and obtain God's favor is to keep the law: therefore he engages
with all his might against all such notions, and fully proves that nothing but
Christ's righteousness can justify us before God: while James wrote principally
to professors, to stir them up, and exhort them to live agreeable to their
profession, in the several places where they were scattered abroad; and to
expose the absurdity of pretending to have faith when it did not produce
obedience. He puts the question, What does it profit my brethren, though a man
say he has faith, and have not works? can faith save him? That is, can that be
saving faith which does not bring forth good fruit; and what profit is there in
a man's saying he has it, when we have only his bare word to prove it? And he
proceeds to make this demand, -- Show me thy faith without thy works, and I
will show thee my faith by my works: From whence it appears that the
justification which he is there upon, is what is evidential, a showing and
evidencing to others that we have justifying faith And to illustrate the matter
he brings in the example of the father of the faithful, saying, was not Abrabam
our father justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his son upon the
altar? Abraham believed God and it was accounted to him for righteousness, long
before that time; but now the evidence thereof, and of his true regard to God's
authority, shined forth with peculiar lusture, which I take to be the import of
these expressions, Now I know that thou fear God. Genesis 22.12. With great
propriety therefore, is this example introduced to detect a dead faith, and to
show the difference between that and a living one.

The apostle would have us observe it well: See thou how faith wrought with
his works? how powerfully it governed his heart and conduct, in such a trying
affair. Yet let us remember, he does not say, "see how his works produced his
faith": No, he sets faith as the leading grace, and tells us in the next verse,
that the scripture was fulfilled which says, Abraham believed God, and it was
imputed to him for righteousness. James held to justification by imputed
righteousness, as much as Paul: and on the other hand, Paul held to faith which
works by love, and makes souls careful to maintain good works Gal. 5.6. Tit
3.8.
as much as James; they were sweetly agreed.

What I shall further attempt from this text, as divine assistance may be
granted, is, I. To open the nature of Faith. II. Show its powerful influence on
the heart and life. III. How by works it is made perfect.


I. I shall endeavor to open the nature of this faith upon which there have
been great controversies in our day. And I shall endeavor to keep close to the
scripture account of it, which shows plainly,

1. That Christ is the author as well as finisher of our faith: and that it is
wrought in the soul by the exceeding greatness of God's power. Heb. 12.2. Ephesians.
1.19.

2. That the word is the means of it; Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the word of God. Romans 10. 17

3. That the heart of man is the subject of this grace: With the heart man
believes, Romans 10.10. yea with all the heart, Acts 8.37. Thus the author,
means and seat of this principle, are plainly pointed out: but still it is
inquired what is the nature of faith? To this the answer is ready,

4. It is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.
Heb. 11.1. The things hoped for, are all the blessings which are promised in
the gospel; grace and glory, and every good thing that God's people need. Faith
takes his word for all, and by it they appear substantial realities to the
soul. The things not seen, comprehend all the affairs of the invisible and
eternal world, which are revealed in the word; such as the being and perfection
of God; his creating all things out of nothing, and upholding all things by the
word of his power; his creating man in his own image, and giving to him a law
as the rule, and condition of his life; man's breaking that law, whereby death
and misery are brought upon the world! the doctrine of the trinity; the son of
God's undertaking for us, and his taking upon him our nature, wherein he obeyed
and suffered in our stead, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to
God; the holy Ghost's coming to apply these great blessings; the resurrection,
general judgment, and the future state of happiness to the righteous, and
misery to the wicked. These and all other matters of divine revelation, faith
is the evidence of.

Evidence is to discover what is otherwise unknown, and to decide
controversies. Now the world by wisdom knew not God; and they are full of
controversies about divine things. But faith takes the divine evidence as that
which is sufficient to end all disputes. The believer settles the matter there,
if God has said it, that is enough; for if we receive the witness of men, the
witness of God is greater. Human testimony about distant things, though it should
come from persons of good credit, yet the things are distant and invisible to
us, and we know men may be mistaken: but the Lord presents the great things
which concern our peace in present view, to the believing soul. His word is
compared to glass, which opens as it were a window into the eternal world, so
that when the spirit takes the veil from our hearts, we all with open face,
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image,
2 Cor. 3. 16 -- 18.

These plain scriptures may teach us the evil of that opinion 'that in the
first act of faith we believe, that which was not true before'. The objects
were the same before, though we did not see them 'till then. And there is as
little truth in asserting on the other hand, that we have no knowledge of our
interest in those blessings, in faith, but only by its effects afterward.
Indeed the glory of divine objects engages our first attention; yet as the
first entrance of the word gives light, Psalm. 119.130.
it gives the soul at the same instant, some knowledge and enjoyment of the
benefits of the glorious Sun! Psalm. 84.11. Mal. 4.2.
and which is greatly consumed by after effects. The conveyance of the truth to
them for their relief, as much prevents every motion of their will, as did the
divine gracious purpose before the world was. For the guilt of unbelief lies in
this, that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather than
light: And their eyes have they closed, least they should see and be converted,
and healed. They are willingly ignorant of the evidence of the truth of God's
word, which shines in all his works. Joh. 3.19. Acts 28.27. 2 Pet. 3.5.
Now how can any soul possibly be turned herefrom, to behold the lamb of God
which takes away the Sin of the world, John 1.29.
without any motion of his will? Another mistake may likewise be detected here.
Some hold that the faith which unbelievers are condemned for the neglect of, is
a lower kind of faith, than that which is saving. But what is saving faith
beside this, viz a receiving with all the heart the witness and testimony that
God has given us, of eternal life in his Son? 1 John 5.9 -- 12. And he that
believes not God, has made him a liar. The evidence of this truth shines so
clearly as to leave all without excuse, who do not believe with all their
hearts; while every soul that is made willing by divine power, to receive his
testimony, and set to his seal that God is true, knows that this faith is not
of himself; it is the gift of God; John 3.33. Ephesians. 2.8.
who is worthy to be obeyed as well as trusted for ever. Which leads us,

II. To consider the powerful influence of faith on the heart and life. See
thou how says wrought with his works? how it moved him to ready obedience.
When the command came, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou
love, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt
offering upon one of the mountains which I shall tell thee of! Genesis 22.
Abraham knew it to be God's call, and that was enough for him; he never stands
to confer with flesh and blood, nor to say, I am in a justified state, and
therefore I shall be saved if I do not comply with so surprising and trying;a
command. No, though there never was a command which nature might form more
plausible pleas against than this; yet he makes no delay, but rises early in
the morning, prepares for the journey and goes three days travel to the
appointed place, for the heart rending work; and there, with unshaken
resolution he proceeds in his obedience, until a voice from heaven gave him a
release from sacrificing his son, and said, Now I know that thou fear God,
seeing thou have not witheld thy son, thine only son from me, Genesis 22. 1 -- 12.

Come precious souls, attend here and learn what that fear of God is, which is
so often enjoined and recommended in scripture: it is not that dread that moves
many to work like slaves for fear of punishment; but it is a noble regard to
God which flows from acquaintance with him, and faith in him, whereby by the
saint views him as worthy to be obeyed with all our powers, and that nothing is
too dear to be given up at his command. Such is the nature and influence of
true faith. There are three things in faith which powerfully excite to
obedience, and guard against all the snares of sin: The believing soul views
the precept to be true and excellent, therefore to be obeyed; the promise to be
sure and sufficient, therefore he shall be supported; and faith presents
eternal thing as near and real, therefore to be regarded without delay. And if
we carefully observe, we shall find that in these are the main springs of
obedience, and that the contrary, is the root of all mischief.

1. The soul by faith views and esteems all God's precepts concerning all
things to be sure, right, and excellent, therefore ever to be obeyed. Psalm. 93
5. and 119.128. The contrary of this was the main snare that drew our first
parents into disobedience. God had given them a law, and declared that in the
day they broke it, they should surely die: but the serpent represented that
command unreasonable, and said, ye shall not surely die if ye brake it; and to
him they hearkened, and rebelled against God. And though many of their children
deny, their being sinners by nature; yet they might be justly challenged to
produce one of them all, who does not naturally conceit, that the plain letter
of God's law is hard and severe, and that if they break it, yet the full
penalty will not take place upon them. Nay what less than this, is implied in
all their objections against the doctrines of absolute and certain salvation in
Jesus alone? Representing as though these doctrines would hinder obedience. All
such objections carry such language as this in them, namely, that men do not
view the divine law to be true and excellent, nor the lawgiver to be worthy of
all honor and regard; no, but since he has got the power in his hands, we must
make the best terms with him we can, lest he fall upon us and destroy us; though
if we were once certain that we were secure therefrom, we would take our case,
and live as we list. O astonishing! Is this the dignity of human nature. that
we hear so much of! We all know that what, we love, and have a great esteem of,
we pursue after and delight in, without being drove to it by terrors, or
punishments: yea, we will pursue after it though terrors and dangers should
appear against us, and still hope to escape the danger, and to enjoy the object
of our desires: Thus the covetous person pursues after, his beloved gains, the
ambitious man after his honors, and the luxurious man after his pleasure; and
notwithstanding the curses of the law are levelled directly against him; he
secretly hopes to escape the lash of them, which hope is supported by unbelief.
So Moses describes the root that bears gall and wormwood, as being one who
hears the words of the curse, yet blesses himself in his heart saying, I
shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart. Deuteronomy. 29.19.

Every soul which runs on in sin, is some way or other blinded about the truth
and verity of God's law; but the believer views his testimonies to be very
sure, and that holiness becomes his house for ever, which engages him to walk
in all the commandments, and ordinances of the Lord blameless; and he is
abundantly strengthened therein.

2 By viewing the promise to be sure and sufficient, and therefore he shall be
supported in all the work that God calls him to. This is one peculiar glory of
the gospel plan, that a full supply of help is provided and promised to enable
the saint to go through every duty, that the precept enjoins upon him. Is he
called to go through rough ways, then his shoes shall be iron and brass, and as
his day is his strength shall be. Is he assaulted with temptation? The Lord
says, my grace is sufficient for thee; yea, he says to all his children, I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee: so that they boldly say, the Lord is my
helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me. Heb 13.5, 6. A believing
view of these and other exceeding great and precious promises, gives the saint
a participation of such divine supplies as enables him to be steadfast and
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as he knows
that his labor is not in vain in the Lord. 2 Pet. 1.4. 1 Cor. 15.58. While
thousands and ten thousands, who have had some sight of the danger of a sinful
course, so as to bring them to resolve to lead a new life; yet have fainted in
the way, and by reason of difficulties without, and struggles within, have
given up the cause and turned again to their old ways, if not into worse
conduct than before. Alas! what multitudes of old, despised the pleasant land,
which God had promised to Israel, because they believed not his word: Psalm,
106.24.
and though they could not deny but it was a good land; yet they imagined that
strength of the enemies, and the height of their walls, were a sufficient bar
against their proceeding any further, and a good reason for their turning back
into the wilderness; where, by God's awful judgment their carcases fell. And we
have abundant evidence that the record of their fall, stands as a loud and
constant warning to us all, to give the more earnest heed to the things which
we have heard in the gospel, least any man fall after the same example of
unbelief Psalm. 95. and Heb. 2, 3. and 4 chapt.


Natural men pursue a separate interest of their own in all they do; therefore
they must support themselves and their cause: but all that are reconciled to
God, become one with him, in interest and end; hence they do not go a warfare,
against the world, flesh and devil, at their own charges; but have truth it
self engaged to supply all their needs, which strengthens them to come boldly
to the throne of grace, that they may obtain help in time of need Phil. 4.19.
Heb. 4.16.
This distinction is very conspicuous in the spies which Moses sent to view the
promised land; although the true, and the false spies both had a sight of the
same walls and enemies, yet how different is their language? The one says, We
are well able to overcome them; but the other said, We be not able: And the
cause of this difference in judgment is quite plain; The false spies formed
their conclusion by computing what proportion there was between their own
strength, and that of the enemy; while the true ones viewed the infinite
disproportion there was between Jehovah, by whose direction they acted, and on
whose promise they trusted, and all those tall worms which others were so much
frightened at; and this view made them plead with Israel not to rebel against
the Lord, neither fear the people of the land, for, say they, they are bread
for us; their defense is departed from them, and the Lord is with us: fear them
not. Number. 13.30, 31. and 14.9. But the congregation refused to hear, and
believe this noble testimony, and O, how dreadful were the consequences!

"Look back, my soul, with holy dread,
"And view those ancient rebels dead;
"Attend the offered grace to day,
"Nor loose the blessings by delay.
"Seize the kind promise while it waits,
"And march to Zion's heavenly gates;
"Believe, and take the promised rest;
"Obey, and be for ever blessed". Watts in the 95th Psalm

The truth we are upon shines with peculiar luster in the example of another
ancient patriarch. Jacob upon his return from Padan Aram with his family, heard
that his angry brother was coming to meet him, with four hundred men, which
filled him with great concern; and what can he do with his feeble company? why,
he makes his address to his heavenly friend, (as well as improves the best
means within his power for relief) and says, O God of my father Abraham, and
God of my father Isacc, the Lord which said unto me, return unto thy country,
and I will deal well with thee: I am not worthy of the least of all the
mercies, and truth, which thou have showed unto thy servant. -- Deliver me, I
pray thee, -- thou said, I will surely do thee good. Genesis 32.9 -- 12. O my
friends, here is an example for us all! and may we duly regard it. Here precept
and promise are sweetly united, which satan is ever trying to separate as he
did in his temptation to our Savior, when he brought the promise of being
borne up by angels: but left out the clause, in all thy ways, which respects
the ways that God has directed us to walk in. Thus he often tempts souls to
presume upon being upheld by divine promise, though in a way of disregard of
divine rule. But Jacob could appeal to what God had said, for the warrant of
his conduct, as well as for the support of his cause; yet he is far from
pleading any deserving of his own; he sees that he is not worthy of the least
mercy; at the same time he believes that God is true, and there he fixes his
claim. Thou said I will surely do thee good; and with humble boldness, he
would hold him to his word, and say, I will not let thee go, except thou bless
me. And the blessing he had with a witness; and a new name, which signifies
that, as a prince he prevailed with God. Come all you who say, that the belief
of mercies being sure to us, will make us careless in our conduct: dare you
still confront heaven? For so long as this and other such like sacred records
remain true, all such objectors will be found liars, and their speech nothing
worth. At the same time, this instance shows what a dead, vain thing, that
pretended faith is, which does not influence men's hearts, and govern their
behavior. See thou how Jacob's faith moved his soul to plead and wrestle all
night for promised blessings; and likewise diligently to use the best means he
could, in order to obtain the deliverance he wanted? These are the footsteps of
the flock, which we must go forth by, if we would find rest to our souls. A
further confirmation of our doctrine is,

3. That faith views eternal things as near and real; therefore to be regarded
without delay. What multitudes are there, where the gospel shines, who do not
pretend to deny the importance of religion, that still neglect the great
salvation? The chief cause of which, is that the objects of sense, and things
of time, appear to them as present realities; while that salvation is to them a
distant uncertainty: And therefore to part with present honors, riches or
pleasures, for things which they know not, they will not do, as long as they
can help it. Thus they are willingly blinded by the God of this world, least
the light of the gospel should shine unto them: but when God who commanded the
light to shine out of darkness, shines into the heart, * then all things appear
just the reverse; the glories of this world are seen to be uncertain, vexatious
vanities, and spiritual things to be present, and glorious realities. By faith
Moses refused all the glittering charms of Pharaoh's court, and chose to take
his lot with God's afflicted people; for he saw the pleasures of sin were but
for a short season; yea he esteemed reproach for Christ to be greater riches
than the treasures in Egypt; for he had respect unto the recompense of the
reward. Heb. 11.24-27,
Faith presents the great white throne in view, and gives the soul (as it
were,) to hear the awful and glorious sentence from the judges mouth, which
shall reward every man according to his works: and this moves the saint to act
now, as every one will wish they had acted when these heavens shall be no more:
yea, and he finds that in keeping God's commands there is great reward.

And as faith guards against the allurements, so it does also against the
terrors of the world and the devil. By faith Moses forsook Egypt; led forth
Israel from their cruel master, not fearing his wrath, though one of the greatest
of earthly Kings, for he endured as seeing him who is invisible. God reproves
his people smartly by the prophet, that they should be afraid of a man that
shall die, and forget the Lord their maker. Isai. 52.12, 13. A believing view
of him, was such a shield to Daniel's three friends, against the rage of
another monarch, who had spread terror through the world, that they could boldly
tell him to his face, that they were not careful to answer him in a matter in
which he commanded, what their God forbid: and that they would not obey him
therein; no, notwithstanding a fiery furnace was set before them, as the
penalty of such disobedience, Dan. 3.16.18. These truths are so weighty, and so
delightful, that I scarce know how to leave them; though it may be time that I
come,

III. To consider how by works, faith is made perfect: and I understand two
things by it,

1. That hereby the perfect, or excellent nature of faith is made manifest: So
the word made is sometimes used; as by Peter on the day of penticost: Let all
the house of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus, whom
you have crucified, both Lord and Christ, Acts 2.36. That is he has made it
manifest, or (as another text has it) declared him to be the son of God with
power. So here, by works faith is made perfect, as its excellent nature is
manifested thereby.

2. By exercise it grows; it is compared to a grain of mustard seed which grows
to a great tree: So the just who live by faith, walk in the path which is as
the shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day, Prove. 4.18.
Both of these, were eminently true in Abraham: the perfect nature of his faith
was made manifest, so that heaven bore testimony thereto; and also this trying
exercise, greatly increased it. Many weighty lessons might be drawn from these
observations: I would touch upon a few.

1. Hence see how unreasonable and false, all the objections are, against the
doctrines of free grace, and being saved by faith, which would represent them
as injurious to the interest of morality; when it is clearly proved, that faith
in Christ for righteousness and strength, is the very principle from whence all
good works flow; yea, and truth it self shows, that without it we can no more
bear good fruit, than the branch can be fruitful without union, and communion
with the vine, John. 15.1 -- 5.

Yet (amazing to think of!) the scripture is not fuller of proofs for these
doctrines, than the world is of opposition against them; but if we examine
carefully, we shall find, that what is said against the doctrines of grace,
proceeds chiefly from the same quarter, that the false prophets dreams did of
old, namely, the deceit of their own hearts. We may often hear men, telling how
they would gratify their lusts, if they believed them doctrines were true; and
also that if their good works, did nothing toward intitling them to divine
favor, they would never do any more. Such language, has often reminded me of
Solomon's remarks, that when he that is a fool walks by the way, his wisdom
fails him, and he says to every one that he is a fool; for what greater
folly can a man express, than this? Such language holds forth plainly, that all
their delight is in sin, and therefore if they were once delivered from fear of
the consequence, they would indulge their lusts without control, with all
their might: and that as to their pretended good works, self is the spring and
end of them all; so that if self was but secure they would not care what became
of God's honor, or others welfare; and on the other hand, if self might not lay
in some claim for the services they do for God, they would quit the tedious
business.

This folly is dressed up in our day, with all the fine language, that many of
the wise men of this world are masters of; who, with great pretenses of reason,
make as bold with the bible, (as to the gospel part thereof) as one of the
senate houses sometimes do, with a bill sent them from the other, i. e. spy
faults, and make amendments, only to clog the same, and render it obscure and
intricate, that so it may sink at last Mr. S. Keeps divine energy. dedication
page 5.
But before men venture so far to speak evil of those things, which they know
not, they had better come down to things that they do know: and if they would
give such a description of their sentiments, about what is good economy in
their own families, as they do about Christ's family, there would be no great
danger of their subverting whole houses, as they often do. Let one of these
doctors come out, and tell the world, that He has got a very affectionate and
faithful wife, and the way she is kept so, is by a constant fear of being
divorced and punished, if she should embrace a false lover; and that he has no
other way to keep her in good order, but only by holding her in suspense about
his unshaken love to her: Or that he has got an excellent and obedient son, and
the way he is kept so, is by frequently threatening to disinherit him, if he
does not behave well; and that he is forced to hold his son always in doubt,
about ever enjoying his father's estate; in order to keep him in good
subjection to his commands. Now when they can convince us, that this is the
best sort of economy in a human family, then possibly we may believe, that
assurance has a hurtful tendency; and that it is not best, for Christ to grant
the request of his spouse, when she cries, Set me as a seal upon thine heart:
-- for love is strong as death, jealousy is as cruel as the grave. Cant. 8.6.
Psalm. 89.30 -- 33.
Though as long as we believe that God knew best what has a good tendency, who
says, of our spiritual David, If his children forsake my law, and walk not in
my judgments, then will I visit their transgressions with the rod,
nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer
my faithfulness to fail. And that he is willing more abundantly to show unto
the heirs of promise the immutibility of his counsel, that they might have
strong consolation: Heb. 6.17, 18.
so long we must detest and abhor all such teachings as would represent, that
the knowledge of God's unchanging love in Christ Jesus, is of a dangerous
tendency.

Let us attend to the testimony of one, who was with our Lord on the mount,
concerning this matter. Beloved, (says he) now are we the sons of God, and it
does not yet appear what we shall be: but we KNOW, that when he shall appear,
we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. And every man that has
this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure. 1. John 3.2, 3.
This testimony is diematrically opposite to the modern notions of many, in two
points: one is, that many will say, If you are assured, you are got beyond
hope: but John calls a knowing that we shall have the beatific vision, this
hope: and though he does not assert that all saints have this Knowledge; yet near
the close of this experimental epistle, he does say, These things have I
written unto you that believe on the name of the son of God; that ye may know
that ye have eternal life. Joh. 5.13.
Which is as plain as words can express, that all true believers may know, that
they have eternal life. The other point is, the effect of this knowledge. How
often have we heard it declared, that if a person knows he shall go to heaven,
this will make him careless about his conduct. And yet John asserts, that every
man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself: and aims at nothing less
than, to be pure even as Christ is pure. And now who shall we credit? him that
wrote by inspiration of God, or they that speak and write according to the
wisdom of this world? Surely we must give in to the apostles conclusion, Let
God be true, and every man a liar.

Therefore, 2. Hence learn the reason why all sin is summed up in unbelief,
both by Christ and his apostles, John 16.9. Romans 3^ 9 and 11.32. Gal. 3.22. The
more we look into things truly, the more clearly we shall find it to be so.
Truth abundantly declares that God is the fountain of all good and happiness.
Now, was this believed, by precious souls, could they pursue a course contrary
to him, in order to obtain happiness? Our Savior shows, that one soul is worth
more than this world, and that if a man should gain the whole world, and loose
his own soul, he would have a dreadful bargain of it. -- If this was credited
as a reality, could men possibly neglect their souls for earthly trifles, as
most of them do? Solomon says, The getting of treasures by a lying tongue, is a
vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death. Prove. 21.6.
Were this viewed as truth, by any that take false and deceitful ways to get
wealth, it would be like the drawn sword Number. 22.31.
to one of old, who loved the wages of unrighteousness, he fell before it. I
have some where seen this remark, that of all transgressors, the drunkard may
seem to have the most reason to say, he cannot help gratifying his lust: yet
present him with the finest bowl of liquor, and then let him know, that there
is a dose of poison in the bottom of it, he will not take it. Now truth it self
warns him not to look Prove. 23.31.32.
upon the wine when it is red, when it gives his color in the cup; because,
at the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder.

So as to uncleanness, where is the mariner, let him be ever so weary, that
would lie down upon the yielding wave, or think to take his rest upon the top
of a mast? yet the oracles of God give this as a just emblem of him that yields
to the harlots embrace. Prove. 23.34. and 7.22.23.
Yea and also likens him to the ox that goes to the slaughter, and a bird that
hastes to the snare, and knows not it is for his life. And if we (like
Ezekiel) turn yet again, we shall see greater abominations than these, in the
false* swearer. He is afraid of losing something of earth; or, of meeting with
shame and punishment from men, and what will he do? why, he will deny the truth
and appeal to heaven to confirm that, which God and his own conscience know is
false; which reminds me of a passage in sir Francis Bacon, to this effect, that
The liar acts the part of a bravado toward God, but of a coward toward men;
for he faces God, but shrinks from men. Be ye astonished O ye heavens at this!

This again brings to mind a maxim, which people often use viz. "Of too evils
choose the least". Now there is the evil of sin, and the evil of affliction: one
is against God, the other affects our selves; and self generally carries the
day, so that Elibu's words are more justly applicable, even to most professors
in our day, than they were to Job and his friends: -- Take beed, regard not
iniquity: for this have thou chosen rather than affliction, Job. 36.21. Whereas
those that live by faith, now as well as formerly, choose to endure the trial of
cruel mockings, and scourgings, bonds and imprisonments; yea to be stoned, sawn
asunder, or slain with the sword: of to wander about in sheep skins, and goat
skins, being distitute, afflicted, tormented, rather than accept deliverance
upon any sinful terms. Heb. 11.35.37. And did the ambitious man believe, that
all men's hearts are in the hand of the Lord, and that he speaks the truth when
he says, Them that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be
lightly esteemed; 1 Samuel 2.30.
would he take the contrary way to obtain honor?

And what shall we say of hypocrites? They draw near to God with their mouth,
and honor him with their lips; but have removed their heart far from him. Isai.
29.13. Mat. 15 8, 9.
They are very strict in some outward forms of worship, and generally add some
precepts of men to divine institution. They come and sit, sometimes before a
good minister, and if he is eloquent, his preaching is to them as a very lovely
song, and they will praise the speaker and his words, but they do them not: for
with their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after their
coveteousness: Ezekiel. 30.31, 32.
so that they will turn aside the just for a thing of naught; devour widow's
houses, and are full of extortion and excess; Isai. 29.21.
yet will make long prayers, and have many religious pretenses, and cry, Is not
the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us. Mat. 23.14 25.
They do not know that Christ IS IN them, the hope of glory Mich. 3.11.
but might know the contrary; yet upon a negative proposition, they form a
positive conclusion.

Observe it well, they do not by faith trust in Christ; yet will they lean upon
him, and say, Is not the Lord among us? The world's religion is built upon
negatives; but when the, Lord's servants openly point out to them their
abominations, and warn them of the dreadful consequences thereof, they will
watch for iniquity; make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him
that reproves in the gate! Isai. 29.20.21.
and though the heads of Zion judge for reward, the priests teach for hire, and
the prophets divine for money; Col. 1.27.
yet because the Lord's name and worship is among them, they will not hear to
any such thing, but for all they are so much against certainty inreligion; they
now positively contradict the warning, and say, none evil can come upon us. Ah!
were they once convinced Micah 3.11.
of the truth; sinners in Zion would be soon afraid fearfulness shall surprise
the hypocrite. Isai. 33.14.


Time would fail, to speak of the evidence that appears from every quarter, of
unbelief's being the root of all evil. The wages of all sin is death, Romans 6.23.
which comprehends the ruin both of soul and body, for time and eternity. This
is what every sinner is at work for, as much as one that is hired is at work
for his wages: it is what he earns, and justice will give him his due. Come up
then, you that say, If our good works do nothing toward procuring God's
favor, we will do no more; Did you believe that the wages of your bad works is
death, and that you earn hell, by every sin you commit; could you run on to
abule the goodness of God, and treasure up wrath unto your selves as you do?
Romans 2.4, 5.

Methinks I hear some say, We are far from denying these plain truths, and
rules; but there are certain doctrines taught by some, which do a world of
mischief. Ay, what are they? why one is, That all mankind are fallen undone
sinners, and cannot help themselves in the least; hence it is in many mouth's I
cant help my self, and so they go on in sin.

Answer, I know I have heard it from many mouths, who yet, when death and
eternity have been made to appear realities before them, have talked quite
other language: for then they would cry, O if God will spare my life; I will
never live as I have done: Which demonstrates that they do not really see, that
they can do nothing, but only would ward off conviction by that pretense. Do
you think the woman with an issue of blood, who had suffered many things of
many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing better, but
rather grew worse; was hindered by a sense of her helpless case, from coming to
Jesus for a free cure? Mark 5.26 29.
Our Lord gives the reason of his being disregarded, yea rejected by the Jews
thus, They that are whole need not the physician, but they that are sick. Luke
5.31.
Had they believed the prophets testimony, Isa. 15.6.
That their whole head was sick, and their whole heart faint; that there was no
soundness in them, they would not have rejected our glorious physician as they
did. Indeed the contrary opinion, was the very cause thereof; they thought that
the Messiah would teach them some further good things, that they might do to
inherit eternal life: Mat. 19.16. Luke 10 25. and 18.18.
but when he proclaimed liberty to them from captivity and bondage, this gave
great offense, and they said we be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage;
how say thou, we shall be made free?

This doctrine is so far from being injurious to good doings, that the contrary
conceit is the main support of sinners and hypocrites, in all their bad doings
in this world. For so long as men think, that to gratify their carnal
inclinations in pleasure, and liberty, they will be upon their guard against
any attempts that are made to turn them there from; and will look upon all that
make such attempts as enemies to their liberty, and happiness; and if they
cannot deny but the consequences will be dreadful hereafter; yet so long as
they think they can turn when they please, they will put it off till a more
convenient season. Whereas if they were once convinced that they are captives
in the worst of slavery, and that nothing but almighty grace can deliver them,
they would be in haste for deliverance Luke 4.18.28. John 8.33.
Act 24.25. Psalm. 40.2. Isai. 51.14.
from the horrible pit. Solomon saw the impudent harlot, encourage herself, and
entice others to take their fill of lustful loves, with this plea, that she had
just paid her vows, and had more peace offerings with her. So God says to those
who had debased themselves even unto hell, Thou art wearied in the greatness of
thy way; yet said thou not, There is no hope. Though they were got so near to
hell in their conduct, they still hoped to escape ruin there; and what was this
hope built upon? why the life of their hands; this guarded them against being
grieved for all their abominations. The Lord proceeds to say, I will declare
thy righteousness, and thy works, for they shall not profit thee. For says he,
I a well, -- with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit, Isa. 57.9,
10.12.15. In the next chapter the prophet is commanded to lift up his voice
like a trumpet to show the house of Jacob their sins; even sins which were
covered under an enquiry after justice, and a pleasing pretense of much
devotion; and he shows them, that the pleasure which they found therein, was a
pleasing conceit that God was indebted to them for these doings. Behold! ye
exact all your labors! And because he did not own their accounts, nor make
them such returns as they expected, they complained and said, Wherefore have we
fasted and thou see not? have afflicted our soul, and thou take no
knowledge? Though he did know at the same time that they did not loose the bands
of wickedness, nor undo heavy burdens, and let the oppressed go free: did not
deal their bread to the hungry, nor clothes to the naked Isa. 58.1 -- 6.

These are God's declarations concerning his peoples righteousness, which is
done by the life of their Prove. 7 14.18.
hands; and it all comes to much the same with the doings of our first parents,
after they had got the knowledge that was forbidden; it is to cover their
nakedness, and to hide even from God. Yea he says, they seek deep to hide their
counsels from the Lord, Isai. 29.15. That it may not be known what the true
nature and springs of their actions are. This should put us all upon close
consideration. Great professions of love in word and in tongue, are the polite
mode of our days; but as to love indeed and in truth, by giving to the
destitute those things which are needful for the body; or to lay down our lives
for the brethren, how little of that is to be found? Here men have many
plausible coverings, "And some who have no need, complain of want,
"To those whose bread they know to be but scant;
"Least they should something from their hands expect,
"And so by lying, cover their neglect.".
Wright
though John says, How dwells the love of God in him? Jam. 2 15.16. 1 John
3.16. -- 18.
Paul was once hid under as good a covering as any of these; yet when divine
light shined into his heart, he counted all his doings and possessions but
loss, and dung, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus; that he
might be found in him, not having his own righteousness, but the righteousness
of God by faith. And he warns Christ's flock to beware of those who taught in
the contrary way, as being dogs and evil workers. Yet this was so far from
making him careless about his behavior, that he directly renounceth the notion
of resting in what he had already obtained, and asserts that he was reaching
and pressing after perfect holiness, Phil. 3 2 8. -- 16. This shows the genuine
effects of faith in Christ alone for righteousness and strength.

Another dictrine which many think has a bad tendency, is that of personal
election; because they often hear sinners say, "If I am elected I shall be
saved", and on they run in all abominations.

But this is doing axactly as the devil would have them, even not to believe
nor regard, those things which are revealed that belong to us; but to presume
upon the secret things that belong to God. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Thus he would have had our Savior presume upon the secret support of angels,
by casting himself down from the pinnacle of the temple, without any regard to
the ways that divine revelation has directed us to walk in. Mat. 4.6.7.
Christ's answer proves, that to use the scripture so, is to tempt God, and not
to trust in him.

Election is as expressly taught as any doctrine in the bible; yet it has been
dressed in such a form, in our times, that many start at the mention of it, as
soon as they would at one covered with a bear-skin, and so determine against
the doctrine by their imagination and passions, instead of being governed by
scripture and reason. Indeed attempts are made to bring both these against it.
One thing advanced for this end is, that to hold that a particular number are
elected, would make God a respecter of persons, contrary to his word. But if
the matter be examined, we shall find that the respect of persons, so often
condemned, is a perverting judgment, through a wrong bias, so as to show that
regard to some, and disregard to others, which is unjust. Deuteronomy. 10.17.2 Chron.
19 7.
Now every pious soul detests any such thought concerning God; yet we have
early notice of his respecting persons in another sense. He had respect unto
Abel, and to his offering; but unto Cain and to his offering he had not
respect; which made Cain very wroth: whereupon Jehovah demands the reason of
it, and says, If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do
not well, sin lies at the door. How strange is it, that some will bring this
demand, as a proof that we are to be accepted for our well doing which was made
to convict Cain of the falsehood of such notions! It was by faith that Abel
offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained
witness, that he was righteous. Both Abel's person, and his offering were
accepted in the beloved Redeemer, so that his works were done from a right
principle, to a right end; both of which were wanting in Cain's offering;
therefore his works were not well done, and the Sin lay at his own door. Every
good act flows from love, out of a pure heart and good conscience, and from
faith unfeigned: and the divine oracles assure us, that all who swerve from
this, understand neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. Heb. 11.4 Ephesians.
1.6. 1 Timothy 1.5 7.
As if he had said, Do you think I am so unjust as not to accept all that is
done well. This demand Cain could not answer; but turns to talk with his
brother and to end the controversy shed his brother's blood: and we are
expressly told, that the reason why he slew him was, Because his own works were
evil, and his brothers righteous. Gen 4.4, -- 8. 1 John 3.12.

Here is sovereign electing love displayed, in the first family of the human
race; two brothers come to worship God, and he respects the person and offering
of the younger, while the elder is not respected. This began a bloody
controversy which is not ended to this day; and it all centers against God's
doing what he will with his own grace; Mat. 20.15.
and his not being under any obligation to bestow it upon any, for all their
doings. The state of this controversy is set in a very clear light by the
evangelist Luke, who informs us, that Jesus, after doing wonders in other
places, came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, and on the sabbath day,
he in their synagogue read in the prophecy of Esaias, where it was written, The
spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the gospel
to the poor, etc. After which he began to say unto them, This day is the
scripture fulfilled in your ears: and all bare him witness, and wondered, at
the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth. But Jesus soon discovered
what notions they had of grace, for he said, ye will surely say unto me this
proverb, physician heal thy self: whatsoever we have heard in Capernaum, do
also in thy country. Which shows that they supposed this glorious physician was
under some obligation to them, so that if he did not do as great things there,
as in other places he would be partial and need healing himself: But Jesus
assures them that there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elias; and
many leapers in the days of Elisha, and yet none of them had such favors
granted, as were shown to a widow among Sidonans, and a leaper among the
Syrians: Which was as much as to say, I am under no obligation to bestow my
grace upon you, because of your outward friendship, but have good right to
grant it to heathens, while you are left to perish in your sins. And observe
the effect; those who had just before wondered at his gracious words, now were
filled with wrath, and rose up and THRUST him out, Luke 4.15 -- 29. And why
should his servants expect better treatment than their master had?

As long as any person thinks he has any thing in him, or done by him, which
can give him the least claim to salvation more than others, he will not give in
to this doctrine; but a I that are brought to see their undone estate, as it
is, have no other gleam of hope, than by sovereign grace: For they see, that if
any good thing were to be done by them, as a necessary condition of their
deliverance, it would be a gone case with them for ever. But to hear that God
is gracious to whom he will be gracious, and that he justifies the ungodly;
this is good news to their poor souls: and when they receive it, they can
heartily join with Paul in blessing the father, for all the spiritual blessings
which are laid up in Christ. According as he has chosen us in him, before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy. Ephesians. 1.3 -- 7.

Observe Paul says, he has chosen us, that we should be holy: But the modern
notions are, that he chooses us because we are holy, making that to be the
cause, which Paul viewed to be the effect. All the controversy turns upon this
point, whether the good pleasure of God's will, or our free will be the cause
of our holiness and happiness. One justly observes, that coditional election,
sets up an inferior cause above a superior; making election and salvation no
more than a may be, instead of a shall be. It represents the Almighty as ever
fluctuating in his councils, taking up with new consultations dependant on the
fickle will of man, and the uncertain acts that flow therefrom: by which method
he is brought in saying. O! I will if they will; and O! that they may will to
believe, become holy, diligently and perseveringly by improving their stock of
free will abilites, that they may be saved: nevertheless not my will but their
will be done!

Chandler's doctrine of grace, printed at Boston 1744. page 208.


Jesus is so far from giving foreseen faith and good works, as the cause of
babes, receiving gospel grace, instead of the wise and prudent, that he
resolves it all into father's pleasure alone; for so it seemed good in his
sight. Mat. 11.26. And if any man teach otherwise, than these wholesome words of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the doctrines according to godliness, we are assured
that he is both proud and ignorant, 1 Timothy 6.3 -- 5. And though such generally
deny their partaking of Adam's sin, yet they at the same time bear witness thae
they allow the deeds of their father, by questioning the truth of what God has
plainly said: and aspiring to be as Gods to know, instead of keeping their
place as creatures, to receive and obey.

These great pretenders to reason, would despise a statesman or general, that
should lay such a plan of proceedings as would need perpetual alterations, and
was liable to final disappointment: yet such is their scheme of conditional
decrees.

But methinks I hear some say, We have one objection that is invincible against
all this reasoning, and that is, there are many who profess a full belief of
these doctrines, that are in fact some of the worst of men. I own it is a
lamentable fact, that there are such men, and so there were in James's day; and
he compares them to dead bodies, and says, As the body without the spirit is
dead, so faith without works is dead also, Jam. 2.26. The Jews had the form of
knowledge, and of the truth in the law: Romans 2.20, 24. 2 Cor. 4 13. Gal. 3 11.
Heb. 10.38.
so m^n may have the form of doctrines of faith and a body of divinity, under
the gospel, and yet both of them conduct so as to cause the name of God to be
blasphemed through them. Yet who would reject all bodies, because there are some
dead stinking ones? We read of the spirit of faith, and of living by faith etc.
and so all ought to live. Again Jude calls such persons filthy dreamers; now
who will say that their waking thoughts and views, have not good influence on
their conduct, because they may have many thoughts and views in dreams, while
they remain asleep on their beds.

However, since you are for appealing to facts, we will try a few of them. None
that believe the scriptures can reasonably deny that the Jews had high notions
of their power to do good works: Paul speaks expressy, that they followed
after the law of righteousness, and had a zeal for God; and he is as express
concerning the reason why they did not attain to it, because they sought it not
by faith, Romans 9.31, 32.102 They had no such faith as he taught in sovereign
decrees, and sovereign mercy to helpless sinners. No, they held to works which
they could do, to entitle them to divine blessings. Now let us see what fruits
these principles produced; they both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own
prophets, and persecuted the apostles: they pleased not God and were contrary
to all men, etc. 1 These. 2.15.16. But the apostles on the other hand, preached
that both Jew and Gentile were all under sin, and that by grace we are saved
through faith, and that not of ourselves, it is the gift of God. And these
doctrines spread their victorious and happy influence as far as the Roman
conquests had ever extended.

Afterward there came on a terrible falling away, and the man of sin was
revealed, who opposed these doctrines, and carried his notions of man's power
to do good works so far as to hold, that he could do more than were required.
But instead of these principles producing good works; their bad works got to
such a length, that the Pope's indulgencies to commit sin with hopes of another
pardon, were openly sold by their ministers, to get money. This shocked Luther;
and he and Calvin, and others were moved to protest against those abominations,
and boldly to preach those doctrines, which have born Calvin's name ever since.
And none will deny that they produced great and good effects then, but such as
are either secret or open friends to popery. Great was the spread, and happy
the influence of these doctrines in our nation at those times; yet the contrary
principles have since extensively prevailed. And a noted divine observed eleven
years ago, to an assembly of the national clergy, that It Is a general
complaint, that our churches are less frequented than they used formerly to be,
and that degeneracy of manners universally prevails. Now says he I may venture
to affirm, that the moral preaching so much in vogue, is the cause of all this.
In short we have preached morality so long, that we have hardly any morality
left; and this moral preaching has made our people so very immoral, that there
are no lengths of wickedness which they are afraid of running into. Mr. Jone's
Sermon at the visitation of the Archdeacon of Surry, Sept. 1755 page 16, 17.


I am not insensible that many are ready to reject this testimony, because it
comes from a friend to the doctrines which they dislike; therefore out of the
abundant evidence which might be produced from the other side, I will touch
upon what appears in one, that the nation has owned to be a rational writer. I
mean Dr. John Brown, whose estimate of the manners and principle of the times,
published ten years ago, met with such a reception that we are told it had six
editions in seven months. Therein he gives a very rational account of the
present state of our nation, deduced from plain facts. He says, We may with
truth and candor conclude, that the ruling character of the present times is
that of a vain, luxurious, and selfish effeminacy. And which has prevailed to
such a degree among them, who are called polite, that he says, To suppose a man
of fashion swayed in his conduct by a regard to futurity, is an affront to the
delicacy and refinement of his taste. Hence the day set apart by the laws of
his country, for religious service, he derides and affronts as a vulgar and
obsolete institution. And they have so lost a sense of honor, that he says,
They laugh at the picture of their own follies; they go home, and without a
blush repeat them. And he shows, that the principle of regard to the public
good is so far lost, and a system of political self-interest introduced in its
room, that a foundation is laid for endless dissension in the state. Thus (says
he) by gradual and unperceived decline, we seem gliding down to ruin. We laugh,
we sing, we feast, we play: we adopt every vanity, and catch at every lure,
thrown out to us by the nation that is planning our destruction.

Thus he points out our danger; and dreadful experiments since have confirmed
the truth of these observations. But what shall give relief in this doleful
case? why Dr. Brown says, he had it in his thoughts, to have proceeded to the
consideration of their most practicable remedies: but (says he) as the closet-
projects of retired and speculative men, often are regarded, as chimerical; he
was therefore unwilling, at present, to hazard the discredit of such an
attempt. And goes on to tell us of two kinds of remedies; the one lasting, the
other temporary: and says he, The first seems totally impracticable at present:
for as they suppose a change of manners and principles, this may justly be
regarded as an impossible event, during the present age; and is rather to be
wished than hoped for, in the next. See fifth edition of his estimate, page
54.61, 64, 121 144, 212, 218, 219.

Here reader is a fair opportunity given us to discern the difference between
ancient and modern christianity. Ancient christianity declares both Jews and
Gentiles to be all under sin; and that we must be created in Christ Jesus unto
good works. Romans 3.9. Ephesians. 2.10.


But the modern scheme tells of a great deal that we can do and must do, in
order to obtain salvation. The ancient plan, while it shows our malady,
discovers at the same time a present and complete remedy: Romans 5.20, 21.
but the late scheme flatters us along 'till we get to the brink of ruin, and
then alas! there is no lasting remedy to be hoped for in this age; and why?
because it supposes "a CHANGE", which according to that plan is "an IMPOSSIBLE
event". Again the ancient plan gave courage boldly to preach the gospel at
Rome, which was then the seat of the greatest warriors and Philosophers in the
world; and emboldened the preacher to assert the use he made of closet-projects
in his work; and also to beseech the brethren there to strive together with him
therein. Romans 19.15.30. These projects have often saved nations from ruin, see
Exodus 32.30. 2 Kings 19. Dan. 0.
While the late rational scheme has taken heart and courage so much from a
minister and doctor of modern divinity, as to make him unwilling at present, to
hazard the discredit of such an attempt; even in his own nation, whose manners
and weapons he viewed to be degenerated into those of women. Estimate page 125.
Yea, and at time too when he saw them laughing, singing, playing, and adopting
every vanity, and perceived not that they were gliding down to ruin?

This soul-destroying scheme had got great footing in New England, before the
Lord appeared for us years ago, and brought forth a number of men to preach up
the doctrines of man's undone condition in himself, and of help alone by
sovereign grace, in a bold and moving manner; and our enemies themselves cannot
deny, that multitudes then really thought those doctrines to be true. Well,
what were the effects?

Why, taverns were forsaken, and had scarce any company but travelers; courts
had little to do when they met; frolicks were dropped; and an anxious pursuits of
the world was in a great measure forsaken. But places of religious worship,
both public and private were crowded; multitudes flocked to hear the word, in
season and out of season; conversation was chiefly on religious subjects and
soul concern; old quarrels were made up etc. Yea, when a little army from
New England was called away to attack the enemies strong hold at Cape-Briton,
their language when they went off was, Pray for us while we fight for you and
they were crowned with such success as proved a principal means of putting an
end to that bloody war.

Ay, say some, but how have things turned out since? Answer, they have turned
out exactly according to the scriptural account. In many the word had no more
root, than seed sown by the highway; others heard with joy, and yet in time of
temptation fell away: Some who seemed to pay a more lasting regard to truth,
yet are choked with cares and riches, and pleasures of this life, so as to
bring no fruit to perfection. While a few chosen ones keep the word, and bring
forth fruit with patience. Jesus had the same end in view in giving this
account, as he had in telling the twelve, that one of them would lift up his
heel against him, namely, that when it came to pass they might believe, Joh.
13.19. But behold and be amazed! Many now strengthening themselves against
believing, because these things are come to pass! And men have a gain straightened
their wits to persuade people, that they are able with ordinary assistance to
perform the conditions of the gospel, so as finally to obtain eternal life. And
these notions have been the most openly espoused in this country of late, that
ever they have been since christianity was known here; and the effects are too
open to need any proof. Pride and extravagence involved people to such a
degree, that in several counties they often had more than a thousand writs at a
court. And if we review the late commotions about the stamp act, what cause
have we all to be abased in the dust, when we think how many more assemblies
were gathered, of all ranks, to consult what creature power or policy could do
in the case, than there were to fast and cry to the creator for help? How
different is this from the conduct of God's ancient people? Ephesians. 4.3. And though
truth says, The King's heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of
water: he turns it whither soever he will; yet the rejoicings immediately
after the news of our deliverance, which were managed so as to destroy a number
of lives; and the thanks if not worship that were addressed to several
instruments of our relief; while there was such a visible backwarkness for
giving thanks to the great author thereof, put me in mind of the note of a
worthy expositor upon the Philistians conduct, who assembled to offer a great
sacrifice to Dagon and to rejoice; for they said, our God has delivered
Sampson our enemy into our hand. The note is this Though Sampson's harlot had
done it, and they had paid her for it, yet they attribute it to their God, such
was their blindness and stupidity; and yet this may shame us believers in the
true God, who are so backward to ascribe to him the great things he does for
us, when such heathens were so forward to give glory to their false deities,
without any foundation for it.

Upon the whole, as the Jews earnestly denied Jesus his being a King; while
their trembling fear of him, and raising such force as they did against him,
plainly said that he was a King; so now all these, and many other facts, which
are brought against these doctrines plainly say they are true. Many facts from
the remarkable effects of these doctrines, in sundry particular towns and
villages in various parts of our land lately, might greatly strengthen our
argument; but that would swell this discourse so far that I must omit them for
the present.
Many who oppose these doctrines make great pretenses to dignity of sentiments;
and one of their high notions is, that Because the deity can receive no profit
from us, therefore his great end in all his works and dispensations, is his
creatures haypiness. But if it is asked, why then are not all his creatures made
happy? The reply is, "Their own folly prevents it". So that they have got a
deity too high to be served by them; yet he is so low that he must serve them
with all his might; and when he has done his best, many of his creatures are
too hard for him, and frustrate his great design of making of them all happy!
This is turning things upside down with a witness! Isa. 29.16.

Another of their high notions is, That they will receive nothing for truth,
but what they can comprehend with their reason. Though by the way, they expect to
be credited in the accounts they give of many of their deep discoveries, which
at the same time they do not suppose common people can fathom. But forsooth!
they are too big to credit what Jehovah declares, any further than they can
comprehend it! Nothing is more certain than this is, that a God which a
creature can comprehend is an idol. The deity which Paul worshipped was quite
another kind of Being. Romans 11, 33. -- 36. And Heathenish principles will always
lead to heathenish practice. Now one of the most unnatural barbarities, that I
ever heard of in the old natives of this country, was, their getting their
powows when they had a friend taken sick, to try their magic art to find out
whether the sick would die or not. And if the answer was that he would die:
then no farther pains were used, but they let him die as soon as he would.
Compare this with our modern reasoners against certain decrees, and see how
much better hearts we have than them old heathens. If they thought their
friends death was determined, that made them neglect the use of means for
natural life: these say if they believed the event was appointed, they would
neglect all means for spiritual life. They neglected means to keep off death;
these use means to hasten it on. They neglected others bodies; these neglect
their own souls. These heathens might be chargeable with negative murder of
others bodies; but these christians, positively murder their own souls!

The son of God knew, and often foretold what sufferings he should go through;
yet, in the days of his flesh, he offered up prayers and supplications, with
strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save from death, and was
heard in that he feared: though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the
things which he suffered, Heb 5.7, 8. And he gave express warning to his
disciples, that they would all be offended because of him: -- upon which Peter
declared, that though all men should be offended he never would. To which Jesus
replied, Verily I say unto thee, that this Night before the cock crow, thou
shall deny me thrice: Yet this certain declaration was so far from excusing his
neglect of his masters caution, to watch and pray; and his sloth, rashness and
cowardice, that when Peter remembered those words of Jesus, he went out and
wept bitterly, Mat. 26.31 -- 75. In Paul's voyage to Rome. after a long tempest
had lain upon them, he stood forth in the midst of their company and said, I
exort you to be of good cheer: for there shall be no loss of any man's life
among you, but of the Ship. And showed how this was revealed to him by an
angel; and then adds, I believe God, that it shall be even as it was told me.
Yet soon upon it, as the shipmen were about to flee out of the ship, by letting
down their boat into the sea, Paul said to the centurion, and to the soldiers.
Except these abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved, Acts 27 21 -- 31 He
believed that the means and end were connected together. When Daniel understood
by books, that the years were near or quite expired, which the Lord spoke of by
Jeremiah the prophet, that he would accomplish seventy years in the desolations
of Jerusalem, he set his face unto the Lord God to seek by prayer and
supplications, with fastings, and sackcloth and ashes, for the fulfillment of
what God had absolutely promised.

Now all these (and many others) thought there was a consistancy between fore
ordination of events in our great Ruler; and earnest prayers and endeavors in
his subjects, for the avoiding of all evil, and the obtaining of all the good
we want. They thought that the certainty of the event no ways took away the
creatures liberty, or made him less worthy of praise or blame for what he did.
but some are lifted up in our days so high, as not to be content with the place
of men, but have set their heart as the heart of God: and Behold! they age
wiser than Daniel, Christ, or his apostles, and explode the sentiments which
they held, and practiced upon! Mr Edwards's remark is worthy of notice here,
which is, That most of the arguments from scripture, which Arminians make use
of to support their scheme, are no other than begging the question: for they
first conclude that these principles which have been just mentioned, are
inconsistent with the use of commands, threatenings, promises, exortations and
the like, and then heap up scriptures that are full of such things; upon which
they boast they have demonstrated their point: whereas the point in dispute, is
whether the certainty of the event takes away the use of these means or not?
and 'till they can prove that it does, all such proofs from scripture to
support their scheme is mear beggary. See his enquiry into the modern notion of
free will, Part 4. Sect. 11.
However, as their heart is lifted up, and they have corrupted their wisdom,
therefore (without repentance) God will bring them down to the pit, in such a
manner as shall cause astonishment and terror to all that know them Ezekiel. 28.2
-- 6, 8, 17 -- 19.

III. These things may teach us the evil nature, and pernicious tendency of a
prevailing custom in our day, encouraging persons to profess religion, and come
into the church without this faith. James calls those professors vain men, who
have not such a living faith as Abraham had: and Paul says with the heart man
believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation. When the eunuch asked what hindered his being admitted to the
initiating ordinance of the gospel church, Philip said, If thou believe with
ALL THINE HEART, thou may. Yet Mr. Solomon Stoddard of Northampton about
half a century ago, openly espoused the contrary sentiments, and held that the
Lord's Supper was a converting ordinance, and that persons that were not
scandalous in their lives, might come to it, though they did not think themselves
converted. This scheme, was by one of our fathers, in that day, compared to
Solomon of old's setting up the high places: and after generations were not
more fond of those high places, than many in our times are of this scheme.

Though we have had a notable experiment of the evil of it in Mr. Stoddard's
church; for his grandson and successor Mr. Edwards practiced thereon 'till he
had got a very large church, and then upon his attempting to have some of them
called to an account for their lacivious and obscene discourse, the town was
suddenly all on a blaze, and little could be done in the affair. And upon their
finding that he had changed his sentiments about that point, they laid hold of
that as a handle against him, and never would rest until they had got him away.
Thus when the world had got into the church, they would not be governed by
divine rule: they would sooner thrust away one of the best divines that this
age has seen. See Mr. Edwards's life printed in Boston 1765, page 53, etc. The
council which concurred with the church in dismissing of him, say, "We have had
no other objection against him, but what relates to his sentiments upon that
point". And what those sentiments were, they give us in these words, viz. his
Insisting upon it as necessary to the admission of members to full communion,
that they should make a profession of sanctifying grace; whereas the brethren
are of opinion, that the Lord's Supper is a converting ordinance, and
consequently, that persons if they have a competency of knowledge, and are of a
blameless life, may be admitted to the Lord's table, although they make no such
profession. printed result of said counsel page 3, 4. Jun 22 1750.


A profession of christianity necessarily implies faith in Christ, and a
devotedness to him; and if there is not a measure of that, truly in the heart,
the profession is false; and to encourage men to lie before God and man, in
order to be converted, looks very shocking. But to avoid this absurdity, Mr.
Williams (who wrote against Mr. Edwards on this point) says page 47. that
Nothing should be expressed in the words of the profession, but what some
unsanctified men may say, and speak true. upon which Mr. E. replies, that There
are two competitors for the kingdom of this world, Christ and Satan; the design
of a public profession of religion is, to declare which side men are"; and
asks, "Is it the constitution of King George, and the British parliament, that
men should take oaths of allegiance, contrived in words of indeterminate
signification, to the end that men who are in their hearts enemies to King
George, and friends to the pretender, may use them and speak true? Reply to Mr.
Williams page 39, 45.

The principal arguments that are brought to support these notions are taken
from Abraham's covenant, and the national church which sprang from him;
notwithstanding the messenger who came to prepare the way of the gospel
dispensation, warned souls against such notions, and showed that God was able
of stones to raise up children to Abraham. And when many of the Jews believed
on our Lord, he said to them, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my
disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you
free. This they immediately resented, and said we be Abraham's seed and were
never in bondage. But Jesus assured them, that whosoever comcommitteth sin, is
the servant of sin. And adds, If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the
work of Abraham. -- ye are of your father the devil. Joh. 8. 30 -- 44. Observe
this well; here was a great number of believers who were ready to profess
Christ's name, if that would have done, but he was for having disciples indeed,
who should know the truth, so as to make them free from the service of sin and
satan, without which he would not own them to be children of Abraham. No,
instead of that, for all their faith he declares them to be children of the
devil.

Paul was very careful to distinguish to the Romans, the difference between
Abraham's natural and spiritual children; and shows that only the latter were
by the gospel counted for thee seed, Romans 9.7, 8. And when some teachers who
desired to make a fair show in the flesh, and avoid the cross, were zealous to
introduce the national, doing plan, under the christian name, into the churches
of Galatia, how smartly does he warn them churches against that scheme? yea
though it had come from apostles or an angel from heaven, and says, who has
bewitched you that you should not obey the truth? And bids them know that they
which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham; and adds, If ye be
Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise. Gal.
1.8. and 3.1, 7, 29. and 6.12.

This apostle knew well how pleasing this scheme was to mankind, and that he
could have avoided persecution by embracing it: but then he knew as well what
the consequence would be on the other hand; and therefore says, If I yet
pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ, Gal. 1, 10. and 6.12. And
how can any that proceed in that way, be servants of Christ now, any more than
in Paul's day.

Mr. Edwards's smart remark may deserve our notice here. Mr. W. and many others
having made much use of the parable of the tares of the field, to support their
cause; though Jesus says, the field is the world, yet they must needs have it to
be the church: Mr. E. observes, that if we should allow ti to be so, it would
not help their cause; for the tares are plainly represented as having no just
right there, but an enemy bro't them in* and too, while the servants slept, who
ought to have been upon their watch to keep the enemy out. He therefore says,
Perhaps some would be ready to make the reflection, that those churches whose
practice is agreeable to the loose principles Mr. W. espouses, do that at
noonday; in the presence of God, angels and men, which the devil did in the
night, while men slept! Reply page 103.

Hence IV. If this faith be so necessary in professors, how much more in
teachers of christianity? Let any man have what else he may, yet if he has not
this faith to see HIM who is invisible, and to look at unseen and eternal
things; he will be governed even in his religion by the things which are
temporal. It was this alone that enabled Paul and his companions to preach not
themselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and themselves the churches servants for
Jesus sake: even because God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness,
had shined into their hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory
of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 4.5.6, 1. Some would turn these off
as extraordinary things; and they profess to be lead in an ordinary way; but
the ordinary way of every man is to seek self in one shape or another, if he is
not delivered therefrom by such supernatural influence.

Our Savior says, Where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also. And
goes on plainly to hold forth that if our eye be not single but evil, the light
that is in us is darkness. Who then will dare to say, that a man of great
knowledge without a single eye, may be a safe guide? or that they can now serve
too masters? Mat 6.21 -- 24.

Many who cannot deny these truths, yet evade their practical influence, by the
plea that we cannot know who are sincere, and who not. Our great lawgiver saw
all this, and therefore, after cautioning against wrong judging; proceeds very
early to give plain rules for right judgment in these affairs; and says, Give
not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast your pearls before swine. Beware
of false prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly are
ravening wolves. Yea shall know them by their fruits, Mat. 7.6, 15, 16. Nothing
is more common in scripture than for things which are devoted to God's worship
to be called holy. In Ezekiel's vision of the temple he was ordered to show to
such as were ashamed of there iniquities, the forms and laws of the house, even
of the comings in and goings out thereof, and all the ordinances thereof; and
he says, The whole limit thereof round about, shall be most holy: behold THIS
is the law of the house. And again, Thus says the Lord God, No stranger
uncircumcised in heart, nor uncircumcised in flesh shall enter into my
sanctuary, Ezekiel. 43.11, 12. and 44.9. Pearls are to be kept as choice treasure,
in distinction from things for common use. Each gate of the hloy city was one
Pearl, Rev. 21.21. Though this is so plain, yet great numbers would have it, that
pearls mean inward experiences, which they say are not to be told before carnal
men. But if Paul greatly transgressed this rule, for he declared the peculiar
circumstances of his conversion before his persecutors, both at Jerusalem and
Cesaria. And we are all required to be ready always to give an answer to every
man that asks us a reason of the hope that is in us, with meekness and fear,
1 Pet. 3.15.


Peter compares false teachers and professors to dogs and swine, 2 Pet. 2.22.
Now compare these things together, and how plain is the command not to give
holy ordinances to such men, nor open the gates of the church to any but the
righteous nation which keeps the truth? Isai. 26.2. And who can fully
describe the rending and filthy work, which churches have often met with for
not attending duly to this rule.

What many seem to understand by fruits is Sheeps-cloathing; their making a
show and appearance like sheep: But Jesus has told us plainly what he means by
fruits. Every tree, says he, is known by his own fruit: -- a good man out of
the good treasure of his heart, brings forth that which is good; and an evil
man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth that which is evil,
for out of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks. Luk 6.44.45. And we
may observe that when Peter declared the faith which was given him by a
supernatural revelation, Christ answered, Blessed art thou; and immediately
says, thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church Mat. 16.16 --
18. Peter signifies, a stone; he was but one stone which was to be laid in the
building upon this glorious rock; and he says to other saints, ye also as
lively stones are built up a spiritual house, 1 Pet. 2.5. Our Lord's speaking
of building his church, directly after that noble declaration of faith,
evidently points out the manner as well as matter of this building. As if he
had said, The way in which I will build my church is by persons declaring thus
with their mouths, what they believe in their hearts concerning me? Romans 10.10.
Hence, on the day of penticost,, when many were pricked in their hearts, and
cried, What shall we do? Peter pointed out to them the way of relief; and as
many as gladly received his word were baptized, and added to the church, and
they continued steadfastly in the apostles doctrine and fellowship -- They
declared both their conviction and conversion, and thus the first gospel church
was built up, and walked in fellowship: and the apostle John's account of the
way wherein christian fellowship is begotten and promoted perfectly agrees
herewith. He says, That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that
ye may have fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship is with the father,
and with his son Jesus Christ 1 John 1.3

When Peter was directed by a vision from heaven to go to Cornelius, and went
without gainsaying; yet when he came there, he asked and received a distinct
account of the steps of experience which had led Cornelius thus far. Then he
opened his mouth and preached Christ to all present; and while he spoke, the
holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word, whereupon they were commanded
to be baptized. Thus the primitive churches were built up.

On the other hand, when one who had been baptized as a believer, spoke that
out of the abundance of his heart, which discovered that his heart was not
right with God, Peter said, Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter, Act.
8.20, 21. So the church of Ephesus is commended because she could not bare them
which were evil; and had tried them which said they were apostles, and were
not; and had found them liars, Rev. 2.2. This discipline was neglected in the
church of Corinth; therefore Paul says to them, Know ye not, that a little
leaven, leavens the whole lump? what have I to do, to judge them that are
without? do not ye judge them that are within? therefore put away from among
your selves that wicked person, 1 Cor. 5.6.12, 13. And to the churches of
Galatia, he says concerning those who had perverted the gospel, a liltle leaven
leaveneth the whole lump. I would they were even cut off that trouble you, Gal.
5.9.12. John speaking concerning the doctrine of Christ, says, Look to your
selves: -- it there come any unto you and bring not this doctrine, receive him
not into your house, 2 John 8 -- 10.

Query, do not actions speak louder than words? Answer, in many cases they do:
yet how do we know what actions mean but by words? for instance, Simon offered
the apostle's money; now had he done it for their support in the Lord's work,
or for them to distribute to poor saints, the action would have been good; though
by what he said when he offered the money, he discovered that his heart was not
right in the sight of God. This hint may show the harmony there is between
those two different descriptions of the last judgment, namely, by thy words
thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned: And, then
shall he reward every man according to his works, Mat. 12.37. and 16 27.
Indeed, fruits comprehend all that men bring forth out of their hearts, in
their principles, experience, conversation and conduct; and hereby we are to
know them, and to act toward them according to the clearest light we can gain.
Some talked much of a distinction between private and public charity, and
assert that private charity will not do to act upon in public affairs. If by
private charity they mean an inward persuasion, which is not governed by
intelligible evidence, I readily concur with them: though I fear what is often
intended by that distinction, is that we should receive all who are willing to
make a public profession of religion, if nothing is openly objected aagainst
them, whether we have any proper evdience to our consciences that they
experimentally know the truth or no. Great noise also has been made about
infallible knowledge, and of assuming God's prerogative to search the heart,
and the like; but this is all beside the proper question which is, whether we
must act toward men, according to what they pretend to be, or upon the
clearest evidence we can gain of what they really are?
If these divine rules were duly regarded they would soon settle the
controversy we have had concerning who has a right to preach, and who not: for
according to these rules, if Peter, Paul, or an angel from heaven should come
to us, and not bring the doctrines of Christ, but a perverted gospel, we ought
to reject them. While all those who have renounced the hidden things of
dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God
deceitfully, but who by manifestation of the truth, commend themselves to every
man's conscience in the sight of God, ought to be received 2 Cor. 4.2. Here
many are ready to cry, alas! what times are we fallen into? a party spirit
encouraged, and one minister condemning another: how much better were former
days than these are? But they forget that Solomon tells them, that they enquire
not wisely concerning this. Eccl. 7.2. there always have been contentions ever
since two seeds have been in the world; and he must be very ignorant of his
bible who does not know that true and false ministers have spoken against each
other in all ages, though with very different tempers; yea, when the teacher of
teachers came into the world, what divisions were there among God's people
about him? Some said he is a good man: others say nay; but he deceives the
people. And he was so far from denying the peoples right to judge of such
matters, that he gave them plain instructions to direct them therein. He first
shows the necessity of being engaged to do, as well as know the Fathers will,
if we would expect to be guided by him; and then lays down a general rule to
judge teachers by: viz. He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory, but
he that seeks his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no
unrighteousness in him. And having given them the rule, he says, Judge not
according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment, Joh. 7.12.17, 18,
24. Others judged according to the appearance: and those who appeared in Moses
seat, and according to the established religion, they judged to be right; but
this man who had never learned in their schools, or been approbated by their
rulers and standing teachers, and was admired only by people who knew not the
law; they accounted a deceiver, ver. 15, 47 -- 49. Notwithstanding he spoke as
never man spoke, and constantly went about doing good. But he calls us to judge
righteously according to what is really said and done, and not according to the
appearance and show that men make. Those who seek their own glory, will be more
concerned to have the esteem and approbation of men, than to approve themselves
unto God, by rightly dividing the word of truth, 2 Timothy 2 15. or to approve
themselves as the ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in
necessities, in distresses, etc. 2 Cor. 6.4 -- 10. as these ministers did,
which these claim a succession from.
These rules are rational as well as scriptural. Saints are often called
witnesses Isa. 43.10. 1 Timothy 6.12. Heb. 12.1. A witness is to testify what he
knows concerning a matter in dispute; and God's witnesses are to testify what
they know of him, and his truth, which the world is so full of disputes about.
Now every rational mind, in order to be satisfied in important affairs, wants
to hear witnesses tell, not only that a things is so; but also how they came to
know it to be so. Hence civil courts will not take up with written evidences,
if the persons can be had, for they suppose there is danger of being imposed
upon by false testimony; therefore they would examine evidences critically, in
order to come at the truth. Neither will men be content to have this done by
one or more in private, and so have what they discover reported to the court:
No, all who are concerned must hear what is said; yea, and have liberty to ask
what questions they think proper: and the fear of witnesses, bashfulness, or
blundering in their story, will not be admitted as a sufficient reason against
this way of proceeding; and why? because their honor, interest, or life is at
stake.

Yet where the divine honor, and the life of souls is at stake, the contrary
method is taken. For many have given out that they had rather receive two
hypocrites (nay some say ten) than shut out one saint. i. e. Had rather receive
2 or 10 enemies than hold one friend in suspense, 'till they could obtain
evidence that he was a friend?
And for fear persons should blunder in their account, written testimonies have
been received, which have often been framed as well as penned by other hands;
persons by signs have owned it as their testimony, when God and their own
consciences knew it was not so. Thus churches have gone on; till of late many
have dropped, having particular accounts of experience in any way; and receive
members only upon a general assent to christianity. And some have been so
stupid as to try to justify such conduct by the eunuch's confession Acts 8.37.
as if their openly assenting to that which they were always taught was true,
was parallel to his declaring his hearty belief of that, which Jews and
Gentiles all said was false. Philip likewise had been particularly acquainted
with his soul exercise about these things before, so that he had good evidence
of the eunuch's conversion before he baptized him.

The generality of those who are going on in the ways above described, are very
ready often to caution us against judging: -- yet if we will not run with them
to the same excess of abomination, they can soon speak evil of us, and judge
our hearts at a great rate. But the things I have now related are not secret
surmises, they are most open and notorious facts; and if any would give me a
better reason for this difference in conduct, than this, I should be glad to
hear it; viz. That most men are wiser for time, than for eternity, and have
more concern about their own interest, than the interest of Christ's kingdom in
the world. And in vain do men wish for better times, while divine rule is thus
disregarded; they might as well look for peace while enemies are not guarded
against; or for health while contagion is freely spread.

Therefore, V. These things should rouse us all, and engage our souls to regard
without delay the only method of relief in our deplorable circumstances, before
iniquity prove the ruin of our nation and land.

But here I am come to the most difficult point in the whole christian plan, I
mean applying the call and command to impotent creatures. None but God can keep
us from straying to the right or left hand here. Multitudes hold it to be
unreasonable for God to require that which the creature cannot do; though the
absurdity of such a notion appears!

1. Because the divine command ever remains holy just and good, although we are
carnal sold under sin, Romans 7.12, 14. What a strange conceit would it be, to
conclude the creditors claims to be unjust, because of the bankruptcy of the
debtor!

2. All sin is a voluntary contrariety to the divine will; how reasonable then
is it that we should be called and commanded to that which must be our hearty
choice, or we never can be saved? and that is a turning from sin to God, Ezekiel.
33.10.11.

3. Nothing but the light and power of the command, brought home upon the
conscience, can ever make a soul truly to know its misery, and so to prize the
remedy which is provided: for without a soul knows he is sick, he will not
improve a physician; 'till he knows he is a prisoner he will not welcome a
proclamation of liberty; and 'till he is convinced of his great and just debts,
and that he has nothing to pay, he will not love much when they are all frankly
forgiven, Luke 4.18. and 5.31. and 7.42.

4 God's call conveys light and life to the soul, when and where he pleases.
When Ezekiel viewed the bones that were very dry, he prophesied, as he was
commanded, and said, O ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord: and how
glorious was the effect? The divine call is, Awake thou that sleep, and
arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians. 5.14. So our
apostle after mentioning, that every good gift comes from the father of
lights, who of his own will begets souls with the word of truth, says
wherefore, let every man be swift to bear, Jam. 1.17 etc.

Here therefore let us observe that true teaching ever shows our constant
obligation to conform to every divine rule; and at the same time, that all our
help so to do, must be freely received from Christ Jesus, by the influence of
the holy spirit. From thence we receive the gift of righteousness, whereby all
our crimes are forgiven; and abundance of grace, whereby our natures are
charged, and our souls are enabled to die unto sin, and live unto
righteousness. But false teaching will either abate part of the price, in order
to accomodate our duty to our ability, or else excuse the creature from his
obligation, because he is not able to fulfill it.

This difference appears plain in all ages. When Joshua in a moving manner had
pressed home upon Israel the importance of choosing that day whom they would
serve, and which had such effect, that the people answered, we will serve the
Lord: -- he immediately adds, ye cannot serve the Lord; for he is an holy God
Joshua 4 15 -- 19. He would have them know their impotency, and their need of
divine help.

The prophets orders were, Tell ye; there is no God else beside me, a just God
and a Savior. Look unto me and be ye saved, all ye ends of the earth -- Surely
shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength. Strength as well
as righteousness is in him, and not in ourselves. So our Redeemer when he came,
insisted much on the strictness and authority, of the divine command, and our
constant obligation to obedience; and at the sametime, he as fully asserted,
that without him we can do nothing, Mat. 5 Joh. 15. While the leaders of most
note in that day, abated the terms in various shapes. They would confine the
law, only to outward actions; but Jesus extends it to our inward disposition,
and designs: they would have an observance of small things answer, while they
neglected the weightier matters of the law: yea, they would fain have their
forms of devotion suffice, while they exercised injustice and cruelty toward
the poor. Yet they could not bear the thoughts of perishing any more than
others: no, they often enquired what good things they should do for eternal
life? And can the words gospel, faith or repentance help these in the least who
deal with souls in this partial line; and can their case be a whit better than
those who of old had been partial in the law? Mal. 2.9. Yea, and is not
justice, mercy and faithfulness as much neglected now under a profession of
christianity, as ever they were among the Jews? Paul saw these things creeping
in, and therefore says, Be not deceived: evil communications corrupt good
manners. Awake to righteousness and sin not; for some have not the knowledge of
God: I speak this to your shame. 1 Cor. 15.33.34.

But here many of our late reasoners, will tell us that we make men mere
machines, who are not worthy of praise or blame: for what we cannot do, we are
not to blame for neglecting; and if we are actuated by divine power in all that
is done right, then we are not praiseworthy therefore.

Answer 1. God is the author and supporter of all nature, who gives to all
life breath and all things; and heathens as well as christians, derive a
natural power from him to do natural actions; and by that power they may do
many things which are materially good; but in order for any action to be
spiritually good, it must be done from a right principle, and to a right end,
without which the end of the commandment is not answered, 1 Timothy 1.5.

2 This controversy proceeds upon the same footing of that between Job and his
friends, namely, darkning counsel with words without knowledge: using words
without knowing what they mean; for the words cannot, are not able and such
like, are as different in their meaning when used about the soul, from what
they are about the body, as the nature of the soul differs from the body See
Mr. Edwards on the will, page 307. A book which has afforded more light to my
mind in these points, than any other human composure that I ever read.
We may be heartily willing to do many outward actions, which yet we cannot do,
and so are excused from blame in our not doing them but the cause why souls
cannot believe the record which God has given of his son, and love and obey him
with all their hearts, is because, they love darkness rather than light; yea,
they hate the light, Joh. 3.19.20. Because the carnal mind is enmity against
God, etc. Romans 8.7. This is the account which Jehovah has given of the case,
and those who dare to set up their reason against this account, will sooner or
later hear that tremendous demand, shall he that contendeth with the almighty,
instruct him? he that reproves God, let him answer it.

What souls will dare to stand the trial, and come up and tell the most High
that they cannot believe him, and therefore he must excuse them from blame in
making HIM A LIAR! Joh. 5.10.
Or tell HIM that they cannot see beauties enough in HIM to attract all their
hearts, and therefore he must abate his law, and take up with bodily exercise,
take up with a showing much love with their mouths, while their heart goes
after their covetousness? Ezekiel. 131.3.
Many are ready to call this rough or harsh preaching; but this is no new
thing, they called it so in Isaiah's day and said, speak unto us smooth things;
cause the holy one of Israel to cease from before us. The near views of a holy
God, tore off their covering which was not of his spirit, and that they would
not bare; therefore the prophet was ordered to note it in a book that it might
be for time to come for ever and ever, that these were a rebellious people,
lying children, children that will not hear the law of the Lord. Isa. 30 1.8,
-- 11. And the day is hastening when an awful tempest shall sweep away the
refuge of lies: now therefore be ye not mockers lest your bands be made strong,
Isai. 28.17.22.

O therefore precious souls, make no more attempts to hide from God, but submit
to him and embrace his free salvation without delay. Do thou say, I cannot
believe? let that teach thee what a heart thou have, which has often regarded
lying vanities, and yet now cannot believe the God of truth Do you say, I can
believe there is mercy for others, but not for me? Why not for thee? oh,
because I am a great sinner! That is thou can not believe, because thou art
just such a creature as Jesus came to save! 1 Timothy 1.15. The bottom of the
matter is we can believe that Christ came to save good sinners, but not bad
ones: such as have nothing else but badness. Hence the profligate person thinks
he believes the gospel, and hopes for mercy at last, because in the midst of
all his extravagance he conceits he has an honest heart, and God regards
honesty, and hates hypocrites. So in every case men conceit they have some good
either of an inward or outward nature, which will when it is well improved move
Christ to save them Yet when the divine spirit shows them truly what they are,
this takes away all that sort of faith.

We naturally imagine that God is altogether like ourselves, who cannot love
those whom we see no lovliness in: though the truth is that his thoughts and ways
are as high above ours, as the heavens are above the earth. The contention in
our day, concerning a general, and a particular faith centers here: for they
don't contend concerning who is the Savior; but the dispute is concerning what
faith gives an interest in him. Multitudes hold that if we believe the gospel
to betrue, and walk according to the rules of it, we may hope for mercy at
last; though they will scarce allow any to know they are safe till they leave
this world; and for this plain reason, because their hope depends upon their
doing well to the end. Others hold saving faith to be a persuasion that Christ
died for me in particular, and that this persuasion must be worked up, by the
spirit's assistance in our hearts.

Now each party can see self and man's doings in the others faith; therefore
they have carried their contentions to a great length. Yet after all, when any
poor soul has his eyes opened, and is turned from darness to light, all their
criticisms will never persuade him to wait till next year, and see what effects
light and heat have upon him, before he may aypropriate the benefits of the
glorious Sun to himself. Psalm. 84.11. Act. 26.18.
If a number of rebels should lift up their arms against their king till many
of them were slain, and the rest scattered in the wilderness, ready to perish,
and they should hear that he had granted out a proclamation of free pardon to
rebels, and a general call to come in and accept it: yet if they still kept
off, how vain would all their disputes or attempts prove, to find out who of
them should be saved by the King's mercy? though in the mean time if he should
appear to any of them in his royal robes, and with his charming voice proclaim
pardon to them; how would it melt their hearts, and engage each of them to
strive who should show the lowest submission, and the highest gratitude for his
undeserved mercy? See Jer. 31.2, 3.

In these debates the ideas of a dead or absent friend unawares slips into our
minds, who has left choice legacies to a select number of persons, where there
is room for lawyers, disputes and men's judgments in order to determine who are
interested therein. Whereas, did we observe that they which find grace in the
wilderness, are such as the Lord has appeared unto, and declares his
everlasting love to their souls: and that we never can see the sun only by its
own light, which always brings its evidence with it, both of its own
excellency, and of our right to enjoy its benefits; this would settle the
point. Here some are ready to cry out, If all our help is in God, and if he has
determined to give it only to such persons as he has chosen; then it is in vain
for us to strive, or use means, we will even take our ease and live as we list
This many call reasoning; and as one told Dr. Tailor (who has written much in
this line, all the cry is reason and candor, reason and candor! and said he,
thou meanest no less by it than they did who cried, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians! Yet if this noise was stilled, we may find a self contradiction in
the very nature of the objection: vid. Mr. Edwards on the will p 316.
for it is in effect to say, The measure of my future happiness is fixed;
therefore I will take methods to increase it. or plainer still: God has
determined what happiness I shall have, therefore I will take my own ways, and
not his to promote it! Every man is using some sort of means or other for
happiness every day he lives; so that the query is not properly whether we
shall use any means, or no; but whether it is best to use the means which God
has appointed, or those which man has invented? Eccl. 7.29


This sort of reasoning began near the forbidden tree; and generally they who
most positively deny their concern in what was acted there, show most plainly
that they allow of the deed of their father, by giving in to reasonings against
what God has plainly said, as he did. How is the world ransacked, and the
faults of professors on all hands brought up, and many false charges added
thereto, and all to guard against taking and regarding God's truth as he has
delivered it? yea rather than yield; the pit below is searched, and Judas is
brought up to carry on the argument against a close adherence to divine rule in
our practice in church affairs. As if Judas's example was for imitation instead
of warning. Though truly he had never had any place in the christian church, as
distinct from the Jewish church; for his commission was limited to the house of
Israel, before their national church was dissolved: and the great commission to
teach and baptize all nations, was given to the eleven; there was no Judas
among them, Mat. 10.5, 6 and 28.16, 19.

It is therefore our highest wisdom to acknowledge our own guilt and folly, and
freely receive the divine testimony as it is delivered to us, and present our
bodies a living sacrifice to God, which is our reasonable service. Even self
interest, if rightly viewed would move us hereto. For if we disregard the
golden rule, the Lord will; not who says with what measure ye mete, it SHALL be
measured to you again. Had David viewed this when he was tempted to defile his
neighbors wife, and then deceitfully to shed his blood; and had he seen that
this would be measured to him double: that one son would defile his daughter,
and another murder him; and then that the murderer would deceitfully dethrone
David, and openly defile his wives; with what indignation would he have
rejected that traveller which came to entice him thereto?

Yet because this sentence is not immediately executed, sinners will not quit
their evil ways: yea when they see the execution of it begin at the house of
God, upon the righteous, they reason directly against revelation, and conclude
that the awful sentence will not reach to ungodly sinners who obey not the
gospel of God. They are willingly ignorant of the true nature and design of all
God's dispensations, 1 Pet. 4.17, 18. 2 Pet 3 5. Let me therefore address you
in the language of wisdom it self, Hear instruction and be wise, and refuse it
not: for whosoever finds me finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord.
But he that sins against me wrongeth his own soul: all they that hate me,
love death, Prove. 8.33 -- 36.

I thought to have stopped here; but a review of our present state constrains me
to go farther. For as we are loudly called to awake out of sleep, so we are
called to stir up one another, and to provoke one another to love and good
works. Many are stiring up one another to evil, and it might make us all
ashamed to think that sinners are more active in the way to destruction; than
saints are in the way to salvation. We can scarce go into any company without
hearing talk of others faults; yet how rare is faithful reproof? and why? we
are afraid of giving offense: though when the report comes round to the persons
ears, the offense is double.

How little regard is paid to the divine rule, for dealing with a faulty
brother in Mat. 18? One way by which many evade it is, that the fault is
secret, and therefore they will not take these steps; yet they can whisper it
all round the church or neighborhood. Another is that many know it, and so
they would be excused from that method; whereas if the case be not openly in
the church, as that was of the incestous man at Corinth, I know no other way to
bring it in aright, but by these steps. and if any case be so secret that we
may not open it in that way, it ought to remain secret: for the command is,
Debate thy cause with thy neighbor himself; and discover not a secret to
another; least he that hears it, put thee to shame, Prove. 25.9, 10.

Nothing is more common than to hear men's faults aggravated in their absence,
beyond what they are in their presence: and as Mr. Morgan observes An evil
report, be it true or false, spreads much faster than a good one; an evident
token that most men do not love their neighbor as they do themseves. But
whence comes this aversion, to giving and receiving reproof? surely not from a
good cause: for, rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee: and open rebuke is
better than secret love. It Is the scorner that loves not one that reproves
him, Prove. 15, 12. Sin is our worst enemy, and if it has ensnared us under any
disguise whatsoever, it is a great kindness to have the enemy discovered and
cast out. And if others are mistaken in their reproof; yet it can be no injury
to have our deeds tried and made manifest, that they are wrought in God.

We have lately been upon the borders of a civil war, for LIBERTY: hanging and
burning were not too bad for the enemies of LIBERTY! Ah! little do many see
what they are doing; for after all this noise? Whosoever commits sin is the
servant of sin, Joh. 8.34. Such harbor the worst enemies to liberty in their
own bosoms. Turkish or Spanish slaves are not to be compared with those who are
under the bondage of corruption. Covetousness will make men rise early, set up
late and eat the bread of carefulness; and if they have grasped much together,
their abundance will not suffer them to sleep: it will drive them to cheat,
lie, steal, and kill, and has brought many to a halter, and ten thousands more
to hell: Pride moves men to manifold works of deceit, to advance self, and
crush others; and when its views are crossed, it breaks out into wars and
fightings with tongue, pen, club, or sword, and fills societies, countries, or
kingdoms, with confusion, blood, or desolation. Luxury draws persons in many
ways to waste their estate, health and time, under a notion of pleasure, and
often brings on a speedy, if not untimely death, and an aggravated damnation.

Yet those who thus weary themselves to commit iniquity, often treat such as
enemies who would labor to convince, them of and turn them from this dreadful
slavery. Every company sounds with complaints of hardtimes; -- debts, and want
of means to pay them: whereas had we the means that have been consumed upon
these lusts, among us in ten years past, and could we use them, and not abuse
them, we should be as happy as any people on earth: but in vain do we look for
peace while we harbor such enemies; or for liberty, while we yield our selves
to serve sin, and are not in earnest to improve all gospel means to search out
these cruel foes. I speak not thus because I am free of blame therein. No,
rather, (as Col. Gardener said) because I have been so scandalously befooled by
them.

We glory much in our liberty of conscience; yet how little is that understood
among us? Good conscience men allow (they say)
but must be understood,
To say as they themselves do say;
or else it cannot be good.
Goddard.
The true nature of it is, when we have delivered our sentiments and the
grounds of them; then to say with Paul, Judge ye what I say But what is more
common than for us to go a step further, and judge for others as well as our
selves, and if they do not concur with our judgment, to treat them with
contempt or abuse? Yea, and civil privileges, or just dues are often witheld,
only because others sentiments differ from ours. All the difference between
this and ancient persecution is, that then the tyrant was upon the throne, but
now he is come down to the footstool; then he took away life; but now he is
restrained from going so far. Paul says, Whatsoever is reproved is made
manifest by light. Other methods therefore than holding forth light, or
speaking the truth in love, have not a good, but evil tendency. Since I have
ventured thus far, I will proceed a little farther, and observe that as to
christian union, John loved the saints in the truth; and we are commanded to
love the truth and peace. Therefore to pursue peace with all men, as far as we
can consistent with truth, is an incumbent duty: but to wrong the truth for
peace; to wrong our own consciences to please others, is an awful sort of
liberty!

The prince of peace calls to arms against sin, and there is no discharge in
this war, any more than in that which will come by and by. No, the Prince
declares, He that is not with me, is against me. Mat. 12.30.
Surely then my brethren, it is high time to awake out of sleep, and cast off
the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light: Romans 13 11, 12.
and no longer follow our blind inclinations, or others inticements, because we
don't know this or that to be wrong; but pursue what we do know is right: and
make this our daily cry, Job 34, 32.
That which I see not teach thou me, if I have done iniquity, I will do no
more. Does the multitude of inward and outward foes cause thee to cry, Alas,
what shall we do? the answer is ready, Fear not; for they that be with us, are
more than they that be with them 2 Kin. 6.15, 16.
The Lord tells us what the controversy is, and that all shall know the issue
of it; says he, they shall know whose words shall stand, mine or theirs. Jer.
44.28.
He calls us to trust and obey his word, though rulers, fathers, mothers, wife or
children say the contrary; and though we loose house, lands, or life in the
cause: And he that will turn from truth for any or all of these, CANNOT be
Christ's disciple. Luke 14.26, 27.


Worldly wisdom says, This is too much, and when it comes to the trial, many go
away sorrowful, not being able to endure so great a fight of affliction. But
faith computes things quite in another line. I remember a story of a great
commander, that when an account of his army was brought to him, in order to
show that their number was not so great as their enemies, he says, "And how
many thousands did you reckon ME for". Unbelief leaves the captain of our
salvation out of the account: but faith views him as all in all, so that if it
sees, violence, iniquity, and greivance, so that the law is slacked, and
judgment does not go forth, because the wicked does compass about the
righteous: yet it sees HIS glory cover the heavens, and the earth was full of
HIS praise. HE stood and measured the earth, HE beheld and drove asunder the
nations, and scatters the mountains and bills. HIS ways are everlasting. Then
let natures supplies all fail, yet the believer will, joy in the God of his
salvation. Hab. 12 -- 4 and 3, 3, 6, 17, 18.

Faith puts self out of the question, and cries, Lord it is nothing with thee
to help, whether with many, or with them that have no power: help us O Lord our
God; for we rest on thee, and in thy name we go against this multitude: O Lord,
thou art our God, let not man prevail against THEE. In this may God's people
out of weakness wax valient in fight, and turn to flight a thousand thousand
ememies, 2 Chronicles. 14.9, 11. Every believer has the sacred three, the armies of
heaven, and all the good men upon earth on his side; and divine power and
faithfulness have engaged to make all the attempts both of his carnal and
spiritual foes to work for his good. Rom 8.28. 2 Cor. 4.17.
While the unbelievers party consists of the prisoners of darkness, and a
multitude of worms who are crushed before the moth, Jude 6. Job. 4.19. It is
high time therefore for us all to have done both with lukewarmness and
cowardice in this cause; and while many are extolling the courage of carnal
men, let us be valient for the truth upon the earth, Jer. 9. 3 Hark yet again
you carnal men,
and hear what I shall say,
In your own dialect, and then
i will you no longer stay.
2 You talk sometimes of valor much
and count those bravely manned,
Who will not stick to have a touch
with any in the land.
Though you dare crack a cowards crown,
or quarrel for a Pin,
You dare not on the wicked frown,
nor speak against their sin.
Know then true courage, there does dwell,
where men engage for God,
Against the devil, death, and hell,
and bear the wickeds rod.
Bunyan.
Every one wants to be happy. Well we have the testimony of truth itself, that
If ye know these things happy are ye if ye do them. And the work of
righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness, quietness and
assurance for ever. AMEN.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
TITLE page r. prefixed p. 11. margin r. Loretto, l. 6 fr. bot, r Ladys l 4 r
are as p 12 l 2 fr bot. r those p 13. l 9 r as fully l 12 r plainly p 14 l 20 r
harden p 17 l 1 r by I come l 22 begins a Paragraph p 25 l 5 tr bot. r appear p
27 l 12 not r He p 33 l 8 r confirmed p 34 l 2 fr. bot r hi^. p 38 margin r Dr.
Watts p 40 l 8 fr bot r ^est. p 43 l 4 r these l 8 1 remark p 45 l 11 r have l
20 r whom p 50 l 22 f. in r is p 51 l 8 not r got p 55 l 6 for the r this l 18
^epers p 56 l 21 r the Fathers p 58 l 18 r Jews and Gentiles p 60 l 23 r He
says p 61 l 26 r a Time p 62 l 2 r Doctrine l 9 r pursuit p 65 l 14 f them r
those p 67 l ^ r are p 68 marg last line for Counsel r Council p 70 l 10 for to
distinguish r to point out l 18 for them r those p 71 l 7 r and tha^ too p 72 l
14 r ye marg l 3 r if so p 77 marg last l f which r whom p 80 l 25 f charged r
changed p 84 l 34 r in p 87 l 11 r the Lord will not.

N. B. This and all ^y other Books are Sold by T. and Z. Rogers in Norwich.


