AN EXAMINATION INTO THE PRINCIPLES OF BAPTISM. In a LETTER to the Infant
Baptizers of North-Parish, in NEW LONDON.

BY J -- h b -- n.

Behold, I waited for your words, I gave ear to your reasons, while you
searched out what to say: And searched the scriptures daily, to see whether
these things were so. NEW LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, 1767

DEAR BRETHREN,
IN AS MUCH as Baptism was instituted by the great King of heaven and earth, I
shall make no apology for being desirous to know who are the subjects of that
ordinance: and seeing you would be great lovers of what you call truth, and not
desirous that the people should be in an error, I hope you will not be offended
with my making some remarks on that subject, and asking a few questions
concerning the chief arguments that I have ever heard used by any person in
favor of infant baptism; and also in respect of persons being desired, or
forced to pay to the support of a ministry that they have no fellowship with.

The first argument I shall mention, is what is generally used to show that
baptism was instituted in the room and stead of circumcision, and to be
administered to the same subjects.

We have an account in Act. 15 chap. of the judaising teachers going down to
Antioch, and said, Except you be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye
cannot be saved. The apostles Paul and Barnabas were sent up to the apostles
and elders, about that question; who wrote back a letter, in which are these
words. viz. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no
greater burden than these necessary things; that ye abstain from meats offered
to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication: from
which if you keep yourselves, ye shall do well. Now if baptism was instituted
in the room and stead of circumcision, did not the apostles know it? And if
they knew it, would they not have taught it? Surely as they declared the
counsel of God, they would have informed us that baptism was instituted in the
room of circumcision. I believe there is none so absurd as to say the Holy
Ghost did not know it; or that he did, and would not reveal it to the apostles.
But in the letter it is said, from which if you keep yourselves, ye shall do
well; let me ask you, could it be said, ye shall do well, unless they did all
that was required in the room and stead of circumcision, concerning which they
wrote?

Again, it is argued in favor of the presbyterians, or infant baptizers, that
the apostles practiced baptizing infants; for they say household were baptized,
viz. the jailor and his household, Lydia and her household, and the household of
Stephanus: they say probably there was infants baptized in some one or other of
these households. But let us consider of the probability. -- As to the jailor we
are told, Act. 16.34. That be rejoiced, believing in God (...) all his house.
Now if they were believers, as is evident they was, they were proper subject,
of baptism, as appears by Philip's answer to the Ethiop an that requested
baptism, see Act 8 37. If thou believe with all thine heart, thou may:
Which plainly shows that faith in Christ was absolutely necessary, in order to
be admitted to the ordinance of baptism, see also, Act. 10 47. Can any man
forbid water that these should not be baptized which have received the Holy
Ghost as well as we? Which plainly shows that the receiving the Holy Ghost was
an evidence of faith in Christ, and the rule upon which they were admitted to
the ordinance of Baptism. But to return: As to Lydia, if we believe the
scriptures, saying her household; she had no husband; for if she had, it would
have been said HIS household, and not her household: and it is not half the
virgins and widows that have households, that have children in them so small,
that if they had faith in Christ, it could not be known. Besides, what would
she do with infants tending her shop? Again, we find in Act. 16 40. And when
they had seen the brethren, they comforted them and departed. Now then if these
brethren are supposed to be infants, how, and with what did the apostles
comfort them? Upon the whole, it is evident that she had no children in her
household, but such as could and did make a profession before they were baptized.

And with respect to the household of Stephanus, see 1 Cor. 16.15, 16. I beseech
you brethren, ye know the house of Stephanus, that it is the first fruits of
Achaia, and that they have addicted themselves to the ministry of the saints;
that ye submit yourselves unto such. Now from the time of the writting this
first epistle to the Corinthians, back to Paul's preaching at Corinth, was but
about five years, as appears by the dates in the bible. Now then, if the
household of Stephanus were baptized in infancy, they must have been in the
ministry over the church, at about six or seven years of age, which I think is
exceeding unlikely.

But let me ask you, if the apostles had constantly practiced baptizing
infants, is it not much more probable there would have been some direct account
of it, some where in the new testament, than that there was infants baptized in
some one or other of these households? Where were the infants of the three
thousand that came together to see that strange thing? As it is in the eyes of
all unconverted people, to see the Holy Ghost poured out upon the apostles, do
you think they brought their infants with them to be baptized, or no? No, it is
evident they did not; as may be shown presently. But why do I talk thus of
probabilities; let us prove from scripture what the apostles practice was;
re-consider and see Gal 3 27. As many of you as have been baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ. Says the Rev. Mr. Fish, on the text, That as, in your
baptism, you put on the character of christians, you declared or professed,
that you received Christ as your Lord and Savior. See his sermons. page 37.
And I verily believe the gentleman was quite right; for I cannot believe, that
to put on Christ, can mean any thing less than that they were true believers in
Christ. Now then, if as many, or all of them that were baptized, had made their
profession, so that it was evident they had faith in Christ, then the apostles
did not baptize children that made no profession: nor is there any believers
that dare declare that all their infants have faith in Christ.

The third argument is drawn from Act. 15.10 Now therefore why tempt ye God to
put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples? Here they say, inasmuch as it
appears from the chapter, that the yoke was circumcision which they would have
laid upon children at eight days old, infants are called disciples in the
scripture, and therefore they are so, and have a right to be baptized by the
commission, Mat. 28.19. where disciples are ordered to be baptized, though the
word children or infants is not mentioned.

But let me ask you why you do not admit infants to the Lord's table, inasmuch
as our Savior tells us in Mat. 26.27. Drink ye all off it. Is not that as much
an institution for disciples as baptism? Do you indeed keep ordinances
according to your own mind?

But for answer, I say the word why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the neck of
the disciples, does not conclude, that all on whom they would have laid that
yoke, were disciples. The church of Antioch was a Gentile church, see Act.
21.25 the believers in it bad not been circumcised; so that the putting the
yoke upon the neck of the believers of the church of Antioch, of whom they
spoke, was putting a yoke upon the neck of the disciples; although there might be
thousands of infants, or others which were not disciples, on whom they would
have laid that yoke. This will appear to be the true meaning of this text, if
it is compared with our Savior's explanation of the word DISCIPLE, see Luke 14
27. And whosoever does not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be my
disciple. Now did all the infants of the church of Antioch, and do all infants
of all believers, take up their cross and follow Christ? Ver. 26 If any man
come to me, and hate not his father and mother, yea and his own life also, he
cannot be my disciple. Did, and do all the infants of believers, love God to
that degree that their love to their fathers and mothers, and to their own
lives, when in competition to their love to God, is but hatred? Of if you do
not like my explanation, do all the infants of all believers hate their fathers
and mothers, and their own lives, with a perfect hatred?

The fourth argument is drawn from Acts 2. and part of the 38 and 39 verses.
Repent and be baptized every one of you -- For the promise is to you and to
your children. Here they argue that the promise was mentioned as an
encouragement to both parents and children, to be baptized. I answer, that the
promise is mentioned as an encouragement to them to repent, and be baptized;
but not that they should be baptized without repentance. But as true repentance
cannot be, without true faith, this text is another instance of true faith's
being a rule, in order to be admitted to baptism. Especially when compared with
the last part of the same verse. Repent and be baptized every one of you, in
the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the
gift of the Holy Ghost. Here I would ask, was there ever a promise of remission
of sins and of the gift of the Holy Ghost, made to baptism without repentance?
if not, then the promise they speak of could be no encouragement to baptism
without repentance. Again we see in the chapter these jewish believers were
baptized themselves; but did they have their children baptized. NO. It is
evident they did not, for we see verse 42, they continued steadfastly in the
apostles doctrine: But they continued steadfastly in the practice of
circumcising their children, therefore that was the apostles doctrine, see Acts
21.20. And they were all zealous of the law: that is the law of circumcision,
as appears from the 21st verse. And they also advised St. Paul to show the
jewish believers, that he kept that law, as in verse 24. To circumcise the
children therefore, was the apostles doctrine and the jewish believers
practice. But if baptism was appointed in the room and stead of circumcision,
then circumcision must have ceased, and would have been no more an institution,
than if it never had been instituted. Now to set up circumcision as a seal
after that, without divine warrant: was to set up a seal of their own in
opposition to that which God had set up. Pray what manner of men do they make
of the apostles, were they the vilest of men? surely no.

The fifth argument is drawn from Mark 10.14, 15. I do not remember any account
of our Savior's being displeased, but when something was said, which tended to
hinder the channels of his mercy to poor perishing sinners. But I suppose no
one will deny that those children were brought to Christ to plead for mercy:
likely their parents were poor and despised in the world; perhaps the disciples
therefore, though it it below their blessed master, to take notice of such
miserable creatures, as likely they appeared to be. But our Savior soon
corrects their mistake; and says he, Suffer the little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God. I understand it is,
as if he had said, those children are in a deplorable condition, polluted with
sin, and exposed to the everlasting wrath of God. Hinder them not from coming
to me for mercy. In me is a fullness whereby is sustained the whole kingdom of
God.

But they argue from the words, suffer little children to come unto me, for of
such is the kingdom of God. That some little children belong to the kingdom of
God, and therefore have a right to church membership and its ordinance. But why
do they say some children? I never knew them to argue that the children that
were brought to Christ, were children of believing parents. But I believe those
persons that brought these children to Christ, were converted persons; and as
it is truly every one's duty to search the scriptures to know what is their
duty, and not to pin their faith upon other men's sleeves without evidence, I
am willing you should make the best of your arguments; I will therefore give
you the reason why I think so. -- But to return -- Observe the word, of such is
the kingdom of God: here is an ALL implied: -- the kingdom means all the
kingdom. Does it not? Is the kingdom of God made up of such infants? Have all
the infants of believing parents an interest in Christ by faith? If there be
evidence of that, then they are proper subjects of baptism; but if not, how do
they belong to the kingdom of God? But if you would have it, that by the
kingdom of God is meant church membership, our Savior tells you in the next
verse, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he
shall not enter therein. -- And can no person enter into your church, unless he
receive it as a little child? You will answer, doubtless they can and do.

But I come now to let you know, why I think those persons that brought the
children to Christ, were converted persons. When any person (at a time) is
under the operation of the Spirit of God, and is brought to see that the
punishment, eternal misery! is, if any thing, much less than he deserves; oh!
now he is amazed at the mercy of God! that he is not sent into the eternal
torments of hell, Lev. 26.41. Ezekiel. 36.31. Now if his heart cries to God for
mercy, God does show himself, in and through Christ, Joh. 17.3. and chap 6.40.
to be more willing to forgive him, than any of you could be to pull an only
son, or your dearest friend on earth out of the flaming fire, if he lay
screaming there. For we all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same image. Now if those that brought the
children to Christ, had not been made thus to know Christ, likely they would,
with the unconverted multitude of that age, have called him the carpenter's
son; or with the topping pharisees of them times, who were not willing that
Christ should preach, have demanded by what authority, and have said this
fellow, etc. and not have come to him for a blessing upon their children. But
the word (at a time) was put because most people think they have known their
punishment for sin was just, ever since they came to the years of
understanding, although their heart rises up against it, and thinks hard of the
punishment. This is what some call an historical knowledge, or learnt by man,
and is not of the operation of the spirit of God. Job 36.22. Behold God
exalts by his power, who teaches like him?

Again, if they should say they have had the same lively sense of it always,
ever since they had an understanding, I should think it was only the same
historical knowledge which is common to all natural men of understanding, and
not from the Spirit of God, Song 3.4. and 5.4.

The sixth argument is taken from 1 Cor. 7.14. And the unbelieving wife is
sanctified by the husband, else were your children unclean; but now are they
holy. Here they ask what holiness this can mean, if it is not such an holiness
as intitles the children to baptism? To which I answer, that it may be such an
holiness as the children of Israel had, on account of which they were called an
holy people, an holy nation, etc. which was an holiness that did entitle them
to circumcision, but now to abstinence from meats offered to idols, etc. but
not to baptism. Baptism is a profession of the subject, that he has faith in
Christ. See Col. 2.12. Being buried with him in baptism; wherein also ye are
risen with him through the faith. Says the Rev. Mr Fish, in his sermons, p. 41.
As if he had said, in and by your baptism, you signify and declare, that your
old man, the body of sin, is crucified with Christ. Then how can the body of
sin be crucified with Christ, without faith in him? But was circumcision a
profession of faith in Christ? The answer is, No: it was ordered to be
administered to the males of the sojourner among the children of Israel, who had
a mind to keep the passover, and to all the males of the children of Israel.
Were these all converted persons? such as could in truth profess that they were
true believers in Christ? Do you think that God ordered or directed his people
to be false? But says the Rev. Mr. Parsons, in his book, entitled, Infant
Baptism vindicated, p. 28. Circumcision signified putting off the sins of the
flesh and so does baptism, Colos. 2.11. This text does not say that
circumcision made with hands, did signify that the subjects of it had put off
the sins of the flesh: but Abraham did not circumcise without hands. Did
circumcision signify that the subjects of it had put off the sins of the flesh?
No. Circumcision was given to teach faith in Christ, and was a seal of the
promise that God would justify such as had or should have faith in Christ, see
Gal 3.8 -- 29. And the scripture foreseeing that God would justify the heathen
through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, in thee shall
all nations be blessed. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and
heirs according to the promise. Thus circumcision was a token, assurance, or
seal, that God would justify Abraham, inasmuch as he had faith in Christ, though
it was before he was circumcised, Romans 4 11. But does not baptism signify that
the subjects of it had put off the sins of the flesh? Why then did the apostles
require faith in Christ, as a rule for their administering the ordinance of
baptism? You don't pretend that the commission, Mat. 28.^9 authorized the
apostles to baptize any but disciples; and they are such as are true believers
in Christ, if I can understand our Savior's explanation of the word Disciple,
in the 14th chapter of Luke. Will not God's saying in Jer. 31.31, 32. I will
make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: Not
according to the covenant that I made with their fathers, convince you that
there is a difference between the new church covenant, and that made with
Abraham; although the new excels, yet that made with Abraham was great. Although
the apostle Paul, writing to the Roman church, says, 2 chap. 26. Shall not his
uncircumcision be counted for circumcision? Such as have faith in Christ will
be justified, when one that is circumcised, not having faith in Christ, will be
condemned. He in the 3d chap v.i says, What advantage then has the Jew? or
what profit is there of circumcision? ver. 2. Chiefly, because that unto them
were committed the oracles of God. A great gift this, which taught the main
errand of the bible, viz. Faith in Christ. But oh! how slothful is man, that he
must be whipped with the yoke of circumcision, to make him remember himself, and
to teach his children. O the depth of the riches has of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding
out. To whom be glory forever. Amen. Romans 11.33.36.

With Respect to the Mode of Baptism.
IT is argued by some, in favor of believers baptism, from Acts 8.38, 39. that
both Philip and the Eunuch went down into the water, and came up out of the
water; from whence they say it is evident that the Eunuch was baptized by
dipping.

This is answered by some, in favor of sprinkling for baptism, that the Greek
preposition ( ek) here rendered out of, properly signifies from. To which for
answer I say, that the word from. being alone, has no signification at all. If
I should meet you in the street, and say from, what could you know by it? Ek,
therefore of itself, or with some additional word, must signify from the place
where they were. Now if the place where they were was in the water, then the
old translators were right in saying out of the water; for to say from in the
water, is not good English, although it would have the same meaning: but if the
place where they were was at the water, then these new translators. Wherefore
the argument turns upon the Greck preposition, eis, which they say in the place
under consideration, was rendered into, and naturally signifies unto, and is
commonly so used in the new testament. Thus Mat. 15.24. Unto the lost sheep.
Joh. 13.1. Unto the end. Joh. 7.8. Unto the feast. 1 These 1. (...). Our gospel
came not unto you. But if the Greek word eis, signified unto, and did not
signify into, why did they not tell us what Greek word signified into, so that
we might have seen the difference. But casting my eyes into a Greek testament,
where in the text under consideration, Act. 8.38. the apostle has written eis
to; now if they show us that eis to, was always translated unto, and never
translated into, and that some other Greek word was always translated into, and
never translated unto, I shall believe the old translators were wrong then, and
never till then. Thus they have utterly failed of showing that the old
translators were wrong. How, when in the text under consideration, the Greek is
eis to, do they think to convince us by saying that eis alone signified unto?
Nevertheless in my observation, there is verses in scripture wherein there is
into in English, and only eis in Greek. Thus the Greek, in Acts 16.40. there is
eis, the English in that text is, and entered into the house of Lydia; and in
Rev. 17.11. there is eis, in English, into perdition: which gives me reason to
think that the Greclans, when they intended into, wrote eis to, unless where
there was a word in the text that forced the sense, into, as in the first of
these instances ENTERED, we cannot suppose that they entered the house, and did
not go in: so in the second instance, the beast could not be supposed to go to
perdition, and not go into perdition. The like observation I have in our own
language in many instances: see 1 Samuel 1.21. And the man Elkanah, and all his
house, went up to offer. What person of sense can suppose that Elkanah went up
with his house to offer, and left all his people at home. But what if the text
had declared, that Elkanah's house was all of a light fire, would you have
supposed his people were all of a blaze, and burnt like tinder? Is not the like
done by those people, with respect to the Greek word, hudata polla, which they
say signifies many waters, although it is translated much water, see Joh. 3.23.
And John was baptizing in Enon, near to Salem, because there was much water
there. Had John any need to baptize in Enon, because there was much water
there, when a small vial full of water would baptize an hundred, according to
your mode of sprinkling? Surely now if the people had water to drink, they
might have easily spared two drops to put in their face, for that would be
sprinkling; for they say it is not in the quantity of water which they baptize
with: but they say they went unto Enon, to get drink for themselves and their
horses. Who ever took a journey to Enon to get drink for himself and his horse,
and all his other creatures at home, had a sufficiency and to spare, so had no
need to drive them. But they baptized in Enon, because there was much water
there, or water sufficient to plunge the subject in. But they further say in
favor of sprinkling, that it appears from Acts 2. 41. that there was three
thousand baptized at Jerusalem in one day, (most certainly toward the close of
the day) and was there any probability that they all should be baptized by
dipping in so short a time? I do not understand the text, that they were
baptized that day, but that they were added that day. Now when persons are
converted, they do in heart give up themselves solemnly, voluntarily and freely
to God, as their king to rule and reign over them, and to obey all his
commands, which teaches them every duty to their brother or brethren. Baptism
therefore is a renewing and solemn profession of this covenant, and is to be
complied with as soon as may be. 1 John 2.19 They went our from us, but they
were not of us. It must be supposed that those here spoken of were baptized
persons, yet they were not of the apostles or children of God, because they
were not converted persons, therefore they were not of them. Ergo, baptism is
not adding. Jer. 31.33. But this shall be the covenant that I will make with
the house of Israel, After those days, says the Lord, I will put my law in
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts. It is not to be supposed that
God never converted a person before, but that this should be the rule of
church-membering in the new church covenant, a covenant which is not according
to the old national church covenant, in which they had to teach every man his
brother. This shows that they did not all know the Lord, which were in the old
covenant, ver. 32. But with respect to the new covenant, how soon was it
declared, that Simon the sorcerer had neither part nor lot in the matter when
it was found that his heart was not right in the sight of God, Act. 8.21.
further see Act. 2.47. And the Lord added to the church daily, such as should
be saved, and not that the apostles added them. Therefore the text, a and 41 of
Acts, does not prove but they were baptized the next day, or onwards.

Again, if the word of God, as recorded in the original languages, is wrong
translated into the English tongue, then that which is wrong cannot be the word
of God. But the truth contained in the bible is proved by many witnesses, that
as it is now translated it is the word of God. For there is no person who has
been converted in the path way or line of the gospel, but what knows assuredly
that the bible is the word of God. But if you should tell me that there are
some passages in scripture which are not thus proved, I would tell you for
answer, that the translators were not men that were then carrying on arguments
in favor of their own party: but as they were men of the greatest knowledge in
the tongues that were then to be found in the nation, and doubtless were vastly
superior to any of our learned men that pretend in this day to correct them,
and that they did translate into, etc. from the same Greek word that they used
to translate into from; therefore; I shall believe them, if a thousand
reverends tells me to the contrary. But if these men may translate the bible as
they please, what argument can they not gain? And now it appears from Acts 8
38.39. that sprinkling is not according to the inititution: and it also appears
by the (...) in the foregoing, that the the infants of believers, as such, are
not the subjects of the institution. Nor can they say they (...) covenant, as
in Mat. 2^.19. In the (...) of the (...), and of the Father, and of the Son and
of the Holy Ghost, according to the institution. Now if it were commanded of
believers, why they do not comply with the institution? Will it do to say, some
minister or other pretended to baptize me? And what else can they say? -- Now,
that we may find what is the TRUTH, and practice accordingly, is the sincere
desire of

Yours, etc. Joseph Brown.

Thus I have made some observations on every argument respecting baptism, that
I think worthy of notice; but give me leave to mention one which I think not
worth notice, which was expressed in these words, viz.

That doctrine which infers all infants to be in the visible kingdom of satan,
is certainly false doctrine: -- But the doctrine that denies all infants to be
members of the visible church, infers them to be members of the visible kingdom
of satan; therefore it is false doctrine. I hope this argument was not put to
make people think that baptism was regeneration, nor to scare some old woman or
other into their principle. But in answer, I suppose you will not pretend that
satan has a kingdom upon earth, into which he takes in and casts out members:
but they who submit to baptism without a right, are more exposed to the kingdom
of satan than those who are not baptized at all; for they who are not true
believers in Christ, not having their wills bowed, will certainly be rejected
of Christ, while they who are true believers in Christ, will be received to
glory, babtized or not. AMEN.

NOW suffer me to say something respecting the unreasonableness of compelling
the people of one persuasion to hear or support the ministers of another. Can a
person who has been redeemed, be so ungrateful as to hire a minister to preach
up a doctrine which in his heart he believes to be directly contrary to the
institution of his redeemer? Now if one of you should happen to be in company
with a number of Roman Catholics, who should tell you that if you would not
hire a minister to preach up transubstantiation, and the worshipping of images
to your children and to an unthinking people, they would cut off your head;
could you do it? Can you any better submit to hire a minister to preach up a
doctrine which you in your heart believe directly contrary to the institution
of Christ? I do not doubt but that many of you, and do not know but that all of
you know what it is to experience redeeming love: and if so, how can you take a
person of another persuasion, and put him in goal for a trifling sum, destroy
his estate and ruin his family (as you signify the law will bear you out) when
he is careful to support the religion which he in his conscience looks upon to
be right, who honestly tells you it is wronging his conscience to pay to your
minister, and that he may not do it though he suffer? Mat. 18 33. Should you
not have had compassion on thy fellow servant, even as I had pity on thee? How
does it seem to a people of another persuasion, to have you say, hire me a
minister to preach up my doctrines to myself and my children, and to all the
people. -- What, hire a minister to preach up a doctrine directly against our
opinion! May we not as well do it ourselves, and that would be lying in us, and
knowingly contradicting our Savior. Do you grudge to support your own
minister, so far as he is faithful in what you say is your Savior's religion?
Mat. 10.8. Freely ye have received, freely give. What if a number of children,
on the request of a father, should say one to another, Do you do it; and do you
do it; and I wish brother you would do it? Is it not shame -- Are we sharers in
redemption, and do we grudge to support religion? No: let us seek for the truth
of the gospel. If we cannot think alike, let us not be cruel one to another, but
remember the words of our Savior, Mat. 18.33 and 25.40. Inasmuch as ye have
done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. --
And for a conclusion -- If any, or all of you, are offended at these things, I
entreat you forbear. O! come let us strive to pattern after our Savior,
honestly meaning to enlighten each other: He, when he was reviled, buffetted,
spit on, and nailed to the cross, and mocked, cried, FATHER, FORGIVE.

FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 6. last Line, for as, read is.


