AN APPEAL to the PUBLIC, IN BEHALF OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND IN AMERICA.

By THOMAS BRADBURY CHANDLER, D. D. Rector of St. John's Church, in
Elizabeth-Town, New Jersey, and Missionary from the Society for the Propagation
of the Gospel, etc.

We desire a fair Trial -- if we are guilty, punish us; if we are innocent,
protect us. JUSTIN MARTYR. NEW YORK: Printed by JAMES PARKER, at the
NEW-PRINTING-OFFICE, in BEAVER-STREET. M, DCC, LXVII.

A BISHOP, that shall have the chief Inspection over those whom he is to
ordain, and over the Labors of those already placed; whom he shall direct and
assist in every Thing; and who governs himself by the Rules of the primitive
Church, and by the Advice of his Brethren, is the likeliest Instrument both for
propagating and preserving the Christian Religion.

Bishop Burnet.

AN APPEAL TO THE PUBLIC, IN BEHALF OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND IN AMERICA:
WHEREIN THE ORIGINAL AND NATURE OF THE EPISCOPAL OFFICE ARE BRIEFLY CONSIDERED,
REASONS FOR SENDING BISHOPS TO AMERICA ARE ASSIGNED, THE PLAN ON WHICH IT IS
PROPOSED TO SEND THEM IS STATED, AND THE OBJECTIONS AGAINST SENDING THEM ARE
OBVIATED AND CONFUTED: With an APPENDIX, WHEREIN IS GIVEN SOME ACCOUNT OF AN
ANONYMOUS PAMPHLET.

ERRATA.
THE Author's Inability to attend upon the Press, has occasioned some Errata,
of which the following are the most material, which are to be corrected thus:
In Page 1, Line 10, for the Support, read Support of the. Page 9 in the Note,
for Fast, read Fasti. Page 14, l. 13, for nor, read or. Page 21, l. 25, for
this, read these. Page 22 in the Notes, for niscis, read nescis; for Justar,
read Instar; and quidam, read quidem. Page 67, l. 2, for Person, read Persons.
Page 73, l. 24, for The Opinion, read His Opinion. Page 76, l. 31, for full,
read the full. Page 83 in the Note, for Chlandler, read Chandler. Page 88, l.
22, for could, read should. Page 89, l. 30, for others, read the others. Page
98, l. 8, for King, read Kings.

TO The Most Reverend Father in GOD, THOMAS, Lord Archbishop of CANTERBURY,
Primate of all England, etc.
May it Please Your Grace,
THE Arguments for sending Bishops of the Church of England to America, are so
strong and convincing, that an Appeal may be made to the World for the
Reasonableness of sending them. The general Plan which has been long settled
for the Regulation of their Authority when sent, is so well calculated to
secure the religious Privileges of every Denomination of Christians, that
nothing more than a proper Explanation can be needful, to recommend it to the
Approbation of every candid and unprejudiced Person. For Want of this, many are
still averse to an American Episcopate, and some are industriously employed in
misrepresenting the Matter, and in propagating their Prejudices and Objections
against it. It is therefore the general Opinion here, that it is at length
become necessary, to explain this Plan, and thereby, as the most effectual
Method, to remove these Prejudices and Objections.

Such, My Lord, is the Design of the following Appeal. The Author of it was not
forward to undertake the Work. Want of Leisure, and a Consciousness of
Inability to execute it properly, were Difficulties in his Way not easy to be
surmounted. But as no one appeared that was willing to perform what all seemed
to allow was necessary to be done, and as he was requested by many of his
Brethren to undertake it, he finally consented.

Without this Apology, the Author would not presume to inscribe to Your Grace
so imperfect a Piece, or to ask for it your Patronage. Nor indeed would any
Apology justify him in doing so, did he not know that Your Grace takes a
Pleasure in encouraging every well-meant Endeavor, however unsuccessful it may
prove, to serve the Cause of Religion and the Church of Christ -- of which
amiable Disposition your whole Life has been a Proof.

As to the Church of England in America, it will ever be acknowledged with all
Thankfulness, that none has shown for it a more affectionate Concern, or
treated the Members of it or its Clergy with more Kindness and Condescension
than Your Grace. Several of them You have honored with a private
Correspondence; and but few have gone Home from this Country for Holy Orders
for a long Course of Years, who have not been able on their Return, to tell of
the great Obligations You have conferred upon them. And this was the Case long
before your Advancement to that high Station, whereby You became related to all
of them as their Metropolitan, and to many of them also as President of the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in foreign Parts.

But besides these particular Kindnesses shown to the Clergy, the general State
and Interest of the American Church, has always been the Object of your close,
and careful, and anxious Attention. None has ever entered so deeply into the
Knowledge of her Condition, or had so true a Sense of her Wants, or represented
them to the Public in so proper and striking a Light, as Your Grace did many
Years ago, in your most excellent anniversary Sermon preached before the
Society. Therein particularly You explained the Need and Usefulness of an
American Episcopate; and what You then said and published on the Subject,
together with what You have continued to speak and write ever since, on all
proper Occasions, has probably contributed more to prepare the Way for it, so
far as it has been prepared, than what has been said, and written, and done, by
any other Person. For these Things, as well as on other Accounts, the Clergy
and Friends of the Church in America revere You, with Sentiments of the
sincerest Gratitude. They look up to Your Grace as eminently their Friend and
Patron; and they can never despair of the Success of their late Application,
while so reasonable a Cause is supported by your Abilities and Influence.

At the same Time they are not insensible of the Obligations they are under to
many other illustrious Persons, and especially to some great Prelates of the
Church, who have been pleased to become their Advocates on this Occasion: And
it is not doubted but they will continue to assist and cooperate with Your
Grace in this good Work, of rescuing the American Church from the Distress she
is under, through the Want of an Episcopate. Every Attempt to relieve her, My
Lord, is really an Act of Charity; and it may properly be said that "the
Blessing of her that is ready to perish," will come upon those that befriend
her in this Necessity.

As the following Papers were drawn up with a View of serving the Cause, which
you have always had so greatly at Heart, and been foremost in promoting, in
that Respect they can be addressed to none so properly as to Your Grace. But in
many Respects the Offering is unworthy of your Acceptance; and yet -- since it
is made with an Intention of publicly expressing, not only that Reverence
which is due to your exalted Station in the Church, but that Gratitude to which
You are entitled, by the many signal Proofs You have given of your Attention,
to the general Interest of Religion, and especially of the Church of England in
America, and your Concern for it, and assiduous Exertions in its Behalf; it is
humbly hoped that it will not be rejected.

If it may be received also as a Testimony of Gratitude, for particular Favors
which Your Grace has condescended to bestow on the Author, it will add greatly
to his Happiness.

That GOD may long continue your Life and Health, so useful to the Public, and
of such peculiar Importance to the Church in America -- and, that You may have
the Satisfaction of seeing all your pious and benevolent Attempts to promote
the Happiness of Mankind attended with Success, and in the End find them
gloriously rewarded -- is the daily and devout Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Grace's most dutiful and obliged Son, and obedient humble
Servant, THOMAS BRADBURY CHANDLER.
Elizabeth-Town, in New Jersey, June 24, 1767.
Advertisement to the Reader.
THE Author of the following Appeal, has said, by Way of Apology, that he was
requested by many of his Brethren to undertake it. He thinks it not amiss to
declare more particularly, with the same View, that the Task was first imposed
upon him by the very worthy and Reverend Dr. Johnson of Stratford in
Connecticut. From that venerable Person a Work of this Nature would have come,
with more Propriety, and greater Advantage to the Cause. For an Appeal to the
Public in Behalf of the Church of England in America, on the present Occasion,
could be made by none so properly, or with so good Effect, as by him, who has
so frequently signalized himself as its Advocate, for the Course of more than
Forty Years, and who, for a considerable Part of that Time, has been anxiously
soliciting the Cause of an American Episcopate. But a Tremor in the Hand,
which causes him to write with the utmost Difficulty himself, made it necessary
that he should leave the Work for another. He thought proper to apply to the
Author, whose Obligations to him were such, that he could not refuse him any
Thing in his Power, without incuring the Imputation of Ingratitude and
Injustice.

At the Time when this Treaty was nearly concluded, the Clergy of New York and
New Jersey, being met together in a voluntary Convention, and assisted by some
of their Brethren from the neighboring Provinces, took into Consideration the
Propriety and Expediency of addressing the Public, on the Subject of an
American Episcopate. After a thorough Discussion of the Point, they were
unanimously of Opinion, that fairly to explain the Plan on which American
Bishops had been requested, to lay before the Public the Reasons of this
Request, to answer the Objections that had been made, and to obviate those that
might be otherwise conceived against it, was not only proper and expedient, but
a Matter of Necessity and Duty. It was accordingly voted that Something to this
Purpose should be published, and the Author was appointed to this Service --
with Liberty, however, to make the Time of his performing it most convenient to
himself. Excuses were not admitted, and a Refusal could not be justified.

The Author, being brought thus under double Engagements, determined to acquit
himself as well as his Circumstances and Abilities would permit. In Order to
this, he was careful to follow the Directions he had received, and, as he had
Opportunity, to consult the most judicious of his Friends, in Regard to the
Method and Management of the Work. How he has succeeded, must be submitted to
the Judgment of the Reader, whose Candor is requested.

It gives the Author great Pleasure, to find that his Sentiments have been so
clearly and forcibly expressed, by The Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of
Landaff, in his excellent anniversary Sermon preached before the Society in
February last. The Thanks of every Friend of the American Church are due to His
Lordship, for so seasonable and spirited an Assertion and Vindication of its
Rights; from which it is not doubted but the following Extract will be
acceptable to the Reader, although for Want of Room it must of Necessity be
short.

The want of Bishops (in America) has been all along the more heavily
lamented, because it is a case so singular, that it cannot be paralleled in the
Christian world. For what sect was ever any where at all allowed, that was not
allowed the means within themselves of providing for the continual exercise of
their worship? the granting one without the other would be but a mockery, Yet
such is the state of our church in the colonies; and at a time, and in a realm,
where the rights of conscience are best understood, and most fully allowed and
protected. All sects of Protestant Christians at home, and all, save one,
throughout our colonies, have the full enjoyment of their religion. Even the
Romish superstition, within a province lately added to the British dominions,
is completely allowed in all points; it has Bishops. -- Thus stands the case
of all churches in our colonies, except only the church here by law
established; that alone is not tolerated in the whole, it exists only in part,
in a maimed state, lopt of Episcopacy, an essential part of its constitution.
And whence this disgraceful distinction? whence this mark of distrust? what is
the fear? what the danger? A few persons vested with authority to ordain
ministers, to confirm youth, and to visit their own clergy. Can two or three
persons, restrained to these spiritual functions, be dangerous to any in any
matter? in what? or to whom? Can they possibly, so limited, on any pretense
whatever, attempt to molest any in their religious concerns? Can they invade
the rights and jurisdiction of magistrates? Can they infringe the liberties of
the people? Can they weaken, or be thought disposed to weaken, the fidelity of
the colonies to his Majesty, or their dependence on this country? To these
duties, if there be any difference, the members of this church, as such are
bound by one special motive, besides the many motives common to them with other
subjects. Page 22, etc.

THE INTRODUCTION. Page 1 SECTION I. A Sketch of the Arguments in favor of
Episcopacy. p. 3 SECTION II. The Powers peculiar to the Episcopal Office shown
to be those of Government, Ordination and Confirmation. p. 13 SECTION III. That
the Church in America, without an Episcopate, is necessarily destitute of a
regular Government, and cannot enjoy the Benefits of Ordination and
Confirmation. p. 26 SECTION IV. The unparalleled Hardship of this Case
represented. p. 39 SECTION V. Reasons assigned why the Church in America has
been thus neglected. p. 47 SECTION VI. That the present Juncture is apprehended
to be favorable to the Episcopate in Question. p, 54 SECTION VII. The Case of
the American Heathens particularly considered, and shown to require an
Episcopate. p. 61 SECTION VIII. The Plan on which American Bishops have been
requested, fairly stated, with Expostulations on the Reasonableness thereof. p.
75 SECTION IX. That the Episcopate proposed cannot hurt the Dissenters, and is
free from all reasonable Objections. p. 87 SECTION X. The Case of Tithes
distinctly examined, and the Apprehension of being forced to pay them in this
Country, proved to be entirely groundless. p. 97 SECTION XI. Farther Suspicions
and Objections obviated, and the Subject concluded. p. 107 An Appendix. p. 119
AN APPEAL TO THE PUBLIC, etc.
The Introduction.
THAT Application has been lately made to our Superiors, by the Clergy of
several of the Colonies, requesting one or more Bishops to be sent to America,
is a Matter now generally known, and was never intended to be kept as a Secret.
As there is great Reason to hope, both from a Review of the Arguments that were
offered in the Support of Addresses that were transmitted on the Occasion, and
from the favorable Disposition of many in Authority, that this Request in due
Time will be granted; it has been thought proper, in a public Manner, to inform
all who may imagine themselves to be any Ways concerned in the Event of our
Application, heartily and explicitly, for what Reasons, and with what Views, an
American Episcopate is so earnestly desired by the Clergy, and the other
Friends and Members of the Church.

Some Persons are said to have been alarmed by this Conduct of the Clergy; but
when the Case shall be duly explained and understood, it is not apprehended
that any Uneasiness will remain, or that any Opposition can be formed against
the Execution of a Plan, so reasonable in itself, so necessary to the Church
here, and so universally harmless to others of every Denomination. As no
Invasion of the civil or religious Privileges of any, whether Churchmen or
Dissenters, is thereby intended, it is hoped that every Objection, or even
Doubt or Suspicion of that Nature, will, by this Method, be entirely obviated.
But should any Objections continue which shall be thought to deserve Notice,
the Objectors are invited to propose them in such a Manner, that they may be
fairly and heartily debated, before the Tribunal of the Public; and if none
shall be offered, it will be taken for granted that all Parties acquiesce and
are satisfied.

SECTION I. A Sketch of the Arguments in Favor of Episcopacy.
IN Order to judge properly of the Subject before us, it is necessary to
premise, SECT. I.
and it should be well considered, that the Church of England is Episcopal, and
consequently holds the Necessity of Bishops to govern the Church, and to confer
Ecclesiastical Powers upon others. Of this there can be no Dispute, since many
of her public Offices, and indeed the whole System of her Conduct with Regard
to the Clergy is founded on this Principle.

In the general Preface to the Ordination Offices she declares, that it is
evident to all Men diligently reading the Holy Scriptures and ancient Authors,
that from the Apostles Time there has been this Order in Christ's Church,
Bishops, Priests and Deacons, as several Offices. And her Practice of admiting
none to officiate as Clergymen, who have not been ordained by Bishops, is a
Proof, that she esteems every other Ordination to be, at least, irregular and
defective. It is not necessary to enter upon a particular Defense of this
Doctrine, in an Undertaking of this Nature; since our present Plea is equally
valid, whether these Principles are founded rightly or wrongly. However, a
brief Sketch of the Arguments, whereby the Necessity of Episcopal Government is
defended, may, on this Occasion, be not altogether useless or improper.

It is an essential Doctrine of the Church of England, that none can have any
Authority in the Christian Church, but those who derive it from Christ, either
mediately or immediately. Those who receive Authority immediately from Christ,
before they can expect Submission to it from others, must be able to prove that
they have it; for which nothing less can suffice, at this Day, than the Power
of working Miracles. Those who receive it mediately, must derive it from those
Persons whom Christ has authorized to convey it, i. e. they must receive it by
a regular Succession. For any to say, that such a Succession cannot be proved,
is insufficient: it is incumbent on the Objectors to prove that the Succession,
by which we hold, has been interrupted. Proof of this, although zealously
attempted, has never yet been made; and could this Point once be made clear, it
would also prove farther, that Christ has neglected to provide for his Church,
in a Case so essential to the very Being of it, notwithstanding his having
expressly promised to be "ever with it, to the End of the World."

Men may ridicule the Notion of uninterrupted Succession as they please; but if
the Authority of the Clergy is derived from Christ, (and if it is not, they are
no Ministers of Christ) they must receive it in one of the Ways already
mentioned. And if the Succession be once broken, and the Power of Ordination
once lost, not all the Men on Earth -- not all the Angels in Heaven, without an
immediate Commission from Christ, can restore it. It is as great an Absurdity,
on St. Paul's Principles, for a Man to preach without being properly sent, as
it is to hear without a Preacher, or to believe in him of whom we have never
heard.

As Christ is the great Founder of the Church, so he is the only Fountain of
Ecclesiastical Authority. Whatever general Laws he was pleased to injoin, must
be of indispensible Obligation to all his Followers. Indeed, with Regard to the
Government of the Church, his Laws are expressed in such general Terms, that we
must necessarily have Recourse to those, whom he immediately entrusted with the
Government of his Church, for a more particular Explanation of them.

That the Apostles, to whom he showed himself alive after his Passion, being
seen of them Forty Days, and speaking of the Things pertaining to the Kingdom
of God, understood the Laws of Christ, is not to be doubted: and, as they were
also conducted by the Spirit of God, the more explicit and particular Rules
which they have given for the Government of the Church, must be received --
either as authentic Explanations of Christ's general Laws, or as Regulations
that are agreeable and conformable to them. To this must be added, that the
public Practice of the Apostles is a faithful and plain Comment on the Laws of
Christ, unless we can suppose them to have been unacquainted with, or
disobedient to, his divine Will; and it is of equal Authority with any written
Instructions.

Now if we carefully examine the Writings of the Apostles, and the Canonical
Records of their Proceedings, I must think that these Things will evidently
appear, -- that our blessed Savior, before his Ascension, committed the
Government of his Church upon Earth, entirely to them -- that this Government
was exercised by them -- that they conveyed this Power to others, to be
communicated successively to others, to the latest Posterity -- particularly,
that these their Successors were an Order distinct from, and superior to, those
who are now called Presbyters -- and that none who were not of this highest
Order, had the Powers of Ordination and Government committed to them. It would
lead me too far from my present Design, to establish these Points by particular
Proof; nor can it be necessary, as several of the Facts that support them, have
been brought to a close Examination, and fairly stated to the Public, in the
Instances of James at Jerusalem, Timothy at Ephesus, Titus at Crete, the Angels
of the Seven Churches of Asia, etc. See Archbishop Potter on Church Government.
See also Mr. Leaming's Defense of the Episcopal Government, etc. against the
Objections of Mr. Wells and Dr. Chauncy.


Let us now consider what Evidence arises to favor these Conclusions, from the
general State of the Primitive Church. The Travels of some of the Apostles are
related in Scripture, and from thence, as well as from other Proofs, it
appears, that with amazing Success they planted and settled Churches in all the
most considerable Countries of Asia and Europe, within the Compass of not many
Years. And it is a Fact well known, that all the Churches that were gathered
during the First Century, whether immediately by the Apostles, or their
Missionaries, were under the Direction of some or other of that venerable
Order. Men of the most eminent and undoubted Piety, who had been honored with
their intimate Acquaintance, were appointed by the Apostles to superintend
Churches in certain limited Districts, some of whom were chosen to succeed them
in those Churches which they had always kept under their own more immediate
Inspection. So that during this Period, while the Christian Church was governed
by the Apostles, and others of their Appointment, nothing, in our Opinion, but
gross Prejudice, or a wrangling and captious Disposition, to say no worse, can
lead any to suspect or assert, that it was materially corrupted, or that it had
departed, in any considerable Degree, from that Plan of Government which Christ
had instituted. The Government of the Church is as much a positive Institution
as the Christian Sacraments, and the Laws relating to it bind us as strongly,
as the Laws which oblige us to receive Baptism or the Holy Eucharist. As such
they were considered in the Period we are treating of; and any Attempt to
change them would have been treated with the same Indignation and Resentment by
the Christians of that Age, as if the Laws relating to the Sacraments had been
wilfully violated.

And if we consider the general Character of Christians, and the State of the
Church, in the Second and Third Centuries, we shall find it not easy to
believe, that there could have been any essential Variation or Departure, from
the original Plan of Discipline and Government committed to the Church.
Christianity still continued to be attacked with all the Engines of worldly
Power and Policy, and had nothing to support it, but its own rational Evidence,
accompanied with the Power and Spirit of God, and the Expectation of Happiness
in an invisible State. But very few worldly Prospects and Motives could operate
either on the Clergy or private Christians, when they all knew that their
Religion tended to deprive them of all worldly Advantages, and would probably
cause them to be abused, and insulted, and persecuted, even to Death. Their
only Dependence was on their ascended Redeemer, for whose Sake, and in
Obedience to whom, they sacrificed all the Ease and Happiness and Glory of the
World, esteeming them but as Dross and Dung in Competition with their Duty: In
this State, and with this Disposition, every Law of Christ was valued more than
Life, every received Usage and Practice of the Church was revered as sacred, by
Christians in general.

And as we are obliged to believe, that but few could have been desirous of
making Innovations, so it is utterly incredible that many would have been
willing to submit to them, in Matters of Importance. How firmly the Christians
of those Days were attached to, and how conscientiously they followed, whatever
they esteemed to be an Institution of Christ or his Apostles, the
Quarto-deciman Controversy, or the Dispute which divided the Church about the
proper Time for the keeping of Easter, among others, is a noted Proof. And
although in this Point one Party must have been mistaken, yet it is manifestly
a Matter of no great Consequence, and the Church at that Time was divided in
their Judgment: and, it by no Means follows from this Instance, that the Church
might also have been mistaken in Matters of the greatest Weight, such as those
of Faith and Government, especially when all were united in Opinion.

And as the Practice of the primitive Church was a faithful Comment on the Laws
of Christ, and his Apostles, relating to the Government of the Church; so it is
not so difficult a Matter, to discover what that Practice was, as some may
imagine, The Works of the Apostolical Fathers The Authenticity of some of these
has been warmly disputed, especially of the Epistles of St. Ignatius; and Dr.
Chauncy of Boston has, within a few Years, in an Appendix to his Dudleian
Lecture, endeavored most zealously to invalidate their Testimony. But the
Doctor undoubtedly knows that he has been able to offer nothing new on so
exhausted a Subject; and others know, that he has said Nothing against the
Authenticity of these Epistles, but what has, long ago, been fairly and fully
confuted

Although the Advocates for Episcopacy see no Necessity for giving up the
Testimony of St. Ignatius, it is not from an Opinion that their Cause would
labor under any great Distress, without that Support. It has a much surer
Foundation to rest upon, and they are willing to have it tried on the Footing
of pure Scripture Evidence, as well as that of public and notorious Facts.

Hard is the Fate of ancient Writers! For if they do not luckily countenance
modern Opinions, either their Credit will be directly attacked, or their
Arguments ridiculed or sophistically evaded; and if nothing less will serve the
Authenticity of their Writings, and perhaps that such Persons ever existed,
will be disputed. And when an obstinate Opposition is once undertaken, whether
from Interest, or Spleen and Malignity, no ancient Authors are so secure, not
even some of those of the Holy Bible, but that such Adventurers may be able to
do some Injury to their Reputation and Authority. This Remark accounts for much
of the Opposition St. Ignatius met with in the last Century: Prejudice and a
partial Attachment to particular Systems may probably account for the Remainder.

Father Hardouin, whose general literary Character was not contemptible, is a
remarkable Instance to what Lengths Prejudice, or rather an incomprehensibly
whimsical Humor, may carry a Man, in Cases of this Nature. In a large Work of
his, printed in Paris 1693, He undertakes to prove from Medals, that the
greater Part of those Authors, which have passed upon the Moderns for ancient,
were forged by some Monks of the xiiith Century, who gave to them the several
Names of Homer* Plato, Aristotle, Plutarch, etc. Tertullian, Origin, Basil,
Augustine, etc. He only excepts out of this monkish Manufacture, the Works of
Cicero, Pliny's Natural History, Virgil's Georgicks, and Horace's Satyrs and
Epistles. These he supposes the only genuine Monuments of Antiquity remaining,
except some few Inscriptions and Fast; and with the Assistance of these, he
thinks that these Monks drew up and fashioned all the other ancient Writings,
as Terence Plays, Livy's and Tacitus's History, Virgil's Aeneid, Horace's Odes,
etc nay he pushed this Chimera so far, that he fancied he could see plainly
enough, that Aeneas in Virgil was designed for Jesus Christ, and Horace's
Mistress Lalage for the Christian Religion. See Dr. Jortin's Remarks on
Ecclesiastical History, Vol. 1, Page 42 -- and the New General Biographical
Dictionary.
It is well for these ancient authors, that in a Case which most People can
better judge of, this same Father Hardouin could not distinguish Partridge from
Horse Flesh.


are still extant -- the Writings still remaining of the Second and Third
Centuries are numerous -- we have not only the Christian Apologies of those
Times, in which many Practices of the Church are explained, but private
Epistles from Friends to Friends, in which they are mentioned without Guard or
Disguise -- we have the Regulations and Decrees of Councils -- and the Report
of Ecclesiastical Historians -- to say nothing of other Writers, whose
occasional Testimony will perhaps be less exceptionable to many Persons, as
they had no Design to serve the Cause of Religion. Now these all agree in their
Account of the general Practice and Government of the Church, and the Evidence
arising from the Whole, appears to us to be of irresistible Force in Favor of
Episcopacy; and in the Opinion of Mr. Chillingworth, one of the best Reasoners
the English Nation ever produced, it amounts even to a Demonstration. It
greatly concerns those who can resist this Evidence, to be very careful that
the same Arguments whereby they endeavor to overthrow the Weight of it, do not
also operate with equal Force against the Authenticity of the Canonical Books
of the New Testament.

It is generally allowed by the Rejecters of Episcopacy, that Episcopal
Government obtained very early in the Church. Dr. Doddridge In his Lectures,
etc. Page 498.
admits, that the Distinction between Bishops and Presbyters has been as
ancient as the Time of St. Ignatius: i. e. the Beginning of the Second Century,
and within Seven or Eight Years after the Death of the last of the Apostles.
Now if this Government was not of Apostolical Institution, a general Usurpation
must have been attempted -- the Attempt must have succeeded -- and a capital
Revolution must have been established and completely settled throughout the
Church within a very few Years of the Apostles Death. Those Powers which were
now given to a new Order of Officers, must have been quietly abdicated by their
former Possessors, and the whole Christian Church must have been persuaded to
give up a Form of Government, which had been consecrated by the Practice and
Authority of the Apostles, and then to submit to a new Form, which they had
never experienced or heard of. Surely so great and strange a Work could never
have been accomplished in so short a Time, without the Assistance of
supernatural Power; and the Enemies of Episcopacy must confess, that a very
extraordinary Miracle must, on this Supposition, have been wrought in Favor of
it.

If the Experiment should be made at this Day, what Address would it require,
what a tedious Process would be found necessary, to proselyte even a single
national Church, that of Scotland for Instance, which holds Episcopacy to have
been an Innovation in the Christian Church, to a peaceable Submission to it?
And yet no modern Christians can pretend a greater Veneration and Zeal for
apostolical Institutions, than the primitive Christians were undoubtedly
possessed of. What long Struggles and violent Convulsions have always been
suffered, before any Republican Governments have been brought to acquiesce in a
Change to Monarchy? And yet Men have commonly been found as ready to give up
the established Forms of Civil Government as those of Religion.

But supposing such a Change to have happened, can any tolerable Reason be
assigned, why no Records, no Intimations of it are to be found in History? Can
it be imagined, that while many trifling Occurrences in comparison, such as the
Death of one Bishop, and the Succession of another, and the Birth of a third,
in every Age of the Church have been carefully related, that not the least
Notice should have been taken, either by Friends or Enemies, Pagans or
Christians, of such a capital Revolution? Or, are we able, from this universal
Silence of History, to form any other Conclusion, than that the Event in
Question has never happened?

Let us hear on this Subject a very celebrated Writer Mr. Chillingworth in his
Demonstration of Episcopacy.
. When I shall see therefore all the Fables in the Metamorphosis acted, and
prove true Stories; when I shall see all the Democracies and Aristocrasies in
the World lie down and sleep, and awake into Monarchies; then will I begin to
believe that Presbyterial Government, having continued in the Church, during
the Apostles Times, should presently after (against the Apostles Doctrine and
the Will of Christ) be whirled about like a Scene in a Masque, and transformed
into Episcopacy. In the mean Time while these Things remain thus incredible,
and, in human Reason, impossible, I hope I shall have Leave to conclude thus:

Episcopal Government is acknowledged to have been universally received in the
Church, presently after the Apostles Times:

Between the Apostles Times and this presently after, there was not Time enough
for, nor Possibility of, so great an Alteration:

And therefore there was no such Alteration as is pretended; and therefore
Episcopacy being confessed to be so ancient and Catholic, must be granted also
to be Apostolic.

SECTION II. The Powers peculiar to the Episcopal Office shown to be those of
Government, Ordination and Confirmation.
THE Episcopal Order appearing thus to be distinct from, SECT. II.
and superior to that of Presbyters, it is proper now to enquire, wherein that
Distinction and Superiority consists. In Order to this, we must carefully
separate the several Things that have been added as Appendages to the Episcopal
Office, from those which originally and essentially belong to it. In Christian
Countries, the Alliance between the Church and State has obtained for the
former many Perquisites and Advantages of an external Nature, which may be
reduced to the three Heads of, legal Exemption, temporal Possessions, and civil
Power. These have generally varied in different Countries and Ages; and
although they have influenced the external Form and Appearance of the Church,
yet they have not altered its real Nature, which is always and essentially the
same under all outward Circumstances, whether protected, neglected or
persecuted, by the Powers of the World.

Thus the Woman, in the Visions of St. John Rev. xii.
, was the very same, after she fled into the Wilderness, and was pursued by the
Dragon, as when she was clothed with the Sun, had a Crown of Twelve Stars on
her Head, and the Moon under her Feet, notwithstanding that her outward
Circumstances and Figure were widely different. Every one knows that the Office
of a Clergyman is the same, whether he is possessed of a Fortune, or is without
one -- whether he has a large Parish, or a small one. And if these things make
no Alteration in the Office of a Presbyter, it will be hard to show why they
should alter the Episcopal Office, and why it should not be exactly the same
now, as it was before the Days of Constantine.

As worldly Prosperity or Adversity does not affect the Nature of the Office,
so neither does the Location nor Limitation of it with Regard to Place. He who
has a small Diocese, has the same Episcopal Powers, as he that has a large one;
and it matters not, as to the Validity of the Act, whether it is performed by
the Bishop of Man, or the Archbishop of Canterbury -- or, in the Language of
St. Jerome, whether by the Bishop of Rome or Rhegium, of Constantinople or
Eugubium, of Alexandria or Tanais.

Our present Inquiry therefore, leads us to the Consideration of those Powers
only, which, being inseparable from the Office, and peculiar to it, all
Bishops, as such, are equally possessed of, and without which they would cease
to be Bishops: and these will be found to be the Powers of Government,
Ordination and Confirmation.

The Power or Right of Government is necessarily included in the Superiority of
their Office. For in every Society, where there is a Subordination of Offices,
that which constitutes the highest Office is the legal Possession of the
highest Power; and the superintending and governing Power, being superior to
all others, must of Consequence belong to the highest Office. In the Christian
Church, the Apostles were invested with this Power by Christ -- as it was
intended for perpetual Use, they conveyed it to their Successors -- it was
exercised by Timothy at Ephesus, by Titus at Crete, by Dyonisius the Arcopagite
at Athens, by Epaphroditus at Philippi, by Archippus at Colosse, etc. -- and,
through all the Ages of the Church, it has been transmitted down and maintained
by the Episcopal Order; who, in the exercise of it, have occasionally and
frequently taken the Advice of their Presbyters. The Bishop may communicate
this Power, in some Degree, to Presbyters or others as he shall think proper;
but in such Cases, it must be exercised in Subordination to him, for he can
never divest himself of his controlling and superintending Authority. It is so
essential to his Office, that he cannot relinquish it in such a Manner, as not
to be accountable for the Exercise of it.

The Epistles to the Seven Churches of the Lydian Asia are a Proof of this, and
show plainly, that the Government of those Churches respectively, was lodged in
the Hands of single Persons, who are called Angels; by which was meant and
intended, according to the united Voice of Antiquity, Bishops, in the
appropriated Sense. Some of these are reproved for the Relaxation of
Discipline, and all of them are treated as having the entire Government of
their respective Districts, and as accountable for the State of Religion within
the Bounds of their Spiritual Jurisdiction. But it is needless to prove what
the Enemies of Episcopacy will not deny, that wherever this Form of Government
has obtained, the Government of the Church has always been exercised by
Bishops, and never by Presbyters, unless in an inferior Degree and in
Subordination to them.

Another Power belonging to Bishops, is that of Ordination; which has always
been considered by the Friends of Episcopacy as peculiar to Bishops, and
unalienable from their Office. And indeed there would be an Absurdity in
supposing the contrary. For to whom can the Appointment of inferior and
subordinate Officers belong, in every Society, but to those who govern it?
Besides, the same Arguments which prove the Distinction of Bishops from
Presbyters, prove also that Ordination is an Office peculiar to the former; for
it is chiefly by the Appropriation of Offices, that we are able to prove the
Distinction of Orders. Because some Ecclesiastical Offices are never performed
by the Clergy in common, but only by such of them as are particularly ordained
for those Purposes, it is evident that those who are thus ordained and
empowered* are admitted to a different and higher Order. Now, with Regard to
the Power of Ordination, none that have labored in the Cause have ever been
able to show from Scripture a single Instance, wherein this Power has been
exercised by Presbyters only; but there are many Instances in which those, who
are manifestly superior to Presbyters, are found to have used it.

As to the Case of Timothy, whom St. Paul exhorts, in his first Epistle to him,
to neglect not the Gift which was given him by Prophecy, with the laying on the
Hands of the Presbytery, it will not answer the Purpose. For allowing, at
present, the Word Presbytery to signify, what some would choose it should
signify, a Number of mere Presbyters; yet we are certain that Timothy was not
ordained by such Persons only, unless St. Paul was but a mere Presbyter. For in
his second Epistle to him he expressly asserts, that this same Gift was
imparted to him by the laying on of his own Hands.

The Question then arises, How these two Accounts of Timothy's Ordination can
be reconciled? To this Question the Answer is obvious. There is not a Presbyter
of the Church of England but can, with Truth and Propriety say, that he
received his Ordination by the laying on of the Hands of the Bishop, and with
the laying on of the Hands of Presbyters. For in our Ordinations, in which, as
in other Things, we endeavor to come as near as possible to the primitive
Standard, the Presbyters that are present, always join with the Bishop in the
Imposition of Hands. But observe the Difference between by and with: Timothy
received his Gift by the Imposition of St. Paul's Hands, as being effectual to
convey it; but it was only with the Imposition of the Hands of the Presbytery*
which implies not any Power in them, but their Concurrence only. St. Paul could
have ordained without their Concurrence, but the Imposition of their Hands
would have been altogether unavailable without the Apostle -- much more in
Opposition to him. I am ashamed to repeat Things which have been so frequently
said by others; but an Apprehension that these Papers may fall into the Hands
of some, who are Strangers to what has been written on the Subject, must be my
Apology.

As to the other Case of Paul and Barnabas, which is objected against us, there
is no Evidence that this was any Ordination at all; and when it can be proved
that it was, it will be soon enough to consider it.

I have said, that there is no Instance in Holy Scripture, wherein Ordination
has been performed by mere Presbyters: I may go on and say, that there is not
an Instance of it to be found in the Church for several Ages. Aerius and
Colluthus in the Fourth Century, seem to have been the first Contrivers of
Ordinations of this Sort; but, with what Views they acted -- in what Light they
were considered by the Catholic Church -- and how badly they succeeded -- are
Particulars, for which I beg Leave to refer the English Reader to Hooker's
Ecclesiastical Polity Book vii. Sect. 9.
, and to Archbishop Potter's very excellent Discourse of Church Government
Chap. v.
.

From this Time, until after the Beginning of the Reformation in the Sixteenth
Century, no Instances worthy of Notice occur to favor Ordination by
Presbyters. So that the uniform Practice of the Church for 1500 Years, may be
added to the Evidence of Scripture, in Support of the Necessity of Episcopal
Ordination.

There is another Branch of the Episcopal Office, which must not be passed over
on this Occasion, as we think it a very material one; I mean the Imposition of
Hands in Confirmation. The Nature and Design of Confirmation may be seen in our
public Office for the Administration of it -- wherein the Persons to be
confirmed are, in a public Manner, presented to the Bishop, who asks them with
due Solemnity, Do ye here in the Presence of God, and of this Congregation,
renew the solemn Promise and Vow that was made in your Name at your Baptism;
ratifying and confirming the same in your own Persons, and acknowledging
yourselves bound to believe, and to do all those Things which your Godfathers
and Godmothers then undertook for you? to this Question each Person answers in
the Affirmative, "I do." Then follows the Imposition of the Bishop's Hands,
with Benediction and Prayer.

We see here, that Confirmation consists of two Parts; one to be performed by
the Bishop, and the other by the Persons presented to him. The Persons
presented, on their Parts, solemnly, in the Presence of God and the
Congregation, renew the Promises made, not by themselves, but by others in
their Name, at their Baptism, and ratify and confirm the same in their own
Persons; in Consequence of which, the Bishop for his Part, imposes his Hands
upon them with Prayer, and blesses them.

As to that Part of the Transaction which belongs to the Persons confirmed,
none can dispute the Propriety or Usefulness of it. For nothing can be better
adapted for the Promotion of Virtue and Piety, than that those who have been
baptized in their Infancy, as soon as they are duly instructed in the Nature of
the baptismal Covenant, should thus publicly engage, in their own Persons, to
perform the Conditions of it. And as to the Bishop's Part, for the same Reasons
that we expect the Blessing of God to attend any ministerial Offices in the
Christian Church, it may be expected in this; which is founded on the Example
and Authority of Scripture, as well as on the unvaried Practice of the
primitive Christians.

The Church of England declares, Can. lx.
that it has been a solemn, ancient and laudable Custom, continued from the
Apostles Time, that all Bishops should lay their Hands upon Children, baptized
and instructed in the Catechism of the Christian Religion, praying over them
and blessing them. If this Custom has been continued from the Apostles Time, it
must have been practiced in their Time; for, in the Language of the Schools,
the Terminus a quo is the Time of the Apostles. And it can with no Propriety be
said to have been continued from their Time, if it commenced after it. Let us
see then what Information the Scripture gives us, relating to this Subject.

In the Acts of the Apostles Chap. viii.14, 15, 16, 17.
we have the following Passage: When the Apostles that were at Jerusalem heard
that Samaria had received the Word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John;
who, when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the
Holy Ghost. For as yet he was fallen upon none of them; only they were baptized
in the Name of the Lord Jesus. Then laid they their Hands on them, and they
received the Holy Ghost. These Words exactly describe Confirmation, as it is
practiced in the Church of England, and there is hardly Room for a Possibility
of applying them to any Thing else. Two Apostles are sent to Samaria, to
perform a particular Office -- had it not been necessary that this Office
should be performed by those of the highest Order in the Church, others
undoubtedly would have been employed in that Service; it being absurd to
imagine, that Apostles would have been sent from Jerusalem to Samaria to do
that only, which might as effectually have been done by common Elders -- the
Office itself was to impose Hands on those that had received Baptism -- and the
great End of it was, that, by this Imposition of Hands, the Subjects of it
might receive the Holy Ghost.

We have another Instance of Confirmation in the Disciples at Ephesus, on whom,
after they were baptized, St. Paul laid his Hands, and the Holy Ghost came upon
them Acts xix.
. There can be no Reason to doubt but the Office here performed to the Converts
at Ephesus, was the very same that was performed to those in Samaria; since it
was administered, in the same Manner -- by a Person of the same highest Order
in the Church -- to those that had the same Qualifications -- and was attended
with the same Effects.

Should it be objected, that these Instances prove only what was occasionally
practiced by the Apostles, but not that this Rite was intended to be of
standing Use to the Church in all Ages, I answer: What was the Intention of the
Apostles, was best known by their Contemporaries who conversed with them; and
what their Opinion was of this Matter, we may safely judge from their Practice.
That Confirmation was also practiced by the immediate Successors of the
Apostles, and has been universally continued through all the Ages of the
Church, until within this Two Centuries, he that has the least Acquaintance
with Ecclesiastical History must confess. Had there been any Doubts or
Disputes, about the Usefulness or Propriety of its Continuance, in the first
Ages of Christianity, we might have some Reason to dispute it now. But so far
was this from being the Case, that it was universally received as of sacred
Obligation, and of great Importance.

Can you be ignorant (says St. Jerome) that this is the common Custom of
Churches, that Hands are laid upon those who have received Baptism, and in that
Manner the Holy Ghost is implored? Do you ask, where this is written? you will
find it in the Acts of the Apostles. But even if the Authority of Scripture had
been wanting, the Consent of the whole World in this Matter, would have the
Force of a Command An niscis etiam Ecclesiarum hunc esse Morem, ut baptizatis
postea Manus imponantur, et ita invocetur Spiritus Sanctus. Exigis ubi scriptum
sit? In Actibus Apostolorum. Etiam si Scripturae Auctoritas non subesset,
totius Orbis in hanc Partem Consensus Justar Praecepti obtineret. Adversus
Luciferianos.
. Whose Hands were imposed in such Cases, we are plainly told, soon after. The
general Custom is this, that the Bishop goes abroad to impose Hands upon those,
who, in the smaller Cities, and at a Distance, have been baptized by Presbyters
and Deacons, that he may obtain for them by Prayer the Gift of the Holy Ghost
Non quidam abnuo hanc Ecclesiarum esse Consuetudinem, ut ad eos qui long in
minoribus Urbibus per Presbyteros et Diaconos baptizati sunt, Episcopus ad
Invocationem sancti Spiritus Manum impositurus excurrat. Ibid.
.

But that it was the Intention of the Apostles, that Confirmation should not
expire with them, but be continued for the perpetual Benefit of the Church, we
are not only able to prove thus mediately, but it must necessarily follow, from
what one of them has said concerning it. The Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews Chap. vi.1, 2.
speaks of it, as one of the first Principles of the Christian Doctrine, and
fundamental to it; and puts it upon the same Footing, in that Respect, with
Repentance, Faith, etc. Leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let
us go on to Perfection; not laying again the Foundation of Repentance from dead
Works, and of Faith toward God, of the Doctrine of Baptisms, and of the laying
on of Hands, and of the Resurrection of the Dead, and of eternal Judgment. What
we are to understand by the laying on of Hands, subsequent to Baptism, those
who reject the Doctrine of Confirmation may probably dispute. But all the
ancient Commentators agreed in Opinion, in which they have had the Concurrence
of the most considerable of the Moderns, that what is here meant, is the
Imposition of Hands in Confirmation only. If therefore, the Principles of
Christianity are the same now as they were originally, Confirmation, which, in
the above Passage is declared to be one of them, ought always to be retained in
the Church.

But it may be farther objected, that from the Instances of Confirmation
recorded in Scripture, the Effects of it appear to have been miraculous, and
consequently, as the Power of Miracles has confessedly long ceased, that this
Rite whereby it was imparted, is now useless, and ought not to be continued.
But the Solution of this Objection is not difficult. There is no Reason to
believe, that miraculous Gifts, although frequently, were always imparted by
the Imposition of the Apostles Hands. But could this be proved, yet other Gifts
of a different Nature were also communicated at the same Time; and this
Communication is necessary to all Persons in all Ages. Without the gracious
Assistances of the Holy Spirit, it is as certain now as it ever was, that no
Man is able to withstand Temptations, and to fulfill the Conditions of the
Gospel Covenant.

Those upon whom the Apostles laid Hands, are said to have received the Holy
Ghost: but, I trust, there is nothing so extraordinary in this, but that
Christians in all Ages, who have a proper Disposition, and make Use of the
standing Means appointed in the Church, may hope to obtain even this
unspeakable Benefit. And if some, in Consequence of this Imposition of the
Apostles Hands, are said to have spoken with Tongues, and prophesied, which was
not so much for their own personal Advantage, as for the Conviction of others;
it is sufficient for Christians at this Day, that, without these miraculous
Endowments, after the Forgiveness of their Sins, they are strengthened with the
Holy Ghost the Comforter, and that the manifold Gifts of Grace are daily
increased in them -- that they receive the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding
-- the Spirit of Counsel and ghostly Strength -- and are filled with the Spirit
of the Fear of God; for all which Things the Bishop and Congregation are
directed to pray, in the Office of Confirmation.

Thus we see upon what Authority this Practice is founded, and the Advantages
that attend it; and if Persons in this Age are disaffected, or indifferent
toward it, it is either because they do not understand the Nature of it, or
have not that Zeal and Anxiety for their spiritual Interests, which Men had
formerly The holy Rite of Confirmation is a divine Ordinance, and it produces
divine Effects, and is ministered by divine Persons, that is, by those whom God
has sanctified and separated to this Ministration. At first, all that were
baptized, were also confirmed; and ever since, all good People that have
understood it, have been very zealous for it; and Time was in England, even
since the Beginnings of the Reformation, when Confirmation had been less
carefully ministered for about Six Years, when the People had their first
Opportunities of it restored, they ran to it in so great Numbers, that Churches
and Churchyards would not hold them; insomuch, that I have read, that the
Bishop of Chester was forced to impose Hands on People in the Fields, and was
so oppressed with Multitudes, that he had almost been trod to Death by the
People, and had died with the Throng, if he had not been rescued by the Civil
Power.

Bishop Tailor.
.

It remains only to be observed under this Head, that Confirmation can be
administered by none but Bishops. In the Time of the Apostles, this Power was
exercised by them -- they conveyed it to those only who were appointed to
succeed them -- and it has always been confined to the highest Order in the
Church.

SECTION III. That the Church in America, without an Episcopate, is necessarily
destitute of a regular Government, and cannot enjoy the Benefits of Ordination
and Confirmation.
SECT. III.
IN the preceding Sections I have endeavored to give a Summary of the
Arguments in Favor of Episcopacy, and to prove, with all possible Brevity,
that the Powers of ordaining, confirming and governing the Church, belong
rightfully to Bishops, and are not to be exercised by any of an inferior Order.

If the Considerations which have been offered have no Weight with others, they
are, however, convincing to us of the Church of England; and we firmly believe
the Truth and Importance of the several Points, the Proof of which has been
thus briefly attempted. Indeed the Conviction of Dissenters, with Regard to the
Divine Institution and Authority of Episcopacy, is not the immediate Intention
of this Publication: and yet it is no Mark of an unfriendly Disposition, to
hope, that those who are unable to invalidate the Force of the preceding
Arguments, will heartily submit to them, unless they are able to oppose to them
others which they judge to be, at least, of equal Strength. For it is the Duty
of every rational Inquirer, in all Cases, and more especially in Matters of
Religion, to be governed by what appears to be the strongest Evidence. But the
present Design is to set before the Public, the Necessity and Importance of
Episcopacy, in the Opinion of Episcopalians, and to show the wretched Condition
of the Church of England in America for Want of Bishops.

And this appears, in Part, from what has been already offered. For if,
according to the Doctrine and Belief of the Church of England, none have a
Right to govern the Church The Reader will observe, that only such Authority is
here spoken of, as is purely Ecclesiastical, and peculiar to the Officers of
the Church. The King's Supremacy, as expressed in Article xxxvii, is maintained
by the Church in America, in as full and ample a Manner as in England.
but Bishops, nor to ordain, nor to confirm; then the American Church, while
without Bishops, must be without Government, without Ordination and
Confirmation.

Was there no other Disadvantage attending our Want of Bishops, than that it
necessarily prevents our having Confirmation administered, we should esteem it
a great Grievance. For in Proportion to our Opinion of the Usefulness of this
sacred Institution, must be the Hardship of being excluded from the Enjoyment
of it -- especially, when it is considered that our Enjoyment of it would not
interfere with either the civil or religious Rights or Privileges of any. I
will not, however, enlarge on this Subject, but proceed immediately to Matters
of greater Consequence; and such are the Church's Want of Government and
ordaining Powers.

When it is said, that the Church of England in America, without Bishops, must
be without Government, this is to be understood in a qualified Sense. For where
there is absolutely no Government at all, there can be nothing but Disorder and
Confusion, without any Appearance of Regularity; which, I trust, is not yet the
Case of the Church in America. Some Degree of Government is essential to the
very Being of every Society, whether civil or religious; and as soon as
Government entirely ceases, the Society is dissolved and has no Existence.

It has been allowed that Presbyters may have a subordinate Authority to
govern; and it is well known, that the Bishop of London has formerly taken
some Cognizance of Ecclesiastical Matters in the Plantations, by Virtue of the
King's Commission. But much more than this is needful, to answer the
Necessities of the American Church. The Clergy can evidently do but little The
most that the Clergy can do to relieve the Church, in the present State of
Things, seems to be in the Way of voluntary Conventions, which has been
regularly practiced, for a Number of Years, in some of the Northern Colonies. A
general Concern for the Interest of Religion and the Church, and a Desire in
the Clergy of contributing their united Endeavors to promote it, occasioned
the first Rise of these Conventions; and the Advantages which have been found,
on the Whole, to attend them, have caused their Continuance.

Indeed such Conventions of the Clergy, wherein all the Members meet together
on Terms of Equality, are unknown to the Constitution of the Church of England.
But it must be also granted, that for such a Number of Presbyters, to be left
without a Bishop at their Head to superintend and govern them, is a Thing
equally unknown to the Constitution of any Episcopal Church upon Earth. That,
of the Church of England in her Colonies, is an extraordinary Case: and in
extraordinary Cases uncommon Measures may be allowable. If some Inconveniences
may be expected from these Conventions, which hitherto have been but small and
inconsiderable; Inconveniences also will arise, from every other Method that
can be taken by the Clergy to serve the general Interest of Religion, while
without an Episcopate -- and undoubtedly the greatest Inconveniences of all,
from their neglecting to exert themselves jointly in the Prosecution of their
general Duty. If those who think unfavourably of our Conventions, would be so
obliging as to tell us, how, in this distressed State of the Church, we can
serve it, and thereby the common Cause of Religion more effectually, we should
take it kindly. This is the great End we aim at; and we are attached to
particular Means, only in Proportion as we judge them to be conducive thereto.


without a Bishop; and when it is disputed, whether one Bishop residing in
America would be sufficient for the Colonies, it is agreed, on all Sides, that
proper Care cannot be taken of them by a Bishop, who has the immediate
Inspection of a large Diocese in England, and resides at the Distance of Three
Thousand Miles. Trial has been heretofore made what could be done by
Commissaries; but their Usefulness, upon the Whole, appeared to be so
inconsiderable, that none have been appointed for near Twenty Years.

So that the State of the Church in America is, at present, really this: The
Clergy are independent of each other, and have no Ecclesiastical Superiors to
unite or control them; and the People are sensible of their Want of Power, and
find themselves free from all Restraints of Ecclesiastical Authority. They both
consider themselves as accountable to God for their religious Behavior, and,
in some Sense, to the World for the Consistency of their Characters. They have
the Rubrics of the Church of England, whereby they profess to govern
themselves, and to which, for the most Part, they strictly adhere, in the
public Offices of Religion; and they endeavor to conform to the Canons, so far
as the Circumstances of the Church in this Country will admit of. But after
all, Men's governing themselves by certain Rules and Laws, (if the Expression
may be allowed of) and their being governed by others, who have a proper
Authority, although according to the same Laws, are Things that will ever be
found to be different. In the former Case, some Appearance of Order may be
maintained, but the Body is without Strength, and liable to be destroyed by
innumerable Accidents; whereas it is only in the latter Case, that Health and
Vigor and Permanency can be reasonably expected.

The Government of the Church may be naturally divided into Two Branches, and
considered as relating either to the Clergy, or the Laity; and it may be proper
to take a short View of it, with Reference to both. Religion being a Matter of
free Choice, for which we are ordinarily accountable only to him, who will
hereafter judge us for our moral Behavior -- and the Church, considered with
Relation to civil Power, being in the very Nature of it a voluntary Society; it
is left to Men's Consciences, whether they will become Members of it or not.
But after they are become Members, the Laws of the Church are in Force against
them, and they are subject, in Ecclesiastical Matters, to the Authority of
those who govern it.

What the just Penalties of Disobedience are, we must learn from the Nature of
the Church itself. In Civil Society, the Magistrate is armed with the Sword of
Justice, and he is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him
that does Evil Romans xiii.4.
, according to the Degree and Nature of his Offenses. But the Power of the
Church is of a spiritual Nature, and the utmost Effect of it in this World, is
the cutting off and rejecting those Members which are incurably and dangerously
corrupted. This Punishment which has commonly been known by the Name of
Excommunication, however it was dreaded in the purest Ages of Christianity, has
lost much of its Force in this; wherein Altars are set up against Altars, and
Churches against Churches, and those who are rejected by one, may be received
by another. A Disposition to slight the highest Punishment which the Church can
inflict has become general, and there appears to be no Remedy for it, unless in
the Use of Reason and Persuasion. But we live in an Age, in which the Voice of
Reason will not be heard, nor the Strength of Arguments regarded, although
supported by the Declarations of Heaven, on the Subject of Church Discipline.
Nay, a Man would be generally esteemed to be either wrong-headed, or
mean-spirited, or both, who should profess much Reverence for Ecclesiastical
Authority; and the Charge of Priestcraft, so long hackneyed by Infidels and
Libertines, would be sure to fall upon the Clergy, should they have Courage to
speak up in Defense of it.

In this State of Things, the Restoration of the primitive Discipline seems to
be a Matter rather to be wished for and desired, than to be rationally
attempted by those in Authority. Accordingly no Attempts of this Nature will be
made under in American Episcopate; the Discipline of the Church, so far as it
relates to the private Members, will be left as it is, and nothing farther will
be done than refusing the Communion to disorderly and scandalous Persons, which
every Clergyman may now refuse, and ought to refuse, agreeably to the Rubrics.

But with Regard to the Clergy, it is proposed that a strict Discipline be
established, and that the Bishop's Power over them shall be as full and
complete, as the Laws and Canons of the Church direct. Of the Necessity of
this, none can be more sensible than the Clergy themselves, who, in all their
Addresses in Favor of an Episcopate, have proposed and requested that this may
be the Case. The general Character of the American Clergy, the Author believes,
if he may judge from a large and extensive Acquaintance with them, and he hopes
it may be thought excusable in him, on this Occasion, although one of the
Number, to declare his Belief of it, to be truly respectable. They are sound
and steady in their Principles, and regular in their Behavior. In so large a
Body, some Exceptions from the general Character must be expected; but it is
rather to be wondered that their Number is so small, considering all Things.

Indeed we have heard much of the profligate Behavior of the Clergy to the
Southward, and in the Islands; but this, perhaps, may have been owing to the
Conduct of a few Individuals, reported and aggravated with a malicious
Intention. But allowing many of these evil Reports to have been justly founded,
yet we all know that the immoral Practices of one vicious Clergyman will be
more frequently mentioned, than the Virtues of Fifty, of an orderly Life and
Conversation.

But after all, whatever may be the Proportion between the virtuous and vicious
Clergymen in America, as there are undoubtedly some of both Characters; the
Want of Bishops to superintend and govern them, is obvious at first View. If
one Sort have no Need of a Bishop to keep them to their Duty, yet some Cases
will arise in the Discharge of it in which his Direction will be useful -- and
many Cases, wherein his Support and Encouragement will be needful -- and in all
Cases, his Friendship and Patronage will give Life and Spirit to them in
undergoing the Difficulties, and in performing the Duties, of their Station.

But as there are Clergymen also of a different Character, it is more
immediately necessary on Account of these, that Episcopal Government should
take Place in America. The Process of carrying an Accusation, and afterward of
supporting it, before our Superiors, at so great a Distance, must be tedious
and difficult; and this Consideration undoubtedly, in some Cases, may cause
those to escape Punishment who really deserve it. But the Case will be
different under a settled Episcopate; as then, for every Grievance of this
Nature, the Church will have an easy and effectual Remedy. If a Clergyman shall
disgrace his Profession in an open and scandalous Manner, a Bishop residing in
the Country can suspend him immediately; and if upon Trial the Case shall be
found to deserve it, he can proceed to deprive him of his Benefice It is said
that in Maryland, a Clergyman once possessed of a Living, can hold it for Life,
however loose and profligate he may prove in his Behavior. If this is really
the Case, it must be owing to some great Defect in the Constitution of that
Province, which ought to be remedied. In the mean while, it is such a Hardship
upon the Church, as, I believe, is suffered in no other Part of the World. And
what makes it the more intolerable, is, that the sole Right of disposing of
every Benefice in the Province, is claimed by the Proprietor, and exercised by
his Governor. It is some Alleviation however, that the present very worthy
Governor makes it a general Rule, (if the Author has been rightly informed) to
which he adheres, as far as he can, consistently with his Obligations to the
Proprietor, to grant Induction to no Clergyman, without the Approbation of the
Vestry and principal Parishioners.
, and not only silence and depose him, but excommunicate him from the Society
of Christians. The Consideration of this, and that they are under the Eye of
their Bishop, one main Branch of whose Business is to inspect and enquire into
their Conduct, will naturally tend to make the Clergy in general, more regular
and diligent in the Discharge of the Duties of their Office, and more careful
and circumspect in their whole Behavior. In a Word, of those whose Characters
are justly exceptionable, some may probably be reformed by a Bishop; and as to
others, they may be easily displaced, unless it be the Fault of the People
themselves.

But a greater Disadvantage, if possible, than the Want of a regular
Government, attends the Church of England in America in its present State, I
mean the Want of Ordination: for none can be admitted to Holy Orders without
crossing the Atlantic, with great Hazard and Expense. The Danger of such a
Voyage may, to some, appear to be trifling; but the Apprehension of it,
together with a natural Aversion to the Sea, has been known to deter many
worthy Persons, who have been desirous of obtaining Ordination in the Church,
from attempting it -- the Fear and Apprehension of Danger, in such Cases,
whether rightly founded or not, having always the same Effect. But what real
Foundation there is for such an Apprehension, will be best discovered from
Experience and Facts. Now the exact Number of those that have gone Home for
Ordination, from these Northern Colonies (excepting some who have sailed
lately, who cannot properly be included in this Account) is Fifty-two. Of these
Forty-two have returned safely, and Ten have miscarried; the Voyage, or
Sickness occasioned by it, having proved fatal to near a fifth Part of them.

The Expense of this Voyage cannot be reckoned at less, upon an Average, than
One Hundred Pounds Sterling to each Person. To Men of Fortune this is an
inconsiderable Sum; but Men of Fortune must not be expected to devote
themselves to the Service of the Church in America, where the Prospect is so
discouraging, and so many disagreeable Circumstances are known to attend it.
The Expense must therefore generally fall upon such, as having already expended
the greatest Part of their Pittance in their Education, will find it extremely
hard to raise a Sum sufficient for the Purpose.

Under these Discouragements, there has always been great Difficulty in
supplying the Church with Clergymen, and there always must be. In what Manner
the Church is supplied at present February 1767.
, the following Instances will sufficiently testify. In the Province of
New Jersey there are Twenty-one Churches and Congregations; Eleven of these are
entirely destitute of a Minister, and there are but Five Clergymen to do the
Duties of the other Ten. In Pennsylvania, including the Lower Counties, the
Case is similar. In the City of Philadelphia there are Three Churches and
Congregations, and but Two Clergymen; in the Rest of the Province the Number of
Churches is Twenty-six, and that of the Clergy is but Seven.

If some of the Colonies are better supplied, perhaps others may be found which
are provided for not so well. In North Carolina, the late Governor Dobbs
informed the Society, in his Letter dated March 29th, 1764, that there were
then but Six Clergymen in that Province, although there were Twenty-nine
Parishes, and each Parish contained a whole County: And the Majority of the
Inhabitants are said to profess themselves Members of the Church. Other Reasons
may have contributed to this general Want of Clergymen in America, but it has
always been principally owing to the great Difficulty of obtaining Ordination.

Under this Head it may be observed farther, that the Danger and Expense of a
Voyage to England for the Purpose of obtaining Ordination, are not the only
Evils we have Reason to complain of: for another glaring Disadvantage, to which
the Church in America is manifestly subject, arises from the impossibility that
a Bishop residing in England, should be sufficiently acquainted with the
Characters of those who go Home from this Country for Holy Orders. To this it
is owing, that Ordination has been sometimes fraudulently and surreptitiously
obtained by such Wretches, as are not only a Scandal to the Church, but a
Disgrace to the human Species.

The Church has taken all due Care that none shall be ordained, without full
and proper Evidence of their good Character and Abilities See Canon xxxiv.
; and as to those who go Home from this distant Country for that Purpose,
sensible of the peculiar Hazard attending such Cases, the Bishop of London, in
Conjunction with the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in foreign
Parts, every Year proclaims and publishes to the World, that he requests and
earnestly* beseeches all Persons concerned, that they recommend no Man out of
Favor or Affection, or any other worldly Consideration, but with a sincere
Regard to the Honor of Almighty God, and our Blessed Savior; as they tender
the Interest of the Christian Religion, and the Good of Men's Souls.

But although the Bishops of London, to whom this Application from America has
always been made, have successively exercised the greatest Care and
Circumspection in this Matter, yet none of them have been able entirely to
avoid Impositions of this Nature. Notwithstanding their utmost Caution and Care
to prevent it, Instances have happened, wherein Persons have produced in
England the most ample written Credentials, obtained God knows how, of their
pious and orderly Conversation, whose Lives have been notoriously infamous in
this Country; and after having been invested with the sacred Office, they have
been sent back to take Charge of the Souls of others -- in the Prosecution of
which Work they have acted as if they had not, or imagined that they had not,
any Souls of their own.

And this is not much to be wondered at, since in such a Country as America, an
artful Man may sometimes be able to procure Testimonials in his Favor, signed
by a competent Number of such Clergymen and others, as a Bishop of London will
not know how to object against. Or, should this Attempt fail him, he may even
forge his Testimonials, and so carry his Point before he is detected. This
Supposition is not an absurd one -- it is necessary in Order to account for the
Success of some Adventurers from the Colonies, who have obtained Ordination in
England, and then have returned to America to disgrace themselves and the
Church -- to the great Grief and Vexation of all its Friends, and, I doubt not,
to the no small Consolation of some of its Enemies.

And when we consider the miserable Consequences that must necessarily follow,
even from a single Instance of this Kind, and that one worthless Clergyman will
do more Mischief to Religion, than many worthy ones are able to repair; it is
evident that the Church may be, as Experience proves that it sometimes actually
has been, a great Sufferer in this Respect. And there seems to be no Method of
preventing this Evil entirely, but by the Residence of Bishops in America; in
which Case the general Character of each Candidate for holy Orders might be
known by the Bishop, and such Impositions as have been mentioned, would seldom
be attempted.

SECTION IV. The unparalleled Hardship of this Case represented.
WAS the Author disposed to proceed in the Way of Declamation, he is of
Opinion, SECT. IV.
that the Christian Church has not, in any Instance, for Ages past, afforded a
more fruitful Subject for it. But it is his Design only to state Arguments and
Facts as briefly as he can, and to recommend them to the candid Consideration
of the Public. He therefore begs Leave, on the foregoing Representation, barely
to make an Appeal to the Consciences of Men in Behalf of the Church -- whether,
in Case the religious Society whereto they belong, was doomed to undergo such
an Hardship as the Church of England in America suffers for Want of Ordination,
to say nothing of other Instances, they would not think themselves injured, and
complain most bitterly? If any other Denomination of Christians in his
Majesty's American Dominions was not allowed to have a Clergyman, without
paying a Fine of One Hundred Pounds Sterling on his Admission, and exposing
him, at the same Time, to some dangerous Process, which had proved fatal to a
fifth Part of his Predecessors, would they not esteem it an intolerable
Grievance, and a cruel Persecution? And indeed, would not every disinterested
Person consider it in the same Light? Now, if this would be esteemed
Persecution, in the Case of Presbyterians or Congregationalists, or of any
other religious Denomination of People in this Country, why it should be
esteemed less when suffered by the Church of England, is hard to conceive. We
have the same Feelings, the same Sensibility with other Persons, and are
equally affected by any Sufferings.

Some perhaps may dispute the Propriety of the Word, as the great Grievance in
Question arises not from any positive Exertion of Civil Power against us: but
if it be not properly Persecution, it is something that is as bad in its
natural Consequences. It may be questioned, whether the worst Persecutions have
ever exterminated a fifth Part of the Clergy in any Country; and it is evident,
that all direct Persecutions have been attended with this good Effect, that the
religious Zeal of those against whom they have been intended, has been animated
and increased: whereas, in the particular Species of suffering, of which the
American Church so justly complains, there is a peculiar Tendency to render the
Members of it careless and indifferent in religious Matters, and regardless of
its Interests.

If there are any Points, in which the Reason and common Sense of Mankind can
be supposed to agree, this must unquestionably be one, that the Church of
England in America, under the beforementioned Disadvantages, although not
formally persecuted, is in a most wretched and deplorable Condition. And, we
who are Members of it, cannot but think it an Aggravation of our Unhappiness,
that it appears to be altogether unprecedented; we being singled out from all
the People upon Earth to be made the first Example of it. It would be but a
poor Consolation, we confess, to be able to recollect Instances, wherein others
have suffered in the same Manner with ourselves. But yet our Condition seems to
imply, and Strangers may conclude from it, that there has been something grossly
amiss and unprecedented in our Behavior, which has brought down upon us the
Displeasure of our Superiors, from whom we might otherwise expect, at least,
that common Protection and Indulgence, which is so generously and properly
afforded to all others.

But while we thus suffer, we are not apprehensive that it can be owing to the
Displeasure of our Superiors, as we are conscious of no Crimes, with Regard to
the State. On the other Hand we claim a Right to be considered as equal with
the foremost, in every due Expression of Fidelity and Loyalty. We esteem
ourselves bound, not only by present Interest and Inclination, but by the more
sacred Ties of our religious Principles and Christian Duty, to support, to the
utmost, the National Civil Establishment. Accordingly no Trumpet of Sedition
was ever heard to sound from our Pulpits -- no Seeds of Disaffection have been
suffered more privately to be sown in our Houses. As our Religion teaches us,
in the first Place, and above all Things to fear God; so, while we can preserve
it, it will be a full Security to the Government for our honoring the King,
and not meddling with them that are given to Change This Declaration is not
intended to imply any Accusation of others; who are able, it is hoped, to make
their own Defense, whenever the Occasion shall require it. His Majesty's
American Subjects, of all Denominations, belonging to the old Colonies, have
always professed Sentiments of Loyalty; and the Author believes they have
generally been sincere in those Professions. If there have been any late
Appearances of undutiful Behavior in the Colonies, they have arisen, not from
any Disaffection toward his Majesty's sacred Person -- not from any Want of
Esteem for the civil Constitution -- but from an Opinion of unconstitutional
Oppression. And so long as the free Principles of the British Constitution
shall be extended to the Colonies, whose Inhabitants, however divided in other
Respects, all agree in maintaining the same Esteem for Liberty with true
Englishmen at Home, there will be no Danger of their attempting to revolt.
.

If then the Church of England in America is not distinguished by the Want of
Duty and Affection to the Government, why should it be thus distinguished and
stigmatized by the Want of those religious Privileges, which are granted to all
other Denominations of Christians whatever, in the British Dominions. In our
petitioning for Bishops, all that we ask for ourselves, is what has been freely
granted to others, what has been refused to none else who have applied for it.
We request only the Liberty of enjoying the Institutions of our Church, and
thereby of being put upon an equal Footing with our Neighbors -- with the
various Sects of English Dissenters, who have the full Enjoyment of their
respective Forms of Ecclesiastical Government and Discipline -- and even with
the Moravians and Papists, who are severally allowed a Bishop. And we cannot
but flatter ourselves, that we have as good a Right to expect Success in an
Application of this Nature, as if we were Dissenters, or Moravians, or Papists.
For it is utterly inconceivable to us, that there can be any Thing in the
peculiar Principles of our Religion, or in the distinguishing Circumstance of
its being the national Religion, that can account for a Refusal If among the
several Denominations of Christians there be one, which has preserved the due
Medium -- in its Discipline, between Tyranny and Oppression on one Hand, and
Licentiousness and Anarchy on the other -- in its Doctrines, between such
Claims of Infallibility as preclude all private Judgment, and such Latitude as
would render a Revelation insignificant for the Purpose of a Rule of Faith --
in its Worship, between superstitious and idolatrous Pomp, and a Neglect of
Decency and Order -- if in its professed Principles, it be best fitted to
promote public Peace and Happiness, and in its external Polity best adapted to
the Form of the civil Constitution: -- and if, over and above all these, it be
in other Respects most conformable to the original Standard, and to the Usages
of the best and purest Ages of Christianity: Such a Society of Christians (we
trust) will ever recommend itself to a wise and religious Legislature, as
worthy of the first, and always of the chief Care.

Dr. G. Fothergill.
.

It has been said, that we look upon the Case of the Church of England in
America to be unprecedented. That it is so, compared with the State of
religious Denominations in the British Dominions, has been already shown. And
if we look abroad, or carry our Inquiries back through all the Ages of the
Church to its first Origin, I am persuaded we shall not be able to find its
Parallel.

During the Time of the Apostles, as the Number of Christians increased, Care
was taken to form them into proper Ecclesiastical Districts, and a Bishop was
appointed for each, to set in Order the Things that were wanting, and to ordain
Elders in every City Titus i.5.
. What was the Extent of these original Districts, to which the Exercise of the
Episcopal Authority was ordinarily limited, is, perhaps, not easy exactly to
determine at this Day. But it is most probable, that in every large City,
including its Environs and Dependencies, where the Gospel had been received,
and the Number of Christian Congregations and Presbyters was considerable,
Bishops were appointed. And in every Territory, which had natural Boundaries
and Limitations, whereby it was made separate and distinct from the
neighboring Countries, whether it did or did not include any Capital City,
provided, as before, that the Number of Churches required it, a Bishop was also
settled. By this Means due Provision was made for the whole Church, and no
large Number of Christians was neglected, nor suffered to continue long without
a regular Ecclesiastical Government.

An Instance of this general Care is to be found in Crete over which Titus was
appointed Bishop by St. Paul; at a Time, when the Number of Converts in that
Island, was probably much inferior to the present Number of professed
Christians, in more than one of our British American Islands. In the succeeding
Ages, until the Roman Empire became Christian, this Apostolic Plan was
carefully followed, and the Number of Bishops was increased, in Proportion to
the growing Extent and Advancement of Christianity Bingham's Antiquities, Book
ix.
. When the Church at length obtained the Protection and Patronage of the State,
these Ecclesiastical Regulations were established by Law, and Bishops, in the
Exercise of their Jurisdiction, were aided and supported by Civil Power.

If we pursue the History of the Church from this Period, we shall meet with no
Instance, in which any large Number of People proselyted to the Christian
Religion, or any considerable Colonies, settled by a Christian Country, have
been without a Bishop, the Dutch Colonies excepted, which do not desire them.
It has been the Practice of all Christian Nations, to provide for and maintain
the national Religion, and to render it as respectable as possible, in the most
distant Colonies; wherein, either a Regard for their Religion, or Reasons of
Policy, and probably both, have led them to take equal Care for the
Establishment of Ecclesiastical, as of Civil Government. As to America, in
particular, wherever we meet with French or Spanish Settlements, we find
Bishops. In Canada, a Country less populous than many of the British Colonies,
when we took Possession of it, there was a complete Ecclesiastical
Establishment under an Episcopate.

But we need not confine our Inquiries to Christian Nations and Countries. If
we consult the Records of Paganism and Mahometanism, the Case appears always to
have been the same in this Respect. Among the ancient civilized Heathens, the
national Religion was never neglected; for it was generally considered as one
of the first Duties of the Civil Magistrate, to encourage, support and increase
its Influence, to the utmost of his Power. And the Mahometans have ever been as
zealous in propagating their Religion, as in extending their Conquests.

This universal Practice of all Nations and Ages, has proceeded from Two
general Principles that are deeply founded in human Nature, and human Policy.
The first is inseparable from our Nature, and necessarily leads Men to exert
themselves, for the Preservation and Security of whatever they esteem and hold
to be valuable, in Proportion as they judge of its Usefulness and Importance.
The other seems to be a fundamental Principle of sound and consistent Policy,
which necessarily requires the Protection and Security of the national
Religion. For as some Religion has been ever thought, by the wisest
Legislators, to be necessary for the Security of Civil Government, and
accordingly has always been interwoven into the Constitution of it; so, in
every Nation, that Religion which is thus distinguished, must be looked upon
as, in the Opinion of the Legislature, the best fitted for this great Purpose.

Wherever therefore the national Religion is not made, in some Degree, a
national Concern, it will commonly be considered as an Evidence, that those who
have the Direction of the national Affairs do not esteem their Religion -- or,
that they are negligent of the Duty they owe to God and the Public, as the
Guardians of its Happiness.

SECTION V. Reasons assigned why the Church in America has been thus neglected.
ARE we then, SECT. V.
from the present State of the Church of England in America, immediately to
form so harsh a Conclusion, concerning those who have the Direction of our
national Affairs? Must we necessarily suppose, that they have no Esteem and
Affection for that Religion, which is so closely allied and connected with the
Constitution of the State? Has the Conduct of the Church of England been such,
with Regard to the Government -- or, are its Principles such, that it is not
entitled to the same Care and Protection, which other Kingdoms and States have
ever afforded to the national Religion, whether Christian, Mohammedan, or Pagan?
Neither of these, it is hoped, can be said properly.

Although the Church of England in America appears not hitherto to have been
made a national Concern; yet many Reasons may be assigned for this Neglect,
owing to the peculiar Circumstances of the English Nation and Colonies, which
will account for, although, perhaps, not altogether excuse it. The Colonies
were generally settled by private Adventurers; and some of them, by those who
had an Aversion to Episcopal Government. The Propriety of not sending a Bishop
to Colonies of the latter Sort, will be disputed by none: and as to the others,
their Beginnings were small, and for some Time an Episcopate was not greatly
wanted.

Besides, it ought to be considered, that the Changes of Government -- the
Revolutions of Power -- the Opposition of contending Parties at Home -- the
Intrigues of foreign Courts -- and the Attacks of neighboring Kingdoms and
States, have generally been more than sufficient to employ the public
Attention, almost ever since the Rise of our Colonies. Accordingly we have
found, that even the commercial and political Importance of these Colonies, has
been but little known or regarded, until of very late Years. In these
Circumstances, it is not to be wondered, that the Case of the Church in
America, has not been attended to; especially as the Members of it, not
excepting the Clergy, have been careless themselves, and not made those
Representations in Favor of it, which they ought to have made.

To this may be added, that so long as no regular Plan for an American
Episcopate was settled and proposed, a Fear of infringing the religious Rights
of Protestant Dissenters in this Country, for which both our Civil and
Ecclesiastical Rulers have so tender a Regard, must have created an almost
insuperable Difficulty in carrying into Execution a Work of this Nature.

Our own Negligence in this Country has been confessed; and I wish as much
could be fairly said in Excuse for it. How can the Necessities of the Church
here be known, at a Distance, unless those who reside here will be at the
Trouble of representing them? And from whom can such Representations be
properly expected, but from the Clergy, and other Friends and Members of the
Church?

Indeed there have not been wanting some Individuals, for almost a Century
back, who have seen and lamented the Want of Bishops in this Country, and
endeavored to obtain them: and there was a Time, wherein the Members of the
Church in general, seem to have exerted themselves in Behalf of an Episcopate.
So early as in 1672, this Subject was mentioned, and it was thought needful and
expedient even then, that a Bishop should reside in Virginia. But in the
Beginning of this Century, Addresses were earnestly and repeatedly made to the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in foreign Parts, then newly
incorporated, signed not only by the Clergy and by Vestries, but by Governors
of Provinces Upon renewed Instances from Governors of Provinces, Ministers,
Vestries, and private Persons in the Plantations, for settling Ecclesiastical
Superiors there, without whom the Church must rather decrease than increase;
and from a full Conviction of the Expediency thereof, Bishops being never more
wanted there than now: the Society's Endeavors have been employed, not without
Expense this Year, in paving the Way for such, by all proper Applications and
due Preparations: not to mention what has been formerly done in this Matter,
after a loud Call for fifteen Years together, by a Committee extraordinarily
appointed to find out Ways and Means for the Maintenance and Support of Bishops
in America: nor to recite the Representations made in the last Reign,
concerning this grand Affair, said, in the last of them, to tend to the Glory
of God, by the Advancement of sound Religion, the Honor of her Majesty, the
Prosperity of her Subjects, and the flourishing State of the Church in those
Parts; offered by his Grace of York, and Lord Bishop of London, in May last,
which her late Majesty, of blessed Memory, received very graciously, and
intended to have proceeded upon: The Providence of God has so disposed Events,
that the concerted Measures may probably be brought to Perfection in the
Beginning of this Reign, as a most pregnant Instance of his sacred Majesty's
Favor and Encouragement, promised to so pious and useful a Work, as he has
been pleased to declare that of the Propagation of the Gospel to be. Nor can
our Expectations but revive, so soon as his Royal Wisdom shall be apprized,
that the Inclinations of those People in those Regions (which surely is the
Voice of God in this Case) concur with the apparent Necessity, that such
Governors in the Church be there constituted, after the Apostolical Form and
Order; (so in one Address to her Majesty they express their Sentiments:) 1st.
To rule and govern well those People, who are desirous to be committed to their
Charge; so another, without which (they are the very Words of the Supplicants)
no wonder if some Members grow remiss in their Duty, if many fall into
scandalous Practices; and if Atheism, Deism, etc. prevail over more: 2dly, To
defend and protect both the Clergy and Laity: so Three more -- 3dly, To unite
the Clergy themselves and reduce them to Order; so his Excellency Governor
Hunter, particularly in a Letter to the Society, May 1714, For without an
Ecclesiastical Superior, the Disorders of some Missionaries are not to he
prevented; and so the Committee of the Society agreed, March 30, 1714, to
report as their Opinion, That the most effectual, if not only way, to prevent
and heal such Divisions, is to have Bishops sent thither. Lastly, To confirm --
so several Addresses -- that the Laity, who have been initiated into the
Christian Faith by Baptism, may not only have the Benefit of Confirmation; but
also, in Conjunction with the Rest of the Members of the Church in those remote
Parts, be Partakers of the benign Influence of the Episcopal Function; in
ordaining Ministers from among themselves; in confirming weak Brethren, and
blessing all Manner of People susceptible of such holy Impressions, as are made
by the Imposition of the Bishop's Hands.

And by Way of Preparation for a Suffragan or Bishop, in one of the Sees upon
the Continent of America, The Society having thought fit to purchase a Seat for
his Residence, some while since, at Six Hundred Pounds Sterling Expense, in a
convenient Mansion House and Lands situate at Burlington, within the Jersies;
they have proceeded to expend this Year, for Repair of Damages done by Fire and
otherwise, under Governor Hunter's Inspection and Manage, Two Hundred and
Twenty-six Pounds Seven Shillings and Five Pence, as a farther Testimony of
their Adherence to Resolutions solemnly deliberated and agreed upon, viz. That
the important Affair of Bishops and Bishoprics to be settled in America, be
considered in the first Place; That the Lands in St. Christophers, now held in
Custodiam, and formerly belonging to the Popish Clergy there, under a French
Government, be thought upon as a proper Expedient for the Support of Protestant
Missionaries in that Isle, and maintaining Bishops of the Church of England,
for the Islands, and for the Continent: And that Addresses be made to the
present Sovereign, with all Expedition, and most suitable Application for these
Purposes. Now, what happy Successes the grand Affair is like to be crowned
with, under the benign Influences of his Majesty's auspicious Reign, may fairly
be suggested from what is here inserted, in the critical Minute of Publication,
through the Vigilance of our Right Reverend Diocesan, that upon his humble
Motion to his Majesty in Council, that he would be graciously pleased to grant
that the Lands and Possessions in the Isle of St. Christophers, which formerly
belonged to the French Clergy there, should henceforth be applied to the
Maintenance of Protestant Ministers of the established Church of England, to
be employed in America; his Majesty referred it to the Lords of his Treasury,
to consider of such an Appropriation; whereupon it has been humbly proposed, by
his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury President, and the Lord Bishop of
London, one of the Vice-Presidents of the Society for propagating the Gospel in
foreign Parts; that the said Lands and Possessions, be vested in the said
Society; and that so much of the Revenues thereof, as shall remain after due
Provision made for licenced and approved Ministers in that Island, be applied
for or toward the Maintenance of two Bishops, one to be settled in the
Islands, and the other on the Continent of his Majesty's Dominions in America.
Abstract of the Proceedings of the Society for 1714, Page 52.

The preceding Extract, from a Narration which is in so few Hands at this Day,
affords so much Intelligence, and so many useful Hints relating to the Subject
before us, that it is not doubted but the Reader will readily excuse the Length
of it.


, setting forth the Necessity of an American Episcopate, and imploring their
Influence and Mediation in Favor of it. That truly charitable and worthy
Society, to whom the Nation and the Christian World in general are under great
Obligations, and to whose unexampled Liberality, indefatigable Application and
amazing Perseverance, the Church of England owes its very Existence, at this
Day, in some of the Colonies, most heartily and vigorously engaged in the
Prosecution of so good a Work. They began with making all proper
Representations of the Case to the Queen In one of their Addresses to the
Queen, were the following Words: We cannot but take this Opportunity, farther
to represent to your Majesty, with the greatest Humility, the earnest and
repeated Desires not only of the Missionaries, but of diverse other considerable
Persons that are in Communion with our excellent Church, to have a Bishop
settled in your American Plantations, which we humbly conceive to be very
useful and necessary for establishing the Gospel in those Parts, that they may
be better united among themselves than at present they are, and more able to
withstand the Designs of their Enemies; that there may be Confirmations, which
in their present State they cannot have the Benefit of; and that an easy and
speedy Care may be taken of all the other Affairs of the Church, which is much
increased in those Parts, and to which, through your Majesty's gracious
Protection and Encouragement, we trust that yet a greater Addition will daily
be made. We humbly pray Leave to add, that we are informed the French have
received several great Advantages from their establishing a Bishop at Quebeck.
Dr. Kennet's anniversary Sermon, Anno 1712, Page 29.
-- they proceeded to purchase a House in New Jersey, for the Residence of a
Bishop -- and after duly preparing the Way, obtained an Order from the Crown
for a Bill However, there being already so many Ministers settled in these
foreign Parts (by the unwearied Application of the Society, and the great
Watchfulness of the Bishop of London over his Charge, both before the Society's
Institution and since) as exceed the Number of those in many Dioceses in
England; and the Tract of Land on the Continent where they are planted,
exclusive of the Islands, being larger in Extent by far than both the Provinces
of Canterbury and York put together; it has pleased the Divine Providence to
raise in the Heart of her Most Excellent Majesty, a Zeal for the better
Regulation of those Places, in the Establishment of Ecclesiastical Superiors,
who may govern both Priests and People, according to the ancient Apostolical
Form, the Model of the English Church, the Inclinations of many of the People,
and the best Methods of bringing Souls to Heaven: Accordingly, after the most
mature Deliberation of a Committee appointed for that Purpose, and of the whole
Society thereupon: A Representation was humbly offered to her Majesty,
importing what Number was expedient to be sent -- where they were to be fixed
-- and what Revenues might be thought proper for their Support: To which her
Majesty was pleased to give a most gracious Answer, highly satisfactory to the
Society; and a Draught of a Bill was ordered, proper to be offered to the
Parliament, for establishing Bishops and Bishoprics in America.

Abstract in 1713, Page 56.
to be drawn and laid before the Parliament, for establishing an American
Episcopate: -- but when the Affair was in a Way of being speedily accomplished,
the Death of that excellent Princess suddenly put a Stop to it.

The Attempt was renewed with the same Spirit, in the Beginning of the next
Reign, and the Prospect of Success was most encouraging See the preceding
Note, Page 49.
; but -- it proved abortive. The Reasons of this Miscarriage are not now well
known in America. Possibly the Rebellion, which soon broke out, diverted the
Royal Attention to Subjects of a different Nature -- perhaps also the Clergy,
and Members of the Church in this Country, grew careless themselves, and
neglected to renew their Application; and their Silence may have been construed
by the Government to imply, that the Necessity of the American Church was not
so urgent as had been formerly represented.

However, the venerable Patrons and Supporters of the Church in America, the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, notwithstanding our own Negligence
and Stupidity in this Country, with Regard to a Matter which so nearly concerns
us, (for which the Failure of the beforementioned Attempts must apologize as
well as it can) continued to keep Sight of the great Object; and they have ever
been watching for seasonable Opportunities of exerting themselves to obtain it.

In the mean Time, the public Declarations of its most illustrious Members,
concerning the Propriety, Usefulness and Necessity of sending Bishops to
America, frequently made as Occasions have been suitable, have done Honor not
only to themselves, but to the Society in general; as we flatter ourselves that
they express the common Sentiments of that venerable Body, as well as their own
See in Particular the excellent anniversary Sermons of two great Prelates now
living, one preached in 1740, the other in 1764.
. And although hitherto their Endeavors to procure for us an Episcopate have
been unsuccessful, they have never dispaired of succeeding in the End; and
while the Times would admit of nothing farther to be done in Favor of it, a
Fund for its future Support was raised under their Influence and Auspices --
they never having ceased to hope, amidst the most discouraging Prospects, "that
a Design" (to use the Words of the late Bishop Butler on this Subject) so
necessary and unexceptionable, could not but at last be put in Execution.

SECTION VI. That the present Juncture is apprehended to be favorable to the
Episcopate in Question.
SECT. VI.
THE favorable Opportunity which has so long been waited for, in the Opinion of
many wise and judicious Persons in America, now presents itself -- and such, in
several Respects, as the Circumstances of the Nation have never, until now,
afforded. As the Tumults of War have ceased, and the public Tranquillity is
restored, without any reasonable Suspicions of a speedy Interruption -- so, the
greatest Harmony subsists between our Mother Country and most of the Colonies,
the late Disputes having been brought, by the Wisdom and good Temper of the
former, to a happy Termination -- the Plan of an American Episcopate has been
previously settled, and adjusted in such a Manner, that the religious
Privileges of none can be violated or endangered -- and, which we should ever
acknowledge with all Thankfulness, we are, at this Time, so happy as to have a
Prince on the Throne, from whose most unquestionable Disposition to promote the
general Interest of Virtue and Religion, from whose sincere Affection for the
Church, and from whose most gracious Declarations on the Subject before us, we
cannot possibly doubt of the Royal Approbation and Concurrence -- while a wise
and virtuous Ministry cannot fail of being ready, to afford to so good a Cause,
all needful Assistance. These are the Advantages, which now happily concur to
favor the American Church, and which peculiarly mark the present Period.

It ought to be farther considered, that the Arguments for sending Bishops to
America, were never so urgent and forcible as they are at present. When such
Progress was made toward obtaining for this Country an Episcopate, in the
former Part of this Century, the Number of American Clergy and Professors of
the Church, although judged then to be greater than in many Diocesses in
England See Note, Page 52.
, was small and inconsiderable, in Comparison with the Amount of their present
Number. The amazing natural Increase of the Colonists, and the vast Accession
of Europeans to the British America, have, in the Compass of Fifty or Sixty
Years, so enlarged the Number of its Inhabitants, and proportionably of the
Members of the Church, that perhaps it is not inferior now, to the Number of
Inhabitants in all the Diocesses in the Province of York, exclusive of
Dissenters.

Should it be said, that the Church of England in America contains now near a
Million of Members, the Assertion might be justified. It is not easy to
ascertain the Number exactly, in a Country so widely extended and unequally
peopled; but from general Calculations it has been frequently said of late
Years, that the proper Subjects of the British Crown in America amount to Three
Millions. This has been said even in the Parliament of Great Britain, if our
Information may be trusted -- it has been repeatedly said in this Country, by
some of our most sensible Writers. Strangers may be astonished at so large an
Account, but to others it is not incredible.

An actual Survey Communicated by a Gentleman of undoubted Veracity.
of the Number of Inhabitants in 1762, with a Distribution of them into
Classes, according to their religious Professions, is said to have been
carefully made: and it was then found, that, not including the new Colonies
ceded by the last general Treaty of Peace, they amounted to between Two and
Three Millions, in the Colonies and Islands. Of the Whites, the Professors of
the Church were about a third Part -- the Presbyterians, Independents and
Anabaptists were not so many -- the Germans, Papists and other Denominations,
amounted to more.

Let this Representation be carefully considered, and it will appear in a very
evident and striking Light, that the Wants of the American Church, as it has
been destitute of Bishops, must have naturally increased, and can amount now to
little less than an absolute Necessity. In these Circumstances, could such a
Number of Christians, even under a Pagan Government, unless in a State of open
Persecution, provided they had always proved themselves loyal and faithful
Subjects, apply in vain for a Favor, so needful for themselves, and so
harmless to others? How much less Reason then can the Church in America have to
fear a Refusal in the present Case, not only from a Christian Nation, famed for
its prudent Indulgence to all religious Denominations in general -- but from a
Nation, which is moreover disposed to befriend it, from peculiar Reasons both
of Affection and Policy?

This Argument taken from the Number of those who belong to the Church of
England in America, will receive great additional Force, from a Consideration
of the State of the Blacks in our Islands and Colonies; who were found, in the
abovementioned Survey, to be about Eight Hundred and Forty-four Thousand.
Although many of these, it is to be feared, through the Neglect of their
Masters, are not Christians at all; yet, as they are connected with, and under
the immediate Government of, Persons who profess Christianity, they may be
said, in an imperfect Sense, to belong to the respective religious Classes of
their Owners. However, their Situation is undoubtedly such, that in Proportion
as a Sense of Religion prevails in their Masters, they will receive Benefit.
Now as these are known chiefly to belong to the Professors of the Church, if an
Episcopate will naturally tend to improve the State of Religion in the Church
of England, it must consequently, (to say nothing of a particular Care which
will probably be extended to them, when Bishops shall be settled) have a
general good Effect upon more than half a Million of poor Creatures, Sharers
with us of the same common Nature -- sent into the World as Probationers and
Candidates for the same glorious Immortality -- whom Christ equally purchased
by his precious bloodshedding -- who notwithstanding, as they are bred up in
Ignorance and Darkness, are suffered, to the eternal Disgrace of their Owners,
to walk on "in the Shadow of Death," without a Ray of rational religious Hope
to cheer them.

This Consideration must make a deep Impression upon the Minds of all serious
Christians, and lead them to encourage and help forward every Work, which has
any probable Appearance of promoting the Spiritual Interests, of so many of
these wretched Outcasts of Humanity. If it is the Duty of Christians to
communicate the glad Tidings of Salvation to Heathens in general; it is a Duty
more peculiarly incumbent upon us, to extend the Gospel to such of them as are
under our immediate Government and Inspection, and who wear out, under the hard
Yoke of Bondage, their Strength and very Lives in our Service.

Another Argument for granting an American Episcopate, arises from the
Obligations of Gratitude; a national Sense of which, it is humbly conceived,
ought, at this Time, to have a peculiar Efficacy in Favor of Religion in the
American Plantations. By a signal Interposition of Divine Providence, the
British Arms in America have triumphed over all that opposed them, our Colonies
have been prodigiously extended, and our new Acquisitions, together with our
old Settlements, have been secured, not only by Treaty, but by a total
Annihilation of that Power on this Continent, whereby our former Safety was
chiefly endangered.

Every wise Nation sees and acknowledges the Hand of God in the Production of
such Events; and every religious Nation will endeavor to make some suitable
Returns to him for such extraordinary Favors. And what Returns are proper to
be made in such Cases, one Moment's serious Reflection will clearly discover.
The Circumstances of Things evidently point out two Duties to our Governors, on
this Occasion, both of them important in themselves, and of indispensible
Obligation: One is, the farther Security and Support of the true Religion in
America, in those Places where it already is; and the other, the Propagation of
it in those Places, to which it has not hitherto been extended.

As America is the Region, wherein the Divine Goodness has been more remarkably
displayed, in Favor of the British Nation; so, America is evidently the very
Ground, on which some suitable Monument of religious Gratitude ought to be
erected. This should be of such a Nature as to be visible to the World, and,
that the Honor of the Supreme Ruler of Events may be thereby immediately
promoted. Now as the Honor of God is most directly promoted by public Worship
-- as that Worship must be most acceptable to him, wherein the Praises and
Adorations of his Creatures are regularly offered him, in the solemn Offices of
the purest and best Religion -- and as the national Religion must be supposed
best to answer these Characters, in the national Opinion; it necessarily
follows, that the State of the national Religion here has a Right, on this
Occasion, to the peculiar Attention and Consideration of those, who are
entrusted with the Direction of our public Affairs.

What then does the present State of this Religion in America require to be
done? What is possible to be done for its Benefit and Advantage? These are the
Questions that, must naturally arise. And every one that professes it, every
Witness of its suffering Condition, is able to answer: -- The Church of England
in America, is perishing for Want of common Necessaries. She has long been
imploring Relief, under such Diseases as must prove fatal to her, if much
longer neglected. She therefore earnestly requests, and she only requests, that
proper Remedies may be provided for her present Sufferings. And she leaves it,
with all due Submission to the Wisdom of her Superiors, whether any Thing
farther is proper to be done, to strengthen and improve her Interests. She
wishes for nothing, which shall be thought inconsistent with the Rights and
Safety of others. She asks nothing, but what has been granted to others,
without any ill Consequences; and she relies on the common Affection and
Justice of the Nation, to raise her to this Equality. And, whether there is any
Thing presumptuous or unreasonable in these Expectations, let Heaven and Earth
judge!

SECTION VII. The Case of the American Heathens particularly considered, and
shown to require an Episcopate.
BUT besides taking proper Care of the true Religion where it already is, SECT.
VII.
the Providence of God calls loudly upon the Nation, to prosecute such Measures
as may be most effectual, for the Propagation of it amongst those Nations on
our Borders, which still sit in Darkness and the Shadow of Death -- or, at the
very least, to afford those who are engaged in, or desirous to undertake the
Propagation of it, all due Encouragement. And in this View, an American
Episcopate will be found to be necessary.

Nothing can be plainer, even from the common Principles of Humanity and
Benevolence, if we have no Regard to the sacred Injunctions of our holy
Religion, than that it is the Duty of those whom the Dayspring from on high
has visited, to communicate this Light to others, and as they have
Opportunity, to give the Knowledge of Salvation to those that are without it,
for the Remission of their Sins -- This is the indispensible Duty of every
private Christian, and it is a Duty still more strongly incumbent upon every
Christian Nation; as the Means of such a Communication are more in the Power of
a Nation, than of private Christians.

The Situation and Circumstances of some Nations are more favorable than those
of others, for Attempts of this Nature. The fairest Opportunities are commonly
in the Hands of trading Nations, like ours; to which Commerce opens a free
Intercourse with the unenlightened Parts of the Earth -- and, when conducted
fairly and properly, it is attended with such sensible present Advantages, that
farther Proposals for their spiritual Benefit, will probably be received, with
less Prejudice, as coming from the Hands of their Benefactors.

When the English Nation first proposed to establish Settlements in America,
the Propagation of the Gospel among the native Inhabitants was always mentioned
as a principal Part of the Plan. Queen Elizabeth, in whose Reign these
Settlements were projected, considered the Opportunity they would furnish for
the Advancement of Christianity, as a strong Motive for carrying the general
Scheme into Execution. "The first Letters Patent granted by her Successor, to
establish a Company for improving the Trade and Plantations in Virginia, April
10th, 1606, expressly enjoined the Propagation of the Christian Faith, as the
End principally intended. Another Patent in the same Year, granting two
Colonies to Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Summers, Knights; Richard Hackluit,
Clerk, Prebendery of Westminster, etc. directs it to the Furtherance of so
noble a Work, which may by the Providence of Almighty God, hereafter tend to
the Glory of his Divine Majesty, in propagating the Christian Religion to such
People as yet live in Darkness, and miserable Ignorance of the true Knowledge
and Worship of God Dr. Kennet's anniversary Sermon, Page 31, Note (b).
."

How this original Plan came to be altered, and so essential a Part of it as
the Conversion of the American Heathens, to be afterward omitted, would
require more Time to explain, than the intended Brevity of this Publication
will admit of. That it has been altogether laid aside as a national Design, is
too evident to be disputed. And yet as the Nation has not rejected the
Christian Religion, but professes to be governed by it, and to esteem the Light
of the Gospel as an invaluable Blessing, may it not be hoped that they may
still be persuaded to resume the Plan? Are there no Sparks of Christian
Compassion remaining, to warm the Breasts of our national Rulers, in Favor of
innumerable Tribes of our Fellow Creatures, originally "made of one Blood" with
us -- with whom we are farther connected by Position and political Ties -- and
who are still Strangers from the Covenants of Promise, having no Hope, and
without God in the World? May it not be reasonably expected, that some generous
Efforts will be made, to furnish them with the Means of rational and eternal
Happiness, of which most of them continue to be entirely destitute? Especially,
may it not be expected, under the peculiar Advantages which the present Season
affords?

The Providence of God, as has been observed, points out this general Duty, by
the late Events, more plainly and expressly than ever. We never had, until this
Time, so favorable an Opportunity for carrying forward this blessed Work. We
never had it so much in our Power; and our Obligations of Gratitude were never
so strong. A necessary Dependence of the Natives upon us, is now established;
as they can have Recourse to no other European Nation, without the utmost
Difficulty, for the Supply of their Necessities. The British Standard is now
erected in the Heart of their Country; and a friendly Communication is opened
with many Tribes and Nations, whose Names were unknown to us until very lately.
The Influence of Jesuits and French Missionaries ceases to operate in those
Regions, where formerly every Attempt made by a Protestant Nation to propagate
the Gospel, was sure of being counteracted as effectually as possible. In a
Word, their Situation is now such, that no Opportunity or Chance remains for
their ever hearing so much as the Name of Christ, if they do not hear it from
us.

What Influence these Considerations may have upon our Politicians, one who is
no Politician will not undertake to determine. But certainly they must deeply
affect the Minds of all serious Christians, and, one would think, of rational
and consistent Deists, who profess a Regard for natural Religion -- the great
Doctrines and Duties of which, are generally corrupted and violated by the
American Heathens, and will be most effectually restored and secured by the
Propagation of the Gospel.

After all, it may deserve to be considered, Whether, on the Principles of mere
worldly Policy, some Pains and Expense prudently bestowed toward the
Conversion of these Savages, would not turn to our Account? The nearer they are
brought, in their Principles and Morals, to the Christian System, the more they
will resemble Christians in their Way of Life. The Principles of the Gospel,
and the Manners of Savages, cannot consist with each other, for any
considerable Time. The more they improve in Civil Life, the more useful they
will be to us in the Way of Commerce -- and the less we shall have to fear from
their barbarous Cruelties, on any Occasion. Nor should it be forgotten, that
every single Indian, whom we make a Christian, we make a Friend and Ally, at
the same Time.

But while the Propagation of the Gospel amongst the American Heathens has been
altogether neglected, as a national Concern, many private Persons, whose
eminent Abilities have been an Honor to the Nation -- whose universal
Benevolence has been as conspicuous as their Abilities -- and whose Activity
has been equal to their Benevolence -- have not neglected to exert themselves,
in Behalf of the general Interests of Christianity. Can any Englishman, even at
this Day, hear the Name of Boil mentioned, without a very sensible Emotion of
Pleasure? This truly honorable and illustrious Person, amidst his unwearied
Application for the Improvement of religious and useful Knowledge at Home,
found much Time and large Sums to bestow, for the Propagation of Christian
Knowledge, in different remote Parts of the Earth, and particularly amongst the
Natives of America.

The Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, although, notwithstanding they
have been abused in this Country by many petulant Tongues, and some petulant
Pens, on this Account, the Conversion of Heathens was not their primary and
original Object (for if we read the History of its Rise, or examine its
Charter, which recites a particular Case only, and makes Provision for it, and
may judge from thence, we shall find it as evident as Language can make it,
that the Support and Propagation of the Gospel amongst our own People in
America, was the immediate and principal Design of their Incorporation;) I say,
this worthy Society, have most assiduously and vigorously attempted, so far as
their more immediate Duty would admit of it, the Conversion of the Indians in
the neighborhood of our Settlements.

It may seem strange, to such as judge of their Design by mistaking their
Title, and are acquainted with the large Sums It has been given out, from Year
to Year, by the Publishers of the Court Calendar, that the annual Expense of
this Society is about One Thousand Five Hundred Pounds. It is astonishing that
so gross a Mistake should be once made -- more so, that it should continue to
be so often repeated -- and most of all, that it should be adopted by Writers,
from whose Accuracy better Things might be expected -- especially, as the
Society never fails to publish yearly an exact Account of their Expenses, and
even to express the Particulars. This Misrepresentation may possibly have been
owing to no unfriendly Intentions; but yet, as it may be supposed to circulate
widely, it must naturally have a bad Effect upon the Society, by preventing
Benefactions. For some who bestow Nothing, on the Supposition that the
Society's annual Expense is but One Thousand Five Hundred Pounds, would, in all
Probability, give liberally, if they knew it amounted to near Five Thousand
Pounds, which is really the Case.

The Society was incorporated in 1701. In Ten Years Time their Expenses arose
to One Thousand Eight Hundred and Forty-six Pounds, Ten Shillings, and One
Penny, per Annum; a Sum considerably larger than the abovementioned Compilers
have assigned, even for the present Year. Their Expenses have been gradually
increasing, from their first Institution to the present Time. In 1740 their
Expense was Three Thousand Four Hundred and Forty Pounds; and in 1765 they
expended Four Thousand Seven Hundred and Eighty Pounds, Five Shillings, and
Three Pence -- of which Sum Four Thousand One Hundred and Forty-four Pounds,
Five Shillings, and Three Pence, was paid in Salaries to Missionaries,
Catechists, etc. and the Remainder was laid out in Books, Gratuities to
Missionaries, and in defraying other incidental Charges.


they have annually expended in America for the Propagation of the Gospel, that
their Progress in the Conversion of Heathens has been so small. But when it
comes to be considered, that their Benefactors have entrusted them with their
Donations, chiefly for other Purposes -- and, that their Funds have never been
sufficient, to answer the Occasions that have arisen in their more immediate
Department -- it is rather to be wondered, that they have been able to make any
Attempts at all of this Nature, than that they have done so little. And yet
they have always employed some Person in this Service; and I believe it may be
truly said, that they have never neglected any fair Opening to introduce the
Gospel amongst the American Heathens, especially if proper Persons could be
found, to engage in such a Mission. But they can force none into this Service,
which heretofore has been attended with great Danger, as well as Fatigue: they
can only offer such Salaries and Rewards by Way of Inducement, as they have
Abilities to offer. However, they have not been altogether unsuccessful in
their Attempts. Several Hundreds, by Means of the Society, have been converted
from Heathenism to the Christian Faith, among whom some have been Ornaments to
their new Profession, and an instructive Example to those who have had better
Advantages. Yet still it must be confessed, that the Success has not been
proportionable to the Pains that have been taken; and from the repeated Trials
that have been made, as well as from other Evidence, it appears, that there
must be some more effectual Way for the Conversion of Savages, than has been
yet taken.

As it was always known, that the living like Christians with Respect to
Religion, and like Savages with Respect to civil Life, could not be reconciled
in the same Persons; it was hoped that the Conversion of Indians to the
Christian Religion, would naturally introduce amongst them Civility of Manners
-- and this was reckoned among the Advantages to be expected from converting
them. But it seems now to be generally agreed, that what was proposed as a
Consequence, ought to be considered as a necessary Means, of spreading the
Gospel amongst savage Nations.

The Religion of the Gospel was intended for Men and reasonable Creatures, and
not for Brutes, although in the Shape of Men. Until these Wretches therefore
are, in some Degree, humanized, there can be but little Prospect of making them
Christians, to any lasting and valuable Purpose. The Society, for a long Time,
seem to have been growing sensible of this; but as another Method had been
undertaken, it was proper that a full Trial should be made of it.

The venerable Dr. Bray, who has not improperly been styled the Father of the
Society, and than whom, no Man ever more carefully considered Subjects of this
Nature, and but few have had better Opportunities of informing themselves, was
latterly of this Opinion. In his Memorial relating to the Conversion of the
American Indians, addressed to the then Commissaries of Maryland, and the Rest
of the Clergy, he has the following Paragraph.

You must earnestly endeavor to bring them off from a wandering and idle Life,
to a settled and industrious Way of living; it being impossible to conceive how
any religious Impressions and Instructions should be given them to any Purpose,
or remain upon them in their wandering State. Nor was it ever known in Fact,
that Christianity did thrive among a rude and barbarous People, continuing in
an unsettled and savage Way of living, as in the Nature of the Thing, it is
impossible that it should. And it is very remarkable, that as our Blessed
Master came into the World when it had become most civilized; and where it was
so, in a few Ages, Christianity overspread the civilized Part of it: so upon
the Inundation of wild and barbarous Nations into the Roman Empire, true
Christianity did sensibly decline; and Satan, by his Deputy or Vicegerent
Antichrist, regained his Dominion over the greatest Part of Christendom, both
in the Eastern and Western Parts of the Empire.

Dr. Stebbing, a Person of distinguished Abilities and Penetration, and a
Member of the Society, in his anniversary Sermon, delivers the same Sentiments.
Of a general Conversion of the native Indians, (says he) I see no great
Likelihood at present. If this is to be done by human Means, there must be the
necessary Preparations for human Means to operate. They must be polished into
good Manners -- there must be some common Intercourse between us -- we must
bring them to some good Liking of our Laws and Customs. All this is necessary,
where the Power of Miracles is wanting; and when, and whether ever, (...) will
be done, God only knows. One of the grand Obstacles the Doctor complained of,
is now happily removed; the others will always continue, until we heartily
engage in the Removal of them. I might avail myself of the Names of more
illustrious Persons now Living; but farther Authorities are needless in so
plain a Case.

It having then become a settled Point, that the most proper Way for converting
Savages, is previously to instruct them in the Arts and Manners of civil Life,
the Society has been, for a considerable Time, carefully employed in collecting
such Information and Intelligence, relating to this Subject, as may enable them
to form a proper Plan for civilizing the Natives of America, in Order to their
becoming Christians -- in which great and good Work, they cannot doubt of
meeting with all needful Encouragement. For this Purpose many Persons in
America have been particularly consulted, both Missionaries and others; and the
Result already is, that they have come to a general Determination to erect
Schools, for teaching the Indian Children the Elements of Agriculture, and the
most necessary mechanic Arts, together with civilized Manners -- to be followed
by proper Instruction in the Christian Religion A School on much the same Plan
has been established for some Years in Connecticut, under the Direction of the
worthy Mr. Whetlock; and its Beginnings are not unpromising.
. They have entered into Resolutions for carrying into Execution a Scheme of
this Nature, as soon as proper Places can be fixed for the Erection of such
Schools, and proper Persons be found to engage in the Service -- trusting in
that good Providence to assist them in this Undertaking, which has so
wonderfully supported them in the Prosecution of their original Work.

But here a Number of Difficulties arise to retard their Progress. A Variety of
Plans and Proposals have been transmitted from this Country. The Persons who
have been consulted, have their particular Prejudices and Attachments. The
Things and Places which one represents as expedient, are condemned by another.
And this must of Necessity happen, where so many Persons, unconnected together,
and without Opportunities of consulting one another, are called upon to give
their Opinion of a Case, like this, whereof most of them must be supposed to
have but a partial Knowledge.

To balance and adjust so many different Opinions and Representations, must be
the Work of much Time and Care, and will of Course greatly retard the Execution
of the general Plan. For one false Step taken in the Beginning, may in Time
produce Consequences that are pernicious and fatal. But these Difficulties
would vanish in a great Measure, under an American Episcopate. Suitable Places
for the Erection of Indian Schools, might be speedily ascertained -- proper
Persons to be entrusted with the immediate Care of them, might be found out and
appointed -- and when actually employed, the general Direction and
Superintendency of a Bishop residing near them, would not only give Spirit to
the Work, but would moreover be necessary to unite so many Persons, in
different Parts of the Country, who are independent of each other, and to make
them regular and uniform in their Endeavors to promote the same general Design.

In a System of this Kind, where a Number of Powers and Movements are to be
employed to one common Purpose, a regular and consistent Direction of them is
as requisite, as of the different mechanical Powers, in a Watch or a Clock. And
the nearer the superintending Influence is, the better; for when it is present,
if irregularities arise, they are soon corrected, and are never suffered long
to continue. In other Cases, where a Number of Persons are employed in one
general Work, a common uniform Direction is allowed to be necessary; and why
this particular Case should be an Exception, will not be easy to show.

The Necessity of one common Direction in the Case before us, will probably be
granted; but perhaps some may think it may as well be carried on without an
Episcopate. This is a Point which deserves some Examination. Although the
general Direction of such a Work must belong to the Society at Home, so long as
it is carried on at the Expense of the Society; yet it will be highly requisite
that a Superintendent in this Country should oversee the Whole, with a Power to
regulate the Behavior of all that are immediately employed in it, to hear
Complaints, to redress Grievances, and to correct Abuses; to whom Application
may easily be made on all Emergencies.

Now the Question is, Whether a Bishop would not be a more proper Person to be
entrusted with this Superintendency, than any other? And if we consider that
the great End in View, is the Advancement and Propagation of the Christian
Religion -- and that many Clergymen as well as others must be employed in the
Service, there must evidently appear to be a peculiar Propriety in carrying on
this Work, under the Direction of a Bishop. Who can be so proper to conduct a
Plan for the Propagation of the Gospel, as one of that Order, to whom the
Charge of the Gospel was principally committed, and to whom a Blessing was
expressly promised, in their Endeavors to promote it? Who so proper to govern
Clergymen, as those to whom the Government of them, together with that of the
whole Church, was particularly entrusted by its Divine Founder?

If some of the Ends of this Superintendency might as well be answered, by
putting it into Lay-Hands, yet others manifestly cannot. There must be frequent
Occasions for the Exercise of those spiritual Powers, which are peculiar to the
Episcopal Office; and it will be of great Consequence to the Success of the
Work, whether Recourse may be had to a Bishop in such Cases easily and
speedily, or whether the Application must be made to one, at the Distance of
more than a Thousand Leagues.

It should also be considered, that such a Station must necessarily require
some Person of eminent Abilities and Influence, to fill it properly. And
although many such, at this Time, are to be found amongst the Laity; yet, where
shall we find one thus qualified, who is not too deeply engaged in Affairs of
another Nature, to devote himself to this in such a Degree as will be
necessary? If such a one should be sent from Home for this Purpose, he must be
supported agreeably to his Rank and Character, the Expense of which the Society
can by no Means afford. Whereas if there was a Bishop in America, this would be
considered as Part of his Office; which he would therefore freely execute,
without any Addition to the necessary Charges. Those Persons in this Country,
who may be thought best qualified for such a Trust, I believe, are fully
employed in other Matters already, and cannot be expected to relinquish them
and engage in this, without a handsome Support.

Sir William Johnson, who, by his long Experience in, and careful Attention to,
Indian Affairs, is probably best qualified for this Direction, and is
undoubtedly the best Judge of these Matters in America, has, on this Occasion,
been particularly consulted by the Society, whereof he is a Member, and by some
in this Country. The Opinion of the Matter, which must always carry the
greatest Weight, is, that an American Episcopate will greatly facilitate the
Conversion of the Indians, upon any Plan that shall be followed. He declares
his Readiness to assist and cooperate with a Bishop in so good a Work, but
says nothing of undertaking it as Principal, as the political Superintendency
of Indian Affairs, with which he is invested by the Government, already affords
him sufficient Employment.

What then remains to be done? Shall the Society, at an Expense which will in a
great Measure disenable them to pursue their Plan, be obliged to support a
Lay-Superintendent, who, at the same Time, will be unable to answer all the
Purposes of such an Office? Or, will an Opportunity be granted them, of putting
the Management of this important Affair into the Hands of an American Bishop --
who can more properly and effectually execute the Office, and without any
additional Expense? If a Christian Nation does not think fit to undertake this
Work immediately, a Work which will probably be attended with many political
Advantages; yet surely it cannot refuse to give all due Countenance and needful
Encouragement, to such benevolent Christians and worthy Patriots, as are
willing and desirous to undertake it -- especially when this can be done,
without burthening the Public.

SECTION VIII. The Plan on which alone American Bishops have been requested,
fairly stated, with Expostulations on the Reasonableness thereof.
THE Design of what has been offered in the foregoing Section, SECT. VIII.
is to show -- That the Propagation of the Gospel amongst those who are
Strangers to it, is a Duty incumbent upon every Christian Nation, as they have
Opportunity: -- That the English Nation in particular has, at this Time, a much
better Opportunity, for converting to the Christian Faith the Heathen Nations
on the Borders of our Settlements, than has heretofore offered, and that the
Obligations of Gratitude to perform this Duty are stronger, and the Providence
of God points it out more plainly, than ever: -- That the commercial and
political Advantages to be expected from such a Conversion, if it can be
effected, are a strong Argument for attempting it, on the mere Principles of
worldly Policy: -- That the true Method to be taken for the Conversion of
Savages, is by previously teaching them the Arts and Manners of civil Life, in
order to which, proper Schools in different Parts of the Country are necessary:
-- That the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, not waiting to see what
the Nation will attempt, have, on these Principles, formed a general Plan for
the Erection of Indian Schools, with a Design to put it in Execution, as soon,
and as extensively, as possible: -- And that in Order thereto, it is reasonable
to think, that an American Episcopate will be most eminently useful, and indeed
that the Work cannot be properly conducted without it. From these
Considerations it evidently follows, that every Friend, not only to the Church
of England, but to Christianity in general, ought most earnestly to desire the
Settlement of Bishops in America, on this Account, and to use his Influence for
obtaining it.

The Reasons which have been offered in Favor of an American Episcopate,
appear to us to be of that real Weight and Importance as to deserve, and we
humbly hope that they will obtain, the Attention of our Superiors; and if they
are duly considered, we are unable to conceive that they can fail of producing
the desired Effect, under so mild and equal a System of Government.

The Principles of Liberty, Justice and Benevolence, are the main Pillars that
support the fair Fabric of the British Constitution. It is the Glory of
British Subjects, that they enjoy as much Happiness and Freedom as is
consistent with Government, and infinitely more than is consistent with the
Want of Government -- and that their Liberties are secured by Laws that have
been made by, and cannot be suspended or repealed without the Consent of, those
whom they have chosen to act as their Representatives. No undue Superiority
over some can legally be claimed by others; and for every Act of Injustice or
Oppression, a sure Remedy is provided. Provision has been carefully made, that
all may have full Enjoyment both of civil and religious Liberty; and so free
and equitable an Execution of the Powers of Government is established, that no
Body of Subjects, not an Individual, can justly complain of any Suffering or
Grievance, without Confidence of Redress. Such is the happy Tendency of our
Constitution, and we trust that our present Rulers have a Disposition to act,
in all Cases, agreeably to the Genius and Spirit of it.

Will not then the Complaints of near a Million of British Subjects in America,
of unimpeached Loyalty and Fidelity, who are suffering under the most
unprecedented Hardships with Regard to their Religion, an Interest dearer than
Property and more invaluable than civil Liberty, be regarded, and procure the
Redress of so intolerable a Grievance? When an impartial Tenderness and Care
for the religious Rights of all, is the professed Principle of the
Administration, as well as of our Legislature, is it not absurd, and injurious,
and ungrateful, to entertain any Suspicions, that so large a Number of Subjects
will be treated with a cruel Partiality? -- of such Subjects especially, as
have ever been dutiful and faithful, and who stand in a peculiar Connection
with, and Relation to, the national Body? Can it be imagined that so gross a
Partiality against the national Religion, may ever be justly imputed to the
British Nation, as no other Nation upon Earth was ever guilty of? For no Nation
has ever treated their Gods, which are no Gods, in such a Manner, as this
Imputation would charge a Christian and Protestant Nation with treating the
great Sovereign of the World.

As therefore we cannot but hope that the Voice of so many Petitioners will be
heard, and that so reasonable a Request will be granted; so we cannot but
flatter ourselves that it will be granted speedily, and that no unnecessary
Delays will prevent its good Effect. The Reasons which have been assigned for
granting us an Episcopate, are now in full Force, and stronger than ever; and
if they require it at all, they require it immediately.

It is not apprehended that any Difficulties can attend the Execution of this
Plan at the present Time, which will not always continue; and some peculiar
Motives and Advantages now concur to favor it, which probably no future Period
will afford. If then our Application fails of Success now, we shall despair of
it hereafter; and -- we want Language to express the ill Consequences we fear
from such a Disappointment.

What has been said implies not an Opinion, that there are at this Time no
Difficulties in the Way, but only that there are no Difficulties but such as
must be always expected. We are very sensible that a Work of this Nature will
have many to oppose it. Some will oppose it from an Enmity to all Religion.
Others will oppose it from an Enmity, either open or secret, to the Protestant
Religion; of which the Church of England is confessedly the strongest Barrier
against Popery. There are others again who heretofore have opposed it, from an
Apprehension, that either the Property or religious Liberty of their Friends
might be affected by it; as it was not so well known, with what Powers and with
what Views it had been requested that Bishops might be sent to us. But this has
been so often and explicitly mentioned of late, that it can hardly be supposed,
that any Persons of Power and Influence can remain ignorant of our true Plan.

However, for the Sake of others, and of such as mistake it, it may be proper,
in a Work of this Nature, to make the following Declaration to the Public, (and
I appeal to every Reader, who is acquainted with the Matter, for the Truth of
it) that it has been long settled by our Friends and Superiors at Home, and the
Clergy of this Country have often signified their entire Approbation and
Acquiescence therein -- That the Bishops to be sent to America, shall have no
Authority, but purely of a Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Nature, such as is
derived altogether from the Church and not from the State -- That this
Authority shall operate only upon the Clergy of the Church, and not upon the
Laiety, nor Dissenters of any Denomination -- That the Bishops shall not
interfere with the Property or Privileges, whether civil or religious, of
Churchmen or Dissenters -- That, in particular, they shall have no Concern with
the Probate of Wills, Letters of Guardianship and Administration, or
Marriage-Licences, nor be Judges of any Cases relating thereto -- But, that
they shall only exercise the original Powers of their Office as before stated,
i. e. ordain and govern the Clergy, and administer Confirmation to those who
shall desire it.

This, without any Reservation or Equivocation, is the exact Plan of an
American Episcopate which has been settled at Home; and it is the only one, on
which Bishops have been requested here, either in our general or more
particular Addresses. And so far is it from being our Desire to molest the
Dissenters, or any Denominations of Christians, in the Enjoyment of their
present religious Privileges, that we have carefully consulted their Safety and
Security, and studied not to injure, but oblige them.

Many may have received different Accounts of our Designs, and of our Conduct;
but such as have not proceeded from Ignorance, must have been the Effect of
Maliciousness. When Bishops were first proposed and requested for this Country,
they were mentioned under the Title of Suffragans. This is no ambiguous Term;
it has a fixed and determinate Meaning in the Laws of England, and cannot be
mistaken. Suffragan Bishops are the same with those that were called
Chorepiscopi, or Bishops of the Country, in the primitive Church; and it is
their Business to discharge all Offices merely Episcopal, in the remote Parts
of the Diocese wherein they reside, according to the Direction of, and by
Virtue of a Commission from, the Diocesan Dr. Grey's System of English
Ecclesiastical Law.
. And since the Term has been omitted, such Explanations have attended our
Petitions for American Bishops, that I know not of a single Instance, wherein
Reason has been given to suspect, that a Departure from the same general Plan
has been aimed at or desired. And of this I am certain, that all our Addresses
from this and several of the neighboring Colonies, for many years, have had
one consistent and unvaried Tenor, agreeable to the preceding Explanation.

What Weight will be allowed to these Assertions, the Author knows not; but the
Authority of the following Declaration to the same Purpose, contained in an
Answer to Dr. Mayhew's Observations, cannot fairly be disputed; as the Author
of it, supposed to be a very high Dignitary in the Church, manifestly discovers
that he is perfectly acquainted with the Affairs of the Society, and of the
Church in America. Speaking of the Members of the latter, he says: It is
desired, that Two or more Bishops may be appointed for them, to reside where
his Majesty shall think most convenient; that they may have no Concern in the
least with any Persons who do not profess themselves to be of the Church of
England, but may ordain Ministers for such as do; may confirm their Children,
when brought to them at a fit Age for that Purpose, and take such Oversight of
the Episcopal Clergy, as the Bishop of London's Commissaries in those Parts
have been empowered to take, and have taken, without Offense. But it is not
desired in the least that they should hold Courts to try Matrimonial or
Testamentary Causes, or be vested with any Authority now exercised, either by
provincial Governors or subordinate Magistates, or infringe or diminish any
Privileges and Liberties enjoyed by any of the Laity, even of our own
Communion. This is the real and the only Scheme that has been planed for
Bishops in America; and whoever has heard of any other, has been misinformed
through Mistake or Design. Page 59.


Now what reasonable Objections can be offered against such a Plan as this,
which is so universally harmless in every Respect, that none can be injured by
it; and so useful withal, that near a Million of Persons will receive Benefit,
and perhaps the Salvation of many Souls will be effected, by its being put in
Execution? Can any Thing be promoted by it, but the Good of the Church? Can any
Thing then be objected against it, but that this End will be promoted? But will
any dare, in this Age of British Freedom and improved Liberty, to avow the
Objection? Would not such a barefaced Attempt thus wantonly to oppress us, and
to prevent our Enjoyment of those invaluable Rights, to which we are equally
entitled with others -- which there is no Pretense that we have ever forfeited
-- and no Appearance of a Disposition to abuse -- rouse the Indignation and
Resentment of all the Friends of religious Liberty and Toleration, whether
Churchman or Dissenters?

Every Opposition to such a Plan, has the Nature of Persecution, and deserves
the Name. For to punish us for our religious Principles, when no Reasons of
State require it, is Persecution in its strictest and properest Sense. Will it
be said, that the Prevention of an Episcopate in America, is no Punishment? It
may as well be said, that keeping a Man out of his Right is no Injustice.
Whatever Evil is inflicted on us on account of our Principles or Practices, is
properly Punishment; and every Good we are deprived of, is equivalent to an
Evil inflicted. Wherever therefore an Evil is inflicted, or we are deprived of
a Good, on account of our Religion, unless it be necessary for the Security of
the Public, we suffer Persecution.

As such Treatment has the very Essence of Persecution, so it can have its
Source only in an intolerant persecuting Disposition. And it is not to be
doubted but a Disposition that will produce thus much, if armed with Power,
would be productive of more -- and that they, who only endeavor now to prevent
our Enjoyment of those Advantages, to which we are entitled by the Laws of God
and the Constitution, would bring us, if they could, to the Stake or the
Gibbet. But what an Abomination is such a Disposition and Behavior, in the
Eyes of every true Englishman, of every true Protestant! What an Indignity and
Affront to the Nation, to desire it to countenance such Injustice and Cruelty!

It is hard to believe that any Protestants, especially that any English
Dissenters, who have generally, for a Century past, been warm Advocates for
religious Liberty, and who are greatly indebted to a Toleration themselves, can
be so inconsistent, as to wish this Harm to the Members of the national Church.
It would be a very ungrateful Return, for the most ample, complete and generous
Toleration, which is this Day to be found upon Earth. Many of the most sensible
Men belonging to that Body, have expressed, on this Subject, Sentiments that
are candid and liberal; and he who was lately considered in some Sense as their
Head Dr. Samuel Chlandler.
, when our Plan was explained to him, and his Opinion thereupon was desired,
did not hesitate to declare his free Consent to, and Approbation of, American
Bishops, in the Manner that we request them.

The Principles of religious Liberty professed by the Dissenters, must not only
restrain them from opposing an American Episcopate, as now settled and
explained, but oblige them, if they would act consistently, even to befriend
it. Some of them, I am fully persuaded, would freely join with us in our
Applications for Bishops, it their Assistance was needed, as we should be ready
to assist them, in Case of the like Grievances; and all of them will really
have a much worse Opinion of the Church of England in general, or of those who
belong to it, as probably their Reproaches on future Occasions will testify, if
this Matter should not be brought to a speedy and happy Termination. For
certainly nothing can more degrade our national Religion, in the Eyes of
Dissenters and others, both Protestants and Papists, at Home and abroad, than
to see that it is in so small Estimation, and its Interest so little regarded,
by those who profess it.

For, wherever Men are indifferent toward the Religion they profess, one of
these Conclusions will necessarily be made, and there is no preventing it --
either that their Religion, upon a more intimate Acquaintance, appears to be
unworthy of their Esteem and Affection -- or, that its Professors are of an
irreligious Character, and have no Regard for that which is the most invaluable
of all Things. And in either Case, the Reputation of their Religion will
greatly suffer.

At the Time of writing this, casting my Eyes upon the Public Paper of the Day,
I was struck with the following Paragraph, said to be an Answer from the King
of Poland to the Empress of Russia, who had interposed with that Monarch, in
Behalf of his Protestant Subjects. I have not forgot the Obligations I am under
to the Empress of Russia, among the Means which God Almighty made Use of to
raise me to the Throne: but when I came to it, I promised the exact Observation
of my Religion throughout my Kingdom. If I was weak enough to abandon it, my
Life and my Throne would be exposed to the just Resentment of my Subjects. I am
threatened with forcible Means to oblige me to do what is asked of me, which
would reduce me to an Extremity equally unhappy. I perceive some Danger in
whatever Resolution I may take; but I had rather be exposed to such as my Duty
and Honor induce me to make Choice of; and from this Time I join with my
Country in Defense of our holy Religion.

On the Supposition, that the Proposals, made by her Russian Majesty to the
King of Poland, were believed to be inconsistent with the Safety of the
national Religion, there is Something so sensible, spirited and open in this
Declaration, that every candid and consistent Protestant must applaud it, at
the same Time that he condemns the established Religion of Poland. Popery is a
gross Corruption of the Christian Religion, and it has been wrought up to its
present State, by the Application and Policy of many Ages. It presents to us,
not the amiable and undefiled Religion of the Gospel, but under the Name of it,
an intolerant System, compounded of Superstition, Absurdity, and I know not
what; and it manifestly appears to be the general Interest of Mankind, to
endeavor, in the Use of all proper and fair Means, to reform it. But although
this appears to be so evident to Protestants, there are undoubtedly others, to
whom it does not appear at all, and who believe the contrary.

As the King of Poland has solemnly bound himself by Oath, to maintain and
defend the Popish Religion, we must charitably suppose that he believes it to
be true. And as he believes it to be true, and has sworn to maintain it, he
cannot give it up, he cannot neglect it, without betraying his Duty and Honor,
in the Opinion of all reasonable and unprejudiced Persons. If therefore the
Dissenters and others, who are sensible of the Absurdities and Corruptions of
the Popish Religion, cannot but commend this firm Adherence to it in his Polish
Majesty, so long as he believes it to be the true Religion; surely they must at
least equally commend the like Conduct, with Regard to the national Religion,
in Protestant Princes -- more especially, when the Security of the established
Religion, and a Toleration of those who peaceably dissent from it, are allowed
to be consistent.

In the same Public Paper we are told, that the Courts of London, Berlin and
Copenhagen, have agreed to assist and cooperate with the Russian Empress, in
Favor of the Protestants in Poland. It must give Pleasure to every considerate
Protestant, to hear of so generous an Effort to be made, provided it be made
properly, in Behalf of the reformed Religion; and we cannot but earnestly wish
it Success. But could it be conceived, that those Powers who are thus active
for the Protestant Interest in foreign Countries, would neglect to encourage it
in their own proper Dominions, their Zeal for it abroad would be esteemed but
little better than political Grimace. And on this Principle our English
Dissenters would have a much better Opinion of the Church of England, and of
our Superiors who are Members of it, if, while they warmly interest themselves
in Favor of Protestantism in Poland, they do not inconsistently neglect, what
they profess to esteem the purest Species of it, in our own Colonies. A true
Regard for the Protestant Religion is not confined to particular Places: it
will produce vigorous Endeavors to improve and secure it, and to render it as
respectable as we can, in all Places; and especially in those Places, wherewith
we are most closely connected, and wherein our Power and Influence are greatest.

SECTION IX. That the Episcopate proposed cannot hurt the Dissenters, and is
free from all reasonable Objections.
SHOULD it be pretended, SECT. IX.
that what appears to be so reasonable in itself as an American Episcopate, and
so becoming the Honor and Character of the British Nation to grant, would be
productive of much Clamor and Discontent in the Colonies, and, on that
Account, that sound Policy forbids it; it would be an ill-grounded Assertion.

It may deserve Consideration, whether any Uneasiness that can be imagined, so
destitute of a proper Foundation to support it, that can arise-from the
Prospect of Bishops in America, sent only to take Care of the Church, in the
Manner explained, can in Reason and Policy justify the Refusal of what is so
essentially needed. Every reasonable Objection of others ought to be
considered; but those which are evidently perverse and unreasonable, especially
after due Care has been taken to make that Unreasonableness and Perverseness
appear, deserve not to be regarded -- much less to be regarded in such a
Manner, as to sacrifice thereto the Interest and very Being of the Church of
England in America. But if the Uneasiness of Americans be of such Consequence,
why the Uneasiness of the Members and Friends of the Church, so justly founded
in Case of a Refusal, deserves not to be considered, as much as the Uneasiness
of its Enemies without any Foundation, will be difficult to show.

Should it be said, which I conceive is the only Thing that can be said to the
Purpose, that Discontent in the Minds of Churchmen has not that dangerous
Tendency with Respect to the Government, which there is Reason to apprehend of
it in the Minds of others: whether, and how far this is true, I will not
undertake to determine. But this may truly and properly be said, that so long
as we are governed by the Principles of the Church of England, no Hardships or
Trials which we are doomed to undergo, will ever occasion just Suspicions of
our Fidelity and Loyalty. But then, ought our inflexible Loyalty and political
Integrity to be thought, in such a Case, a sufficient Reason for our being
denied the common Rights of British Subjects, and the most sacred Rights of
Conscience? We humbly apply to our Superiors -- we call even upon our Enemies
-- we appeal to the World -- for a Decision of this Point.

These Things have been hinted as worthy of Consideration, even on the
Supposition that sending Bishops to America could be really attended with
Discontent and Uneasiness in Dissenters and others. But of any considerable
Discontent or Uneasiness, there is no Reason to be apprehensive. Whatever
Notions the Dissenters in this Country may have formerly entertained,
concerning the Church; yet of late Years they have greatly come off from their
Prejudices, and Sentiments of Candor, Charity and Moderation have visibly
taken Place. And, excepting here and there a hotheaded Writer, or a
pragmatical Enthusiast, some of whom are to be found in all Communions, who
expect to find their Account in raising a Combustion and being noisy, we would
hope of the Dissenters in America, that they bear no Ill Will to the Church,
and desire nothing more than Security in the Enjoyment of their present
Advantages.

Indeed in the Time of the late Disturbances occasioned by the Stamp Act, it
was asserted in some of the London Papers, that the Fear of Bishops being sent
into America, was the principal Cause of that Uneasiness and Clamor, which
raised such a Flame in this Country. Every one here knew the Assertion to be a
vile and malicious Representation of the Case; and whoever could believe it to
be true, must have previously conceived of the Americans, as being of all
Creatures the most wretchedly stupid. The Discontent of that Time, arose
altogether from another Quarter. It was by no Means peculiar to the Rejecters
of Episcopacy, nor had any Relation to it; but proceeded from what the
Americans generally esteemed, and complained of, as an unconstitutional
oppressive Act. I appeal to all the Remonstrances of those unhappy Times -- to
all that was published here, either in Pamphlets or periodical Papers, whether
the Fear of an Episcopate was once assigned as a Reason for the public
Uneasiness. And I appeal to every American, whether there now is, or ever has
been any considerable Noise or public Clamor on this Account. For myself, I
can truly declare, that I have not heard of any, nor do I forsee any.

Of the Inhabitants of this Country, a full third Part belong to the Church,
and a considerable Proportion of others are professed Episcopalians; and none
of these can be supposed consistently to have an Aversion to Bishops. Of the
English Dissenters, a very large and respectable Body are the People called
Quakers; who entertain a particular Friendship and Respect for the Church of
England, and have given many substantial Proofs of it. The Affair of Bishops
has been mentioned and explained to many of them, and they appear to have no
Disposition to be jealous or uneasy on Account of their coming.

And as to Dissenters of other Denominations, the Subject has been proposed to
some of the most sensible of them, who have, with great Candor, confessed,
that as such an Episcopate as has been requested, could have no ill Effect upon
any, they had no Objections to offer. Nay some have even been so generous, as
to endeavor to undeceive their more ignorant and illiberal Brethren, if the
Author of these Papers has not been misinformed. And even amongst the most
prejudiced, it is hoped that but few can be found, who would not think
themselves injured by any Suspicions of their having such an Antipathy to
Bishops, that they cannot endure to breathe the same Air, or to live in the
same Country, with them. Time perhaps was when this might be truly said of some
of them; but the present Age has, in this Respect, mended greatly on all Sides,
in this, as well as in the Mother Country.

The Dissenters in England find that they can live happily with Bishops, even
where their Jurisdiction is complete -- where it extends to all Persons -- and
where it is supported by all the Strength of the civil Power. The English
Bishops have, for a long Course of Years, exercised their Authority with so
much Mildness, Tenderness and Moderation, as scarcely to have afforded an
Instance of reasonable Complaint, especially to Dissenters; and many of the
latter have been so generous as to confess it. The late Dr. George Benson, a
very learned Dissenter, did not scruple to make the following Declaration. The
Church of England, with its present Candor, Spirit of Toleration and Charity,
appears to me, to be the best Establishment on the Face of the Earth In his
Life of Jesus Christ, as quoted by the Monthly Reviewers.
.

The Authors of the Monthly Review, than whom none can be warmer Advocates for
every Species of religious Liberty and Indulgence, say, with particular
Reference to our very Subject: Whatever formidable Ideas of Episcopacy, those
Dissenters that fled into America, might carry along with them, and transmit to
their Posterity, we can safely aver, that Episcopal Power, granting that it was
oppressive formerly, is not so now: and that Dissenters at Home have no Reason
to conceive any Terror of it Vol. XXX. Page 285.
. If then the Dissenters in England, who live under the immediate Jurisdiction
and Government of an Episcopate, find no Reason to complain or to conceive any
Terror of it; surely in America they cannot have Reason to be terrified at the
Prospect of the same Episcopate -- especially as they will not be under the
Jurisdiction and Government thereof in any Respect.

As all Power is liable to be abused, and some Defects must be expected in the
best-regulated Government in this World, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil; it is
not denied but there have been formerly some Instances, wherein the Power of
our Bishops has been strained too high. But these may be considered rather as
the Fault of the Times, in which neither the natural Rights of Men, nor the
religious Rights of Christians, were so well defined and understood, as in the
present Age. And even then, the Spirit of the Church of England like that of
the Gospel, was more peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, than that of
any other national Church; and the English Bishops, to whom it was greatly
owing, were treated with particular Respect on that Account. In what Light the
most eminent Reformers and foreign Protestants have always considered them and
the English Prelacy, may be seen in The French Church's Apology for the Church
of England Bingham's Works, Folio Edition, Vol. II.
, to which I must refer those who are desirous of particular Information.

In the mean Time, I beg Leave to produce two short Extracts from that Work.
The first shall be from a Declaration of the celebrated Peter du Moulin, an
eminent Professor of the French Church in the Beginning of the last Century, in
the following Words: I know that under Pretense that the Church of England has
another Form of Discipline than ours is, our Adversaries (the Papists) charge
us that our Religion is diverse. But Experience confuteth this Accusation. --
The most excellent Servants of God in our Churches, Peter Martyr, Calvin,
Zanchius, Beza, etc. have often written Letters full of Respect and Amity to
the Prelates of England. -- Our Adversaries unjustly accuse us to be Enemies of
the Episcopal Order. The other Extract shall be from the Words of Calvin
himself. Give us such a Hierarchy (says he) in which Bishops preside, who are
subject to Christ and to him alone (not to the Pope) as their only Head; and
then I will own no Curse too bad for him that shall not pay the utmost Respect
and Obebedience to such an Hierarchy as that. And what Calvin says in general
of such an Hierarchy as ours, Beza and the most illustrious foreign Protestants
have particularly applied to the Church of England.

If then Calvin and the most celebrated foreign Protestants, were of Opinion,
in former Times, that the Dissenters in England ought peaceably to submit to
the Government of our Bishops: surely the Dissenters in America now, when the
English Episcopal Government is so much milder than heretofore, will not oppose
the very Existence of Bishops in the same Country with themselves -- especially
as no Obedience or Submission at all from them is required or expected. But, as
was said before, I take not this to be the present Disposition of Dissenters in
America, and believe that they would resent the Imputation of it as a gross
Affront. They have acquired the same liberal Turn in their Sentiments and
Manners, with the Dissenters at Home; and provided there be no Invasion of
their Privileges and Rights, they can live as quietly and peaceably with their
Neighbors, although differing in Principles, and even with Bishops, as their
Brethren can in any other Part of the World.

Some of them indeed formerly have had an Aversion to the Idea of Bishops in
America, on the Supposition that they must become subject to their Authority.
But the Plan which is now fixed, must effectually obviate all their Objections
and dissipate their Fears. As the Bishops proposed will have no Power over
them, or Concern with them, there can be nothing to alarm them. Our Ordinations
cannot hurt them; any more than their Ordinations can injure us. They can have
no more Reason to complain of Confirmation, or of any other Episcopal Office
performed in our Churches by Bishops, than they now have to complain, that
Preaching and the common Administration of the Sacraments are practiced in them
by Presbyters. And as to such Discipline and Government as is intended to be
exercised under an Episcopate, they will have no Reasons to be dissatisfied
therewith; any more than we now have to be dissatisfied with the Discipline
exercised by them -- but on the other Hand, they will have many Reasons to be
pleased with it.

There are several Things in the Church of England in America, owing to the
Want of a proper Superintendency and Government, with which they say they are
offended; and the Removal of Offenses will naturally give them Pleasure.
Sometimes they have been grieved, at seeing the ill Behavior of a Clergyman in
the Orders of our Church; but by the Settlement of American Bishops, a Remedy
will be provided for this Disorder. Sometimes they have lamented, that the
Bishops at Home, and the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, have been
imposed upon by false Accounts transmitted from hence by our American Clergy,
(whether with or without just and sufficient Reasons, I will not stop to
enquire); but under an Episcopate, they must be sensible that there can be no
Opportunity for any gross Impositions of this Nature. Sometimes, again,
Complaints have been made, that, in Consequence of this false Information,
Missions have been erected in improper Places, and the Society's Bounty has
been misapplied; but of all such Cases Bishops in this Country will be
competent Judges, and no Perversion or Abuse of the Society's Favors will be
suffered to continue. Some of them have signified that it would give them the
utmost Pleasure, to see more vigorous Efforts made by the Society, for
propagating the Gospel amongst the Heathens on our Borders: This Pleasure the
Society intends to afford them, as soon as Bishops shall be settled in America,
without which this important Work cannot be conducted properly -- and this is
one Reason why an Episcopate has been so earnestly requested. I might instance
in many other Particulars to the same Purpose, but these are sufficient to
show, that an American Episcopate will probably produce many Effects that will
be agreeable to the Dissenters. And as the Laws of Christian Charity and
Benevolence oblige them to desire it, for our Sake; so they may be supposed,
very consistently, to desire it also for their own.

If our American Bishops are to have no Authority over Dissenters, nor indeed
to exercise Discipline over our own People, the Clergy excepted; then the
frightful Objection of Spiritual Courts entirely vanishes. For if no Authority
of this Kind will be claimed or exercised by them, we may be sure that no
Courts will be erected for the Exercise of it.

What Foundation there is for Complaint of the Spiritual Courts in England, I
know not. Perhaps they may have used too great Severity in some particular
Instances. But this Complaint is not infrequently made, of our common Courts of
Justice. Cruelty and Severity is by no Means the Character of the English
Bishops, nor is it connected with the Exercise of their Authority, more than
with that of the civil Magistrate: and in all Courts, whether Ecclesiastical or
others, where an Injury is suffered, the Laws of England have provided a Remedy.

If some of the Laws which relate to these Courts, are imagined to bear hard
upon British Liberty, this, by the Way, is not necessarily to be considered as
the Fault of the Bishops -- it ought to be charged to the Account of the
Legislature in general, and not of a particular Branch of it. But be this as it
may, it is probable that these, and all other Ecclesiastical Laws, as well as
our Liturgy and public Offices, and our Translation of the Bible, will be
reviewed, as soon as it shall be thought that there is good Sense and Candor
enough in the Body of the Nation to admit of it.

Some undoubtedly blame these Courts, because they find themselves punished
therein for Actions, of which other Courts at present take no Cognizance. But
such Persons do not consider, that if Spiritual Courts were abolished, those
Actions which are prosecuted and brought to Trial there only, would many of
them be made punishable in other Courts, as they were before the Norman
Conquest; since they are esteemed by the Legislature of the Nation to be
inconsistent with the public Happiness.

Upon the Whole, I may venture to assert, that the Spiritual Courts at Home,
with all their Defects, are an advantage to the Public; and that the
Annihilation of them would be no Benefit to those Individuals, who make the
loudest Complaints of them. But whether they are useful or hurtful, and whether
the Aversion to them in this Country be rightly founded or not; as it is
certain that they will never be established here, they cannot with Propriety be
made an Objection against an Episcopate.

SECTION X. The Case of Tithes distinctly examined, and the Apprehension of
being forced to pay them in this Country, proved to be entirely groundless.
AS to Tithes, of which many Americans have had formidable Apprehensions, there
could be no Reason to fear the Payment of them here, even should the Authority
of our Bishops be as full and extensive as it is in England; and it is owing
altogether to Ignorance and Misapprehension, that People here have ever given
themselves Uneasiness on that Account. As perhaps no Prejudice has taken deeper
Root or extended wider in America than this, and as it still continues to
prevail in the Minds of many well-meaning but mistaken People; some Pains taken
to undeceive them, and to place this Subject in its true Light, will not be
condemned by the friendly Reader.

Tithes cannot be demanded by Bishops in this Country, because there are none
belonging to the Church: they are demanded in England, only because they are
due to the Church. They are due to the Church there, because they have been
freely given to it, by the ancient Proprietors of the Lands; and the Laws
relating to them do not convey them to the Church, but make them recoverable as
its Property, to which it had a previous and complete Right. This Right was
vested in the Church by King Ethelwulph, with the Consent of his Barons, in the
Year 854. At this Time all the Lands in England were properly the Kings
Demesne, and he had as good a Right to dispose of any Part of them in this
Manner, as any Proprietor or Owner of Lands in this Country has, to dispose of
them to such Persons and for such Purposes as he thinks proper. Sir Edward
Coke, in his Comment upon Littleton's Tenures As quoted by Dr. Heylin.
, says: It appears by the Laws and Ordinances of ancient Kings, and
especially of King Alfred, that the first King of this Realm had all the Lands
of England in Demesne, and les grands Manours and Royalties they reserved to
themselves, and with the Remnant they for the Defense of the Realm enfeoffed
the Barons of the Realm with such Jurisdiction as the Court Baron now has.

The very Charter, by which this Conveyance was made, is extant, we are told,
in the old Abbot Ingulph, in Matthew of Westminster, and the Leiger Book of the
Abbey of Abingdon. This Charter was solemnly offered by the King on the Altar
at Winchester, in the Presence of his Bishops and Barons, and of Beored and
Edmund, the Two tributary Princes of Mercia and the East Angles, by whom it was
also signed; it was accepted by the Bishops in Behalf of the Church, and
immediately published throughout all the Parishes in England. The Charter, as
translated by Collier, is in the following Words:

I Ethelwulph, by the Grace of God, King of the West Saxons, with the Advice of
the Bishops, Earls, and all the Persons of Condition in my Dominions, Have, for
the Health of my Soul, the Good of my People, and the Prosperity of my Kingdom,
fixed upon a prudent and serviceable Resolution of granting the Tenth Part of
the Lands throughout our whole Kingdom to the holy Churches and Ministers of
Religion, officiating and settled in them, to be perpetually enjoyed by them,
with all the Advantages of a Free Tenure and Estate. It being likewise our Will
and Pleasure, that this unalterable and indefeasible Grant shall for ever
remain discharged from all Service due to the Crown, and all other Encumbrances
incident to Lay-Fees: which Grant has been made by us in Honor of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Blessed Virgin, and all Saints; and out of Regard to the
Paschal Solemnity, and that God Almighty might vouchsafe his Bless^^^ upon us
and our Posterity. Signed Anno (...). Indiction the Second, at the Feast of
(...) Ecclesiastical History, Vol. I. Page 156.
.

Afterward, when a Distribution was made of the Lands to the Barons for the
Defense of the Kingdom, they received them under this Encumbrance; and by
Conveyance and Descent they have come down into the Hands of their present
Possessors, thus incumbered, i. e. Nine Parts as private Property, and the
Tenth Part as, through all Changes, belonging to the Church. When therefore the
Tithe is paid to the Church, the Church only receives its own, and what never
did, nor can rightfully, belong to the Person who pays it.

To make the Nature of Tithes appear plainer if possible, let us consider them
in their most simple and original State, before any Alteration was introduced
by Impropriations, Modus's, etc. And here let us suppose two Estates of equal
Value, each to be really worth One Thousand Pounds, but one free from Tithes,
the other titheable. If these two Estates were to be sold, the Price of the
first would be its full Value One Thousand Pounds, while that of the other
would be abated, in Proportion to this Incumberance. Or supposing these two
Estates to be leased at an annual Rent; in this Case, if the former is rented
at Fifty Pounds per Annum, the latter will be rated at Forty-five Pounds only,
to be paid to the Landlord, the remaining Tenth Part being due and payable to
the Church.

From these supposed Cases the Nature of Tithes plainly appears; and it also
appears, that none have Reason to complain of the Hardship of paying them, any
more than of paying Rent to the Landlord -- or than he who receives Money
belonging to the Church, can justly complain of being accountable for the Use
of it. For as the Tenth Part of the Produce of the Land, in this latter Case,
belongs to the Church, the Landlord never purchased it, and consequently he has
no Right to receive it from the Tenant. If the Tenant pays Five Pounds in
Tithes to the Church, he pays but Forty-five to the Landlord, in all Fifty
Pounds; whereas, if he paid no Tithes, he would be obliged to pay the same Sum
of Fifty Pounds to the Landlord. If Tithes were exactly paid in the Manner here
stated, neither Party would be injured in their Rights; the Church would
receive Nothing but its own from the Land-Holder, nor the Land-Holder from the
Church, and neither in this Case would be injured or benefited.

Although the State of Tithes in England is now become more complex and
intricate than is here stated, owing to many Causes, which it is not my present
Business to assign; yet their true Foundation and Original has been explained,
from whence the general Nature of them, which continues the same, may be easily
understood. And it evidently follows from what has been said, that so far as
the Church is supported in England by Tithes, especially by Predial Tithes, it
is supported without any Expense to the Inhabitants.

Some may imagine that the Tithes of most Parishes in England must amount to an
enormous Sum, and that such exorbitant Wealth must have a general bad Effect
upon the Clergy. Whether this be so or not, is, I confess, not immediately to
my present Purpose to consider. And yet, since I have entered upon the Subject,
I would willingly, if possible, remove every Prejudice and Mistake concerning
it, which have been conceived in the Minds of Americans. Every Prejudice
relating to this Subject, contributes Something to that Aversion to Bishops,
which many are possessed of. The candid Reader will therefore excuse my taking
Notice, even of such Prejudices as these, as not altogether impertinent to my
general Design.

In what Manner Wealth has a natural Tendency to affect the Clergy, may be
concluded from this common Assertion, sometimes made with a friendly Intention,
but perhaps more frequently with a malicious one, but which is strictly and
literally true, that the Clergy are but Men. For this will directly lead us to
infer, that Wealth will operate upon them, much in the same Manner that it does
upon Men in general. Upon some it will have a bad Effect, and upon others a
good one, according to the prevailing Disposition and Character of each Person
respectively. But as it is hoped that, in Proportion to their Numbers, there is
more true Piety and Virtue to be found amongst them, than in any other Order of
Men; so it will be expected, that their Wealth is proportionably employed to
better Purpose. And, to say nothing of what has been bestowed in private
Charity, if we take a View of all the public Institutions in the Kingdom, such
as Colleges, Hospitals and charitable Societies; the Friends of the Clergy will
have the Pleasure to find, that none have been more forward than they, in
affording all useful and charitable Assistance to their Fellow Creatures.

As to the other (...) of the Suggestion, concerning the Amount of Tithes; it
is acknowledged, that if they were at this Day paid according to the original
Grant of them, they would, in most Parishes, produce a large Revenue to the
Church. But under the present Customs and Regulations, I believe that there is
not a Parish in England that pays a full Tithe, agreeably to the Intention of
the Donors, in such a Manner that the Incumbent receives Five Pounds out of
every Fifty Pounds produced by the Parish: But of this there is no Complaint,
with Regard to those Parishes, where the Clergy are still provided for
sufficiently; and it is confessed that there are such in the Kingdom. But the
Number of them is very small, when compared with that of the Livings that fall
short of it.

An Author of Reputation says: It is well known that there are in England and
Wales about Three Thousand parochial Cures, none of which exceed the yearly
Value of Thirty Pounds a Year, Two Thousand of which are not above Twenty
Pounds a Year a piece, and a Thousand of those not above Twelve Pounds a Year.
I, (says he) now Minister to a Congregation of about Twelve Hundred People, in
the dearest Part of England, and almost daily am employed in the Business of
the Cure, and yet have not Fifty Pounds per Annum certain, of which the Tithes
are about Thirteen Pounds per Annum, and the Glebe about Twelve Pounds Lewis's
Examination of the Rights, etc. Page 522.
. Now can it be imagined that the Tithes are fully paid in any of these
Parishes, I mean that the Tenth Part of the yearly Value of the Lands in the
Parish, is paid to the Incumbent? A landed Estate of Three Hundred Pounds per
Annum is esteemed but moderate in any Part of England; and yet the complete
Tithe of such an Estate is more, than all the Tithes that are actually paid in
the largest of Three Thousand Parishes -- as the proper Tithe of an Estate of
but One Hundred and Twenty Pounds per Annum, is equal to the Tithes received by
the Incumbent, in a Thousand Parishes.

The Author mentions his own particular Case, wherein he cannot mistake. His
Cure, I suppose, he meant Margate in Kent, contained about Twelve Hundred
People, which cannot be computed at less than Two Hundred Families, and his
Tithes amounted to about Thirteen Pounds per Annum, i. e. not to One Shilling
and Four Pence to a Family on an Average, which is but the Tenth Part of
Thirteen Shillings and Four Pence.

From this Representation, is it possible not to see, that the Church at Home
has suffered a prodigious Depredation of its Property? And that, in the Case of
Tithes, there are indeed the greatest Reasons for Complaint -- but not on the
Side of those who pay, but of those who receive them? And yet, not satisfied
with the Injuries that are past, some, it is said, still pay with Reluctance
the poor Pittance that is left! But, as has been observed, Men might as justly
refuse to pay the Rent that is due to their Landlords, or any just Debts
whatever. For what is saved from the full Payment of Tithes, where they are
due, by any Arts or Evasions, is only so much gained by the Plunder of the
Church, already greatly distressed in many Parishes: a Species of Injustice
which has the true Nature of Sacrilege, and is as highly criminal under the
Gospel, and even the Law of Nature, as it ever was under the Law of Moses.

Let us now return, and proceed to the Application of what has been said on the
Subject of Tithes, to the Case of America. If any Person in America has given
to the Church the Tithes of his Estate, as possibly some may have done,
although I have never heard of such an Instance; the Church has unquestionably
a Right to receive it, whether we have Bishops or not. If any have given less
or more than this Proportion, as some have; the Church has equally the same
Right to receive it -- the Right being not founded on the Circumstance of its
being precisely a Tenth Part, but on the free Gift and Conveyance of the legal
Proprietor. Whatever has been given or conveyed to the Church, the Church has a
Right to demand; whatever has not been given or conveyed to the Church, belongs
not to the Church, nor can it be claimed as its Property.

The Case of Societies, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, is exactly the same,
in Regard to the Acquisition of Property, with that of Individuals. Neither of
them can obtain a Right to the Property of others, without the free Consent or
Conveyance of the true Proprietors. These Principles are evidently and
necessarily founded on the Law of Nature, and no Power, either divine or human,
can reverse them. Can any then be so weak as to fear, that the Arrival of
Bishops in America, will immediately cause the Nature and Relation of Things to
be changed? The Residence and Power of more than Twenty Bishops in England have
no general Effect upon private Property; and (...) may be very certain, that
the Residence of one or two Bishops in this, which is a much larger Country,
without any Power of a temporal Nature, will not affect it. In this Respect, at
least, our American Bishops will be like the Bishops of the primitive Church;
they will content themselves with such a Reception as they can obtain fairly,
and claim no Perquisites, but such as shall be freely granted them.

But although it is evident, that Tithes, in the present State of Things,
cannot be claimed in this Country, and that Bishops cannot make any Change in
the Nature of Property; yet some may go on to object, that the Laws of England
relating to Tithes, will take Place in America, under an Episcopate. I answer:
those Laws unless they are now binding in America, or have some enacting Clause
to make them to be of Force here as soon as we shall have Bishops, neither of
which will be pretended by the Objectors, can no more operate in this Country
under an Episcopate, than without one. They can never have any Effect here,
until an Act of Parliament shall be made to extend them to us. And it is absurd
to suppose, that such an Act will be made; because all that it could effect, is
sufficiently provided for already, by those Laws which are universally allowed
to be in Force in America.

For, as has been before shown, the Laws which relate to Tithes in England,
only enable the Church to recover them as its lawful and equitable Property,
but do not make them its Property. There are many Estates in England, which,
notwithstanding those Laws, pay no Tithes at all. This, in particular, is the
Case of most of the Abbey-Lands which were vested in the Crown, in the Reign of
Henry VIII. on the Dissolution of the Monasteries. If then the Laws in Question
make not Estates titheable in England, a Person of the lowest Capacity can draw
the Consequence, that they can make none so here.

SECTION XI. Farther Suspicions and Objections obviated, and the Subject
concluded.
BUT it may be inquired, SECT. XI.
whether new Laws will not be made, in Case of an American Episcopate, to
subject us to the Payment of Tithes? But of this there can be no more Reason to
be apprehensive, than if Bishops were not to be sent hither. Tithes are not
paid in England to Bishops, but to the Incumbents of Parishes; and the Clergy
in this Country will have no greater Need of Tithes after the Arrival of
Bishops, than they now have, and have had always. In several Provinces on this
Continent, the Clergy are regularly and well supported: and in the others, we
have no Prospect but still to depend, in a great Measure, upon the Charity of
our Benefactors at Home, until God shall either enable or dispose our Friends
in this Country to do more for us.

But as Ignorance is ever suspicious, it may farther be asked, Shall we not be
taxed in this Country for the Support of Bishops, if any shall be appointed? I
answer, Not at all. But should a general Tax be laid upon the Country, and
thereby a Sum be raised sufficient for the Purpose: and even supposing we
should have three Bishops on the Continent, which are the most that have been
mentioned; yet I believe such a Tax would not amount to more than Four Pence in
One Hundred Pounds. And this would be no mighty Hardship upon the Country. He
that could think much of giving the Six Thousandth Part of his Income to any
Use, which the Legislature of his Country should assign, deserves not to be
considered in the Light of a good Subject, or Member of Society.

But no such Tax is intended, nor, I trust, will be wanted. It has been
proposed from the very Beginning, that the American Bishops should be supported
without any Expense to this Country. A Fund accordingly has been established,
for this particular Purpose, for more than half a Century past, under the
Influence and Direction of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel; and
many worthy Persons have contributed generously and largely to the Increase of
it. I can recollect as I am writing, the following Instances: Archbishop
Tennison, who has been dead upwards of Fifty Years, bequeathed to it One
Thousand Pounds Sterling; Sir Jonathan Trelawney, near the same Time, another
Thousand Pounds; the Lady Elizabeth Hastings, Five Hundred Pounds; Bishop
Butler, Five Hundred Pounds; Bishop Benson, Two Hundred Pounds; Bishop
Osbaldeston, Five Hundred Pounds; and Mr. Fisher, One Thousand Pounds. These,
and all other Sums which the Society have received for this Use, were put into
the public Funds as soon as paid into their Hands, and have been accumulating
ever since, excepting what they expended at Burlington, in the Manner that has
been mentioned. If this Stock is not sufficient for the Support of a proper
Episcopate in America, I imagine the Difficulty in making it sufficient, will
not be great. For, as many have given liberally on the remote Prospect of its
being needed, it is not to be doubted but Benefactors will be raised up, when
Assistance shall be called for by a present Necessity.

Another Objection has been made by some Persons, to the following Purport;
That if Bishops are once settled in America, although in the Manner we now
propose, there will probably be an Augmentation of their Power, as soon as
Circumstances will admit of it: and what is easy and inoffensive in its
Beginning, may become burdensome and oppressive in its End. But at this Rate
there can be no End of objecting. For if every possible ill Effect of a Thing,
although confessedly proper in itself and harmless in its natural Tendency, may
be made an Argument against it, there is nothing that can escape. Arguments of
this Sort may be as fairly and properly alleged -- against a religious
Toleration, which is now generally esteemed by Protestants, to be a natural
Right of Men, and a very important one of Christians -- against admitting those
who dissent from the national Religion to any Degree of civil or military
Power, to which, indeed, they have no natural Right -- against allowing the
common People the Use of the Holy Scriptures, or the Liberty of examining any
Points of Religion or Government -- against suffering any to receive a learned
Education, etc. for none can tell what ill Consequences and Abuses may follow,
in some future Period, from these Concessions and Indulgences. The Truth is,
Men are not to be terrified or influenced by Fears of such Consequences as are
barely possible; but to consider what is reasonable and proper in itself, and
what Effects will probably and naturally follow.

That an American Episcopate is reasonable and proper in itself, and that such
an Episcopate as is now proposed has a natural Tendency to produce no ill
Consequences, has, I trust, been sufficiently proved. There is not the least
Prospect at present, that Bishops in this Country will acquire any Influence or
Power, but what shall arise from a general Opinion of their Abilities and
Integrity, and a Conviction of their Usefulness and of this, no Persons need
dread the Consequences. But should the Government see fit hereafter to invest
them with some Degree of civil Power worthy of their Acceptance, which it is
impossible to say they will not, although there is no Appearance that they ever
will; yet as no new Powers will be created in Favor of Bishops, it is
inconceivable that any would thereby be injured. All that the Happiness and
Safety of the Public require, is, that the legislative and executive Power be
placed in the Hands of such Persons, as are possessed of the greatest
Abilities, Integrity and Prudence: and it is hoped that our Bishops will always
be thought to deserve this Character.

To explain in what Manner civil Power, if vested in American Bishops, would be
most likely to operate, I beg Leave to put the following plain and familiar
Case. Let us suppose a Clergyman in this Country, of any Denomination, made a
Justice of the Peace, or a Judge of the Quorum: Would the Persons who are
immediately concerned in his Proceedings, be otherwise affected, than if he was
a mere Layman? It cannot be pretended. Whether it would be proper to give such
a Commission to any of the Clergy, is another Point. In most Parts of this
Country there can now be no Occasion for it, and where it is not evidently
necessary for the Good of the Public, I know that some of the Clergy would
refuse it, and I believe there are but very few that would desire it. If then
it could be of no great Consequence to the Public or to Individuals, whether a
Justice of the Peace be a Clergyman or a Layman, supposing their Abilities and
personal Characters to be equal; so, if Bishops should be invested with a
proportionable Degree of civil Authority, neither would there be any great
Reasons for Complaint. But after all, nothing of this Kind is at present
foreseen or intended; and it is absolutely determined that no Powers shall be
given them, that can interfere with the civil or religious Rights of any.

But there is no Occasion for dwelling on Particulars of this Nature. The real
and only Plan on which it is agreed to settle Bishops in America, when his
Majesty shall see fit to appoint them, has been fairly stated and explained in
the preceding Pages. This Plan is now proposed to the Public, to see whether
any reasonable Objections can be offered against it. But whatever may be
objected against any different Plan, is not to the Purpose. The Friends of the
Church are desirous to know, what can be said or suggested against an American
Episcopate, in the Form wherein it is proposed to settle it; and they who have
any Thing to offer, are requested to confine themselves to this particular
Point: For to object against Bishops in this Country, under a Form wherein it
is determined not to settle them, is as foreign to the Purpose, as to object
against the Authority of the Archbishop of Gnesna, or the Pope of Rome.

I have now taken Notice of all the Objections that have been made against
sending Bishops to America, so far as they have come to my Knowledge; and it
must be left to the Reader to judge, whether, with Regard to the Episcopate in
Question, they are not unreasonable and groundless. It is indeed possible that
other Objections may have been offered, or may be hereafter suggested, against
American Bishops; but I am persuaded that upon Examination they will generally
be found to be Proofs, rather of the Dexterity or Ill Will of the Inventors,
than of the real Fears and Uneasiness of the Inhabitants. Ar full Men may raise
Objections and Difficulties in the plainest Cases, and can make any Thing an
Argument against any Thing, in a Way that shall appear plausible, to those who
are unacquainted with the Legerdemain of Cavilers and Sophists. But whoever
employs his Talents in this Exercise, is as unworthy of the public Attention,
as the Child that engages in Crambo or Push-Pin.

Thus, having represented the Distress the Church of England in America is
under, for Want of an Episcopate -- having attempted to prove, by various
Arguments and Considerations, the Propriety and Fitness and Necessity of
relieving it, and of allowing it the same Advantages which are granted to all
other Denominations of Christians in his Majesty's American Dominions -- and
having explained the Nature and Extent of that Authority with which our Bishops
will be invested, when it shall be thought proper to send them, and shown that
such an Appointment can produce no Harm to the Dissenters, nor afford just
grounds of Uneasiness or Complaint to any; I must now hasten to a Conclusion,
submiting what has been offered to the Judgment of the Reader. Nothing has been
asserted, in the Course of this Work, but what the Author believes, upon good
Evidence, to be true; no Argument has been advanced, but with a full Persuasion
of its being pertinent and conclusive. He looks upon the Subject to be of the
utmost Importance; and he has no Disposition to trifle with it, or with the
Public to which he appeals.

If these Papers should have the Honor of coming into the Hands of any of
those Persons, from whose Power or Influence an American Episcopate is in any
Measure expected; the Author humbly begs, that the Cause which he has
undertaken to plead, may not suffer, in their Estimation, from the
Unskilfulness of its present; Advocate. Although he greatly distrusts his own
Management, he has no Diffidence of the Cause itself. He believes it to be the
Cause of Truth, of Justice, and of Christianity, and as such he most
respectfully and submissively recommends it, imploring their Attention to so
extraordinary and important a Case, as that of the Church of England in America.

It need not be repeated, that unless Bishops should be speedily sent us, we
can foresee nothing but the Ruin of the Church in this Country. It need not be
suggested, that such an Event is too much to be hazarded, when no Good can be
expected to arise from such a Risque, and much Evil will probably follow it --
Evil, which it is the unquestionable Duty of those to prevent, who are
entrusted with the Interests of the Nation. The Church of England here, is so
inseparably connected with the Church at Home, or rather, is so essentially the
same with it, that it must ever subsist or perish, by the same Means. The
Causes indeed, which destroy it here, may be local, and not immediately operate
in England; but then, that Inattention and Negligence in our national
Superiors, which would suffer it to be destroyed in the Colonies, must have a
general Effect, and can produce no Good to the same Church in the
Mother Country. Here, the Church has been long struggling under such an
increasing Load of Difficulties, and is now in such a State of Oppression, as
to deserve the Compassion* of the whole Christian World. From our own Nation,
and the Guardians of its Interests, it conceives itself to be entitled to more;
as there is a Concurrence of every Kind of Motive for prevailing upon them, to
afford it the Relief which is so essentially needed. The common Principles of
Justice, and the most sacred Obligations of the Christian Religion, have been
shown to require this at their Hands.

Nor need the Author use many Words to prove, that Considerations even of a
political Nature, are sufficient in this Case, to prevail with those who are
insensible to other Motives. The Church of England, in its external Polity, is
so happily connected and interwoven with the Civil Constitution, that each
mutually supports and is supported by the other. The greatest Friendship and
Harmony have ever subsisted between them; and in that memorable Period, wherein
the Ruin of the one was effected, the Destruction of the other immediately
followed. The Resurrection of the one, afterward closely attended the
Restoration of the other; and he that has a Regard for the Happiness of either,
can never wish to see the Experiment repeated, either in England or her
Colonies.

It is not pretended that the Character and Manners of the present Times are,
in this Respect, the same, as in the Period refered to; nor that those who are
Enemies to Episcopacy in this Age, are Enemies to Monarchy, as was frequently
the Case formerly. The contrary is evident, in innumerable Instances. There are
many British Subjects, both at Home and in the Plantations, who reject
Episcopacy, and yet are warm Advocates for our happy Civil Constitution. It is
therefore rash and Injurious to charge any with Disaffection to the Government,
at this Day, because they dissent from the national Religion. But
notwithstanding, Episcopacy and Monarchy are, in their Frame and Constitution,
best suited to each other. Episcopacy can never thrive in a Republican
Government, nor Republican Principles in an Episcopal Church. For the same
Reasons, in a mixed Monarchy, no Form of Ecclesiastical Government can so
exactly harmonize with the State, as that of a qualified Episcopacy.

And as they are mutually adapted to each other so they are mutually
introductive of each other. He that prefers Monarchy in the State, is more
likely to approve of Episcopacy in the Church, than a rigid Republican. On the
other Hand, he that is for a Parity and a popular Government in the Church,
will more easily be led to approve of a similar Form of Government in the
State, how little soever he may suspect it himself. It is not then to be
wondered, if our Civil Rulers have always considered Episcopacy as the surest
Friend of Monarchy; and it may reasonably be expected from those in Authority,
that they will support and assist the Church in America, if from no other
Motives, yet from a Regard to the State, with which it has so friendly and
close an Alliance.

But there is no Reason to doubt, but every proper Motive will have its Effect,
upon those wise and illustrious Patriots, who now conduct our public Affairs.
We no more suspect the Goodness of their Disposition, than the Reasonableness
of the Cause, for which we are so anxious. All that we can be justly
apprehensive of, is, that to those who reside at such a Distance, the Necessity
of relieving the Church in America, with all possible Speed, may not be so
evident, as to those who are Eyewitnesses of its suffering Condition. We
therefore beg Leave to suggest this -- and earnestly to request, that the
Relief, which we doubt not is intended, may be speedily granted. The ill
Effects of delaying it, may be irretrievable. The present favorable
Opportunity may be soon lost, and then Despair will succeed our disappointed
Expectation.

To those who have been averse to American Bishops, and hitherto have shown a
Disposition to oppose their Settlement, I have but a Word more to offer. Their
Prejudices, we charitably believe, must have arisen altogether from
Misapprehensions of the Case, and from the Fears which, from thence, have been
conceived, of their becoming Sufferers, either in their Property or Privileges,
by the Episcopate in Question. The Subject is here placed in its true Light,
and thereby, it is trusted, their Misapprehensions are fairly removed, and
their consequent Fears are shown to be groundless. Instead therefore of
distressing themselves, or of opposing the Church in the Case before us, we
flatter ourselves that they will act the Part which Generosity and Candor
prescribe, and behave toward us as Fellow Christians and Protestants ought to
behave to one another. If they have been led by Ignorance or Misinformation to
oppose a Cause, which they now find to be just; their Duty obliges them to be
careful for the future, at the very least, not to obstruct it. If they are in
Reality the Friends of Truth, and Justice, and Liberty, which they pretend and
we are willing to believe them to be, they must be heartily disposed to act a
friendly Part toward us, with Regard to an Episcopate; which Disposition will
add greatly to their own Happiness, as well as to ours. They know, by
Experience, the inestimable Value of those Advantages, for which we have
petitioned; and if we are as fairly entitled to them as any other Christian
Societies, they ought not to envy, but to take Pleasure in, our Enjoyment of
them.

If all the religious Denominations in America, by the general Constitution of
the British Colonies, are to be treated on the Footing of a perfect Equality,
for which some have contended; then, the Church of England is as fully entitled
to the complete Enjoyment of its own Discipline and Institutions, as any other
Christians. If any one Denomination is entitled to a Superiority above others,
as is believed by many; then, the Claim of the Church of England to this
Preference, is not to be disputed. One of these must be undoubtedly the Case;
and on either Supposition, to endeavor to prevent the Episcopate we have asked
for, is Injustice and Cruelty.

If any should remain unconvinced by the Arguments that have been advanced, or
unsatisfied with the Solution of Objections that has been attempted, or should
have any new Objections to offer; the Author will be ready, in Case of a decent
Notification of it, to reconsider the former, and to examine the latter --
should it be thought proper by his Friends, upon whose Judgment, in such
Matters, he will always depend more, than upon his own. For the present, he
begs Leave to conclude in the Words of an eminent Writer of the last Century,
as they exactly represent his own Disposition and Sentiments: I shall heartily
beseech all those who shall please to read what has been written, that if they
meet with any Thing therein, which either is less fitly spoken, or not clearly
evidenced, they would give me Notice of it in such a charitable and Christian
Way, as I may be the better for it, and they not the worse. Which Favor if
they please to do me, they shall be welcome to me as an Angel of God, sent to
conduct me from the Lanes of Error into the open Ways of Truth. And doing these
Christian Offices to one another, we shall by God's good Leave and Blessing,
not only hold the Bond of external Peace, but also in due Time be made
Partakers of the Spirit of Unity. Which Blessing that the Lord would graciously
bestow on his afflicted Church, is no small Part of our Devotions in the public
Liturgy; where we are taught to pray unto Almighty God, that he would please
continually to inspire his universal Church with the Spirit of Truth, Unity and
Concord, and grant that all they which do confess his holy Name, may agree also
in the Truth of his holy Word, and live in Unity and godly Love. Unto which
Prayer he has but little of a Christian, which does not heartily say, Amen.

AN APPENDIX.
SINCE the drawing up of these Papers, I have met with a Pamphlet entitled, A
Demonstration of the uninterrupted Succession and holy Consecration of the
first English Bishops, being an Extract from Mr. Ward's Second Canto of his
England's Reformation: with an Introduction, Notes and an Appendix, containing
the solemn funeral Song of the native Irish. Printed M, DCC, LXVI. This curious
Performance has been printed with great Secresy, probably in Philadelphia,
although the Place and Name of the Printer be not mentioned, and as secretly
dispersed amongst the Inhabitants of the remote Parts of the Country. The
Design of it is to ridicule the Office and Succession of our English Bishops,
and the Occasion of it appears to have been the late Application made by some
of the Clergy, for American Bishops.

The Editor, in his Introduction, which he has endeavored to set to the Tune
of Ward's Canto in doggerel Verse, absurdly assumes the Character of a
Churchman, as he introduces his Hero to defend, what he even professes to
expose; whereas a Regard to Consistency of Character, which is as necessary in
Works of Drollery and Humor as in any other, should have led him to appear in
his true Shape of an Anti-Episcopalian, or rather of an Anti-Protestant.

For the Story of the Nag's-Head Consecration, the only Engine with which this
vain Mortal advances to attack the Church, is well known to have been a Fiction
of the Papists, invented Forty Years after the Time wherein it is said to have
been transacted, and when it was hoped that no direct Proof could be made of
its Falsity. But he, who frequently disappointeth the Devices of the Crafty, so
ordered it in his Providence, that what was thus infamously projected to
dishonor the Church of England, is an eternal Monument of Reproach to the
Church that invented it, as it must ever disgrace those who endeavor to
propagate it. But that the Reader may better judge of it, an Account of the
whole Affair, as given by Bishop Burnet, is hereunto subjoined.

The Extract from Ward, which makes the Body and even the Soul of the Pamphlet,
is nothing else than a Repetition of this villainous Slander of the Nag's-Head
Consecration in wretched Rhyme, cooked up and larded with such unsavory
Ingredients, as must render it offensive to every Person of the least Delicacy,
and can agree only with such Stomachs as can bear the Rankness of Train Oil. It
is now generally agreed that Ridicule, even when managed with the greatest
Dexterity, is not the Test of Truth. If this Editor thinks otherwise, let him
try the Experiment with One or Two keener and better Pieces, which are
recommended for the Improvement of him and his Friends, if peradventure he has
any, I mean Butler's Hudibras and Swift's Tale of a Tub.

The Appendix is entitled Remarks on the preceding Piece; wherein the Editor
condescends to come down to the Level of tame Prose, and advances a Number of
Assertions tending to discredit Episcopacy, which have been frequently and
effectually confuted, and shown to be false. For the Support of them, he refers
to a List of Authors, who have been often and abundantly answered, without
taking the least Notice of the Answers; and concludes with a doleful Story of a
poor Clergyman in Ireland who was supposed to be frightened to Death, and a
Lamentation of the wild Irish on the Occasion. This, we may charitably suppose,
was intended for an Exploit of Wit; but it will puzzle a Reader of ordinary
Sagacity, to discover any Thing, either in the Imagination, or Execution of it,
that can justly entitle it to this Character.

His whole Performance is closed with this graceful Period: I shall conclude my
Remarks with only adding, that I wish there may be no Occasion to repeat this
solemn Dirge over your Bishop upon his Introduction. The Danger here intimated
there is no great Reason to fear, as it is suggested, not by any public
Appearances, but by the Ferocity and Rancour of his own Heart, of which his
whole Performance is a Proof. But does he not say that he wishes the Occasion
may not happen? Aye, indeed does he; but any one that reads his Pamphlet, will
think it to be as charitable and polite Treatment as he deserves, to reply to
him in the Words of Valerian, an old honest Capuchin, " Mentiris
impudentissime."

Upon the Whole; I can venture to pronounce the Performance before me to be the
most unfair, impudent and malicious Thing I have met with; and I am persuaded
that those whom he intended to serve, or rather to deceive, will not thank him
for his Trouble. For so long as Men, in any tolerable Sense, continue to be
reasonable Creatures, such Management must be esteemed a Disgrace to the Cause
which it aims at promoting.

If this Person is alarmed at the Prospect of Bishops in America, Why does he
not stand forth fairly and produce his Objections? In the Name of Goodness, let
him show, if he can, that the Church of England in this Country has no Need of
Bishops -- or that she has no Right to expect that Bishops will be granted her
-- or that such an Indulgence will harm the Dissenters. But conscious of his
Weakness, should it be put to a fair Trial, he dares not venture into the open
Field. Like a Cherokee, he chooses rather to skulk in the Dark, and to do what
Mischief he can amongst such of the Inhabitants as he suspects to be most weak
and unguarded. Contrary to the Rules of Honor, and the Laws of all civilized
Nations, like his Brother-Savages he attacks with poisoned Arrows; and
therewith he too is supplied by the inveterate Enemies of the Protestant
Interest. For, as has been observed, this Nag's-Head Affair, was altogether a
mean and wicked Contrivance of the Papists, to blast the Reputation of the
English Reformation. Ward was a notorious Papist, and his whole Book, from
which this Extract is borrowed, was written for the very Purpose of setting the
Reformed Religion in a contemptible Light. What must the World then think of
such a Publication as this? Or, of a Cause, that can require such an Advocate,
and such Arts, to support it?

I will not give this poetico-prosaic Haberdasher any farther Disturbance, but
leave him in the Possession of as much Tranquillity and Satisfaction as such a
Production, with the Consciousness of his own evil Intentions, can afford him.
Had his Views been honest, with whatever Abilities he had acquitted himself, his
Reward would have been greater. For there is much Truth in the Observation of
Father Garasse, speaking of those Authors that write with a good Design, that
when a poor Genius toils incessantly to produce some worthless ridiculous
Piece, and for that Reason will never obtain the public Applause, yet that all
his Pains might not pass unrewarded, God gives him a Self-Satisfaction, for
which it would be an Injustice beyond Barbarity to envy him, And thus God, who
is all just, denies not even to Frogs the Pleasure of being charmed with their
own Music. M. Paschal's Letters.

An Account of the Consecration of Archbishop Parker, and the Fable of the
Nag's-Head confuted, by Bishop Burnet.
"On the 8th Day of July the Conge d' Elire was sent to Canterbury; and upon
that, on the 22d of July, a Chapter was summoned to meet the first of August;
where the Dean and Prebendaries meeting, they, according to a Method often used
in their Elections, did by a Compromise refer it to the Dean to Name whom he
pleased: and he naming Doctor Parker, according to the Queen's Letter, they all
confirmed it, and published their Election, singing Te Deum upon it. On the 9th
of September the Great Seal was put to a Warrant for his Consecration, directed
to the Bishops of Duresme, Bath and Wells, Peterborough, Landaff and to Barlow
and Scory (styled only Bishops, not being then elected to any Sees) requiring
them to consecrate him. From this it appears, that neither Tonstal, Bourn nor
Pool were at that Time turned out: It seems there were some Hope of gaining
them to obey the Laws, and so to continue in their Sees.

"This Matter was delayed to the 6th of December. Whether this flowed from
Parker's Unwillingness to engage in so high a Station, or from any other secret
Reason, I do not know. But then the Three Bishops last named refusing to do it
a new Warrant passed under the Great Seal, to the Bishop of Landaff, Barlow
Bishop Elect of Chichester, Scory Bishop Elect of Hereford, Coverdale late
Bishop of Exeter, Hodgkins Bishop Suffragan of Bedford, John Suffragan of
Thetford, and Bale Bishop of Ossory; that they, or any Four of them, should
consecrate him. So by Virtue of this, on the 9th of December, Barlow, Scory,
Coverdale and Hodgkins, met at the Church of St. Mary le Bow; where, according
to the Custom, the Conge d' Elire, with the Election, and the Royal Assent* to
it, were to be brought before them: and these being read, Witnesses were to be
cited to prove the Election lawfully made; and all who would object to it were
also cited. All these Things being performed according to Law, and none coming
to object against the Election, they confirmed it according to the usual
Manner. On the 17th of December, Parker was consecrated in the Chapel of
Lambeth, by Barlow, Scory, Coverdale, and Hodgkins, according to the Book of
Ordinations made in King Edward's Time: Only the Ceremony of putting the Staff
in his Hands was left out of the Office, in this Reign. He being thus
consecrated himself, did afterward consecrate Bishops for the other Sees:
namely, Grindal Bishop of London, Cox, that had been King Edward's Almoner,
Bishop of Ely, Horn Bishop of Winchester, Sandys Bishop of Worcester, Merick
Bishop of Bangor, Young Bishop of St. David's, Bullingham Bishop of Lincoln,
Jewel Bishop of Salisbury (the great Ornament of that Age for Learning and
Piety;) Davis Bishop of St. Asaph, Guest Bishop of Rochester, Berkley Bishop of
Bath and Wells, Bentham Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, Alley Bishop of
Exeter, and Par Bishop of Peterborough. Barlow and Scory were put into the Sees
of Chichester and Hereford. And sometime after this, in February 1561, Young
was translated from St. David's to York; there being now no Hopes of gaining
Heath to continue in it: which it seems had been long endeavored, for it was
now Two Years that that See had been in Vacancy. In like Manner, after so long
waiting to see if Tonstal would conform, there being now no more hope of it, in
March 1561, Pilkington was made Bishop of Duresme. Best was afterward made
Bishop of Carlisle, and Downham Bishop of Chester.

"I have given the more distinct Account of these Promotions, because of a
malicious Slander with which they were asperst in aftertimes. It was not
thought on for Forty Years after this. But then it was forged, and published,
and spread over the World, with great Confidence, That Parker himself was not
legally nor truly consecrated. The Author of it was said to be one Neale, that
had been sometime one of Bonner's Chaplains. The Contrivance was, that the
Bishop of Landaff being required by Bonner not to consecrate Parker, or to give
Orders in his Diocese, did thereupon refuse it: Upon that the Bishops Elect
being met in Cheapside at the Nag's-Head Tavern, Neale, that had watched them
thither, peeped in through an Hole of the Door, and saw them in great Disorder,
finding the Bishop of Landaff was intractable. But (as the Tale goes on) Scory
bids them all kneel, and he laid the Bible upon every one of their Heads or
Shoulders, and said, Take thou Authority to preach the Word of God sincerely,
and so they rose up all Bishops. This Tale came so late into the World, that
Sanders and all the other Writers in Queen Elisabeth's Time, had never heard of
it: otherwise we may be sure they would not have concealed it. And if the Thing
had been true, or if Neale had but pretended that he had seen any such Thing,
there is no Reason to think he would have suppressed it. But when it might be
presumed that all those Persons were dead that had been present at Parker's
Consecration, then was the Time to invent such a Story; for then it might be
hoped that none could contradict it. And who could tell but that some who had
seen Bishops go from Bow-Church to dine at that Tavern with their Civilians, as
some have done after their Confirmation, might imagine that then was the Time
of this Nag's-Head-Consecration. If it were boldly said, one or other might
think he remembered it. But as it pleased God, there was one living that
remembered the Contrary. The old Earl of Nottingham, who had been at the
Consecration, declared it was at Lambeth, and described all the Circumstances
of it, and satisfied all reasonable Men that it was according to the Form of
the Church of England. The Registers both of the Sea of Canterbury, and of the
Records of the Crown, do all fully agree with his Relation. For as Parker's
Conge d' Elire, with the Queen's Assent to his Election, and the Warrant for
his Consecration, are all under the Great Seal: So upon the Certificate made by
those who consecrated him, the Temporalities were restored by another Warrant
also enrolled; which was to be showed to the House of Lords when he took his
Place there. Besides that the Consecrations of all the other Bishops made by
him, show that he alone was first consecrated without any other. And above all
other Testimonies, the original Instrument of Archbishop Parker's Consecration
lies still among his other Papers in the Library of Corpus-Christi College at
Cambridge, which I saw and read. It is as manifestly an original Writing, as
any that I ever had in my Hands: I have put it in the Collection, for the more
full Discovery of the Impudence of that Fiction. But it served those Ends for
which it was designed. Weak People hearing it so positively told by their
Priests, came to believe it; and I have myself met with many that seemed still
to give some Credit to it, after all that clear Confutation of it, made by the
most ingenious and learned Bishop Bramhall, the late Primate of Ireland.
Therefore I thought it necessary to be larger in the Account of this
Consecration; and the rather, because of the Influence it has into all the
Ordinations that have been since that Time derived down in this Church."
History of the Reformation, Vol. II. Page 402.


