SEVEN SERMONS, On the Obligation and Encouragement of the Unregenerate, to
labor for the Meat which endures to everlasting Life.

Preached in the first Parish in WELLS. By MOSES HEMMENWAY, M. A. Pastor of the
CHURCH there.

Strive to enter in at the strait Gate, for many I say unto you shall seek to
enter in, and shall not be able. Luke 13.24. BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by
KNEELAND and ADAMS, next to the Treasurer's-Office in MILK-STREET. MDCCLXVII.

SERMON I. The Duties prescribed to the Unregenerate, and their Power for the
Performance of them considered and stated.
JOHN VI. 27. Labor not for the Meat which perishes, but for that which
endures unto everlasting Life.
THE corruption and folly of man appears not more remarkable in any thing, than
in preferring the empty enjoyments of this world, to glory, honor and
immortality in the world to come. The most careful diligence and pains are
thought well bestowed, in making provision for the support and delight of the
body; but in the concerns of our eternal peace, the coldest wishes and feeblest
endeavors commonly suffice; notwithstanding our future interests are as much
more important than our present, as the heavens are higher than the earth.

AND because this is a very common as well as dangerous error, we find many
reproofs and cautions pointed against it in the word of God; but in no part of
these sacred writings more, than in the discourses of our blessed Savior, who
came into the world to redeem us from our iniquities, deliver us from this
present evil world, and teach us the words of eternal life. -- He it is who
speaks in the words which have now been read, which, whether we consider the
authority with which they are enforced, or the importance of the instruction
therein contained, deserve our serious and particular attention.

THAT we may understand the true meaning and purport of our text, so as to
receive that instruction which it is designed, and adapted to convey to us, it
is proper that we take notice,

IN the first place, to whom these words were addressed. -- And our context
informs us, that these were Jews, who followed Christ in multitudes with great
professions of respect; but their notions of his character were quite wrong,
and their views or expectations mean and unworthy. They were no true believers
in him, but were influenced in their whole conduct toward him by carnal
motives. In this view Christ regards them, in this character he addresses them
in our text. The primary intention of these words, we are sure then, was not to
instruct his disciples, but the carnal Jews, who followed him for the loaves.
This appears from the verse immediately foregoing; wherein our Lord, like a
faithful teacher, who sought to be serviceable to them in their best interests,
rather than ingratiate himself with them by popular artifices, charges their
hypocrisy upon them freely and plainly -- "Ye seek me not," says he, because ye
saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves and were filled. Ver.
26. q. d -- Though you pretend to honor me as a teacher come from God, because
you have seen the miracles I have wrought before you, yet I know this is not
the true spring of your zeal to find me, and resort to me; but it is because
you have been fed with my provisions, without any cost or expense of yours.
Your view is not to be instructed by me, but that you may again eat your fill
of bread.

WE may note in the second place, the substance and matter of the instruction,
which our Lord here gives them. He prescribes duty, expressed both negatively
and positively -- Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that which
endures to everlasting life. The phrase implies a serious concern, and
diligent endeavor, as has been remarked by critics. Leigh's critica sacra.
It denotes an active exertment of ourselves, in order to obtain the end, or
good proposed. The design of this command, is not only to declare to the Jews,
to whom it was given, what was their duty, but also to encourage and persuade
them to a practical attendance thereunto. There is an encouraging motive or
inducement couched in the command, and plainly intimated in the manner in which
it was delivered.

IT will be proper to remark once more, the object of those endeavors here
enjoined, or what it was that the persons addressed in the text were required
to labor for -- Not for the meat that perishes. There is a Hebraism in this
phrase. The negative particle is to be understood not absolutely, but
comparatively. -- The sense is, Labor not SO MUCH BY FAR for the meat that
perishes. Meat here is to be taken by a Synecdoche, for all kind of
provisions, for the support, and refreshment of the body. These things should
not be sought after, in comparison with the meat which endures to everlasting
life. What is intended by this metaphorical expression, the meat which endures
to everlasting life, we may learn from the following context, ver. 32. and
onward. Moses gave you not that bread from heaven, but my father gives you the
true bread from heaven. For the bread of God is he that comes down from
heaven, and gives life unto the world. I am the bread of life: He that comes
unto me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst. The
meaning of which is, that the doctrine concerning Christ, received by faith, is
through the influence of the Holy Spirit, the support of the divine life; the
spiritual food, whereby our souls are nourished unto life eternal. The
immediate object of faith is Christ, as exhibited in the divine testimony
concerning him. In receiving this doctrine into our hearts we receive Christ,
and as it were feed upon him, to our spiritual nourishment; or as it is
expressed in ver. 53. we eat his flesh, and drink his blood: That is, we feast
our souls with the doctrine of his atonement. That this is the true meaning of
these expressions, appears from ver. 35. where after asserting that he was the
bread of life, he quits the metaphor he had been pursuing, and says, "he that
comes unto me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never
thirst." Believing on Christ, and coming to him, and eating the bread of life,
are expressions of the same import, mutually illustrating each other. The plain
sense of which is, receiving him as proposed to us, in the gospel-doctrine
concerning him. This spiritual food then, which our text exhorts to labor for,
is Christ with his benefits, exhibited in the gospel as the object of faith,
or, which comes to the same thing, it is the divine testimony, admitted into
the mind and heart, or it is faith objectively considered. To labor for this
meat then, is to labor that the saving truth concerning Christ, may have
access to the heart; or, in other words, to labor for that faith by which the
just live, and which is, as it were, the food of their souls; that faith
whereby the divine life is ingenerated, and whereby it is supported. For this
bread of life not only preserves, but gives life to the world. It Is the same
thing that Peter calls the incorruptible seed of the word of God, which lives
and abides forever, whereby, when received into the heart by faith, we are
born again. It may be added, that as man's natural life subsists not by bread
alone, but by God's word of blessing, so the benedictive influence of the Holy
Spirit must accompany the bread of life, that our souls may be in health and
thrive and prosper.

THE sense of our text then may be given in the following paraphrase, q. d.
This meat for which you take so much pains will perish, as well as the life
that is supported by it: It ought not therefore to be the chief object or end
of your cares and labors. Spend not your thoughts and strength for the empty
short-lived enjoyments of this world, which will never satisfy, and soon will
fail you. But as you have an eternal interest at stake, let that be minded in
some proportion to its importance. Let it be your principal concern and
endeavor, to obtain that spiritual understanding and belief of the truth,
which I have declared unto you (wherein I the bread of life have been
exhibited, as the object of faith) and those influences of the Holy Spirit in
and with the same, by which that divine life may be ingenerated, and supported,
which fails not, but endures forever.

THE text thus opened will naturally suggest to us these two doctrinal truths,
viz.

FIRST. That the soul is to be preferred to the body, or the interests of the
world to come, are vastly more important than all the interests and enjoyments
of this life.

SECONDLY. That it ought to be the chief concern and endeavor of those who
hear the call of the gospel, to secure their eternal interest, and in order
thereunto, obtain that faith in Christ, and that grace or influence of the Holy
Spirit, which are necessary to salvation.

THE first of these points, though it might profitably be enlarged upon, I shall
wholly pass over; as I think it must be readily owned by all, who have any
serious regard for the plainest dictates of reason or scripture. They who would
see this considered at large may read what Dr. Evans has written on this text,
in his very useful discourses on the Christian Temper.
The second will also, I think, be allowed, at least as to the substance of it,
so far as it respects true believers. But whether the gospel has any commands
or encouragements, for sinners to labor for the meat that endures to
everlasting life, previous to regeneration, and saving faith, is a point in
which professed christians have not been so universally agreed. And they who
have professed an agreement in the simple affirmation of it, have yet differed
considerably in their manner of explaining and defending it. I have therefore
thought, that it might be of good use, for the direction and satisfaction of
serious minds, that this matter be carefully enquired into, and the scriptures
diligently searched upon it. And this is what I have proposed, by divine
assistance, to attend unto, in this and some following discourses. I shall
therefore endeavor to explain and confirm this proposition, which I think
appears plainly to be implied in, and grounded upon our text; viz. That the
hearers of the gospel, antecedent to their believing in Christ savingly, are
commanded and encouraged, to make it their chief concern and endeavor, to
obtain that faith and grace of the Holy Spirit, which is necessary to
justification, and salvation.

IT would not be foreign to my text, to enquire what is the nature of saving
faith, considered objectively, as the meat itself which gives and supports that
life of which believers are partaker; and subjectively, as it denotes our
reception of this spiritual food; as also how faith under both these
considerations is the means of our obtaining and enjoying life, judicially, in
our justification, and adoption; spiritually, in regeneration and
sanctification: But it is not my design, at present, to prosecute the subject
in this extent. -- What I propose is to consider the obligation, and
encouragement of the unconverted, to labor, or use endeavors, to obtain
salvation; and in order thereunto, to seek for converting grace, and saving
faith. -- And the method in which, I shall prosecute this design, is as follows.

I. I WOULD show what those endeavors are, which are here intended.

II. ENQUIRE whether men, without regenerating grace and saving faith, have any
power or capacity for such endeavors.

III. CONSIDER why these endeavors are supposed to be prescribed, or what good
ends they may subserve.

IV. PROVE that unconverted sinners are bound, and encouraged, thus to labor
for the meat that endures to everlasting life.

V. ANSWER objections.

I. OUR first business is to declare what are those endeavors or duties which
are here intended. And as it is not my design under this head to vindicate the
obligation of these duties, or inculcate an attendance to them, but only show
what I would be understood to mean by those performances, which are supposed to
be required of men unregenerate, I shall aim at brevity.

THE duties or endeavors, which are now to be enquired into, are manifestly
supposed to be antecedent to a man's first conversion;, and to have some
subserviency to his obtaining the meat which endures to everlasting life: They
are some way conducive to his obtaining a saving understanding and belief of
the gospel. And therefore, these duties must of necessity be supposed to be of
such a kind, as men are capable of performing before they are converted. To
speak of duties required in order to conversion, which none are capable of
performing till they are converted, is grossly absurd. If any endeavors are
required of men as in any respect conducive to their obtaining justifying
faith, these must be understood to be of such a kind, as they are by divine
assistance capable of, before they are in a justified state.

BUT to give some further opening to our subject, let it be observed, that as
the duties or endeavors we are now considering are not of the nature of true
holiness, so they do not infer any moral fitness for, or worthiness of the
saving or effectual grace of God. Their subserviency to our conversion is in a
quite different way; that is, by "removing those impediments in us which would
otherwise unavoidably hinder our receiving this grace," as one expresses it;
Mr. Willard.
by preparing the soul for the reception, and exercise of the spiritual life;
and by bringing and keeping us in the way of God's blessing; that is, in an
attendance to those means, by which it is ordinarily conveyed to the children
of men, as shall, by God's help, be hereafter more fully explained and proved.
In the mean time, a few hints may throw some light upon our present enquiry.

THERE are three things especially which have a manifest tendency to hinder a
man's turning to God, through faith in Christ; namely, gross ignorance and error
-- stupid inconsiderateness -- and wilful opposition to the dictates of
conscience.

AS it is the truth revealed in the word of God that is the object of faith,
and means or instrument of conversion, so it is plain that he who is grossly
ignorant of, or mistaken about the great doctrines or precepts of divine
revelation, is incapable, so long as he remains in this state, of perceiving
the spiritual glory of the gospel, which is that peculiar evidence of its truth
and divinity which saving faith is grounded upon. And it is equally plain that
such a one is incapable of being begotten again, in the ordinary manner of the
Spirit's operation, even by the incorruptible seed of the word of God, till the
truth there revealed is admitted into his mind.

MOREOVER a stupid and inconsiderate disregard of the great concerns of
religion, is a fatal obstacle in the way of a sinner's conversion, not only as
it naturally tends to settle him down in ignorance and error, but also because
it is necessary that his attention and serious concern be awakened, in order to
his perceiving the evidence, and feeling the influence of the gospel. No adult
person is brought into a state of salvation till he is first roused, from his
careless security, and becomes seriously solicitous about the concerns of
eternity.

FINALLY, wilful opposition to the light and dictates of conscience, especially
when long persisted in, leads on, in its natural tendency, and by the righteous
judgment of God, to hardness of heart, and a reprobate mind. The conscience, in
consequence of such outrageous violence and opposition to its dictates, becomes
feared as with an hot iron. The apostle speaking of persons of this character,
says, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
"For this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they may believe a
lie; that they all might be damned that believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness." And speaking of himself, though he magnifies
exceedingly the grace manifested in his conversion, and intimates that
henceforth the chief of sinners need not despair, yet in the bosom of this
declaration, he gives a very alarming hint to those who presume to sin
wilfully, in opposition to the conviction of their own minds, when he says, "I
was a blasphemer, etc. but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in
unbelief." 1 Timothy 1.13, compare Luke 23.34.


To prepare the soul for the introduction and exercise of a new and spiritual
principle, it is previously requisite that there be some competent doctrinal
acquaintance with the main articles of the christian religion, together with a
conviction of our own character and condition: There must be a serious concern
to be delivered from the misery of a state of sin and guilt, and obtain eternal
life: And a diligent care to comply with the dictates of conscience, and
improve that grace and influence of the Holy Spirit, which is ordinarily
granted to those who have the outward means of christian knowledge. Of this a
sinner is capable before he is renewed by the special operation of the Holy
Spirit; and according to the order which God is pleased to observe in
dispensing spiritual blessings, this preparatory work of grace, with those
duties or exercises which are connected with, and prompted by it, are
ordinarily necessary, to make way for those special and saving influences of
the Spirit, whereby we are effectually renewed in the spirit of our minds, and
so enabled to believe in Christ to the saving of our souls, and turn to God
through him.

BUT these things must be called over again, and examined more distinctly in
another place; so I do but hint briefly, so far as may serve to give some light
to the point now under consideration. For it is in the use of instituted means,
or in the way of attendance to prescribed duties, that ignorant and secure
sinners are awakened, convinced and humbled, and then savingly enlightened, and
converted to God, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth.
-- And hence we may be in some measure directed in our present enquiry, what
are those means and endeavors for obtaining the meat that endures to
everlasting life, which are primarily intended, and prescribed to sinners in
our text.

IN general then, whatever tends to confirm them in their ignorance and errors,
in their stupidity and inconsiderateness, and in their courses of presumptuous
sinning, must be carefully avoided; and whatever conduces to enlighten their
minds, to enlarge, clear and rectify their apprehensions of divine things, to
impress serious sentiments or convictions upon their hearts, to call them off
from their sinful courses, and produce a reformation of their lives, must be
diligently attended to and improved for this end. More particularly, they must
guard against sensuality, or an excessive indulgence to the pleasures and
delights of the body. These will naturally sink them into sloth and security,
draw off the thoughts and attention from the concerns of another life, and
beget an insensibility of the misery of a state of sin and guilt, and the
happiness of being at peace and favor with God, and in a word, confirm an
habitual inattention to, and unmindfulness of, the important motives which the
gospel proposes, to awaken a concern about their souls salvation. And for the
same reason, an immoderate carefulness about, and eager pursuit after any
worldly or temporal interest, must also be avoided. This will soon stifle
convictions, quench the Spirit, and obstruct the good effect of the means of
grace: It will choke the good seed sown in their hearts, and lead on to many
foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. Evil
company is another dangerous snare they ought carefully to shun. Experience
abundantly proves that this has a mighty tendency to abate our earnestness, and
diligence in seeking the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and leads on to
the most destructive and heart-hardening courses. In fine, all sinful
diversions or amusements do stupify the conscience, and unfit the soul for
serious exercises: These must therefore be renounced, as of most dangerous
tendency.

ON the other hand, there are outward means and duties to be attended to,
together with proper exercises of the mind in and upon them, in order to remove
our ignorance, correct our errors, excite and cherish conviction and religious
concern, produce a reformation in our lives, and lead us to that faith in Jesus
Christ, and repentance toward God, to which the special promise of the gospel
are annexed. We must particularly read and hear the word of God, which is the
great ordinance or instrument, whereby the knowledge of the truth, and saving
belief of it is conveyed to our minds: We must also meditate on what we read
and hear agreeable to these holy oracles, and consider the evidences of their
divine authority. We must examine our spiritual state by this rule, and reflect
upon our sins in their several aggravations, together with the dreadful wages
annexed to them. And that this may be done in the most serious and affecting
manner, we must pray to God for that grace and mercy we need, with humble
confessions of our sins, and just condemnation. This is a most solemn way of
meditation, excellently adapted to impress the great truths of religion deeply
on our souls, and so affect our hearts with a most sensible conviction of their
infinite importance, and render them powerfully influential on the temper and
practice. These duties are especially to be observed at those times and
seasons, which are peculiarly appropriated to religious exercises. In
particular the Lord's day must be remembered and kept holy, agreeable to the
design of its institution. I might also mention religious fasting and
humiliation, as an ordinance recommended by scripture, and the practice of holy
men in all ages. But I need not enlarge any further on these things. What is
ordinarily meant by the means of grace, is well enough understood. A diligent
attendance on these, with a proper exercise of mind therein, comprehends the
sum of those endeavors which are supposed to be primarily required of sinners
in the text, and of which this discourse is chiefly to be understood.

BUT it may be enquired, has a man any power or capacity to perform these
duties or exercises, till he be endowed with the grace of regeneration, and
that faith which is the principle of all acceptable obedience, as well as the
means or condition of justification? -- Are not unrenewed sinners in a state of
spiritual death, utterly destitute of any power or will unto any thing that is
good, without any sincere desires of the gospel-salvation, and therefore
morally incapable of seeking for it?

THIS is an enquiry of great importance. A right resolution of it will go far
toward deciding the dispute concerning the obligation, and encouragement of
the unregenerate, to a diligent use of the means of grace, in order to obtain
salvation. Our second head will be chiefly occupied in examining, and stating
this point: And accordingly I shall now proceed to it.

II. I AM to consider what power, or principle of action, there is in a natural
or unregenerate man, whereby he may be supposed capable of those endeavors,
which have been described.

AND that we may have a more clear and distinct view of this point, I shall
endeavor, in the first place, to explain and fix the sense, in which this
enquiry, concerning the power of men unregenerate, is to be understood. -- Then
I shall consider briefly, what is the state of fallen man, previous to
regeneration and conversion. -- After that we may be able to determine whether
man, in his lapsed and depraved state, before he is born again, has any power
to labor for the meat which endures to everlasting life, in the manner that
has been declared.

THE meaning of this enquiry, concerning the power of fallen man to labor,
endeavor, etc. must in the first place be explained; because it is more than
possible, that the conceptions of some concerning the true state of this
question, are not sufficiently determinate. We are to observe then, that the
question is not, whether we have an independent power of our own, to do any
thing that may be available to our obtaining eternal life. For not only fallen
man, but all other creatures, are every moment dependant upon God entirely for
their being and all their powers. Nor are we to understand the enquiry to be
about what is commonly called the natural power or capacity of fallen man, for
those performances, or endeavors, before mentioned. For in this respect, there
is no essential difference, between the unregenerate and the regenerate. The
same faculties of understanding and will, and executive power, physically
considered, belong to both. No one I think can or will pretend, that these
duties are beyond the natural ability of a sinner, provided he has a
disposition or will to observe them. He is undoubtedly as able to read and hear
the word of God, as he is to read and hear discourses upon different subjects:
To think or meditate upon the concerns of his salvation, as to be musing on
things of no consequence: To consider and enquire how he may be saved, as to
put the most trifling and impertinent questions: To implore the mercy of God
upon him, as to petition for a favor from any of his fellow men: To attend
diligently to the religious duties of the Lord's day, as to profane it by
idleness, by worldly conversation, or unlawful diversions. The point then to be
determined by us, I think is this, Whether man, in his fallen and depraved
state, has any moral power to perform these duties? -- Or to speak in more
plain and determinate language, Whether there be in men unregenerate any
principle, which may be a foundation of their having a will to endeavor and
strive to be delivered from a state of sin and misery, and obtain eternal life
and salvation, and accordingly use means for this purpose? Or to vary the
expression yet again, Is it consistent with a state of sin, that a man should
desire to be saved, and so become disposed to seek salvation by attending these
instrumental duties prescribed for this end?

AND that we may be able to give a just and plain resolution of this important
enquiry, it will be needful that we consider, what is the state of fallen man
unregenerate?

THIS is what I proposed in the next place to enquire into, and declare. I
cannot now undertake to discuss this point fully and minutely, but must only
hint a few things, so far as may be necessary to our present purpose.

AND here it is readily granted that unregenerate sinners are spiritually dead,
or in other words dead in sin. What this expression imports, will be considered
immediately: -- But that this character belongs to all men, except those who
are born again, and so endowed with a vital princple by the Holy Ghost, I think
cannot be denied, unless some medium can be found between life and death. In
regeneration there is communicated to the soul that spiritual life and power,
whereby we are prompted and enabled sincerely to repent of, and turn from sin
unto God, and live to him in the exercise or practice of evangelical holiness.
All who are the subjects of this spiritual life and power, are born of the
Spirit, and according to the scripture phrase, are quickened, or made alive to
God: And of consequence all who are destitute hereof, are in that respect dead.
There is then no reason for confining this character to heathens and the most
abandoned sinners, unless we will say, that all besides such are raised from
the death of sin, and have the spiritual or divine life begun in their souls;
that is, unless all besides heathen Idolaters are born of God. For I think it
must be allowed, that these are expressions of the same import, at least that
they necessarily imply each other.

SINCE then every man before regeneration is in a state of spiritual death, it
must now be enquired, what is the true notion of such a state, and how are we
to conceive of the impotency and indisposition of fallen man to that which is
good?

SPIRITUAL death then consists primarily and formally in the want of that holy
rectitude or integrity of nature, that habitual conformity of soul to the will
of God, which is the principle, or foundation of those views, affections and
exercises, which have the specific nature of true holiness. There is a divine
beauty and excellency in true holiness, and in contrast hereunto a
correspondent evil and turpitude in sin, which they who are spiritually dead
are insensible of. There is such a change wrought in the soul of a sinner in
regeneration, that he has apprehensions, affections, purposes, and acts, which
are new, and of a different kind from what he had before. The proof of this
cannot now be entered upon. It will not however I suppose be denied by any, who
allow that true holiness differs in its nature from all other endowments, or
affections, or exercises of a rational being. This, all who are spiritually
dead, or under the power of sin, are, while in such a state, morally indisposed
unto and incapable of.

BUT though the strict or precise notion of spiritual death be the loss of this
uprightness of nature, yet it must be added, that it implies more than a bare
privation of spiritual life and power. A positive depravity of nature, or a
prevailing inclination to that which is evil, will of course ensue upon the
loss of habitual integrity. There is no need of supposing that any vicious
taint is infused, or any principles simply and positively evil implanted, in
order to account for the corruption of human nature. As soon as that union of
the soul to God, whereby the divine life subsists is broken, the vital
principle with all its acts or exercises will cease: -- Of consequence, the
sinner will be governed in his conduct by self-love, with the natural appetites
and affections. And hence he will not favor the things of God, but become
alienated from the divine life, prone to, and full of vanity, folly and
wickedness.

IT cannot then be supposed, that while a man is dead in sin, blind to the
beauties of holiness, indisposed and disinclined to that which is spiritually
good, he should have any direct desire to be freed from the power of sin, and
renewed after the image of God, in righteousness and true holiness; or should
use any means or endeavors with a direct intention to obtain that of which he
has no just idea, and which he does not truly and properly desire, or delight
in. It would be manifestly absurd to suppose that any one should desire and
endeavor after any thing, which is not apprehended or considered as good or
agreeable, in that respect in which it is desired and endeavored after. While a
man is ignorant and insensible of the spiritual excellency of the new creature,
and of the dignity and happiness of the divine life in the soul, but on the
contrary is disinclined to, and alienated from it, this will not be regarded by
him as a proper object of his desires and endeavors. To desire grace
sincerely, is the effect and exercise of a gracious principle; even as it is a
sign and effect of a vital principle, to desire and struggle for life.

NEVERTHELESS mankind, however depraved in all their faculties, are capable of
feeling the force of moral obligation. A sinner may have such a sense of the,
reasonableness of those duties which are required of him, the authority of God
over him, and the duty and wisdom of submitting to it, as that he may really
desire, and endeavor to obey the divine commands, as to matter and substance
of them. It cannot be denied, that the worst of men have some sense of the
reasonableness and fitness of virtue, and the moral evil or turpitude of vice.
For it is plain they have a sense of desert: Their consciences testify that
piety and benevolence, with all proper practical expressions thereof, are right
and good; and that when they sin wilfully, they are worthy of punishment. They
who have no holy love to God and his laws, are yet sensible, from the dictates
of conscience, that it is their duty to be obedient to the great creator and
lawgiver, who is able to save and destroy; and that his commands are just and
righteous: Otherwise they would not feel remorse and self-condemnation when
they transgress them. They have some natural notions of moral good and evil;
and though these natural principles, and that obedience which flows merely from
them are not spiritually good, as wanting what is essential to evangelical
holiness, they are yet good and useful in several respects; as we shall have
occasion to show more fully hereafter. To this purpose speaks a learned and
eminent author, Dr. Owen.
Under the ashes of our collapsed nature there are yet remaining certain sparks
of celestial fire, consisting in inbred notices of good and evil, of rewards
and punishments, of the presence and all-seeing eye of God, of help and
assistance to be had from him, with a dread of his excellency where any thing
is apprehended unworthy of him or provoking to him. They who are incapable of
perceiving the most divine excellency of true holiness, who are not struck with
those motives and reasons of duty which are of the sublimest kind, and fitted
to produce the most noble and divine movements of the heart, are yet capable of
perceiving so much of the reasonableness and equity of God's commands, as that
their temper and conduct may be much influenced thereby. There is in human
nature a sense of duty or moral obligation, a conscience which directs us what
we ought to do, and warns us what we are to expect: And these natural
principles may be so wrought upon by motives, as that men may really desire and
endeavor, in some sort, to obey the divine commands, previous to regeneration.
Moreover,

AS there is in human nature a desire of happiness and dread of misery, mankind
are capable of being moved by the promises and threatenings of the gospel, to
desire deliverance from the guilt and punishment of sin, and be happy hereafter
in the favor of God; and hence they may be persuaded to use means and
endeavors for this purpose. Many without question are excited from this
principle to do much in religion, and strive very earnestly for salvation.
There is no command which a man may not be persuaded to observe, as to the
matter of it, merely from self-preservation: And though what is done merely from
this principle is not true holiness, yet the principle is good, useful and
necessary in itself, and may lawfully enough have its influence in all our
obedience to the divine commands.

I SHALL only add, that these natural principles we have mentioned, which are
all good and useful in themselves, may be much improved and strengthened by
instruction, exercise, and the common influence of the Holy Spirit. Mankind are
capable of a doctrinal or theoretic knowledge of the truths and duties of the
gospel. By a sedulous exercise of their minds in attending to the outward means
of knowledge, they may obtain daily a clearer, and more extensive view of the
doctrines and precepts of revelation. And there is a common influence of the
Spirit, in a work of illumination, conviction, etc. which men may experience
while in an unconverted state, as shall be proved in the sequel. By these
means, the conscience or moral sense, the desire of happiness, and dread of
misery, implanted in human nature, may become more quick, and have a stronger
influence on the heart and life.

THE substance of what has been offered on this point is, that mankind by the
fall have lost that holy rectitude or uprightness of nature, wherein consists
the moral image of God; and are become so corrupted and dead in sin, that until
they are born again of the Spirit, they are indisposed to, and morally
incapable of any affections or exercises, which are spiritually good and holy.
Nor have they strictly speaking any sincere desires to be delivered from this
state of spiritual death, and have a principle of divine life communicated to
them. But yet there are other principles or springs of action in human nature,
whereby they may be moved and excited to perform many duties required by God,
though not in a holy manner, nor for holy ends. They may from a sense of the
equity of God's commands, and the obligations they are under to be subject to
his authority, and from a natural desire of happiness, be induced to endeavor
carefully to frame their lives according to the rules of religion, and that not
in mere pretense and gross hypocrisy, but with serious engagedness of mind.

AND hence we may easily resolve our third enquiry, viz. whether man in his
lapsed and depraved state, before he is born again, and has a saving and
spiritual understanding and belief of the gospel, has any power or capacity to
labor for the meat which endures to everlasting life. That mankind have a
natural power, by the ordinary assistance of God, to perform these duties, if
they are so inclined, I suppose must be readily allowed; that men unregenerate
are morally incapable of doing any thing in religion in a holy manner, must
also be granted, if the principle we have laid down be true, that that
supernatural life, power and grace, which is communicated to the soul in
regeneration, is necessary unto all acts of holy evangelical obedience. But I
think no one who understands himself, can deny that the natural principles of
reason, conscience, and self-preservation, when improved and excited by
instruction, exercise, and the common influences of the Holy Spirit, are a
sufficient foundation for those desires and endeavors to obtain salvation,
which have been described under the foregoing head: And therefore unregenerate
men have a moral power in this manner, to labor for the meat that endures to
everlasting life. In plainer words, they may become inclined and willing so to
do.

THIS appears not only from what has been argued from the nature of man, but
also from undeniable fact. Is it not certain that many while unregenerate, have
sought to enter in at the strait gate? Common observation, as well as our
Savior's express words, Luke 13.24.
will warrant us to assert this. Yea perhaps it may appear in the sequel, that
it is in the way of diligent seeking, in attendance to the duties before
specified, that the grace of regeneration, and the saving knowledge of the
truth are ordinarily obtained. Though man in a state of sin is not in a present
moral capacity to perform religious duties in a holy manner, yet the
performance itself is plainly within his power, by God's common assistance. Our
natural principles of reason, conscience and self-preservation, when informed
with such knowledge of religion as men unregenerate are capable of, and excited
by the common influence of the Spirit, are a sufficient foundation for such a
compliance with the substance and matter of prescribed duties, as is here
intended. If men have not a will to attend the common means of conversion, it
is not because an unregenerate state is incapable of it, but because the voice
of reason and conscience is not hearkened to, because those notices of truth and
duty which they have received are not regarded, and because they will not
pursue their own interest. The new (...) is only an addition to your former
being. And though it cannot produce itself, yet cannot your reasonable soul in
which it is to be formed, use God's appointed means in order to that blessed
change? If you cannot act graciously as a saint, cannot you act rationally as a
man? Howe's blessedness of the righteous.


BUT it will here be objected, that salvation consists in freedom from sin, and
perfection in holiness, as well as exemption from the curse: But this is what
no one in a state of sin desires. Is it not absurd then to suppose, that a man
should seek that which he has no desire to obtain? And labor for the meat
which endures to everlasting life, when he has no appetite or relish for it?

I ANSWER, how absurd soever some may imagine it is to speak of sinners seeking
salvation, this is the express language of scripture, which ought to have
screened the expression from that censure, which some cricical refiners have
presumed to pass upon it. "A scorner seeks wisdom and finds it not." Prove.
14.6.
"When he slew them then they sought him, and they returned and enquired early
after God." Psalm. 78.34.
"Many shall seek to enter in (at the strait gate) and shall not be able." Luke
13.24.
Yet it will not be allowed, I think, that a scorner has a direct sincere
desire of true wisdom; or that they whose hearts were not right with God,
sought him in truth; or that such as fail of entering in at the strait gate, do
seek for an entrance with that sincerity of desire and endeavor, which arises
from a spiritual renovation of heart. We may then without scruple adhere to the
style of the sacred oracles, let men criticize and cavil as they please. And as
to the objected absurdity, of supposing that men may seek salvation at the same
time that they refuse it, and desire it not, a little attention will show that
it is of no force in the present case. For,

1. A MAN may be willing and inclined to attend those means, which are by the
appointment of God conducive to his conversion, though he may have no just
conception of the nature of this divine change, nor any direct sincere desire
to attain to it. The prompting motive with such a one to use these means, is
not indeed their supposed subserviency to an end which he has not in view, nor
wishes to obtain: But he may do it from a regard to other ends, which he may
really desire and aim at. Yea he may act from such ends as are lawful and good
in some respects, and in their proper place, as may be shown hereafter. And his
endeavors may, by the will and appointment of God, land him happily at a point
which at first he thought not of arriving at. We may illustrate this matter in
some measure perhaps by the following simile, however it may halt in some of
its members. A man who is sick and delirious, and who has conceived an aversion
to his father, may be persuaded for fear of his anger, and in hopes of an
inheritance, to follow such directions as are designed and suited to restore
him to his health, his reason, and dutiful affections: And accordingly by this
means may find himself at length happily recovered from all his indispositions,
though in his disordered state he was neither sensible of his miserable
condition, nor had those benefits in view, which he has found. So though men in
a state of sin or spiritual death have not a spiritual apprehension of the
nature and excellency of salvation in its full extent, as revealed in the
gospel, and so cannot have a direct aim at obtaining what they have no relish
for, yet it is very supposable, that they may, in obedience to the dictates of
conscience, and the natural principle of self-love, be induced to a diligent
use of those outward and ordinary means whereby the benefits of redemption are
ordinarily applied; and in this way may come to the saving knowledge of the
truth, and be born again of this incorrupible seed. Moreover,

2. AN unregenerate man may attend to the ordinary prescribed means of grace,
with some desires that he may obtain the end which they are ordained to
subserve: He may, in some sort, really desire and hope that, in the use of
these means, he shall receive further light and influence from the Holy Spirit,
that so his feet may be guided in the way of peace, and he may find rest to his
soul. It Is true indeed, such a one has no direct and sincere will and purpose to
obtain that faith and repentance which the gospel requires, so long as he is
insensible of the spiritual glory of the gospel, and does not acquiesce in the
method of divine grace therein revealed. But he may have real desires to obtain
further degrees of that common light and grace, which is ordinarily preparatory
to conversion: Yea, he may have real desires of salvation, not indeed in its
full extent, nor on account of the spiritual excellency of the blessings
proposed in the gospel, but because of their natural suitableness to his wants,
as a condemned sinful creature.

I TAKE it for granted, that a man who is not savingly enlightened and renewed,
may be convinced that he is a sinner, that the wages of sin is death, and that
the gospel contains a revelation of mercy to the ungodly. Now these sparks of
light, if I may so speak, which are in the understanding, these notices of
truth, which by the common influence of the divine Spirit, are conveyed to the
mind, either from the works or word of God, may excite the attention to further
manifestations of divine truth. An imperfect view of the gospel doctrine,
however indistinct and erroneous, may awaken an enquiry after a fuller and
clearer knowledge; and that not to amuse a vain curiosity, but from a serious
concern to escape the wrath to come. And though no one will take pains to find
himself guilty and miserable, since it is contrary to nature to seek misery,
yet a general apprehension and partial conviction of guilt, may put a man upon
a serious enquiry into his spiritual state: It may fully convince him, than he
ought not to shake off those disquieting apprehensions which have begun to
arise in his mind: That it would be most dangerous presumption to indulge
himself in security and inconsiderateness, while he has so much reason to fear
that he is in a bad case. And hence he may be prompted to seek a more thorough
acquaintance with himself, and with the word of God, the rule by which he is to
judge of his own case, and which opens the only way of salvation to the guilty.
Thus, as Solomon speaks, "he may cry for knowledge, and lift up his voice for
understanding, seek for it as silver, and search for it as for hid treasure;"
and so obtain further degrees of knowledge, conviction, humiliation, and be in
a nearer capacity for saving illumination, faith and conversion; as will be
more fully explained and proved hereafter. And accordingly it is certain from
fact, that when sinners begin to be awakened, they sometimes cherish serious
thoughtfulness, and lay to heart their miserable case: They are attentive to
the revelation of grace and truth in the divine word: And so a religious
concern is more deeply impressed, and the sensibility of their heart increases.
And sometimes when they are made to tremble, as Felix did at the preaching of
Paul, they practically say with him, "go thy way for this time, and at a more
convenient season I will call for thee." They take pains to wear off the uneasy
impression among vain companions, worldly cares, or carnal pleasures, so quench
the Spirit, and become more hardened and secure than ever.

NOW though it must be ascribed to the agency of the good Spirit, that a secure
sinner is first awakened, and then directed and inclined to think upon his
ways, to attend the common means of instruction, and so seek further light and
aids from God, yet it cannot be said that the reverse conduct of other sinners
is owing to any natural or moral incapacity inseperably connected with an
unregenerate state. It Is voluntary wickedness and folly, which indeed flows from
the corruption of unrenewed nature, but is an accidental, not a necessary or
universal effect.

EVERY kind and degree of knowledge and grace whether common or special, which
God is pleased to communicate to mankind, conveys a power to seek for more. And
the first end of men's attendance to the means of grace, is ordinarily that
they may be excited and enabled in this way to seek for further influence and
grace of the same kind with that which has awakened their attention and
endeavors. And though this be not what is commonly meant by converting grace, I
use the word grace here, and in many places in this discourse, to signify a
divine influence upon the soul, of a salutary tendency. In this sense the word
has been commonly used by Christian Writers, for about 1400 years at least; so
I suppose it will be well enough understood. Whether this be a scriptural or
the most proper signification, is a grammatical question which I leave to the
critics.
yet it has a tendency to conversion, and is preparatory for it, as will be
proved in its proper place.

IT may be added, that men unregenerate may and often do, in some sort, really
desire salvation, or the blessings which are through Christ proposed to men in
the gospel. They have not indeed a direct immediate and intuitive perception of
spiritual glory and excellency, as true believers have, who are spiritually
enlightened and quickened; so their desire of salvation has not precisely the
same objective ground. But gospel blessings have an excellency and suitableness
to the nature and wants of man, which the unregenerate are capable of
perceiving. Every one who is pained with a sense of guilt, and fear of
punishment, naturally desires pardon and the favor of God.

EVERY one who believes that the heavenly state will be happy, naturally
desires to be admitted to it, whether he has a true notion of the nature of
this happiness or not. Yea an unregenerate man may in some sort really desire
to be delivered from the power of vicious habits and inclinations, and practice
his duty as to the substance and matter of it. The natural conscience when well
informed acknowledges and approves the righteousness of all God's commands, and
condemns every transgression of them. This moral sense sees and feels the
obligation of a creature to be obedient to the laws of God. Though this natural
principle be distinct from that divine supernatural instinct or taste, which is
the foundation of those affections and actions which are holy or spiritually
good, yet it is a subjective ground of men's approving the matter of their
duty. There is a beauty in virtue, and an ugliness in vice, which is an
immediate object of complacency or disgst to mankind in general. Now a man may
really desire to be freed from sin, and practice his duty, in that view in
which his conscience approves the one and disapproves the other. That the
unregenerate act merely from self love in all their religious performances, has
been confidently asserted by some. An assertion which is either impertinent, or
false! If it only means, that the ultimate end of their acting is the
obtainment of something which they regard as good and agreeable to their desire,
in this sense we may as truly say, that every creature acts merely from self
love. But if the meaning be, that in all that they do they have nothing in view
but to advance their own private interest and happiness, this is contrary to
scripture, reason and experience. There is in human nature a moral taste, or
sense of moral good and evil, which does not arise from self love, as the late
Mr. Edwards has observed, after Butler, Hutcheson, and others. See his
dissertation on the nature of virtue. -- This doubtless has its influence on
the conduct of men in general, particularly on their religious conduct. And to
say that sinners act only from self love in the latter sense, has a direct
tendency to strengthen many in a false hope: For it will lead them to conclude
at once that they are regenerate, when they find that in sundry instances they
act from a conscientious regard to duty, a sense of the equity and
reasonableness of God's commands, a natural love of justice, a kind concern for
the interest of their neighbors, etc. all which may be without supernatural
principles. The moral sense or conscience, and the social affections, are as
natural to man as self-preservation: And they are evidently distinct from each
other, notwithstanding all that has been urged to the contrary by Hobbes, or
any other. For it is to be observed, that the impleaded notion is no other than
one of the exploded tenets of Hobbes, new vamped. But it is no service to the
cause of truth, for any one to belie human nature, in order to prove that it is
depraved; and disown those "sparks of celestial fire, which (as Dr. Owen
expresses) remain under the ashes of the apostasy."


UPON the whole, we may I think reassume our conclusion with confidence, that
men unregenerate have a power to labor for the meat that endures to
everlasting life, in the sense explained, which is all that has here been
contended for. Whether these endeavors are better in any respect, than a total
neglect of them, will be enquired into under the next head.

TO conclude; we do not pretend that any thing done by a man while in a state
of sin, is of the nature of gospel holiness; or that an unrenewed sinner ever
will or can of himself seek salvation to any purpose, without a divine
influence prompting and assisting him thereunto. It is further granted, that
the first knowledge and instruction we receive in religion, and the first
influences of the Holy Spirit, are preventive of our desires, enquiries or
endeavors. And therefore they who are utterly ignorant of the truths of
religion, and with whom the Holy Spirit strives not at all, are in their
present state morally incapable of seeking salvation. They have indeed a remote
capacity for it, in the faculties of their mind, but an immediate power they
have not, till their active powers and principles are excited, by some notices
of their need of salvation, accompanied with the influence of the good Spirit,
moving them to seek for it in attendance to the means of grace. But he who has
so much knowledge and belief of the gospel as to be convinced that he needs
salvation, and does not absolutely despair of obtaining it, (which surely an
unregenerate man may have) such a one has not only a natural power to labor
for the meat which endures to everlasting life, in the manner that has been
declared, but his natural principles or springs of action may, by the common
influence of the Holy Spirit, be so touched and waked up by motives and moral
suasion, as that he may have a desire and will so to do; notwithstanding his
impotency, while dead in sin, to perform any religious duties in a holy
spiritual manner.

SERMON II. The Ends for which Duties are required of the Unregenerate, and to
be performed by them.
THE nature of the duties supposed to be required of men in order to
conversion, and their power for the performance of them have been considered.
It will be observed, that I have not hitherto offered any direct proof, that
these duties are prescribed to the unregenerate, for such an end. Concerning
this I shall only say at present, that I think this supposition is at least
countenanced by our text. But be this as it may, it is not my intention to pass
a naked supposition upon any one in the place of a proof. The truth of this
point shall in its proper place be particularly examined. And in the mean time
begging the patience of those who are dissatisfied (if there, be any such) I
shall proceed to explain the subject a little further, and endeavor to relieve
some further doubts and difficulties, that so the way may be better prepared
for a more direct confirmation of our capital point.

AND a very material enquiry will now arise, which I must endeavor to answer
as well as I can, viz. Is it reasonable to think that a man's eternal interest
can be served by those performances which have not the nature of holy
obedience? Can the sinful doings of the unregenerate be of any avail, except to
inhance their guilt?

TO this I scruple not to say, that men's observing the duties required of them
in the gospel from natural principles, is much better than a total neglect and
contempt of them; and may be conducive to very valuable purpose, no less than
the salvation of their souls; as I hope to make appear under the

III. GENERAL head, which was to consider why sinners are to labor for the
meat which endures to everlasting life, and what good end it can be supposed
to answer. It is of no small importance that we have right conceptions of this
matter: And yet it is more than probable that some have wrong notions
concerning the ends of men's endeavors in seeking salvation. I shall therefore
consider this point both negatively and positively. And

1. I SHALL mention some wrong ends which men often propose in religious
duties. There are many, who will do much in religion, and take great pains to
frame their lives according to the rules of God's word, while their designs
herein are such as the gospel strongly militates against. This is the case of
those who perform duties for self-righteous purposes. And though I deny not but
that self-righteous endeavors may be a means of good to men, by giving them an
experimental conviction of the insufficiency of their own righteousness and
strength, yet no one must be encouraged to perform duties for such ends as
ought not to be proposed, or cannot be obtained. On the contrary it should be
the care of every one who would speak as it becomes the oracles of God, while
exhorting men to the observance of duties, to caution against all dangerous
mistakes as to the place and use of human endeavors. But to be more particular.

NO one is required to do any thing to atone or satisfy for his past offenses.
The gospel utterly disallows our attempting the performance of any duty for
such an intention. And yet it is natural to mankind, when pressed with a
conviction of guilt, to endeavor the expiation of their past crimes, by their
future obedience. This has given rise to a world of superstition, not only
among Pagans, but nominal Christians. Witness the austerities and satisfactory
penances imposed and practiced in the church of Rome. Nor have Protestants been
always free from this error. Many no doubt have thought that their charitable
distributions to the poor would cover a multitude of sins. Hence almshouses and
hospitals have been erected and endowed, and large sums given away to the
indigent by people in the last moments of life, in hopes that this would
compensate for their former miscarriages. Others have had the same intention in
their fastings, prayers and devotional exercises. But this is a vain thought.
God requires nothing of sinners as an atonement for sin. The best services of
the holiest man upon earth, yea of the holiest angel in heaven, will not
expiate the guilt of one transgression. Surely then unholy performances will
not be accepted as a fit satisfaction for multiplied and heinous offenses. Our
best and our worst actions are alike unavailable in this case. It Is the peculiar
honor of Christ's obedience and sacrifice to take away the guilt of sin. His
work is fully sufficient for this purpose; none of ours are required, or may be
added as coefficient with it.

NOR are these duties required, or to be performed, as meritorious of the
favor and kindness of God, or as rendering us worthy objects of his mercy. This
is the end that some have in their religious services. They may indeed own,
that it is only the blood of Christ the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of
the world: Yet they have a notion of rendering themselves worthy to have the
benefits purchased by Christ, applied or bestowed upon them. They have a secret
thought (though they may disclaim the pretense of merit) that by their reading,
hearing, praying, attending ordinances, and endeavoring to reform their
manners, there will be such a change in them for the better, such a difference
from the profane, that they will hereby become worthy of a favorable regard:
And that after they have shown so good a disposition, and so much respect to
God's commands, they may be warranted to advance some peculiar claim upon the
divine mercy, as subjects morally qualified for it, and in some sense worthy of
it.

BUT the scriptures will justify no such conclusions. There we are taught,
"that by grace we are saved, through says, not of works, lest any man should
boast." The meritorious procurement of salvation is the work of Christ, and was
finished when he rose from the dead. The gracious purposes of God toward
fallen man, had their rise from his infinite sovereign mercy, and not from any
worthiness beheld in the subject. And after God had decreed to glorify the
riches of his grace in saving some of the lapsed race of men, the atonement and
righteousness of Christ, and not any absolute or comparative worthiness of
ours, is the moral ground or consideration of the bestowment of salvation upon
the vessels of mercy. It seemed meet to infinite wisdom, that eternal life
should be purchased for men by a price of sufficient value, that his holiness
as well as mercy might be glorified, in his bestowing the greatest blessings
upon the ungodly. But no obedience of ours is of any value to purchase eternal
life. If we had done all that is required of us, we should still have reason to
say that we were unprofitable servants, and deserved no thanks. For the most
perfect obedience which our natural faculties are capable of attaining to, is
no more than our present duty requires. Must it not then be great vanity and
presumption in a sinner, to think himself at all worthy of eternal life, on
account of such corrupt and sinful services as his best actions are? It Is not
from respect to any works of righteousness that we have done, but according to
God's mercy in Jesus Christ, that we are delivered from a state of sin and
misery, and brought into a state of salvation. And when men apply themselves to
the practice of religious duties, that they may thereby recommend themselves to
God, as worthy objects of his saving mercy, they, as much as in them lies,
frustrate the divine grace, and substitute their own righteousness in that
place which the gospel assigns solely to the work and atonement of Christ.

IT must be further added, that these duties, of which we are now treating, are
not required of men unregenerate as a covenant term or condition of acceptance
with God; so as that upon their performance of them, they should become
entitled, by virtue of God's promise, to justification and eternal life. We
have no covenant-right to eternal life and salvation, unless we stand right
according to that rule, by which we are directed to examine ourselves, whether
we are in a state of peace with God, and heirs of salvation; and by which
mankind will be judged, and their state determined by Christ, at the last day:
That is the gospel. But no actions or exercises of the unconverted answer the
requirements of the gospel. All who are in such a state, far from having a
promise of eternal life, are expressly declared to be under condemnation and the
wrath of God. Nothing that is wrought in; or done by an impenitent unconverted
sinner, antecedent to faith and conversion, will give him an interest in the
promise of salvation, according to the gospel which is (more properly than
faith) the instrument of justification, or the rule, according to which the
benefits of redemption are applied to, and bestowed upon men. How diligent and
conscientious soever a man may be in seeking and striving to obtain salvation,
till he is truly and effectually converted, he is under condemnation; and then
surely the promises of salvation, which are constantly limited to believers and
penitents, cannot possibly belong to him.

AGAIN, these duties are not enjoined on the unconverted, nor to be performed
by them, as having a promise of faith, or the grace of regeneration annexed to
them. We cannot say, that God has assured impenitent sinners by any promise,
that if they attend to the prescribed means of grace, they shall certainly be
born again of the Spirit, and so enter into his heavenly kingdom. I know there
have been great controversies, and of long standing, concerning promises to the
endeavors of the unconverted. It is not my present business to dispute this
point: Others have done it sufficiently already. I shall only say, that though
there is abundant encouragement for awakened sinners to attend the common means
of conversion, as shall hereafter be proved, yet I must acknowledge that I know
of no promises of regeneration, or effectual grace, that are claimable by any
unconverted man. Nor can I apprehend, that if there were indeed such promises
as some plead for, they would give any satisfaction to those who are thoroughly
pained with a conviction of their sin and guilt. It will not I think be
pretended by any, that there is a promise of a sinner's finding mercy, if his
endeavors are cold and slack; or if he long delays the business of seeking
salvation, after having been earnestly called and urged thereunto. But how will
a man be able to determine to the satisfaction of an awakened conscience, with
what degree of earnestness a sinner must strive, in order to fulfill the
condition of the promise; and how soon he must begin to mind in earnest the
concerns of eternity; and whether he may not already have deserved the matter
so long, that the promised grace may be forfeited irrecoverably. Such enquiries
have, I think, never been answered clearly and pertinently; and therefore the
supposition upon which they are founded seems to have a tendency rather to
perplex and discourage the most serious minds, than to give any relief or
excitement to duty. For what man whose conscience is not greatly seared, but
must own, that he has given God high provocation to cast him off, and show him
no mercy, because he has so long neglected the great salvation that has been
proposed to him, and still continues not to regard it in any proportion to its
importance? I think it will be very presumptuous for a sinner to conclude, that
God has bound himself by promise, to extend his saving mercy to one who has
been so dilatory and slack, in laboring for the meat which endures to eternal
life, as every unregenerate man, who is thoroughly awakened, must be convinced
that himself has been.

TO proceed, these duties and endeavors of which we now treat, are not
prescribed to us as the means and way to move the divine mercy and pity toward
us. No one ought to be encouraged to strive for eternal life, from an
expectation that he shall hereby excite God's compassion toward him. God's
mercy is infinite. The communications and exercises of his goodness and grace,
are free. Divine mercy does not wait for any good dispositions in us to draw it
forth into exercise. When God decreed to manifest the glory of his mercy and
grace in saving some of mankind from sin and death, and accordingly provided
and appointed a redeemer for them, he regarded them as miserable creatures, and
at the same time most unworthy. And in carrying his gracious decree into
execution, by applying the benefits of redemption to the vessels of mercy, his
grace prevents all amiable qualifications in them. And if any one is made
sensible of the danger and misery of a sinful state, so as that he seeks
earnestly to God for deliverance, this must be considered as an effect of
divine mercy, in opening his eyes to see his perishing condition while there is
a possibility and hope of his being happily saved from it. For, as has been
already noted, it is owing to preventing grace that sinners are prompted, and
enabled to do any thing, that has any tendency to their spiritual advantage.

I MUST only add, that the duties or endeavors which God has prescribed to the
unregenerate, are not prescribed because there is any spiritual goodness in the
performances of such persons. We ought not to think, that actions flowing
merely from natural principles are gospel holiness, or will be approved
accepted and rewarded by God as such. Men cannot rightly take encouragement to
attend the means of conversion, by imagining that such an attendance as they
while unconverted are capable of giving, will be regarded by God, as having the
nature of holy obedience. On the contrary they should be humbly sensible, that
till their natures are savingly renewed, their most serious and earnest
endeavors are sinful, through a defect in the principle and end. Indeed the best
actions of men unregenerate are good in some respects, and in their proper
place; and from this consideration, among others, they may with propriety be
exhorted to duties; as shall be shown presently. But nothing done by men
antecedent to conversion, is in the estimation of God evangelical holiness.

THUS far I have endeavored to show for what purposes the duties we are now
treating of are not required, and am willing to acknowledge we ought not to
think that any endeavors of the unregenerate will avail to expiate their past
sins, or recommend them to God as worthy objects of his favor, or give them a
covenant title to salvation, or the grace of regeneration, or move the divine
pity and mercy toward them, nor are they of the nature of gospel holiness. And
whoever considers the subject in a practical view, will I hope indulge my
enlarging a little on the negative part, since it is likely that many are in
danger of acting from such mistaken ends and views as have here been mentioned.
And hence instead of being guided to Christ, and having their eyes directed to
him, as the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world, they are turned
and fixed on a delusion; and so are in danger of spending their money for that
which is not bread, and their labor for that which will not satisfy them.

BUT the enquiry still remains, why then are sinners commanded to labor for
the meat which endures to everlasting life? Of what benefit can their
endeavors be to them with regard to their eternal interest? I must therefore
attempt a more direct and positive answer to it.

AND in general, our observance of these duties is required as the ordinary
method and means, whereby God is pleased to prepare a sinner for, and then
communicate to him that saving grace, light and life, whereby he becomes a new
creature, and is enabled and disposed unto these exercises and acts which are
spiritually good, and with which, according to the gospel promises, eternal
life is connected. And accordingly a sinner ought to attend to them as the way
or means in which God has required and encouraged him to seek an interest in
these benefits and blessings.

BUT it will be proper to examine this matter more closely and particularly. I
shall therefore consider first, why God requires sinners to labor for the meat
which endures to everlasting life. Secondly, why sinners are to observe and do
what is thus required of them. These are quite different considerations, and
must be distinguished accordingly. The former respects God's end in commanding,
the latter our end in obeying. The one will lead us to enquire into the reasons
and designs of infinite wisdom in giving these precepts to men; the other will
give us occasion to examine the motives and views upon which men are persuaded
and influenced to practice the duties therein prescribed. God's ends in
commanding are most wise, holy and good; but unregenerate sinners are morally
incapable of obeying for holy ends, till they are endowed with new and
supernatural principles. By following out and carrying in mind this distinction
between God's end in requiring, and our end in performing the duties, we are
treating of, we may be able to answer our present enquiry distinctly. Whence it
will appear, that as it is agreeable to the divine perfections to require these
duties of sinners, so the observance of them may and ought to be inculcated
upon all the hearers of the gospel, and that from such motives as are suited to
reach their consciences, and influence their practice.

FIRST, What are those ends for which God has required sinners to labor, in a
diligent use of prescribed means, for the meat which endures to everlasting
life? I answer, that in subordination to his own glory, God has a twofold end
in prescribing these duties to men. His primary design herein is that he may
glorify the riches of his goodness and mercy, in calling and recovering sinners
from the corruption and misery of their fallen state, to a participation of
those benefits, which Christ has purchased for the vessels of mercy. Or in the
Apostle's words, "that they may be saved, and come to the knowledge of the
truth." And in case men neglect or refuse to attend to these prescribed means,
and so fail of obtaining that grace and salvation which is proposed to them, to
be by them sought in this way, then it is God's design, that they being left
without excuse, having no cloak for their sin, his justice may be glorified in
their condemnation.

AS human endeavors are the appointed means by which God gives and we obtain
the meat that perishes, so human endeavors are also the appointed means in
and by which God bestows and we receive the gift of eternal life. And he has
commanded sinners to read and hear, and meditate on his word, to implore his
mercy, to avoid wilful sins, and temptations thereunto, because it is his will
that they should be awakened to consideration, convinced of their miserable
state by sin, taken off from false confidences, and, despairing of help in
themselves, attend to, believe, and acquiesce joyfully in, the revelation or
proposal of mercy in the gospel, through the obedience and sufferings of Christ,
and be sanctified through the truth and Holy Spirit. And it is God's will to
awaken and humble them, to work faith and holiness in them, in the way of their
attendance to these prescribed duties. These are, by the appointment and
blessing of God, means whereby the work of conversion is effected. They are
accordingly made use of by him in fulfilling the good pleasure of his goodness.
And he has commanded and encouraged men to use these means, because he has
designed that his commands and encouragements should influence and persuade
them so to do, that they may hereby receive that benefit, and his grace that
glory, which is ultimately aimed at in and by them. And if sinners set at
naught these counsels and commands, still his word shall accomplish his
pleasure, and not return to him void. The mouth of the impenitent shall hereby
be stopped; they shall be left without excuse; and God shall be justified when
he speaks, and clear when he judges.

IF it should be further enquired, why God is pleased to prescribe and use
these means in effectuating his holy and gracious purposes? It may be
sufficient to answer, because thus it has seemed good in his sight. If it shall
appear (as I trust it will in its proper place) that this is in fact God's
ordinary method in the dispensation of saving blessings, we ought to be
satisfied, though we should not be able to enter into the reasons of the divine
appointment herein. But besides, there are several considerations which may
lead us to conclude, that it was wise and fit that God should have an
established method of working in the kingdom of grace, as well as nature: That
he should make use of means in the conversion, as well as preservation of men:
And that this method which he has established, and these means which he makes
use of are wisely chosen, being well adapted to subserve the designs of his
mercy. As there is a beauty and wisdom apparent in that regular subordination
of causes and effects which is established in the natural world, so the same
appears in a higher degree in that connection and dependence of antecedents and
consequents, means and ends, which is constituted in the government of the
intelligent and moral world. And this method of dealing with and working upon
mankind; which we plead for, appears to be well suited to the nature of
rational and active beings; and will serve to display abundantly not only the
grace of God in the salvation of his elect, but also his justice in the
condemnation of impenitent sinners, suggesting an easy account of that increase
of guilt and punishment, which they will in the coming world be the subjects
of, who reject the offers of salvation in the gospel. But to enquire into these
things is beside our present purpose. If it shall appear that this is the
method in which the benefits of redemption are applied or conveyed to mankind,
we ought to be satisfied, without disputing the fitness of God's appointments.

WE shall now, in the second place, consider for what ends sinners are to
attend to these prescribed means.

THOUGH it is granted that men ought always to act for holy ends, from that
love which is the prime effect of a spiritual view of divine glory displayed in
the gospel; inasmuch as the want hereof is owing to a criminal blindness; yet
it is easy to see, that this answer does not satisfy our present enquiry. For
since the unregenerate are under the power of this blindness, they are plainly
in a moral incapacity of acting for holy ends, till the eyes of their
understanding are savingly enlightened. If then no kind or manner of acting be
required or encouraged at all in the word of God, but what necessarily includes
or presupposes faith and regeneration, then all enquiries about commands and
encouragements to duty, as means of obtaining faith, or the grace of
regeneration, are plainly at an end. A supposition which the scriptures will
not allow. Wherefore, that I may give as clear an answer to this enquiry as I
can, I would observe --

(1.) No man may do any acts of religious obedience, for such ends as are
simply and absolutely unlawful. Such sacrifices are in a peculiar sense an
abomination to the Lord; and will highly provoke his wrath and jealousy against
such as presume to offer them. This was what rendered the long prayers of the
Pharisees so odious in God's sight, that they used and designed them as a cloak
to their unmerciful and unrighteous practices, in devouring widows houses, and
neglecting the weightier points of the law.

(2.) THOUGH men unregenerate are morally incapable of obeying any divine
precept for holy ends, they are yet capable of acting from a regard to such
ends as, however deficient, are not simply unlawful, but in their place and
kind are good and worthy to be regarded. They may have so much knowledge of
God, and his will, and their obligations to obedience, as to be influenced
hereby to do many things good in themselves, and commanded by God. They may for
instance be persuaded that an attendance to the prescribed means of grace is
their wisest course, in order to obtain further light and instruction, that so
they may escape the wrath and curse of God, and obtain that happiness which
nature prompts all men to seek for. A regard to their own future and eternal
interest, may influence them to an observance of these duties, and so keep them
waiting upon God in the appointed ways, in which he is pleased to grant his
blessing.

NOW though there be an essential defect in the obedience of the unregenerate,
with respect to the ends of their actions, so that they cannot be denominated
holy, yet we cannot say, that it is simply unlawful for men to have a regard to
their own happiness, and endeavor to escape those evils with which they are
threatened. It is not unlawful for men to act agreeable to the present light and
conviction of their mind concerning their duty and interest, though their minds
be not savingly enlightened; yea it is undoubtedly the duty of every one to do
so. The natural conscience of man bears witness to the obligation he is under
to obey the commands of God. When therefore the mind of a sinner is so far
enlightened, as that he is persuaded, and convinced that God has commanded him
to attend to the ordinary means of instruction and conversion, though he may
not have a just conception of the nature, and divine excellency of that change
of heart, which these means are designed to effect, through the blessing of God,
and influence of the good Spirit, certainly it is lawful, yea it is his duty,
to act from a regard to such a conviction and persuasion. When the divine call
in the word has reached his ears, and the truth therein revealed has found
access to his conscience, so far as to produce a conviction that the gospel is
a divine revelation of mercy to mankind, it is certainly lawful, yea an
indispensable duty, that he attend to it; though he may have no spiritual
apprehension of the nature of the blessings therein proposed, or the way in
which men come to the enjoyment of them.

TRUE holiness implies a regard to higher and nobler ends, than any which an
unregenerate man aims at; but it does not exclude a regard to inferior ends in
a due subordination: Which shows, clearly that it is not simply unlawful to
have respect to inferior ends in our actions. Such ends are in their place
right and good. To instance in self-love. It Is not simply unlawful for a man to
seek his own happiness: Yea it is fit and right that he should do so. But if he
aims at nothing more than to secure his own private interest, though he may use
no unlawful means, there is nothing of holiness or true virtue in his conduct;
yea it is sinfully deficient in respect of the end. But the fault does not
consist in his acting for an unlawful end, but in neglecting those ends which
ought to have been regarded. The gospel proposes rewards and punishments as
motives to obedience, which are directly suited and designed by God, to work
upon the natural principle of self-love; whence it is evident that our own
happiness may and ought to be regarded by us, in the highest acts of holy
obedience. Yea God has enforced his precepts by much lower motives, even
temporal promises and threatenings; and that not only to Jew, but Christians.
Says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.6.
Godliness has the promise of the life that now is. And again, Ephesians. 6.2.3.
Honor thy father and mother, that it may be well with thee, and that thou
may live long upon the earth. Says another, 1 Pet. 3.10 -- 13.
For he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from
evil, and his lips that they speak no guile; let him eschew evil and do good;
let him seek peace and ensue it. For the eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous, and his ears are open unto their prayers, but the face of the Lord
is against them that do evil. And who is he that will harm you if ye be
followers of that which is good? If there be any pertinency and force in these
arguments and motives to christian duties, then it is not unsuitable for
christians to have respect to temporal blessings, in their obedience to the
laws of Christ. Indeed these things are not the highest end we are to act for;
but this is doubtless a lawful end, yea a good end in its place. In short, if
what men aim at be lawful and good in itself, whether of a higher or lower
kind, they then act for a lawful and good end, though through a sinful defect,
their actions may be unholy. To proceed --

(3.) DUTIES performed in such a manner, and for such ends as the unregenerate
are capable of, are preferable to a total omission and wilful neglect of them.
That men observe the matter of God's commands from natural principles, from
common light, grace and assistance, and for inferior ends, is better than not
to do it at all. Such actions are as to their matter and substance (as Divines
speak) agreeable to the command of God, therefore good; but the neglect is
contrary to the divine precept, therefore simply evil, every way wrong, having
no goodness belonging to it. And as to the end which sinners have regard to in
the performance of commanded duties, from which actions take their form, this
is indeed defective, and so unholy. Yet the end of such actions is not so
opposite to true holiness, as the end of neglecting and despising the matter of
God's commands. It discovers extreme malignity and contempt of God, when men
wilfully act in opposition to the present light of their minds, and convictions
of conscience. Moreover, actions good in themselves, though defective in their
end, are better in their tendency and effects, than those actions which are
every way evil. God and his laws are not thereby so much dishonored. There is
less abuse, and outrageous violence done to our rational and moral faculties,
our reason and conscience. The Holy Spirit is not so despitefully resisted.
There is not so much mischief done to our fellow creatures. The virtuous and
religious actions of unsanctified persons, have a good and happy tendency in
diverse respects. They are good and profitable to the world: And they are
attended with manifold advantages to the persons who do them. First they are
usually crowned with temporal blessings. This has been long since observed by
Lactantius, Augustine, and Jerome, with respect to the virtuous actions of the
Heathens. The last and most learned of these fathers, has the following words,
in his commentary on the 29th chap. of Ezekiel. Intelligimus, etiam ethnicos,
fi quid boni fecerint, non absque mercede Dei judicio praeteriri. And Sir
Walter Raleigh makes the same remark, in his history of the world; "God even
among the Heathens" (says he) has often rewarded moral honesty with outward
happiness, book 2. chap. 8. sect. 3 -- And says another learned author; God
has often signally rewarded acts of honesty, justice and fidelity, and
punished the contrary by his judgments, to deter men from such an unworthy
practice, and to encourage others to what is comely, and of a general good
report in the world. Ahab's humiliation put a demurrer to God's judgments
intended against him, etc. In this the divine goodness is eminent; since in the
most moral actions, as there is something beautiful, so there is something
mixed, hateful to the infinitely exact holiness of the divine nature; yet he
will not let that which is pleasing to him go unrewarded. Charnock on the
goodness of God.
Secondly a serious and conscientious attendance to the prescribed means of
grace tends to, and often issues in, their spiritual and eternal good, by the
appointment and blessing of him, who works all things according to the
counsel of his own will. In ipsis improbis, dum sormidato supplicio fraenatur
facultas, invocato Deo sanatur voluntas." August. God seldom brings a man
from the wretchedness of forlorn nature, to the blessed estate of saving grace,
but where first, by his restraining grace, in some good measure he does correct
nature and moralize it. Saunderson's sermon on Genesis 20.6.
The proof of this shall be offered under the next general head. It may he
added, suppose a sinner should at last fall short of heaven, yet his endeavors
in the way of obedience to God's commands, defective and unholy as they are,
will not be punished with such sore and heavy stripes, as the presumptuous
rebellion of those, who against the light and conviction of their own minds,
plunge themselves into all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness.

IT appears then, that although the best actions of the unregenerate are not
holy, yet there is in them something really good, right and commendable in its
kind and place, As there are good actions which have sin adhering to them, so
there are sins which have good in them. For bonum o^itur ex integris, malum ex
quocunque defectu. Such are the duties of men unregenerate; formally and unto
them they are sin, materially and in themselves they are good. This gives them
a difference from, and preference above such sins as are every way sinful. And
on this ground they ought to attend to them, and may be pressed thereunto. That
which is good materially and in itself, though vitiated from the relation it has
to the person by whom it is performed, is approved, and has its acceptance in
its proper place. For duties may be performed two ways. 1. In hypocrisy and
pretense, so they are utterly abhorred by God in matter and manner. That is
such a poisonous ingredient as vitiates the whole. 2. In integrity, according
unto present light and conviction, which for the substance of them are
approved. And no man is to be exhorted to do any thing in hypocrisy. And on
this account also that the duties in themselves are acceptable, men may be
pressed to them. Owen on the spirit, page 248.
Though it must be owned that one thing is wanting, yet we must say also, that
there is in them less evil and more good, than in a total, wilful and malicious
neglect of them.

IT is the duty of the unregenerate to observe and practice the duties, which
God has in his word enjoined on them, from such principles, and for such ends
as have been mentioned, rather than not at all. This is a plain inference from
what has been before observed. The divine command binds upon us both the matter
and end of the duties it prescribes. However then the end and manner of action
in the unregenerate be defective, they are undoubtedly bound to perform the
matter of the duty required of them. The performance of commanded duties is
good in itself, and as such is bound upon all men, considered abstractly from
the manner and end of the performance. We ought indeed to act for holy ends,
but we ought to do what God has commanded for inferior and defective ends,
provided they are not in their own nature simply unlawful, rather than not do
it at all. To neglect doing any thing that God has commanded, or to do what he
has forbidden, is in itself evil. Whoever then does what is materially good,
and commanded by God, therein does as he ought to do: That is, he does his duty
so far, he avoids sin; for if he had done contrary, he had done what is
directly forbidden, and sinful. Nor does this imply that it is a man's duty of
two sins to choose the least. He ought in such a case to choose neither. But he
ought to do what is good, though in a defective unholy manner, rather than do
what is every way sinful.

FROM what has been said, we may give a distinct answer to our present enquiry,
viz. why, or for what reasons or ends are sinners to labor for the meat that
endures to everlasting life, in a diligent attendance to the prescribed means
of grace before declared. They ought to repent and believe the gospel, and obey
all the precepts therein contained, from a true faith in God, and in his son
Jesus Christ the redeemer, from a holy reverence, love and gratitude, for the
majesty and grace displayed in the work of redemption. But they are morally
incapable of acting from such views and ends as these, till they have a
spiritual knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; yet they
are capable of performing the matter of the duties required, from lower views,
from natural principles, and a different kind of light and influence from the
Holy Spirit. And it is their duty, and they have encouragement to do what God
has required of them, in such a manner and for such ends as these, however
defective, rather than not at all. Till their hearts are divinely renewed, and
their minds savingly enlightened, they are to attend upon the instituted means
of grace, from a conviction of conscience that God has commanded them to do so,
and it is their duty to obey. They are to do it from a desire of further light
and instruction, which God has directed them to seek for in this way. They are
to do it from a serious concern, if it may be, to find rest to their weary
souls, to flee from the wrath to come, and obtain reconciliation with God.

AND if the foregoing conclusions are just, we may infer, that sinners, however
incapable of acting in a holy manner, are to be exhorted to the duties
prescribed to them in the word of God. These things are to be enforced upon
their consciences by the authority of God; by the terrors of his wrath against
presumptuous transgressors; the riches of his grace, and the excellency of the
blessings revealed in the gospel. All the encouragements which the scripture
holds forth to those who wait upon God in his appointed ways, and the danger of
resisting the Holy Ghost, and hardening the heart against conviction must be
declared. We must bear witness to the truth revealed in the gospel, concerning
Jesus Christ, his character and work, his power, merits and grace, appearing in
what he has done, and said, and in his name beseech you to be reconciled to
God. In brief, we must address their reason and conscience, their hopes and
fears, with all those powerful motives, whereby the precepts of the gospel come
recommended and enforced.

IF it be asked, to what purpose it is to exhort and press men to acts of
religious obedience, while they are incapable of complying in a holy manner? I
answer, that if God has required these things, for such ends as have been
declared, then christians must inculcate the practice of these duties on all
who hear the call of the gospel, notwithstanding their moral impotency to do
any thing that is spiritually good. For it is the will and command of God that
his precepts be inculcated on those to whom they are given, whether they have a
present power to obey in a right manner or not. If he has required and
encouraged his sinful creatures thus to wait upon him for his mercy, they ought
certainly to be exhorted so to do. I say not that they are to be exhorted to
perform duties in a sinful manner, but however they ought to do them in such a
manner as they can; and not indulge themselves in a neglect of what God has
commanded, though they are morally unable to obey as they ought. There is
encouragement (as we shall see hereafter) for sinners to seek salvation by
attending those means which God has prescribed. And this is a sufficient reason
why preachers should direct and exhort them to such a conduct, and lay before
them all the encouraging and quickening motives that their case admits of.

NOR have they any reason to conclude that their labor will be in vain. Such
exhortations may have a happy effect, nothwithstanding the moral impotency of
those to whom they are addressed. For, First, it will not be denied, that
sinners may hereby be persuaded to observe the substance and matter of God's
commands, from those principles before spoken of. So much as this may be
effected in men unregenerate by moral suasion alone. And such a performance of
duties as this is much better than a total neglect and contempt of them. Hereby
men are restrained from such courses of presumptuous wickedness, as not only
inhance their guilt, but induce and strengthen vicious habits, sear the
conscience, quench the Spirit, and so render their conversion in a manner
hopeless. And by attending these duties, sinners are kept in the ordinary way
of God's blessing; but by neglecting them, they put far away the ordinary means
of conversion, But besides these advantages which were mentioned before, it
must be considered, that in and by those calls and exhortations to duty, which
are addressed to men in the ministry of the word, God is pleased to communicate
that grace and influence of his good Spirit, whereby sinners are enabled and
persuaded to believe and repent, and turn to God through Christ. There is a
double end in pressing on men the observance of duties with the supposition of
the state of impotency. (1.) To prevent them from such courses of sin as would
harden them, and so render their conversion more difficult, if not desperate.
-- (2.) To exercise a means appointed of God for their conversion, or the
communication of saving grace unto them. Such are God's commands, and such are
the duties required in them. In and by them God does use to communicate of his
grace to the souls of men, not with respect to them as their duties, but as
they are ways appointed and sanctified by him unto such ends. And hence it
follows, that even such duties as are vitiated in their performance, yet are of
advantage to them by whom they are performed. For (1.) By attendance to them,
they are preserved from many sins. (2.) In an especial manner from the great
sin of despising God, which ends commonly in that which is unpardonable. (3.)
They are hereby made useful to others, and many ends of God's glory in the
world. (4.) They are kept in God's way, wherein they may gradually be brought
over to a real conversion to him. Owen on the Spirit, page 249.
And hence, the calls and exhortations of the gospel are termed the vehicles or
conveyances of grace. However unable men may be to perform aright the duties to
which they are exhorted, christians have yet encouragement to inculcate these
duties on all the hearers of the gospel; and these have also great
encouragement to attend seriously, and endeavor to obey such calls and
exhortations to duty, since the salutary influences of the good Spirit of grace
and truth are ordinarily communicated by this medium.

NOW of the things which have been spoken, this is the sum. God has holy and
gracious ends in commanding and encouraging unregenerate persons, as well as
others, to attend diligently the outward means, wherein the saving knowledge of
the truth is conveyed, and the benefits of redemption applied to the souls of
his people. These commands and encouragements are given to sinners, that they
might hereby be persuaded to wait upon him for his mercy, in this way which
infinite wisdom has appointed; that so God may glorify the riches of his free
grace, in their salvation.

AND though it must be owned, that sinners are incapable of acting for holy
ends, yet they are capable of acting from a regard to such ends as are so far
right and good, that they may and ought to be exhorted and encouraged to
perform duties in such a manner, rather than not at all. Such performances are
preferable to a total neglect of God's commands. Notwithstanding what is amiss
or defective, they may be, and ordinarily are a means of good to men, both in
this world, and the world to come. It is not because men perform these duties
in a right manner, and with a holy intention, that they have so desirable an
issue, but because this is the way in which God has thought fit to fulfill the
good pleasure of his goodness, and carry into execution the purposes of his
grace toward the sons of men. God's designs in giving these commands are
indeed different from theirs in obeying them. They are by a secret influence
led in a way that they know not, and find themselves at last conducted whither
at their first setting out they thought not of arriving. In the progress of
their endeavors they find their apprehensions and views much altered from what
they were in the beginning. When the light of the glorious gospel shines with a
transforming power into their hearts, it discovers to them their former
darkness and mistakes. The charm is now dissolved (if I may be allowed the
expression) whereby satan held them under his dominion. Those false appearances
with which they were deluded, vanish away: And they see that they have been
walking upon enchanted ground. They are then ready to acknowledge, that however
this blessed change may have been effected in the way of means, it is God who
works all in all: Who has called them out of darkness into his mavelous
light, and translated them from the kingdom of satan, into the kingdom of his
dear son.

HAVING thus largely explained the subject, and stated several preliminary
points, which seemed necessary to be enquired into in order to prepare the way
for what is proposed to be mainly insisted on, I shall in the next place enter
upon the direct proof and vindication of our doctrine, which shall be the
business of some following discourses.

SERMON III. That the Conversion and Salvation of some Sinners, is more
probable than of others.
IT is now time that we proceed to the fourth general head, which was to prove
that unregenerate men are bound and encouraged to labor for the meat that
endures to everlasting life. As this is the main point I undertook to defend,
and the pertinency and practical use of what has hitherto been offered depends
upon the truth of it, I propose to examine this matter something largely.

I JOIN obligation and encouragement together; for I shall insist upon no
arguments, but such as include and carry encouragement, as well as obligation
to obedience. To press duties upon sinners only with legal reasons, and for
legal ends, that they may hereby work out a perfect righteousness by which they
may be justified in the sight of God, will have no tendency to excite their
endeavors to comply with them, but only fill them with tormenting
disquietments. Such reasons will only prove reasons of despair, to him who
knows that he has already sinned, and that it is absolutely impossible that he
should so comply with the command, as to obtain justification and eternal life
by the deeds of the law. It Is not sufficient for our present purpose to show
that men ought to perform these duties, unless we can propose some desirable
end which may be attained by such a performance of them as they are capable of;
that so they may be induced thereunto by the hope and prospect of obtaining it.

THIS being premised, in order to a right understanding of the true state of
the question, I shall proceed to the proof of the doctrine proposed to be
defended.

AND the first argument shall be taken from the probability and hope there is
that they who seek salvation in the way of attendance to the duties before
spoken of shall obtain it, and the danger that they will perish in their sin
who neglect them. If they are most likely to obtain eternal life who thus
strive for it, and they are in greatest: danger of everlasting perdition who
will not in this way endeavor to escape it, then it is the duty and wisdom of
all, to labor for the meat which endures to everlasting life, and strive
earnestly to flee from the wrath to come. Every one who apprehends that there
is any hope or possibility that he may be saved, and that any thing which he is
able to do will tend either to promote or hinder his salvation, is bound and
encouraged to such a conduct as will have the most hopeful aspect on his final
happiness. This I think no man will or can deny. All therefore that is
necessary to be proved in this place is, that such as attend the common means
of grace and salvation, have a probability of obtaining it; and they who refuse
so to do, are in peculiar hazard of perishing in their sins.

BUT before I proceed to the proof of this proposition, I would offer one word
by way of explanation. That when we speak of probability in any case, it must
be understood only in reference to the judgment which men make concerning
things; or the view in which things are presented to, and apprehended by the
human mind. There is no probability with God. He beholds every thing as it is,
with a certain and intuitive view. He knows perfectly all things that ever have
been, are, or will be through the immeasurable ages of an endless duration. It Is
not at all uncertain with him who will have everlasting life. But we can judge
of things only from such degrees of evidence as our limited and feeble
faculties can discern, which in most cases is too small to support a certain
and infallible conclusion. This lower degree of evidence is called probability.
When therefore we say there is a probability that such as diligently seek
salvation in the use of prescribed means shall obtain it, and that they who do
not shall fail of it, the meaning is, that these things commonly go together;
that God oftener extends his saving mercy to those who thus wait upon him, than
to those who neglect so to do. And therefore that there is more ground to hope
comfortably in one case, than in the other. What the degree of probability is,
is another question, which we may perhaps be better able to judge of when we
come to the close of the present argument. The proposition before us will, I
suppose, be sufficiently proved, if it shall be made to appear --

I. THAT some who are not in a state of acceptance with God, are more likely to
attain thereunto than others.

II. THAT what manifests the state of some to be more hopeful, than that of
others, either consists in, or is connected with, and depends upon their
endeavors in attending the ordinary means of grace.

I. SOME who are not in a state of acceptance with God, are more likely to
arrive at it than others. Some who are not yet savingly converted, may be much
more likely than many others to attain to this happy change. To illustrate
this, I shall first prove from scripture that it is true; and then secondly
show in what respects some are in a more hopeful case than others.

1. I SHALL show that it is agreeable to scripture to say that the case of some
is more hopeful, and their conversion and salvation more probable than that of
others. This is so manifest, that they who are most inclined to oppose it are,
I think, sometimes compelled to acknowledge it, when its evidence shines full
in their face. Some plain scripture testimonies shall be briefly called over in
its confirmation, with such remarks as may show their pertinency to our present
purpose.

WE are expressly taught by our Savior's words to the Scribe, Mark 12.34.
that a man who is not yet a subject of his spiritual kingdom, may be not far
from it. "When Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said to him, thou art
not far from the kingdom of God." Which words most naturally carry this
meaning, that he had juster notions of religion; and the state of his mind was
such, that it was more likely according to human rules of probability, that he
should attain to a true understanding and belief of the doctrines of the
gospel, and so become his disciple, than the other Scribes and Pharisees, whose
religious sentiments were so corrupt, their prejudices against Christ: and his
doctrine so strong and rooted, and who opposed the clearest evidences of his
divine mission with most unreasonable perverseness, and blasphemous malice. I
think that nothing but a strong attachment to prejudicate notions would incline
any one to accommodate an opposite interpretation to so plain an expression.
But yet our Savior's words carry a strong intimation that this scribe was not
at that time a true believer in him. We have here then an example of one who,
by the testimony of Christ, was comparatively near to the kingdom of God; one
who though not savingly converted to the faith of Christ, had made an advance
toward it. Some may be in a greater forwardness and preparation for the work
itself [of regeneration] and thereby in a greater nearness to the state of it
than others. Owen, ibid. page 179.

In some respects the pains you have taken may be of advantage to you, inasmuch
as you are nearer salvation than before you began to seek after God. -- Some
men are nearer a great deal to the kingdom of God, than others. Mark 12.34.
Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. Stoddard's Safety of appearing, page
243.




THIS may also be inferred from what the scriptures teach concerning the
kingdom of God coming to a place and people. It is a great blessing to mankind
to have the scripture among them. When the light of the gospel shines among a
people, they are highly favored in comparison with others, who are left in
darkness and the shadow of death. If the Jew had the advantage of the Gentile
much every way, because they were favored with peculiar religious privileges,
and chiefly because unto them were committed the oracles of God; certainly the
advantage of having the divine oracles is greater now, inasmuch as the light
and instruction they are fitted to diffuse, is much clearer than the Jews
enjoyed. But why is this to be accounted a privilege? Is it not plainly because
they who enjoy these outward means are more likely than others to be saved, and
come to the knowledge of the truth? Where God is pleased in his providence to
send and set up the light of the gospel, we have good grounds to conclude, that
he has designed that it shall be effectual to the conversion and salvation of
some who hear it. Accordingly the apostle Paul was encouraged to preach the
gospel at Corinth boldly, because he was assured by the Lord, that he had much
people in that city. Can any one, who considers the matter with attention,
really believe, that the most ignorant pagan is as near the kingdom of God, and
as likely to understand and believe the truth savingly, as that sinner to whom
God has sent the word of salvation, and whose attention to it is so much
awakened, that he studies it diligently, and with a great concern about his
soul's salvation, though he is not yet a true believer? Or, that a child who is
brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, is altogether as likely
to perish eternally, as he who is instructed in nothing but corrupt principles,
and lewd practices? Church members that were so born, or received in their
childhood, have many privileges which others (not church members) have not.
They are in covenant with God, have the seal thereof upon them, viz. baptism;
and so if not regenerated, yet are in a more hopeful way of attaining
regenerating grace, and all the spiritual blessings both of the covenant and
seal. Cambridge platform, chap. 12.
He who will not scruple to assert this must not only shut his eyes against the
clearest light of his own reason, and all appearances of fact, but also blot
out this plain text, with many others, from his bible, "Train up a child in the
way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it." Prove. 22.6.
He must say, in direct opposition to the apostle, that a man who hears not the
outward call of the gospel, is as likely to obtain faith, as one who does. For
if faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17.
then they to whom the word of faith is preached, and who hear it, are in a
more hopeful case than they whom the found of the gospel has never reached, and
according to human probability never will. How shall they believe in him of
whom they have not heard? The form of expression plainly intimates the
impossibility of such a supposition.

WE find also that it is spoken of as a most awful judgment, when the kingdom
of God is taken from a people. But why is this so terrible a judgment, but
because when men are deprived of the means of grace, they are given up, as it
were, to the tyranny of satan, left without hope, and without God in the world?
But if no one sinner is nearer the kingdom of God than another, with what
propriety can it be said to be sent to, or taken away from any? If the case of
one is every whit as hopeful, and his salvation as probable as that of any
other who is not actually justified, then those unhappy creatures, who are in
awful judgment thus abandoned as it were to perdition, are as likely to be
saved as any persons in the world who are not now in a state of salvation.
Which is a supposition so repugnant to scripture, reason and observation, that
I think it needless to say any thing more in confutation of it.

WE learn also from the scriptures, that sinners are sometimes given up by God
to judicial hardness of heart. The Holy Spirit which once strove with them,
enlightening their minds, awakening their consciencies, and exciting serious
thoughts and concern about their eternal interests, after having been often
resisted and quenched, at length departs, and strives with them no longer. Of
such the apostle speaks, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12.
For this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe
a lie; that they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness. Of like import are the words of the Psalmist: My
people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me; so I gave
them up to their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own counsels. Psalm.
81.11, 12.
We read also of a particular sin and blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which
shall never be forgiven. Matt. 12.31.
There is sin unto death, says the Apostle, 1 John 5.16.
I do not say that a man shall pray for it. Now they who are thus given up of
God to damnation, with whom his spirit no longer strives, and who have
committed the sin which is unto death, are certainly in a more hopeless
condition, than others are in the day of their gracious visitation. Yea should
it be supposed that the case of no man is absolutely desperate so long as he
lives, yet these expressions must imply, that the case of some is peculiarly
dangerous; which is sufficient for our present purpose.

AND this is further manifest from those texts which declare the peculiar
difficulty and hazard of the salvation of some denominations of sinners. Thus
the words of the Prophet suggest, that they who are under the power of evil
habits of long continuance, are in a very sad and dangerous state. Jer. 13 23.
Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots, then may ye also
do good who have been accustomed to do evil* And our Savior has pronounced the
condition of the rich, or those who trust in riches, to be especially
perilous. Mark 10.24.
How hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God?
It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man
to enter into the kingdom of God. In another place he teaches us that it is a
matter of the utmost difficulty for those to believe in him who were in high
reputation among men, and whose hearts were much set upon the honor and
applause of the world. Joh. 5.44.
How can ye believe who receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor
that comes from God only? Upon these words we have this remark (in the
Epistolary correspondence between S. P. and R. S letter 6.) "The great reason
why this exchange of honor or charity hindered men from believing, and humanly
speaking rendered it impossible for them to admit the saving truth, was, that it
seared their consciences with a conceit of their excellency above other men
before God, so rendered it impossible for them to admit the conviction of sin."
-- And again. "Among people zealous about faith, where the business of
believing is their very righteousness, and where the great emulation is, who
shall be the most dexterous believers, it must be the hardest of all things to
fasten a conviction of unbelief." I do not think that it is intended in these
remarks to intimate either that the conviction and conversion of some is more
difficult than that of others, in respect of the power of God, or that without
a divine agency and influence, it is in the power of man either to admit the
saving truth into his own mind, or fasten a conviction of sin and unbelief upon
the consciences of any. I think both the text and gloss ought to be understood
as spoken in accommodation to human views of things, and human rules of
probability. But at any rate I should conclude that this sentiment is fully
implied in both, viz. That some are in a more dangerous case than others, less
likely to admit a conviction of sin, and of the saving truth.
And on another occasion he tells the chief Priests and Elders of the Jews,
Matt. 21.31.
Verily I say unto you, that the publicans and harlots go into the kingdom of
God before you. For John came to you in the way of righteousness, and ye
believed him not; but the publicans and harlots believed him; and ye when ye
had seen it repented not afterward, that ye might believe him. These Jews, as
appears by the evangelical history, opposed with the utmost perverseness all
means of conviction. They were obstinately prejudiced against Christ and his
doctrine. Their hearts were hardened, and their conscience seared more than
loose and scandalous sinners. And therefore Christ told them, that they were
farther from the kingdom of God, and less likely to enter in than they whose
characters they accounted most infamous. But with what propriety this could be
said, if no one unbeliever is more likely than another to enter into the
kingdom of God, I cannot understand.

THE Apostles declare plainly, that the case of some sinners, particularly
apostates from the christian profession, after great degrees of common
illumination, joy, and spiritual gifts, is peculiarly dangerous, and in a
manner desperate. Thus we read, Heb. 6.4.
It is impossible for those who have been once enlightened, and have tasted of
the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted
the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, if they fall away,
to renew them again unto repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves the son
of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. And again, Chap. 10. 26.
If we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sin; but a certain fearful looking for of
judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. Much of
the same import are the words of Peter, 2 Pet. 2.20.
If after they have escaped the pollution of the world through the knowledge of
the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein and
overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the beginning. For it had been
better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than after they
have known it to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them. This seems
also to be plainly intended by our Savior, when he says, Matt. 12.43.
That when the unclean Spirit, after having been cast out of a man, returns and
enters into him again with seven worse spirits, the last state of that man is
worse than the first. Can any one after reading, and duly weighing these
passages of scripture, really think that it was the intent of Christ, and his
Apostles, to signify that persons of such characters were in as hopeful a case,
and as likely to be saved, humanly speaking, as any others who are not actually
justified. If any such there be, methinks it were somewhat inconsistent for
them to suggest that self-righteous sinners are twofold more the children of
hell than the profane. For if so, it seems that in respect of probability of
salvation, there is a difference between the case of the fervent devotee, and
the ringleader in profaneness and excess. And there is ground to suggest to the
latter some favorable symptom in his condition.

2. I PROCEED now in the next place, to consider, as was proposed, what it is
that renders, or manifests the condition of one sinner more hopeful than that
of another. It is necessary that we examine this matter carefully, and have
clear and determinate conceptions of it, in order to judge whether human
endeavors have here any place and use, and if they have, in what respect, and
how far they are useful and necessary.

IN general, whatever it be that renders the case of mankind more or less
hopeful, it is something that lies open to human observation, either
immediately, or by means of its effects or concomitants. For it is to be
remembered, that probability respects the views and judgments of men, and not
the knowledge or decrees of God. When therefore the scriptures speak of events
as more or less probable, it is necessarily implied, that there is in the case
such evidence presented to the human mind, as a sufficient ground of a probable
judgment. There is then in the case and condition of some who are not yet in a
state of acceptance with God, that which may properly be regarded as a
favorable symptom, indicating that there is more probability that they will
attain to a saving conversion, than many others. There is a visible ground for
a comfortable hope concerning them. If it be now enquired what that is, I
answer, it is a work of the Holy Spirit preparatory to conversion. This
therefore is now, by the light of scripture, to be enquired into. Accordingly I
shall endeavor -- First, To declare and open the nature and properties of it.
Secondly, Prove the truth and reality of it.

AS to the nature of this preparatory work which is now to be treated of, it
may be noted, that taken in its full extent, it comprehends whatever is done
for us, wrought in us, or performed by us, that has any kind or degree of
subserviency to our conversion or regeneration. But that we may have a more
distinct view of it, I shall consider it, first, as it is more general;
secondly, as it is more special.

FIRST, There is a general work of the Holy Spirit preparatory to conversion.
Indeed the eternal love of God the Father, the purposes of his grace toward
man, his providing a mediator, and commissionating him to his part of the work
of redemption, as also the whole work of Christ, in obeying the precepts, and
bearing the curse of the law, may properly enough be said to be preparatory to
the work of regeneration or conversion. But I shall here consider that work
which is especially ascribed to the Holy Spirit, and which belongs to the
application of the redemption, ordained by God the Father, and purchased by the
Son. This general preparatory work of the Holy Spirit consists in giving a
revelation of God's gracious and merciful designs toward fallen man, and the
way in which he has purposed to carry these designs into execution, through the
mediation of Christ; that the Mediator by his obedience and sufferings has
wrought out a righteousness, and made an atonement for sin, in which God is
well pleased; and in consideration of which, whosoever believes shall not
perish, but have everlasting life. This revelation is contained in the gospel,
which was given by inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and confirmed by miracles
wrought by the power of the Holy Ghost, through the instrumentality of those who
were first chosen to bear witness to the truth. And ever since there have been
witnesses to the same raised up from time to time, who have been furnished,
assisted, and moved by the Holy Ghost, to publish the glad tidings of salvation
to men, and proclaim these general proposals of mercy and grace to all and upon
all that believe, without distinction, and so call sinners to faith and
repentance. Now this is in its natural tendency, and by the appointment of God,
preparatory, and subservient to the conversion and salvation of men, and
carries an encouraging aspect toward every one.

BUT besides this, there is, secondly, a more special preparation for faith and
conversion, which some are the subjects of in distinction from others; in
respect of which the case of some is more hopeful, and their salvation more
probable in various degrees. This is what our present design requires to be
carefully explained. And that may be able to take a distinct and orderly view
hereof, I shall endeavor to represent this preparatory work of the Holy Spirit
in its gradual progress, according as the connection and subordination of
causes and effects, means and ends, will most naturally direct. In the first
place, the sending of the Gospel-call to some in distinction from others,
belongs to this work of the Holy Spirit, which is preparatory to conversion.
Notwithstanding the general declarations of grace to sinners through Christ,
there are many who hear not the report of the gospel. Such are not in so near a
capacity of obtaining faith, as they who are distinguished by the outward call
of the gospel, nor is it so likely that they will come to the knowledge of the
truth. When God in his providence favors a person or people with the outward
means of christian knowledge, there is more reason to hope that they will
believe and be saved, than that others will, who have not these advantages.

SECONDLY, It is also the work of the Holy Spirit to awaken the attention of
men to the outward call of the gospel. There are many who hear words of eternal
life, as though they heard them not. They are so careless and thoughtless,
their minds are so filled with vanity, with worldly prospects or contrivances,
that they do not mind nor attend to the import and weight of the words that are
sounding in their ears. But the good Spirit so awakens the attention of some,
that they listen greedily to what they hear. The truths which are declared sink
into their ears. This is a further degree of that preparatory work of the Holy
Spirit, which we are now enquiring into. And they who are enabled and
influenced to give attention to the revelation of grace and truth in the
dispensation of the word, are more likely to understand and believe it, than
they, who, while the call of the gospel is sounding in their ears, have their
minds and thoughts occupied with cares or amusements foreign to the serious
import of what they hear.

THIRDLY, Another effect of the Spirit's agency preparatory to conversion is,
the illumination of the mind by a common doctrinal understanding and belief of
the truth. This is what men are capable of previous to regeneration. They may
in some measure apprehend the import, and perceive the evidence of the
christian doctrine. I grant that these things appear in a new light, to those
whose understanding is so enlightened, as to discern spiritual things in a
spiritual manner. But it is certain that men unregenerate may and often do
understand the meaning and are convinced of the truth, of many of the doctrines
of the gospel. And therefore such are in scripture said to be enlightened, to
believe, to receive the knowledge of the truth, and to know the way of
righteousness. The Holy Spirit not only makes them attentive to the outward
call of the gospel, but also conveys into their mind by means hereof some
knowledge of divine things. They are enabled to take in a true idea of what is
objectively revealed, and are also persuaded on good grounds that it is true.
This common illumination admits of very different degrees, both in respect of
the objects or truths hereby discovered to the mind, and also in respect of the
clearness of evidence by which they are discovered. And hence some have a much
more extensive understanding of the great doctrines of revelation than others
have, and their assent is stronger. Some have only a weak and wavering
persuasion that the gospel may perhaps be true: Others are fully satisfied of
it. The minds of men may be much enlightened, without any saving renovation of
the heart: Yet this common illumination is ordinarily subordinate to, and
preparative for that special and effectual work, whereby we are created anew in
Christ Jesus. For by this means sinners are kept in the ordinary way of God's
blessing, preserved from many dangerous snares, and their attention is kept up
to those outward means, whereby the saving knowledge of the truth is conveyed
to the minds and hearts of the children of men.

FOURTHLY, By means of this light and knowledge, which by the word and spirit
of God enters into the mind, a disquieting sense of the guilt of sin is
excited, with fear of punishment, and some kind of sorrow and compunction,
accompanied with anxious thoughts and contrivances how to obtain pardon and
deliverance. This also belongs to that preparatory work we are now considering.
The Holy Spirit impresses upon the soul such a conviction of its sin, guilt and
danger, as excites some painful sense of the misery of such state, with earnest
desires to be delivered from it. The degrees of this preparatory trouble and
sorrow, are indeed very different in different persons, in whom it has a happy
issue. And therefore we ought not to prescribe certain measures and degrees of
these fears and disquietudes, either as matter of duty, or necessary to
conversion. But conviction of sin is a duty, and a necessary requisite to our
believing in Christ. And so is humiliation, that is a despair of deliverance
and salvation in those false ways, which God has not appointed. And this
conviction will unavoidably produce trouble of mind in some degree, which will
never be removed effectually, while the conviction which excited it remains,
till the revelation of divine mercy in the gospel is fully believed, and the
way of salvation therein proposed is embraced with hearty acquiescence. When
therefore any appear to be convinced of their sin and guilt, and humbled out of
their false confidences, though we cannot certainly determine where these
convictions will land them at last, yet we must say that they are a favorable
symptom, and have in their place a good subserviency to saving conversion.

LASTLY, This preparatory work extends to the inward purposes and resolutions,
and the outward conduct. The Holy Spirit by means of that common illumination
and conviction before mentioned, works in men to will and to do many things,
which have a tendency and subserviency to their obtaining faith and the grace
of regeneration. Of this kind are all those duties which have been spoken of.
Such as the avoiding wilful known sins, which tend to harden the heart, sear
the conscience; and quench the spirit: And practicing those moral and religious
duties, whereby a sensibility of consience may be preserved and increased,
further degrees of knowledge acquired, and the influences of the Holy Spirit
cherished.

BUT having thus far explained what I mean by this preparation for conversion,
which where it appears is a hopeful symptom. I shall now secondly, prove the
reality of it.

I THINK it will not be denied, that the revelation of grace and truth in the
gospel was given by inspiration of the Holy Spirit, "that men might be turned
from darkness to light, from the power of satan to God, and so obtain
forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified, through
faith in Christ." Acts 26.18.
And that the word of salvation, is by the direction of divine providence sent
to those that hear it, that they may be called to faith and repentance. And
that some are influenced to attend to it by him, "who has the hearts of all men
in his hands, and turns them as the rivers of water whither soever he
pleases." Thus far I suppose a work of the Holy Spirit, preparatory to
conversion, will be acknowledged by all professed christians; therefore I shall
not spend time to prove it.

BUT besides, previous to conversion there are further degrees of preparation,
wrought in the soul by the word and spirit of God, consisting in some knowledge
of God's revealed will, conviction of sin, concern about escaping the
punishment of it, hopes of pardon, together with a care to attend to those
prescribed means, whereby the Holy Spirit applies to men the redemption
proposed to them in the covenant of grace. This is what I must now endeavor to
prove. But to prevent mistake I would repeat here, what has been already
hinted, that I do not suppose that there is any true holiness in those
convictions or endeavors, which I plead for as preparatory to conversion: Or
that the subjects of them are hereby rendered in any degree worthy of the grace
of regeneration. But the point which is here proposed to confirmation is, that
before God savingly reveals to a sinner the gospel way of salvation, in its
excellency and suitableness, so as that he joyfully acquiesces in it, and
repenting sincerely of his sins, turns to God through Jesus Christ, the Holy
Spirit, by means of the word of God, ordinarily enlightens his mind with some
knowledge of the most important doctrines of revealed religion, convinces him
of his sin, guilt and condemnation, awakens some serious solicitude about his
eternal state, and excites in him serious purposes and endeavors to forsake
his sins, and reform his life; and particularly prompts and enables him to
attend the common means of conversion. I beg leave to subjoin the judgment of
the British divines at the synod of Dort. 1. There are some external works
ordinarily required of men before they are brought to the state of
regeneration, which are wont sometimes to be freely done by them, sometimes
freely omitted, such as to go to church, to hear the preaching of the word, and
other things of this kind.

2. These are some internal effects previous to conversion or regeneration,
which by the power of the word and spirit are excited in the hearts of those
who are not yet justified, such as are the knowledge of God's will, a sense of
sin, fear of punishment, thought concerning deliverance, some hope of pardon.

3. Whom God affects in this manner by his spirit, by means of the word, them
he calls and invites truly and seriously to faith and repentance.

4. God forsakes not those whom he thus affects, nor ceases to further them in
the true way to conversion, until he is forsaken of them by a voluntary
neglecting or repulse of this first grace.

5. These previous effects produced in the mind of men, by the power of the
word and spirit, may through the fault of a rebellious will be smothered and
wholly extinguished; and in many they are wont so to be: So that some in whose
minds by the power of the word and spirit, there was impressed some knowledge
of divine truth, some sorrow for their sins, some desire and some care for
deliverance are changed manifestly to the very reverse. They reject and hate
the truth, give themselves up to their lusts, become hardened in sins, and
corrupt (computrescant) in them without any desire or care for deliverance,
etc. Acts of the Synod of Dort. part 2. page 165. quarto.


In proof of this proposition, I would observe --

(1.) THAT this previous work of the Holy Spirit before described tends to
prepare the soul for regeneration and conversion. Though all who are
unregenerate, are equally unregenerate, destitute of spiritual life and power,
yet it may be maintained without any inconsistency, that some are better
prepared for conversion, than others; they are in a nearer capacity for it,
according to the ordinary method in which this great change is effected. All
who are dead are it is true equally void of life: But every portion of lifeless
matter is not alike fitted and disposed for the reception of a vital principle,
and to be a proper instrument or organ for perception and action, according to
those laws of nature which God has established. So though we acknowledge that
every unregenerate man is equally destitute of spiritual life, yet some are
better prepared than others for the reception, and exercise of supernatural
principles and abilities. "Some," says Dr. Owen, may be in a greater
forwardness and preparation for the work itself, of regeneration, and thereby
in a greater nearness to the state of it than others. Of this we have a very
lively emblem in the 37th chap. of Ezekiel: Where the Prophet describes the
vision he had of a multitude of dry bones scattered abroad in a valley. Upon
his prophesying to them there was first a great shaking among them, and they
came together each bone in its proper place, then the sinews came upon them,
after that they were covered with flesh and skin: But till the breath of life
entered into the bodies, they were as incapable of perception and action as the
rocks, yet they were better prepared to be receptacles of living souls. Nor was
life communicated, till the body which was to be animated was thus prepared,
and made a proper subject and organ, in and by which the soul might receive
ideas, and exert itself in actions agreeable to its nature.

THUS though nothing that is wrought in or done by a sinner before
regeneration, either renders or manifests him to be more worthy of this grace
than another, yet by these effects of the word and spirit upon him, which have
been described, he is more prepared for that new state, to which in
regeneration he is introduced, and so becomes a more meet subject of this
grace. That vital principle which is communicated in regeneration is to the
soul, as the soul is to the body; its dignity, its quickening and governing
principle, whereby it becomes capable of answering the end for which it was
made. The body may subsist with all its natural and essential properties,
without the soul; so may the soul, without this divine principle. But in this
case the body is naturally, and the soul spiritually dead; the one tending to a
state of natural corruption, the other to a state of moral depravity. Keeping
these things in mind, we may illustrate in some measure, how and in what
respect the soul is said to be prepared for regeneration and conversion, by a
previous work of the spirit. For it is easy to see that this preparation may be
considered is being either external, or internal. There is an external
preparation for the union of a soul to a body, which consists in providing
suitable objects for the soul to converse with by means of the body, and
placing them so near, as that the organs of sensation may be impressed by them,
and the nerves or animal spirits put in motion. The eye would be useless to the
soul without visible objects, or light; and the same may be said of the other
senses. So we read that the heavens and earth were created, before God made
living creatures. Thus in the new creation, God has made preparation for the
work of regeneration, by providing (if I may so speak) and revealing outwardly
in the gospel, those great and divine objects which are suited to the new
nature. The revelation of grace and truth by Jesus Christ, presents to view
those glorious objects, in the knowledge, choice, pursuit and enjoyment of
which, consists the proper exercise of the divine life. And these things are
bro't near to men, in the report of the gospel. Again, there is also an
internal preparation, or a work of the Holy Spirit in and upon the soul,
whereby it is fitted and disposed for the reception and exercise of the divine
life. A body that is frozen and stiff, whose nerves and fluids are motionless
and not easily moved, is not in its present condition so fit a receptacle of a
living soul, as one that is warm and supple, and especially if we should
suppose the blood actually circulating in the veins, and the other organs
performing their several offices. And we might truly say that the one has a
nearer capacity of vital action than the other. For according to the laws of
nature which God has established, these internal motions of the fluids and
nerves, are necessary to all acts of the natural life. If we should suppose a
living soul to be united to a stiff and motionless body, it would be
imprisoned, as it were, in a state of insensibility and inactivity. Thus the
internal effects of the word and spirit upon the mind and heart previous to
conversion, prepare the soul to receive and exercise the principle of spiritual
life. They are to the soul, as internal motion and warmth to the body. Though
they be not life, yet they include a nearer capacity of vital exercises. For
suppose a man were endowed, by an immediate physical operation of divine power,
with that supernatural sense or instinct which is communicated in regeneration,
yet if he had no knowledge of the will of God, no conviction or sense of sin,
etc. how could he discern the spiritual glory of the gospel, so as to believe
it because of this lively evidence of divinity in stamped upon it? How could he
acquiesce in the way of salvation therein revealed? How could he repent of sin,
and obey the commands of Christ? -- Those speculative ideas of the truth
revealed in the gospel, and conveyed to the understanding, are the immediate
objects about which the new creature is occupied. As therefore there can be no
exercise of sensitive life, without a previous impression upon the organs of
sensation; so there can be no exercise of spiritual life, without a previous
perception of divine truth by the natural faculty of the understanding; --
which is (if I may so speak) the organ of the spiritual sense. Dr. Owen calls
this internal preparation for the work of regeneration a material disposition
for or unto it; which he thus explains: A material disposition is that which
disposes, and some way makes a subject fit for the reception of that which
shall be communicated, added, or infused into it as its form. So wood by
dryness and a due composure is made fit and ready to admit of firing, or
continual fire. A formal disposition is where one degree of the same kind,
disposes the subject unto farther degrees of it. The former we allow here, not
the latter. -- Treatise of the Holy Spirit, page 191, 192.


BESIDES, does it not manifestly accord with the honor of God, and the good of
his people, that they should first be convinced, that by sin they are in a
perishing case, before their consciences are quieted by a saving belief of the
mercy of God to sinners, through the mediation of Christ? Will they who are
insensible of their maladies, accept the remedy which Christ has provided and
offers to them? Will they attend to the messages of grace which God sends to
comfort and raise the hearts of those who are overwhelmed with a sense of guilt
and unworthiness? No surely. Till we are thoroughly convinced of our need of
mercy, we shall neglect and slight God's calls and counsels in the gospel. They
who are in their own apprehension, rich and increased in goods and in need of
nothing, will have no ear for the counsel of Christ, "to buy of him gold tried
in the fire that they may be rich, and white raiment that they may be clothed,
and to anoint their eyes with eye salve that they may see."

MOREOVER, it is necessary that men be bro't and kept in the way of God's
blessing, and that their attention to the call of the gospel be awakened, and
kept up, till through the influence of the spirit it has accomplished its end
and effect in their conversion. Now the attention of sinners to the call of the
gospel is awakened, and they are kept in the use of those means, whereby the
saving knowledge of the truth is obtained, by this preparatory work which is
here contended for. To excite and keep up men's attention to those outward
means, whereby God is ordinarily pleased to effectuate his gracious purposes
toward mankind, the Holy Spirit makes use of commands and exhortations,
together with those external evidences of the truth and divine authority of the
gospel, which are proposed to all the hearers thereof in the ministry of the
word. So that before men are enabled to believe savingly in Christ, and turn to
God through him, there is a subordinate work of the Holy Spirit by the word, in
and upon the soul, which has a tendency and subserviency to this happy change.

2. GOD ordinarily gives the new heart only to those who are prepared for it in
the manner before mentioned. It is his usual way in the conversion, of sinners,
to make them first sensible in some measure of their miserable helpless state
in themselves, and their dependence upon his sovereign favor for deliverance,
and then comfort them wih a spiritual view of the glorious foundation of hope
and joy which the gospel presents.

IN proof of this we may bring an argument by no means contemptible from
analogy. I own such kind of reasoning are oftentimes very slippery and
uncertain: But in some cases they appear to have great weight. In particular
our present point I think will receive illustration and evidence, by our
considering in what manner God has been wont to work, in carrying his purposes
into execution.

IT has been God's usual method, when about to accomplish any signal work for
the manifestation of his glory, to proceed gradually, and make way for the
completion thereof by previous operations. Thus in the first creation, we may
observe an orderly progression in God's working. Every thing effected in its
proper order. Whatever is done, makes way for what is to follow. The heavens
and earth, the sun, moon and stars, the trees and herbs were first made, and
then living creatures to move upon the face of the earth, or fly in the
heavens. And last of all man who was to have dominion over the other creatures,
and for whose use this world was especially created. And in the creation of
man, first his body was formed of the dust of the earth, and then the breath of
life was breathed into his nostrils, and man became a living soul. The crowning
act of creating efficiency which gave the material world its chief importance
was not introduced, till the Creator by six days working had made preparation
for it. Almighty power could have begun and consummated his work in a moment.
But divine wisdom saw meet to proceed in a gradual and regular order, every
step of the whole process making way for the next, till the whole was finished.
And herein he has given us a view of his ordinary method of working. In
particular the creation of man may properly be looked upon as in this respect
analogous to his regeneration, and therefore this is called the new creation.
Yea the word regeneration alludes plainly to natural generation, in which are
previous dispositions of matter before the vital principle is infused. And
there is reason to think that an analogy in this respect is intended hereby to
be intimated to us.

ANOTHER instance to our present purpose is the deliverance of Israel's
posterity from their Egyptian bondage, and settlement in the land of promise.
We have good reason to look upon this deliverance as typical of the deliverance
of particular persons from the slavery of satan, and their introduction to the
privileges and happiness of God's spiritual kingdom. The Apostle plainly
considers it in this view in the epistle to the Hebrews. And accordingly those
passages of scripture which had a primary reference to the Israelites, and
their settlement in that rest which was promised to them in the land of Canaan,
are applied and addressed to christians for their admonition and instruction,
in pursuit of that rest in heaven which remains for the people of God. Such an
application of these texts is proper and pertinent, supposing the events
immediately pointed at in them had a typical reference to the redemption and
salvation of men by Christ: And I see not how the Apostle's reasoning from them
can appear solid upon any other supposition. We may therefore expect to find in
the manner of Israel's deliverance from the house of bondage, a representation
of the method of divine grace, in translating sinners from the kingdom of
satan, into the kingdom of the dear Son of God.

IF now we turn our eyes to the history of this memorable transaction, we shall
find that they were first made sensible of their evil case under the tyranny of
Pharaoh and the Egyptians, and cried unto God by reason of their hard bondage,
before he delivered them from it. Hereby they were prepared to hearken with joy
to the proclamation of liberty. So at the Red sea, they were first convinced
that unless God would save them they must perish: The impassible mountains
being on each side, the sea before them, and the Egyptian army in their rear,
and then God opened before them a wonderful way of escape.

AND if we look through the scriptures, we shall I think find, that it has been
God's ordinary method to prepare his people for the reception of remarkable
favors, by making them sensible of their need of them, and thereby exciting
them to look to him for them. And as a late writer of our own has observed,
there is an analogy observable in God's dispensations and deliverances which he
works for his people, and the manifestations which he makes of himself to them,
both ordinary and extraordinary. See Edwards on religious affections, page 52,
-- 56.


AND perhaps something may be argued by way of analogy in favor of a work of
conviction and humiliation preparatory to saving faith, from God's conduct
toward his church, considered as a collective body. Says the author last
quoted; There is all reason to suppose that God deals with particular believers
as he dealt with his church, which he first made to hear his voice in the law
with terrible thunders and lightnings, and kept her under that schoolmaster to
prepare her for Christ; and then comforted her with the joyful sound of the
gospel from mount Sion. In a way somewhat similar, the law is still to
individual persons, as it was formerly to the church, a school master to bring
them to Christ, that they may be justified by faith.

BUT the account we have in the evangelical history, of the manner in which the
gospel dispensation was introduced, is I think more plainly to our purpose.
When the Lord Jesus was about to open the kind commission upon which he was
sent into the world, to preach the gospel to the poor, to heal the
brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight
to the blind, and to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the
acceptable year of the Lord, Luke 4.18.
John the Baptist was sent before him, to prepare the minds of the people for
those gracious words. And this he did by a very awakening manner of preaching,
charging their sins home upon their consciences, and warning them of their
danger of the wrath to come, and of being cut down and cast into the fire, by
the ax which even then lay at the root of the tree. He was a messenger sent
before his face in the spirit and power of Elias, to make ready a people
prepared for the Lord, by awakening their consciences, convincing them of sin,
that so they might be in a fit disposition of mind, to attend unto, and receive
the revelation of grace and truth by Jesus Christ. That sinners may hearken to
this word of salvation, they must know that they have destroyed themselves. And
because they do not easily entertain such a though it of themselves, and so slight
the glad news of salvation, they are awakened to hear them by the voice of the
law, and its work upon their consciences, the Lord Christ by his Spirit making
the law subservient to the gospel, by this means shutting up sinners to the
faith, and stopping their mouths, that they may be subject to the judgment of
God, and so hearken to the glad tidings of salvation." Glas's Testimony of the
King of Martyrs, chap. 5. sect. 3.


AND that this is the general method and order in which the work of conversion
is accomplished, may be more directly argued from several of our Savior's
parables. It may be observed in the parable of the prodigal son, which is
commonly thought to exhibit the method of divine grace in calling sinners into
his gospel kingdom, that before he was received and feasted by his father, he
came to himself, so far as to be sensible of, and affected with his indigent
starving condition, and own himself to be an undutiful sinner, unworthy to be
called his son. And in the parable of the servant who owed his king ten
thousand talents, we are told that his lord called him to a reckoning, charged
him with the debt, demanded payment, and in default hereof commanded him to be
sold, and his wife, and children, and all that he had. By this means he is made
to humble himself, acknowledging himself bound to him in the whole sum, and
then receives a full acquittance of the free mercy and bounty of his Lord.

AND are there not particular calls and invitations in the gospel, directed to
awakened sinners? Is it not most natural thus to understand these words of our
Savior, as well as other parallel texts, Matt. 11.30.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest?
I think the persons here designed are such as not only are in a miserable
perishing condition, but also sensible of their misery. Such as feel themselves
wearied, and burdened with guilt, so that their hearts are sinking within them,
these are invited to come to Christ for rest. Nothing can give them effectual
relief, but the grace of the gospel; and such is the state of their mind that
the news of a Savior will be welcome and refreshing to them, as cold waters to
a thirsty soul. And therefore they are called and invited, as those whose
immediate concern it is to come to Chris;t, and cast their burden upon him. The
grace of the gospel indeed is freely proposed to all. The call is, "whosoever
will let him come." But no man will have an ear for it, till he is convinced of
his guilt and misery, as a sinner. It is therefore the next or immediate
concern of the ignorant and secure, to awake to consideration, and admit that
conviction of sin and misery which is offered to them from the word of God,
through the influence of the Holy Spirit, whose office it is to convince the
world of sin. And when they are thus prepared to hear and receive the report of
the gospel, then they are called and directed to behold the "Lamb of God that
takes away the sin of the world." No righteousness or qualifications of ours
are required as recommendations to the mercy of God, but a conviction of sin
and misery is needful to awaken our attention to the revelation of God's grace,
to keep us in the use of those means by which the Holy Spirit ordinarily works
saving faith in the soul, and to render the gospel, agreeable to the proper
import of the word, "glad tidings to us."

FINALLY, The reality of a preparatory work of the Spirit in and upon the soul,
consisting in common illumination and conviction, prompting to answerable
endeavors, may be argued from facts recorded in scripture, as well as the
common experience of christians. The multitudes at Jerusalem that were
converted on the day of Penticost by the preaching of Peter, were first:
pricked in their hearts with conviction of sin, and said to the Apostles, men
and brethren, what shall we do, before they believed unto justification, and
were comforted by the grace of God in Christ, revealed for the relief of the
guilty. A late writer, in order to remove the foundation for the appropriating
act of faith, which some have endeavored to maintain from the Apostle's answer
to the awakened Jews, viz. The promise is to you, etc. has intimated that these
Jews were true believers when they said to the Apostles, men and brethren what
shall we do? I freely concur with him in rejecting the appropriation, but am
dissatisfied with the turn he has given to this passage, Peter seeing the
effects of his preaching in the convictions and disquietude of mind it had
produced among his hearers, might hope that God was leading many of them to
repentance. But I think this author cannot, upon his own principles, pretend
that they gave any evidence that they were true believers in Christ. They
professed no such faith, nor were comforted by what they believed, nor were
engaged in the practice of the peculiar precepts of the gospel. Nothing
appeared from their words or actions but that their hearts were pricked with
conviction. But he is so far from allowing this to be an evidence of saving
faith, that he will not allow that it is so much as a favorable symptom in the
case of any one. For he says -- We cannot have the least ground to suggest to
any man any hopeful symptom in his condition, from the disquiet produced in his
mind by a sense of guilt. Letters on Thereon, etc. vol. 2. page 20, 3d edit.
What warrant could he then have to say, that Peter saw God's power leading many
to repentance, by the truth he had testified, while nothing appeared but
expressions of disquiet from conviction of sin? But what need is there of the
unnatural supposition that the Apostle addressed them in the character of
believers. Methinks a man of ordinary capacity would take the import of the
Apostle's words to be this. Repent of your sins, and be baptized with the
christian baptism, that your sins may be forgiven: and then you shall receive
the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise (of pardon and the Holy Spirit upon
the conditions before mentioned) is (directed or addressed) to you, and to your
children, and to those that are afar off, even to as many as the Lord our God
shall call, (by sending the word of salvation to them.)
The Philippian jailer also came trembling, under conviction of guilt and fear
of punishment, no doubt, and fell down before Paul and Silas, and said, sirs
what must I do to be saved? He applies to them for instruction and direction in
this most important affair, being persuaded it is likely by considering what
had happened since their arrival at the city, that they were the servants of
God, who could show unto man the way of salvation. And though it seems that he
was not first awakened to a sense of sin by the ministration of the word, yet
we have reason to think that his concern about salvation was excited by the
influence of the Holy Spirit, by means of those extraordinary occurrences which
he had occasion to take notice of, and by those traces of the law of nature
which were imprinted on his heart. Nor is the conversion of Paul any objection
against what we are pleading for, but rather a confirmation. For, 1. We have no
reason that I know of to conclude that he was a true believer in Christ, upon
his being first awakened, when he was upon the road to Damascus. Though the
manner in which he was awakened to a sense of his sin in persecuting the church
was miraculous, yet, for any thing we know, he might after that be gradually
prepared for the new birth, by a work of conviction and humiliation. But 2. was
Paul converted in an extraordinary and miraculous manner. Perhaps there never
was an instance so remarkable in all respects before or since. So far from
truth is what has lately been hinted by some, that, in respect of the manner of
his conversion, he was designed for a pattern to all that should hereafter
believe. If the merciful truth (as some choose to speak) surprised him upon the
road, then the knowledge of it was conveyed to him by a miraculous objective
revelation of it, and not by means of the ordinary dispensation of God's word.
But this same Apostle will support us in saying that faith ordinarily is
obtained in another way, even by means of the reading or preaching of the
gospel.

I MIGHT further confirm the point in hand, from the common experience and
acknowledgment of those who have given the best evidences of sincerity in their
professions of faith, and obedience to Christ. But this, with other things,
which might have been introduced, must not be insisted on; as this discourse
has already exceeded what I first proposed, and I have yet considerable work
before me. But the further prosecution of this argument, must be deferred to
another opportunity.

SERMON IV. That those who attend to the Means of Grace, are more likely to
obtain Salvation.
I AM still upon the first argument to prove the obligation and encouragement
of mankind in general, who hear the call of the gospel to labor for the meat
that endures to everlasting life. The argument is briefly this: That they who
attend to the common means of grace are more likely to obtain salvation, than
they who neglect them. In confirmation of this I have proved, that some who are
not in a state of acceptance with God, are more likely to attain to it than
others. Wherein this probability appears, has been also declared and
vindicated. I am therefore now ready to proceed to the SECOND POINT proposed to
confirmation, which compleats our present argument, That what manifests the
state of some to be more hopeful than that of others, either consists in, or
depends upon, and is obtained by, their endeavors in attending the ordinary
means of grace. Our attending to these duties has a tendency, by the
appointment and blessing of God, to promote that work of illumination,
conviction and reformation, which is ordinarily preparatory to conversion. Yea
it is in the way of attending to these duties that the work itself, of
conversion, is accomplished.

AS this contains the substance of what is to be pleaded for in the ensuing
discourse, it may be proper in the first place to state the matter a little
more exactly, to prevent exception or mistake. Let it then be observed, that I
acknowledge there is a preparatory work of divine grace which prevents or is
beforehand of all human endeavors. Thus it is in no degree owing to any thing
in us, or done by us, that we are born in a part of the world that is
enlightened by the gospel -- that we have in our early days had wise and
faithful instructors, and an acquaintance with such whose conversation and
example were adapted to direct and quicken us in our duty -- and that we were
taught and required to read the scriptures. It is also to be ascribed, many
times at least, to a directing providence, without any design or intention of
ours, that we read, or hear such discourses as are in a special manner
calculated to instruct and awaken us, and that we are sometimes visited with
remarkable afflictions or deliverances, which tend to rouse men to serious
consideration, and often prove the occasion of saving good to them. Besides it
has been allowed that the first motions of the Holy Spirit upon the heart, are
before any desires and endeavors after salvation in us, inasmuch as all our
seeking is prompted by a previous influence of grace. In these respects some
are brought nearer than others to the kingdom of God, without any concurring
endeavors of theirs* All this belongs to what may be called the preventing
grace of God.

BUT though the work of divine grace in preparing a soul for regeneration is
begun without any active concurrence of ours, yet our active compliance, and
endeavors in a way of attendance to prescribed duties, is ordinarily necessary
to the progress and completion of it. The first kindly impressions are indeed
from preventing grace; but the continuance and increase of the Spirit's
influence, with the effects thereof in illumination, conviction and conversion,
are usually found only in those who are previously moved and excited to
answerable exertments of their active faculties. Herein it is true God works
in us to will and to do, as well as in the work of sanctification. But our will
and endeavor is necessary in both cases, in order to our attaining the end,
which the operations of God's grace have a tendency unto. God's first end in
using means with sinners, and communicating the influences of his Spirit in and
with them, is to awaken their attention, and put them upon diligent observance
of those duties which he has appointed to be means of their obtaining further
communications of light and grace, whereby they may be thoroughly awakened,
convinced of their sin and guilt, and led to true repentance and conversion. If
then men resist the Spirit in his first striving with them, and will not awake
to consideration, nor attend to the means of further light and grace, they then
receive the grace of God in vain.

BUT that we may understand more clearly and distinctly, how far, and in what
respects a man is brought nearer the kingdom of God, and his case rendered more
hopeful, by means of his endeavors in a way of attendance to prescribed
duties, we must call over briefly some things that were offered in the last
discourse, showing in what respects some are said to be more likely than others
to obtain salvation. Now whatever may be thought to have a favorable aspect
and tendency may, so far as the point in hand is concerned, be reduced to these
three heads, viz. Outward means and privileges, -- the agency and influence of
the Holy Spirit in and by these means -- And the effects produced hereby, in
the mind, heart and life. If then human endeavors are of any use or advantage
in all, or any of these respects, then these endeavors have a good use and
tendency, and sinners ought to be pressed and encouraged thereunto, as
conducive to their obtaining eternal life. I shall therefore consider, each of
these points distinctly, And

I. HAVE any doings or endeavors of the unregenerate a tendency to render
their outward circumstances either better or worse in respect of spiritual
privileges? -- A case so plain as this appears to be, will, I think, be easily
resolved. Is it not most manifest that our outward condition depends very much,
under God, upon our own choice? Some it is true are by the kindness of
providence more happily situated than others in respect of outward means of
grace, antecedently to any choice of their own. Some are born in places that
are peculiarly favored in this respect: Others are conducted to such places by
a secret influence, not knowing whither they go: And others have the means sent
to them without their desire or procurement, as has been observed: -- And
herein the sovereignty of God is manifested. But it is as evidently true that
people are very much at liberty to choose, whether they will put themselves, or
continue in the way of christian instruction or not. Our Savior's maxim holds
true in this case, "whosoever has, to him shall be given; but whosoever has
not, from him shall be taken away." The Jews might have all along enjoyed the
outward means of divine knowledge, if they had not refused them and as far as
they were able put the word of God far from them, so judged themselves unworthy
of eternal life. Is it not owing to men's hating and rejecting instruction,
that the gospel is not at this day preached among all the nations of the world?
-- Their opposing the means of grace at a distance, is the great cause and
occasion why they are not brought near to them. And where God sends the word of
salvation, and sets up the light of the gospel, is it not plain, that some by
their wilful refusal of it keep out of the way of being savingly benefited by
it, and on the contrary rush greedily into the way of all kind of sin, error
and temptation, whereby their state is rendered deplorable, and in a manner
desperate? But when men are willing, and take pains to have and attend to the
outward means of grace, they are ordinarily continued and increased to them. If
it be the care and endeavor of any one to avoid the conversation of those who
have no regard for religion, and to shun those places where nothing is to be
learned but impiety and wickedness, this will tend to preserve him from these
dangers and temptations. If he desire to be instructed in the doctrines and
precepts of the gospel, and accordingly seeks for, and attends upon the best
means he can have access to, he will be likely to have his present advantages
continued, yea, and have further helps, and greater opportunities than he at
present enjoys. We who live where the christian religion is professed, have
peculiar outward assistances offered to us, whereby we may come to the
knowledge of the truth, and experience its renewing and sanctifying influence
upon our hearts. But if we refuse, and endeavor to shun them, we may
effectually deprive ourselves of them in a great measure; and on the contrary
if we improve them, we shall hereby find ourselves led and conducted into the
way of further helps and advantages of this kind. We have the scriptures in our
hands; but how can they be a means of making us wise to salvation, if we will
not read them? The gospel is preached among us; but this cannot be a means of
converting us, unless we will hear it. This then appears to be the true state
of the case: The first outward means which God uses for the conversion of
sinners, prevents all their endeavors; but then there are further outward
privileges which God ordinarily vouchsafes to those who desire and endeavor to
obtain, and hold them; from which they who despise and reject them, are
excluded. The Jews at Antioch, to whom Paul preached the gospel, might have had
the privilege of further instruction, if they had desired it, and been willing
to receive it; but when they were filled with envy, and spoke against those
things which they had heard, contradicting and blaspheming, yea proceeded so
far in their opposition, as to raise a persecution against the apostles, and
expel them from their coasts, they were justly deprived afterward, of those
advantages which they wilfully refused. Upon the whole, if men are willing and
desirous to attend the means of grace, they are usually favored with the
continuance and enlargement of their spiritual privileges; but if they refuse
instruction, and reject the counsel of God against themselves, they are justly
left to remain under the power of that darkness which they love rather than
light. It is true we ought to ascribe it to the grace of God, that any are
influenced and enabled so to improve their outward advantages, as to receive
further helps of this kind. And on the other hand, it is owing to men's
wickedness that they hate the light, and oppose the outward means of grace, as
we have formerly had occasion to observe. But whatever be the occasion of this
difference of conduct, the consequences are of great importance. These things
(that is an outward attendance unto the dispensation of the word of God, with
those other external means of grace which accompany it, or are appointed
therein, and a diligent intention of mind in attendance on these means, to
understand and receive the things revealed and declared as the mind and will of
God) are required of us in order to regeneration, and it is in the power of our
own wills to comply with them, and we may observe concerning them, that the
omission of them, the neglect of men in them, is the principal occasion and
cause of the eternal ruin of the souls of the generality of them to whom or
amongst whom the gospel is preached. This is the condemnation, that light is
come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their
deeds are evil, John 3.19. The generality of men know full well, that they do
in this matter no more what they are able, than what they should. All plead --
able pretenses of inability and weakness are far from them. They cannot but
know here, and they shall be forced to confess hereafter, that it was merely
from their own cursed sloth, with love of the world and sin, that they were
diverted from a diligent attendance on the means of conversion, and the
sedulous exercise of their minds about them. Owen on the Holy Sprit, page 193.
For by a due improvement of our outward advantages, we shall be likely to have
them increased and prolonged, and so in this respect be brought near to the
kingdom of God: But by neglecting and refusing them, we forsake our own
mercies, and as far as in us lies, keep ourselves out of the reach of that
grace, which God is wont to convey in and by these means to the children of men.

LET us now, in the 2d place, consider, whether men's conduct has any kind or
degree of conduciveness to further or hinder their receiving inward influences,
and assistances from the Holy spirit? -- Whether the continuance and increase
of those common influences of grace, which are communicated to men
unregenerate, with and by the outward means before spoken of, depends at all
upon the improvement they make of these means? And whether the withdraw of this
grace, and the withholding of further supplies of it, be occasioned by, and
owing to, their neglecting, and resisting what they have received? Now this, I
think, both scripture and experience will warrant us to affirm. It is always in
consequence of men's grieving and quenching the Spirit, that he withdraws his
kindly influences from them. This is an awful, but just punishment, for their
wilful neglect of, and opposition to those gracious motions and solicitations
which they have experienced. To this purpose the Divines at Dort argue and
conclude -- God forsakes not those whom he thus works upon (by his word and
Spirit) nor ceases to further them in the true way to conversion, till he is
forsaken by them, by a voluntary neglect or repulse of this first grace. The
talent of grace, once given by God, is taken away from no one, except him who
by his own fault first buried it. Mat. 25.28. Hence it is that we are often
admonished in scripture, that we resist not the Spirit, that we quench not the
Spirit, that we receive not the grace of God in vain, that we depart not from
God, Heb. 27. Yea this is most manifestly pointed out as the reason of God's
forsaking men, that God is first forsaken by men. Prove. 1.24. Because I have
called and ye refused, I also will laugh at your destruction. 2 Chronicles. 24.20.
Because ye have forsaken the Lord, he has forsaken you. But there is not the
least hint in scripture, that God is wont, or has a will ever without the
previous fault of man, to take away from any one the help of his exciting
grace, or any assistance ordained for the conversion of man, which he has once
conferred. Act. Synodi Dordract. part 2. page 167. quarto.


OUR conduct, in improving or resisting the influences of the Holy Spirit, is
therefore of great importance in its tendency and effects. If men do not quench
the Spirit of grace, but comply with his motions, he will continue striving,
moving and breathing upon their souls. Yea by improving diligently the grace
they have received, they shall obtain further degrees. Though I do not plead
for a promise of regeneration to the endeavors of the unconverted, yet we
have, I think, reason to conclude, that they who comply with the motions of
God's Spirit, in that preparatory work which has been discoursed of, shall
receive further influences and assistances of the same kind, whereby they may
become more and more prepared for the reception, and exercise of the divine
life, and so advance gradually toward the kingdom of God. Hereby they may
attain to more divine knowledge, and conviction of sin, and be taken off more
and more from self dependence, and false confidences. Yea they may at length be
so convinced of the insufficiency of those false refuges, to which they used to
betake themselves when pressed with a sense of their guilt, as to abandon them
all. For this belongs to that work of humiliation, which is antecedent to
saving conversion.

NOW I apprehend that it is not obscurely suggested in the holy scriptures,
that sinners shall receive further degrees of grace and assistance from the
Spirit of God, if they do not wilfully resist his gracious operations, and
thereby quench his kindly influences upon their hearts. Those words of our
Lord, which we find several times repeated, seem to imply as much. "Whosoever
has" (that is whosoever holds, or improves what he has, for so the word is
sometimes understood, see Heb. 12.28.) "to him shall be given: And whosoever
has not, from him shall be taken away." This is delivered as a universal rule
or maxim, applicable to every kind of gifts and talents conferred upon mankind:
And it imports, that the way to have them increased is to improve them. That
this is the true intent of the words, will I think plainly appear, to every one
that will examine the several occasions on which they were spoken. And I see no
reason why that passage, in Mat. 7.7 -- 10. may not properly be expounded in
the same manner. "Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, knock
and it shall be opened unto you: For every one that asks receives, and he
that seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened. If ye being
evil know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your
Father in heaven give good things (that is, as Luke expresses it, give the Holy
Spirit) to them that ask him." These words undoubtedly contain a promise of an
increase of grace to believers, upon their seeking for it. But this does not
hinder but that we pay properly understand them as signifying also, that there
shall be an increase of that common grace, which men may be the subjects of
previous to conversion, upon their seeking for it with persevering diligence
and importunity. And there seems to be the more reason to receive this
interpretation, because it appears from the two last verses of this chapter,
that Christ's sermon on the mount was addressed to the multitude, as well as to
his disciples. Now as it is the duty of all to ask of God the gift of the Holy
Spirit, so it is reasonable to conclude, that it was our Savior's design in
these words to propose unto his hearers in general an encouraging motive unto
this duty. Many of the conditional promises in scripture are, I apprehend, to
be understood in the same manner. God's design in giving them seems to me to
have been to encourage mankind to seek unto him for that common light and grace
of his Spirit which is antecedent and preparatory to conversion, as well as for
those influences which are special and sanctifying, and inseparably connected
with salvation. It will not be easy to show how these promises can give any
encouragement to the endeavors of men unregenerate, if this exposition be not
allowed. And yet it is certain that they have commonly been quoted as motives
and encouragements to the unconverted in seeking the grace of God, even by
those who have never been suspected to favor the Pelagians. I shall only
recite one passage from a noted writer of our own. It is the late President
Edwards, in his sermon on pressing into the kingdom of God. It is plain from
many passages in this discourse, that by pressing into the kingdom of God, he
means the striving of an unconverted sinner to obtain an interest in Christ.
And he says, Persons thus engaged in their hearts will strive to enter in at
the strait gate, and will be violent for heaven. THEIR PRACTICE WILL BE
AGREEABLE TO THE COUNSEL OF THE WISE MAN, Prove. 2. at the beginning. My son, if
thou will hear my words and hide my commandments with thee, so that thou
incline thine ear to wisdom, and apply thine heart unto understanding, yea if
thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding, if
thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures, then
shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God --
page 136. -- If the practice of a striving sinner be agreeable to the counsel of
Solomon, IN ANY SENSE, I suppose it cannot and will not be denied, that we may
warrantably conclude that he will in some sense receive the grace or blessing
thereunto annexed by promise.
Not that it is our duty to seek in unbelief, but it is the duty of those to
whom the word of salvation is sent, to seek for the grace of God's Holy Spirit
with serious minds in the exercise of that faith, and that grace which they are
the subjects of, whether it be saving or not. And if they do so, their
endeavors will not be in vain.

AND that our cherishing and complying with the motions of God's Spirit, in his
common as well is special operations, should be the way to have them continued
and increased, is agreeable to the experience of mankind, and the manner of
God's dispensations. We see that they commonly make gradual advances in
knowledge of any kind, who use diligently the means and advantages for
proficiency which they enjoy, and improve those measures to which they have
attained. The same may be said of our wealth and outward estate. By improving
our present stock industriously, and husbanding it carefully, it will gradually
increase. All the blessings of providence, all our mental endowments and
spiritual gifts, though they are the free bounties of our heavenly Father, yet
we see, that they are continued and increased ordinarily unto such as
diligently use what they have received, and seek for further degrees, by those
means which God has prescribed. On the contrary, they who neglect to improve
the price that is in their hands do often lose it, and always lose the benefit
of it. And do we not accordingly find in experience, that the effects of the
Spirit's, influence upon our hearts continue, and become more sensible so long
as we comply with these motions, and improve that grace which is given us; and
on the contrary are interrupted and weakened, when we resist and quench the
Spirit by negligence and wickedness; as will be further shown under the next
enquiry.

BUT here arises a question or two of some moment, which we must consider
briefly before we proceed any further. It will be asked, may one who is not
savingly united to Christ by faith, take encouragement from any promise to hope
for favors and blessings of any kind from God?

I ANSWER first, It is a certain and undeniable fact, that sinners do receive
favors and blessings from God, before they are in a state of acceptance with
him, by a special and saving interest in Christ. The common gifts of providence
of which mankind in general are partakers, are evidently favors and instances
of the goodness and kindness of God. Many are further favored with the outward
call of the gospel. They have means and advantages for attaining to the
knowledge of the way of salvation by Christ. They have a perfect revelation of
the whole matter of their faith and duty, and enjoy those ordinances, and
outward means of grace, whereby the benefits of redemption are communicated and
applied to man. And there are some, who besides these outward privileges are
the subjects of the influences of the Holy Spirit, whereby they are awakened
and enlightened in various degrees, though they are not true believers in
Christ, nor so united to him as to be in a state of salvation, in the most
important sense. Now all these things are exercises of the goodness and mercy
of God to sinners. The scriptures will warrant us to consider and speak of them
in this view, notwithstanding some by abusing the blessings of God turn them
into curses, and make them the occasions of inhancing their guilt, and future
punishment. This has, I think, never been denied by any. Moreover,

IT is also generally acknowledged that these common favors were purchased for
men by Christ. To him the world in general is beholden for all the good they
enjoy. To this purpose are the words of Mr. Charnock -- "Had not Christ," says
he, interposed to satisfy the justice of God, man upon his sin would have
actually been bound over to punishment as well as the fallen angels were upon
their's, and been fettered in chains as strong as those spirits feel. The
reason why man was not hurled to the same deplorable condition upon his sin, as
they were, is Christ's promise of taking our nature, and not their's. In regard
of those fruits of this patience, Christ is said to buy the wickedest apostates
from him. 2 Pet. 2.1. Denying the Lord that bought them. Such were bought by
him, as bring upon themselves just destruction, and whose damnation slumbers
not. ver. 3. He purchased the continuance of their lives, and the stay of their
execution, that offers of grace might be made to them. This patience must be
either upon the account of the law, or the gospel; for there are no other rules
whereby God governs the world. A fruit of the law it was not; that spoke
nothing but curses after disobedience. It must be therefore upon the account of
the gospel, and a fruit of the covenant of grace. -- Thus far this learned
author. [Vol. 1. page 478.]

HENCE it will follow, that by the death of Christ, blessings have been
purchased for mankind in general. Common blessings are bestowed on the world
for his sake. There is therefore, a common relation, or union of men to Christ,
which is the ground of their receiving these benefits which he purchased for
them. All are in some sense interested in Christ, who receive any benefits for
his sake. We may then without any inconveniency allow that these benefits are
founded upon the merits of Christ, and purchased by him, and that they who
partake of them are in some sense related to Christ, and interested in him. --
Yea this must be the case, unless these benefits are conferred on sinners
without any regard to the redemption of Christ.

AND if any should insist that these are not the fruits of Christ's merits, and
that no one is in any respects interested in Christ, until he savingly believes
on him, then they must acknowledge that God may and does confer his favors and
grace on those who are not in any sense united to Christ. So that upon either
supposition the difficulty will come to nothing. God does in fact bestow these
favors, in what manner soever it is done. And if he may without any dishonor
to his perfections bestow them, then there is no difficulty in supposing that
he may (if, he thinks fit) declare unto sinners for their encouragement, that
they shall not seek for them in vain. If it be thought unsuitable that God
should promise any kind of favors to those who are not so in Christ as to be
in a state of justification, then it is unsuitable for him to confer any kind
of favors on such persons. For it is to be observed, that the weight of the
objection, as it is commonly urged, does not lie so much against the promise of
blessings to sinners, as against the bestowment. No considerate person will
find any difficulty in allowing that what is fit to be done by God, may if he
thinks proper be the matter of promise. A special and saving union to Christ is
not necessary as an antecedent ground of God's bestowing upon us the common
bounties of his providence, and the common grace of his spirit, or even that
grace whereby we are enabled to believe unto salvation. For it is by faith that
we are first savingly united to Christ. Our special interest in him is
therefore the consequence, and not the ground of our first believing on him. In
other words, our first ingrafting into Christ, is a favor inseparably
connected with justification and salvation, and yet it would be a contradiction
to say that the bestowment of this favor was founded on our being antecedently
in Christ by a special and saving union.

THERE is then, I apprehend, as good as a promise though not of salvation, or
converting grace, to the endeavors of the unconverted, yet of further grace
and influence of the Holy Spirit to those who improve what they have received.
-- Only this must be understood with one limitation, viz. that it holds true
only during the continuance of men's probationary state in this life, which
depends entirely upon the sovereign pleasure of God, to determine. Nor is it
any objection that the Apostle says, "all the promises are in Christ." This is
readily granted in the utmost extent, to which the universal term, can with any
appearance of truth be understood. All the promises, or encouragements which
God has ever given to fallen man, yea I will add, all the unpromised mercy that
he has ever visited mankind with, must be considered as the fruit of Christ's
redemption, and therefore the Redeemer stands in a common relation to and
connection with the race of Adam. But I conceive however that the Apostle in
the words above quoted, means the special promises of the covenant of grace,
which presuppose a special relation to Christ, as the ground and condition of
our partaking of them; and then nothing can be argued from them against
promises of a different kind, to persons in a different state. But these things
may come under consideration again in another place.

IT may be further enquired -- Do not men always resist the Holy Ghost in this
common operation, till they are overcome by that grace which is irresistably
efficacious? I answer, it is true, that the natural tendency of this grace is
resisted by every one who still remains unconverted. For the tendency of it is
to influence men to repent sincerely of their sins, and turn to God. But so far
as any good effects are wrought in and upon us by the Holy Spirit, his agency
is not resisted. There is no compulsion or violence offered to the liberty of
the will, either in conversion, or that conviction, and humiliation, and
reformation which is ordinarily antecedent and preparatory thereunto. To
enquire then whether a sinner does always and universally resist the Holy Ghost
until he is regenerated, is the same as to ask, whether the agency of the
Spirit, previous to regeneration, be ever productive of any good effect. Or,
(which comes to the same thing) whether there be any duties performed by, or
inward effects wrought in a sinner, by the common grace of the Spirit,
preparatory to conversion. But this has been already, considered, and the
reality of this preparatory work, I trust, has been sufficiently proved from
scripture and experience. However opposite the corrupted nature of man is to
that which is good, our actual resistance to the work of the Holy Spirit
ceases, and without any force upon our natural liberty is overcome, so far
forth as the Spirit's agency proves effectual to the production of any good
effect in and upon our souls. He then who receives the light and conviction
which is objectively proposed in the word, and is thereupon affected with a
sense of his sinful and wretched estate, and cherishes a religious concern
about the salvation of his soul, and guards against those sins and temptations
which tend to harden him in security and impenitence, such an one does so far
comply with the motions of the Holy Spirit. Whereas he who opposes convictions,
who counteracts the dictates of conscience, who casts off fear, and will walk
in the way of his heart, and the sight of his own eyes, he who does thus,
resists the grace of God, and as the Apostle says, receives it in vain.

AND however the unregenerate do oppose the tendency of those means whereby the
Spirit strives with them, inasmuch as these are in their own nature fitted to
lead them to a saving conversion, it will not follow, that a sinner may not so
comply with, and improve that grace which he has received, as that there may be
reason to hope, from the word of God, that he will receive further supplies.
The regenerate do always in this world resist the Holy Ghost, so that the means
which are used with them for their sanctification, have not that effect, which
in their own nature they tend unto. Were it not for this, they would be
perfectly holy in heart and life. But it will not be denied, that they may so
improve that grace which is given to them, as that they may take encouragement
from the promises of the gospel, to hope and trust that he who has begun a good
work, will carry it to perfection; and that in the way of waiting upon God,
they shall renew their strength, through continued supplies of the Spirit of
Christ.

IT is also to be remembered, that it is the ordinary method of the Spirit to
work upon the souls of men, with and by the outward means of grace. It is by
the word of truth, as the instrument, that sinners are awakened, enlightened,
humbled and converted. They therefore who diligently attend thereto, are in
this respect in the way of receiving divine aids and influences, and of having
them continued and increased; and on the contrary, they who neglect the outward
means, do thereby keep themselves, as it were, out of the way of these
blessings. The heathen are more unlikely to enjoy the salutary beams of the sun
of righteousness, than we on whom it is risen. And because they have not the
outward means of divine knowledge, they are in scripture spoken of as far off
from God. And with equal truth it may be said, that where the christian
religion is professed, and its ordinances administered, they who through
carelessness will not improve their spiritual privileges, and so continue in
gross ignorance and wickedness, are farther from the kingdom of God, than they
who seriously and diligently improve them. As the Spirit is wont to enlighten,
humble and convert men only by and with the word, so they only to whom the word
is sent, and who attend unto it, are in any probability of knowing the truth,
and turning from darkness to light. How clearly soever the light shines round a
man, if he keeps himself always shut up in the dark, he will not enjoy the
benefit of its influence, any more than if the sun were not risen upon the
earth. Nor will any other means, with which the Spirit uses to work, be of any
better effect, any farther than they are attended to by us. Upon the whole, our
conduct in this case is of most important consequence, and according as we
improve the grace we have received, there is reason to conclude that it will
either be continued and increased, or suspended and withdrawn. But it is time
to proceed to the third enquiry, viz.

3. ARE any endeavors or exertments of a sinner conducive to his being in a
more desirable and hopeful state, in regard of his inward dispositions and
qualifications?

I ANSWER, this point is already in effect determined, if the reasoning above
be just. For it has been proved at large, that some who have not yet attained
to the state of regeneration and conversion, may be nearer thereto than others,
in the disposition of their minds, and are therefore more likely to obtain that
faith and repentance with which salvation is connected. It has also been
proved, that these preparatory dispositions are wrought in us by the power of
the word and Spirit. And that our conduct is of important consideration with
respect to our having the outward means of grace, and inward influences of the
Spirit -- It follows then plainly from these principles, that those inward
effects of the word and Spirit which are now under consideration, have a like
connection with, and dependence upon our conduct. Without some exercise of our
active faculties, we shall never, understand the doctrines and precepts of the
gospel, nor be duly convinced that we have sinned and come short of the glory
of God, nor have a just sense of the danger and misery of a state of guilt and
condemnation, nor cast about in our minds whether there be any way, of
salvation, and what ground of hope there is for one in such a case, nor shall
we look to heaven for that help which none but God can give us. Such a work of
conviction is necessary to prepare the soul for the grace revealed in the
gospel; and it is not effected without our active concurrence, in attending to
the ordinary means whereby the Holy Spirit works in the minds of men.

IT may be added, that our own experience and observation further confirms the
truth of what has been above argued. By complying carefully with the dictates
of conscience, it will become more tender and perceptive. Earnestness of mind
and diligence of endeavor, tend to promote each other. He that has an heart
earnestly engaged, will take pains; and he that is diligent and painful in all
duty, probably will not be so long, before he finds the sensibleness of his heart,
and earnestness of his spirit greatly increased. -- Edwards on pressing into
the kingdom of God, page 145.


THE effects of the Spirit's agency in and upon our hearts will be more
sensibly perceived, in some proportion to our care to improve that grace, and
those means of grace which we are favored with. Every one who has attended
with care to the state and frame of his own mind must, I believe, acknowledge,
that if he has at any time attended with seriousness and diligence on the means
of grace, and cherished the motions, of God's Spirit in and with them, it has
commonly been followed with some sensible effect on his mind and conversation.
He has found some check given to his vain and sinful pursuits, and a conviction
of the necessity of minding his soul's concerns, and securing the things of his
eternal peace, has been more deeply imprinted on his mind and heart. And they
who have worn off those serious impressions which they have sometimes had, I
doubt not, have a witness in their conscience against themselves, that they
have often resisted and quenched the Spirit striving with them, by indulging to
sloth, wilful sin, love of the world, and vain amusements. As believers by
improving the grace and assistance afforded to them, receive fresh supplies,
whereby they make progress in the work of sanctification, so the awakened
sinner, who improves the strength and influence communicated to him by God in
and with his ordinances, shall hereby attain to further degrees of light and
conviction, and be more and more reclaimed from those evil courses, which tend
to blind and harden (...) and so obstruct his effectual conversion.

I HAVE now finished what I proposed to offer in confirmation of the second
part of this argument, that what renders the state of one man more hopeful than
that of another, is ordinarily connected with human endeavors, in a diligent
use of the outward means of grace. And hence the conclusion is plain and
undeniable, that sinners are encouraged, as well as bound in duty, to labor
for the meat which endures unto everlasting life.

IF no more could be offered for the encouragement of sinners in seeking
salvation than what has been insisted on, this ought in all reason to determine
their resolution, and animate their endeavors. But we may go further and say,
that it is in the way of attending the instituted means of grace that faith,
and all the benefits of redemption therewith connected are obtained. I have
been showing that it is by the Spirit's concurrence with our active endeavors,
that we acquire such degrees of doctrinal knowledge, conviction of sin, concern
about deliverance, etc. as are requisite to prepare us to give a due
entertainment to the grace of God revealed in the gospel. And that none but
they who are thus previously enlightened, awakened and humbled, do receive and
acquiesce in the message of life and peace by Jesus Christ: And of consequence,
such are more likely than others to partake of this grace and salvation. But it
is to be added for the further encouragement of human endeavors, that it is in
the way of attending the prescribed means of grace that the saving benefits of
redemption are ordinarily obtained by and applied to us. It is by our attending
the preaching of the word, in particular, that we obtain faith, according to
the express words of the Apostle. "It is of the incorruptible seed of the word
of God, that we are born again."

SHOULD it be objected, that however the word may in some sense be the means of
faith and conversion, yet there is no room for any endeavors of ours in order
to obtain it. For a sinner is wholly passive in hearing understanding and
believing the report of the gospel. I would answer. -- That it is a commanded
duty that sinners should attend to the preaching of the word, as shall be
proved in its proper place. That they are capable of obeying this and suchlike
commands in some manner, even from a regard to the authority of God. -- That
these commands were given as a motive to obedience. -- And that whatever is
done in obedience to a command, ever implies some active exercise of the
faculties. So that however passive the mind may be supposed to be in the very
instance of believing, yet we may be and are active in hearing, which is a
necessary prerequisite and condition of faith. I might further say, that the
scripture notion of justifying faith, considered subjectively, is more than a
passive perception. But to propose and vindicate the evidence of this truth,
would require more room than can here be allowed for an incidental point: Nor
does our argument require us to dispute this question.

IT is sufficient for our present purpose, that we have plain scripture to
assure us, that in the times of Christ and the apostles, human endeavors were
the way in which men obtained faith, and entered into the kingdom of God. We
have to this purpose the testimony of Christ himself -- Since the days of John
the Baptist, the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it
by force. Mat. 11.12.
The sense of which words is more plainly expressed in the parallel text: "The
kingdom of God is preached, and every man presses into it." Luke 16.16.
These words certainly imply much more than that men were passively wrought
upon. They denote a strong desire, and earnest endeavor. In this manner
sinners then entered into the kingdom of God; into a state of grace and
acceptance with him. They struggled and contended resolutely for salvation, and
like soldiers storming a city, or forcing an entrenchment, they strove as it
were who should be the first to rush in. And the account which the inspired
historian gives of the success of Paul's preaching among the Bereans, is worthy
of special remark. -- These were more noble than those of Thessalonica, in that
they received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the scriptures
daily whether those things were so: Therefore many of them believed. Act. 17.11.
They used the appointed means to understand the nature and evidences of the
christian doctrine: This is recorded with a particular commendation; and it was
owing to this, as the historian informs us, that so many believed.

IN this manner men were converted to the faith and obedience of the gospel,
under the preaching of John Baptist, Christ and the apostles. And if it be
enquired concerning those, who have in every succeeding age given the best
evidences of sincerity in their professions of faith in, and obedience to
Christ, how they were called out of darkness into God's mavelous light, and
translated from the kingdom of satan, into the kingdom of his dear Son, they
would, I doubt not, all agree in this account; that they were first awakened to
a sense of the misery and danger of a state of sin, and the necessity of
obtaining pardon, and being reinstated in his favor: And hence they have been
excited to a diligent improvement of the outward means of grace. Thus they have
been led into all that knowledge of, and satisfaction in the gospel, and the
way of salvation therein delineated, to which they have attained. If we
consider the accounts, which the most exemplary professors of the christian
religion have given of the manner of their conversion, we shall find them thus
far agreed, how much soever they may differ in other circumstances.

FROM the whole that has been offered under this argument, may I not venture to
say, it is evident, that they who labor for the meat which endures to
everlasting life, in the manner which has been declared, are much more likely
to obtain it, than they who wilfully despise it, and put far from their
thoughts the things of their eternal peace. To deny this will, I think,
unavoidably run us into the grossest absurdities.

IF the diligent improvement of the means of grace (as we commonly speak) has
no sort of conduciveness to men's obtaining of salvation, it is then no
privilege to be in the way of these means, and they who are brought up and
live all their days among the savages of Africa, have as desirable a lot, as we
who are born in a christian land, educated in the profession of the true
religion, having the scriptures in our hands, with liberty and capacity to read
them, and the gospel faithfully preached to us. -- For the outward means will
be of no advantage to any one who will not attend to and improve them. How
plainly soever the truth with its evidences may be declared, no man will be the
wiser or better or happier for it, unless he can be some way persuaded to
exercise his active faculties, in considering and judging of these things, and
applying them to himself, that he may see his own personal concern in them. To
persuade and enable a sinner to attend unto and use the outward means of faith
and conversion, is the first work of the Holy Spirit; and is the foundation of
every consequent effect wrought in the soul by the influence of the word and
Spirit of God. But there is one scruple which we must endeavor to remove,
before we dismiss this argument. For though it does not directly militate
against our reasoning under this head, yet it tends to weaken its persuasive
force, and damp the zeal of men's endeavors.

IT may be said, That since there are no promises of salvation or effectual
grace, to any thing wrought in or done by a sinner before he savingly believes
in Christ, he may notwithstanding all his endeavors, and all that light and
conviction, and reformation, to which an unregenerate man may attain, perish at
last with hypocrites and unbelievers: And then not only all his pains will be
lost, but his guilt and punishment will thereby be greatly inhanced. That grace
which was insufficient for his conversion, will subject him to a more fearful
doom than he would have been liable to, if he had always lived in ignorance,
and a careless neglect of religion. -- There seems therefore to be but small
encouragement for an unregenerate man to strive for salvation, upon such
uncertainty of success, when there is so much danger that his case will hereby
be rendered more deplorable. -- I answer, --

ALLOWING that there are no promises of salvation or effectual grace to any
thing, which a sinner, remaining unconverted, is capable of attaining to, yet I
see little reason for so sad a conclusion, as that any one shall be left to
perish forever, who perseveres in striving and pressing to enter into the
kingdom of God, and through the agency of the Spirit, with the outward means of
grace, is awakened, enlightened, and brought off from false confidences, all
which is attainable previous to conversion. Does not God every day dispense
numberless unpromised favors among mankind? What promise is there that the
next morsel of food that we shall take, will not have the effect of poison? Yet
who is there in his right mind, that would scruple to eat and drink when
prompted thereunto by the necessities of his nature? Who is there that was
denied a blessing if he continued seeking for it in God's appointed way? Is
there any instance upon scripture record of one who sought God's favor and
blessing in vain? Or is there any intimation of such a thing in the word of
God? It Is true we are told, Luke 13.24.
"that many shall seek to enter in at the strait gate, and not be able." But it
is plain from the occasion and connection of the words, that it was a cold,
faint, slothful way of seeking, which is here spoken of as ineffectual --
"strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many I say unto you shall seek to
enter in and shall not be able." In these words Christ exhorts to earnestness
of endeavor for salvation. The reason enforcing the exhortation must then be
taken in such a sense as will carry a persuasive force. Now it is a strong
argument for earnest striving, that many will take some pains, and yet fail for
want of resolution and perseverance. But if we say that many who struggle and
agonize to the utmost of their power to enter in at the strait gate shall yet
be excluded, this will tend to discourage, rather than animate the earnestness
of our endeavors.

THOUGH God is not bound to save an unregenerate sinner, yet there is great
reason to hope, that he will be found of those who by his grace are influenced
to seek him, in that way in which he ordinarily dispenses his blessings. And if
this be not enough to awaken our diligence in laboring for the meat that
endures to everlasting life, I do not think that even a promise would have a
better effect. That man is surely very perverse, who will be at no pains to
know and secure the things of his eternal peace, unless he has a promise that
his attempt shall certainly be successful. Think how many take some pains for
salvation, and yet perish because they do not take enough. Many will seek to
enter in, and shall not be able. The reason why many come short of grace and
glory, is because they rest in a lazy seeking of that, which will not be
attained without a laborious striving. They have a good mind of happiness, and
a good opinion of holiness, and will take some good steps toward both, but
their convictions are weak, they do not consider what they know and believe,
and consequently their desires are cold, and their endeavors feeble, and there
is no strength or steadiness in their resolutions, and thus they come short and
lose because they do not press forward. Henry on the Text.
Such a resolution very ill becomes a sinner, who has nothing to hope for but
from unmerited mercy. We labor for the meat that perishes, without any
promise of success. And we have equal encouragement to hope for spiritual
blessings in waiting upon God herefor, in the ways of his appointment.

BE it then, that they who die in their sins, after having had great common
illumination, and great means of conversion, and having quenched the Holy
Spirit that his been long and powerfully striving with them, should on these
accounts receive greater damnation; this ought not to discourage any one from a
diligent attendance to the means, and improvement of that grace which God is
affording him. No one is necessitated to abuse these favors and advantages, to
the aggravation of his misery. Some do yield to the motions of God's word and
Spirit, so as that they are by this means brought nigh to the kingdom of God.
So nigh, that the late venerable Mr. Stoddard scruples not to say, that it is
in a manner certain that they will believe to salvation. These are some of his
memorable words -- When God has by the wonderful work of his Spirit prepared a
sinner for Christ, he does bestow Christ upon him. Though I dare not say there
is any direct promise made to humiliation in scripture, yet universal
experience does confirm it. It seems to be in this case as in the work of
nature; when a child in the womb is prepared for a soul, God does always infuse
a soul into it, though there be no such promise: So where a sinner is prepared
for faith, God does infuse that. Safety of appearing in the Righteousness of
Christ.
And whosoever improves what he has, to him shall be given, and he shall have
abundance. It is not then from any incapacity, or want of power necessarily
connected with a state of spiritual death, that sinners refuse, neglect and
oppose that light and grace, which is either given, or immediately offered, to
the inhancement of their future misery. These favors have in their own nature
a good tendency, and are often subservient to the conversion and eternal
salvation of the children of men. Did men attend to, and improve the outward
means of grace, and inward influences and aids of the Holy Spirit, diligently,
and seriously, as they might do previous to regeneration, it would be much
otherwise with them than it is: And for any thing I know, it might constantly
issue in their saving conversion.

BESIDES, how absurdly does he act who neglects and refuses the favors and
grace of God, because they may be abused, and their good tendency and design
counteracted, to the increase of his guilt and woe. A man who will practice
upon this maxim, must stop his ears against all instruction; shut his eyes
against all light, and banish all serious thought if possible from his mind:
Not only so, but he must resolutely refuse all the common blessings of
providence which are tendered to him, and put an end to his life without delay.
For as long as a sinner lives, he is treasuring up to himself wrath against the
day of wrath, unless the goodness of God leads him to repentance. But who
except a mad man would think it prudent, to involve himself in certain and
immediate guilt, to avoid that which is only possible, and choose certain
perdition, rather than a probable hope of salvation. And what assurance have we
that wilful, chosen ignorance will be any excuse or extenuation of sin? How do
we know that men's refusing the knowledge of God's ways is not as offensive to
him, or will not receive as many and heavy stripes, as if they had known his
will and not done it? Are we sure that sinners will not be reckoned with for
those advantages and privileges that were tendered to them, whether they
received them, or made any use of them or not? The scriptures no where inform
us that this will not be the case, but rather intimate that it will be so. Be
this as it may, since there is so much encouragement that the sinner who
diligently perseveres in laboring for the meat which endures to everlasting
life shall obtain it, it must be the height of folly and madness for any one to
despise and reject this, and choose to sit down with the forlorn hope of a more
tolerable doom in hell.

AND now to shut up this argument, every one who desires salvation is bound and
encouraged to take that course in order to secure the same wherein there is the
greatest probability of success. And that course has the greatest probability
of success, in which both scripture and experience teach us that salvation is
ordinarily obtained. That is the diligent use of those means which God has
prescribed, and is commonly pleased to accompany with his blessing. We have
abundant evidence, that he has been found of many, who have thus sought and
enquired after him: And it does not appear that any one was ever savingly
converted, till he was first brought thus to seek to God for converting grace:
Nor does it appear that any one who persevered in thus waiting on God for his
mercy, was ever finally rejected by him. From all which it appears, that it is
the duty of all who are concerned to obtain the meat which endures to eternal
life, to labor for it, in such ways as God has prescribed: And to this they
have abundant encouragement. Which was to be proved.

SERMON V. The Obligation and Encouragement of the Unregenerate to attend the
Means of Grace, argued from the Command of God.
ANOTHER argument in proof of our doctrine may be taken from the command of
God, enjoining upon sinners an attendance to the instrumental duties before
mentioned. And that I may state this matter plainly, and show how pertinent the
argument from hence is to our present purpose, I propose --

I. TO prove that these things are in scripture required of men unregenerate.
And

II. SHOW that it follows from hence, that they are bound and encouraged to
observe these duties.

1. I SHALL prove that these instrumental duties before described, are in
scripture enjoined on the unregenerate. It will not I think be necessary to
labor this point. If we look into our bibles with any attention, it can hardly
escape our observation. It will be sufficient, I think, briefly to recite and
illustrate a few plain texts to this purpose.

ALL to whom the call of the gospel is sent are commanded to attend to it. The
divine proclamation thus bespeaks sinners of mankind, He that has ears to
hear, let him hear. Mark 4.9.
These are the words of Christ to the multitudes, which resorted to him from
the cities and towns round about. The greatest part, no doubt, went to see and
hear him chiefly out of curiosity, from the fame they had heard of him; and not
because they believed that he was the Son of God, the promised Savior, or even
a teacher come from God; which yet many of the rulers and chief priests did in
some sort believe, who would not confess him for fear of the Jews: For they
loved the praise of men, more than the praise of God. Not only the professed
disciples of Jesus, but all who were capable of hearing, are called, -- and
commanded to hear.

THE same is suggested in the parable of the rich man and Lazarus. Luke 16.
When the former is represented as calling to Abraham, and praying that Lazarus
might be sent to warn his brethren, lest they should come to the place of
torment; the answer is, they have Moses and the prophets, let them hear them.
It was plainly our Savior's design in these words, to insinuate a command to
all who have the word of God in their hands, that they attend to the reading
and preaching of it, as means of escaping the punishment of the world to come.
There is no intimation that these five brethren were true believers, or that no
one was required to hear the word of God till he was first a believer. The
whole scope of the parable has quite a contrary appearance. If it should be
thought, that the words above quoted direct men to a practical attention, or
obedience to the doctrines, and precepts of divine revelation, rather than
require the duty of hearing the word, I am well content with this
interpretation; but would observe upon it, that this is as much to our purpose
as the other. For here is plainly a command to make use of the holy scriptures,
as means of avoiding the place of torment: And this presupposes our reading or
hearing them. Here is an express injunction of the use of means: Yea the duty
of hearing the word, is by necessary consequence enjoined upon sinners, as the
way to escape the pains of hell.

THE words of the apostle James may, I think, be not improperly added, James
1.19
Let every man be swift to hear. Every man who has capacity and opportunity, is
here commanded to give diligent attendance to hearing the word. If any should
object, that these words were addressed only to believers, in profession, and
the acceptance of the Apostle; I answer, if this be granted, yet the
obligation of this precept ought not to be limited to believers, or those who
profess faith in Christ. The universal term, every man, (pas anthropos)
methinks must signify, that it is the duty of every one, to whom the outward
call of the gospel is sent, to hearken to it, consider the nature and evidence
of the christian doctrine, and improve all proper opportunities of hearing the
gospel preached. Besides, should we suppose, that this precept belongs only to
persons of the same character with those to whom this epistle was directed, it
will I apprehend infer an obligation of obedience, on those who are not true
believers. There is great reason to conclude, from several passages in this
epistle, that St. James did not consider them all as true christians, however
they might profess faith. Many of them it seems held very corrupt opinions, as
that a dead faith would save them, though they were loose in their lives: And
their practice was agreeable to this opinion. It is scarce credible, that
persons whose principles and practices were so corrupt, were all in the
acceptance of the apostle, the true disciples of Christ.

AND if it be the duty of sinners to hear, we might justly conclude, from
analogy, that it is their duty to read the word of God. Besides we have an
express direction to this purpose in scripture. Says Christ to the unbelieving
Jews, of whom he testifies, that they would not come to him that they might
have life; search the scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life,
and they are they that testify of me. John 5.39.
It was not certainly the primary design of these words to instruct believers
in the duties of the cbristian life, but to recommend to unbelievers the study
of the scriptures, as means of obtaining faith in Christ. For to him all the
prophets gave witness, and if they would receive their testimony, they could
not reasonably reject him.

GOD has also commanded men in a state of sin to remember, and consider those
things which he declares and speaks to them. Remember now and show yourselves
men, bring it again to mind O ye transgressors Isai. 46.8.
And the Psalmist having declared the awful doom of the wicked, the judgment
which God will pronounce and execute upon them, concludes with a solemn
admonition to such, that they attend to it, and lay it to heart. Consider this
ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver
you. Here is a plain command to sinners to reflect and meditate seriously upon
the solemn truths revealed in the word of God, and suffer them to sink deep
into their heart, and intimation that this is a means of their escaping the
destruction, with which they are threatened.

THAT prayer is a duty enjoined on the unconverted, appears from the words of
Peter to Simon the magician. That he was a wicked man, in the judgment of the
apostle, no one can doubt, who attends to the apostle's words. Thou have, says
he, neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not right with God. I
perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity. Yet he
exhorts him to pray to God, if perhaps the thought of his heart might be
forgiven him. Should it be pretended that he was not directed to pray unless he
first repented sincerely, so was converted: I answer, though it was doubtless
his duty to repent of his sin with godly sorrow, and pray in true faith, yet we
cannot conclude from the order of the words, that he was not bound and
encouraged to pray, unless he first was a true penitent and believer. Yea the
apostle's words obviously intimate the contrary. -- For there is a sure promise
of pardon to all that repent in godly sincerity, and pray in faith. Such shall
without peradventure be forgiven: Whereas the apostle's words, "pray to God IF
PERHAPS the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee," imply that it was his
duty and wisdom to pray for pardon, though he should not do it with that
repentance and faith which has a certain connection with forgiveness. Act.
8.21.22, 23.


AND our text so expressly requires sinners to use endeavors for obtaining
salvation, that with it I shall close these scripture testimonies. Labor not
for the meat that perishes, but for that which endures to everlasting life.
But these words have already been sufficiently opened, and their pertinency to
our present purpose, shown at large in the introduction, which I shall not here
repeat. To these direct proofs, I will add two or three consequential
arguments, and so finish this head.

THE scriptures teach us, that they who will not improve their spiritual
privileges, shall be severely punished for such neglect. When Jesus sent his
apostles to preach the gospel, Mat. 10:14, 15.
he said to them, Whosoever will not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye
depart out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet: Verily I say
unto you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the
day of judgment, than for that city. If any to whom the call of the gospel is
sent will not hear it, nor attend to it, their refusal will be charged to them
as their great sin, and will procure them a most intolerable punishment. It is
then a plain and certain consequence, that it is the duty of sinners to attend
to the means of grace. No one surely would be threatened, and punished, for not
doing what he was not required to do.

THIS may be also inferred from God's giving mankind a revelation of his will,
and appointing outward means for the conversion of sinners. When God speaks to
men, it is certainly their duty to be attentive. His instituting the ordinance
of preaching, infers the duty of hearing. There is a necessary connection
between them. Now it is certain, that the counsels and instructions of God's
word are addressed to unrenewed sinners, as well as saints. The preaching of
the gospel is, by the appointment of God, a converting, as well as edifying
ordinance. It is therefore the duty of the unconverted to attend thereto;
otherwise they turn away from God, who in his word is calling and speaking to
them from heaven, so oppose his will, and condemn his authority.

FINALLY, the obligation of sinners to attend to the ordinary means of grace,
may be inferred from God's commanding them to believe, and repent. This is the
work of God, "that is the work which he requires of us," (so Dr. Owen
paraphrases the words) that we should believe on him whom he has sent. Joh.
6.29.
This is his commandment, that we should believe on the name of his son Jesus
Christ. 1 John 3.23.
Jesus preached the gospel, saying, the time is fulfilled, the kingdom of God
is at hand, repent ye and believe the gospel. Mark 1.14, 15.
God has now commanded all men every where to repent. Acts 17.31.
Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. Acts 3.19.
But the scriptures teach us that faith, repentance, and conversion, are
ordinarily no otherwise obtained, than by attending to the prescribed means of
grace. Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17.
So does repentance. If they hear not Moses and the prophets, (says Abraham in
the parable) neither will they be persuaded (to repent) though one arose from
the dead Luke 16.31.
Consideration is also a means of conversion. I thought on my ways (says David)
and turned my feet into thy testimonies Psalm. 119.59.
-- When therefore we are commanded to believe, repent, and turn to God, we are
virtually, and by necessary consequence, commanded to use those means, or
observe those instrumental duties, whereby faith and repentance are obtained.
God in requiring any duty, does thereby require whatever is necessary on our
part, in order to the performance of it.

ENOUGH has been said to make it appear, that the duties are in the word of God
enjoined on the unregenerate; which was the first thing proposed. So I pass to
the --

2. TO show at follows from hence, that they are bound, and encouraged to a
practical attendance unto these duties. It will not be denied that it is the
duty of all to obey the commands of God, and observe all the ordinances he has
prescribed to them. Nor will it be denied that believers have encouragements,
as well as obligation to obedience. I suppose it will also be acknowledged on
all hands, that sinners are bound and encouraged, to believe in the son of God,
and then yield the obedience of faith, to these and all other precepts of the
gospel. So I shall not insist upon the proof of these things. But the great
point which is here to be enquired into is, Whether these commands oblige and
encourage men to obedience, while they are destitute of saving faith and the
grace of regeneration?

TO this I answer, that such obedience to these commands, as sinners are
capable of antecedent to faith and regeneration, is required and encouraged in
these precepts. It is required, because as to the substance and matter of the
performance it is good, and agreeable to the divine precept. Though it be not
the whole requirement of the command, yet it is part of what is required;
consequently carries an obligation of obedience with it. It is required,
because the neglect and omission of the substance of commanded duties, as well
as the want of right principles is sin, and as such is severely threatened and
punished by God. Every one is commanded to depart from evil as well as do good:
And such actions as are materially as well as formally contrary to God's
commands, are every way evil. And finally it is required, because it is the way
and means, in attendance to which faith and a new heart are ordinarily
obtained. When therefore sinners are commanded to believe, and repent, they are
by necessary implication commanded to attend the means of faith and repentance.

AGAIN, such obedience to these commands as men are capable of before
regeneration and saving faith, is also encouraged. All the precepts which God
has given to mankind in his word, were designed not only to make them know
their duty, but also influence them to practice it. The end of God's giving
commands to men, has always been to encourage, as well as bind them to
obedience. They are founded upon a dispensation of grace; so are designed and
adapted to subserve this wonderful plan of divine mercy. And this is
encouragement enough to sinful men to endeavor a compliance with them. It is
also a great encouragement to a diligent improvement of the privileges and
gracious influences which God vouchsafes to sinners, that this is the way to
have them continued and increased: For whosoever improves what he has, to him
shall be given. Acts of religious obedience performed by the unregenerate;
though defective and unholy, tend to and often issue in their everlasting good
Hereby they are withheld from many sins, kept in the way of God's blessing, in
the use of those means by which faith is obtained. But in order to clear up and
vindicate the evidence of this proposition, that sinners are bound and
encouraged, by the commands of God in his word, to seek salvation, in the way
of attendance to the prescribed means of grace, even while they are destitute
of that faith and repentance which is unto life, it will be proper that we
consider the several ways in which some have endeavored to evade this
conclusion.

1. IT may be said, all unbelievers are under the covenant of works. And
therefore all the obligations of duty which they are under, are only the
obligations of a covenant requiring perfect obedience as the condition of life.
Though it be their duty to read and hear and pray, since God has commanded
these things, yet till they are set free from the law by being married to
Christ by faith, there is no other obligation or encouragement to endeavor
obedience in these instances, than there is to keep all the commandments with
sinless perfection, in order to justification. It Is vain to urge duties on men,
while under the law, as a covenant of life, unless we will inculcate perfect
obedience to the law of works. But since no man is able to obtain justification
and eternal life in this way, though obedience is the duty of unbelievers, yet
there is no encouragement to any attempts in this way. In opposition to this I
undertake to prove,

THAT these duties, which in the word of God are required of fallen man, are
not required upon the foundation of a covenant of works; or as included in the
condition of a covenant of life, demanding perfect obedience to the law of
works, in order to justification. I grant that the law of God obliges all
mankind to observe every command which God is ever pleased to give them. Our
disobeying any divine precept, even the positive precepts of the gospel, is
truly a breach of the law, and punishable as such. But what is here asserted
is, that the END of God's giving these commands to sinners, is not that any one
should be justified by his obedience to them; they do not belong to a covenant
of works, requiring perfect obedience to the law, as the condition of life: But
they are given upon quite a different foundation, and for quite a different
purpose. For,

(1.) IT does not appear from scripture, that perfect obedience to the moral
law, or law of nature, ever was made the covenant condition of life to man. The
word of God does not inform us, that Adam was put upon trial for life, under a
covenant requiring perfect obedience to the whole moral law, as the condition
of immortality: But the whole account we have of that primitive constitution
has quite a contrary appearance. I know many have supposed, that Adam was under
such a covenant of works; but upon what grounds I know not. There is nothing in
scripture to build such a supposition upon that ever I could find; and we can
know nothing about this matter beyond what we are taught by revelation. The
condition of life was abstaining from the forbidden fruit. No other is
mentioned, or intimated. Had our first parents been obedient in this instance,
they and their posterity had been hereby justified, and inherited immortal
life. By the account we have of this matter in scripture, the death or life of
our first parents, and their offspring, was wholly put upon their eating or
forbearing to eat the forbidden fruit. The law of nature is not, that I know
of, any where mentioned as a part of this covenant transaction. The tenor of
this covenant in its first exhibition was, in the day thou eatest thereof thou
shall surely die. And accordingly after the fall, God only demands of Adam, who
told thee that thou wast naked? Have thou eaten of the tree whereof I commanded
thee that thou should not eat? Agreeable to this we find the sentence was
inflicted on Adam for this cause, without mention of any other, because thou
have eaten of the tree, etc. Dickinson on Original Sin, see page 93-96.


BUT it may be asked, would they not have fallen under condemnation, if they
had committed any other sin? I answer, if they had believed God, and not
transgressed that positive prohibition, which was the condition of life to
them, we have no reason to think that they would have sinned in any other
instance; but by the providence and grace of God, they would have been
preserved from the prevailing power of every other temptation. In other words,
they would have been confirmed in a state of sinless rectitude, as a reward of
their obedience in that instance, upon which the promise of life was suspended;
in like manner as the saints in heaven will be confirmed in holiness, through
the favor of God, in consequence of their being justified, and entitled to
eternal life, by the righteousness of the second Adam Jesus Christ. But,

(2.) WHATEVER covenant man was under before his fall, it laid no obligations
of obedience, as a covenant, after it was broken. And that for this plain
reason, because a covenant is at an end as soon as it is broken, unless it be
renewed. Mankind are indeed bound to suffer the penalty their breach of
covenant was threatened with. But it would be grossly absurd, to suppose that
after a covenant was effectually broken, and its promise irrecoverably
forfeited, man should yet be bound by virtue of it to fulfill the duty therein
required, in order thereby to obtain justification and eternal life. The
covenant with Adam, as Mr. Stoddard has justly observed, was at an end, upon
his eating the forbidden fruit. After this it had no further commands upon him.
The obligation he was now under, by virtue of this constitution, was not to do,
but to suffer. So that if Adam were supposed to be a probationer for
immortality under a covenant of works, or upon condition of perfect obedience
to the law of nature, yet I think it cannot and will not be pretended, that
after he had sinned, broken covenant, and he with his posterity were condemned
to die, he was still a probationer for life on the terms of sinless obedience,
by virtue of this primitive constitution.

PERHAPS it will now be enquired, are not sinners then bound to keep the law?
Does their first transgression set them at liberty ever after from all
obligations of duty or active obedience? I answer, every man is doubtless
eternally obliged to keep the law of God. For the law is a perfect unchangeable
rule of righteousness, enjoined by the authority of God our maker and
sovereign. Though sin exposes us to punishment, it does not loose our obligations
to obey for time to come. But we must distinguish between the divine law as a
rule of righteousness, and a covenant of life. This seems not to have been
attended to by some, as ^^ought. We are always bound to obey the law; but we
are no longer bound to keep a covenant that while it is in force: And it is no
longer in force after it is broken. We may illustrate this distinction by the
following simile. Suppose a man should covenant with his servant, that if he
would serve him faithfully for a limited rhyme, say a year, he would then give
him his liberty, and a settlement for life: But if he was unfaithful, he should
not only forfeit and lose these privileges, but be chastised according to his
deserts. It is plain he is now put upon probation for liberty by virtue of this
covenant, and consequently is bound to faithfulness by the promise and
threatening. But suppose he should be unfaithful, and steal from his master what
he was forbidden to take, the covenant would now be broken, the promise utterly
void, and he would be exposed to deserved punishment. In this case, every one
sees that he is no longer upon probation, nor is he any longer bound to
faithfulness under the notion of fulfilling the condition of a covenant. That
is plainly impossible. Yet he will still be bound to obedience and
faithfulness, because he is supposed to be under obligations to his master,
distinct from, and antecedent to this particular agreement. -- These therefore
remain upon him in full force. Thus the divine law binds man to obedience,
abstract from the consideration of any covenant transaction. Had there never
been any such transaction, man would have been obliged in duty to love and obey
God. And after he had broken the covenant which God had made with him, so the
promise was forfeited, still it was his duty to love and obey God. Yet it is
plainly absurd to imagine, that duties are still required of him upon the
foundation of a covenant which is broken effectually, and so is at an end. If
we do not duly attend to the distinction between a duty required by law, and a
condition annexed to a covenant, we cannot rightly apprehend the nature and
ground of obligations to duty.

(3.) MANKIND have never since the original lapse been put upon probation for
life under a covenant of works. They have never been required to obey the law
perfectly, as the covenant condition of life. The whole account we have in the
scriptures, of God's dealings with fallen man, is plainly contrary to this
notion. Immediately after the fall of man, a promise of the Savior was given,
and another constitution, inconsistent with the impleaded supposition, was
established and revealed, even before sentence was past upon the transgressors.
The covenant with Noah contains no intimations of such a covenant of works. The
Abrahamic covenant was a covenant of promise or grace, by the express testimony
of the apostle. The Sinai covenant was I grant in some respects a covenant of
works. And by the way it was this covenant, that in the new testament is called
the first or old covenant, in opposition to that new covenant of which Christ
is the mediator; and not any covenant of works with Adam, or with mankind in
general. Every one who will be at the pains to examine the several places where
the word occurs, will I think be immediately sensible of this. But it is certain
that God never intended, in this national covenant with the children of Israel,
to propose to them a way of obtaining justification, and eternal life by their
own works of righteousness The rewards of obedience were temporal blessings,
which however were subservient to their obtaining blessings spiritual and
eternal. For by possessing the land of promise, they had not only a fruitful
country to live in, but also lived in the valley of vision, where were much
greater advantages and privileges of a spiritual nature, than any others
enjoyed. While this covenant was in force, they were indeed justified before
God as their political king, by their own works. -- See Deuteronomy. 6.24, 25. But
with regard to a title to eternal life, no one was ever justified by his
obedience to the precepts of this national covenant. For if eternal life had
been to be obtained in this way, the covenant of grace which had been revealed
to Abraham (and I may say to Adam) long before, must of consequence have been
annulled; the contrary to which is strongly asserted and proved by Paul, in
disputing against the judaizing christians. -- (See Gal. 3.15, 17.) says he,
Brethren, I speak after the manner of men, though it be a man's covenant, yet
if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth or adds thereto. And this I say, that
the covenant of God in Christ, the law which was four hundred and thirty years
after, cannot disannul, that it should make the promise of none effect.
Besides, the Sinai covenant was given only to one nation. The Gentiles were
never required to observe it. Did Christ or his Apostles then propose a
covenant of works, requiring perfect obedience to the law as the condition of
justification and life? This will hardly be pretended. Upon the whole, the
scriptures no where inform us, that mankind have since the original lapse been
put upon probation for life under a covenant, requiring perfect personal
obedience, as its condition, whatever were the state of man before the fall:
Yea I think the supposition of God's putting man under such a covenant, in his
present depraved state, is scarce reconcilable with divine wisdom. It is then
certain that the commands and exhortations to duty, which we find in the
scriptures, are none of them on the foundation of a covenant of works. Romans
10.5. Gal. 3.12. Lev. 18.5. "The man that does these things shall live in
them." These words are evidently to be referred to the Sinai law, which was a
covenant of works, but contained no promises of eternal life to obedience. The
error of the Jews and judaizers, which the Apostle disputes against, was, that
justification, and a title to eternal life, were to be obtained by obedience to
the Sinai covenant. The Apostle's argument imports, that this could not be,
because the Sinai covenant was a law or covenant of works, whereas the
scriptures teach plainly that mankind have from the beginning been justified
and saved by faith. The covenant of promise was before the covenant of Sinai;
so could not be annulled by it. The law was given for other ends, Mat. 19.17.
Jesus said to the young ruler, "If thou will enter into life, keep the
commandments." And to the lawyer, Luke 10.28. "This do and thou shall live."
Obedience to the commands of God, has in the gospel a promise of eternal life.
"Without holiness no man shall see the Lord." And "blessed are they that do his
commandments, that they may have a right to the tree of life." But this does
not imply that our obedience may be our justifying righteousness. The promise
of life is on the foundation of the covenant of grace: Nor is there any holy
obedience: without faith in Christ, the end of the law for righteousness. --
See Henry's exposition. The law requires duty, the gospel promises eternal
reward to the works of faith and love, and declares that without faith it is
impossible to please God. If we love God and our neighbor, we shall have
eternal life, not by the law, which contains no promise of eternal life upon
any condition whatever, but by that faith which has wrought by love. And
without faith we have no holy love to God or our neighbor. Indeed the young
ruler and lawyer, it seems, were under the same mistake, so common among the
Jews at that time, viz. that upon the foundation of the Sinai covenant, which
was a covenant of works, eternal life was obtainable by obedience to the law,
so they might be justified by their own righteousness. And nothing could be
better suited to give an effectual wound to the very root of this
self-righteous fancy, than to lead them to a just view of the breadth of the
divine law, in the spirit and not in the letter. And this appears plainly to be
the scope and design of Christ's answers to them. They could not but be
conscious that their obedience had been defective: Yea that they had not obeyed
one command in the true spirit and extent of it, upon their having just
apprehensions of the divine law; consequently must fall under its curse. But to
set these things in a just light, a full dissertation would be necessary,
instead of a short incidental note. -- Upon the whole, I can see no reason to
infer from these texts, or any other, that mankind are, previous to their
believing in Christ, under such a covenant of works as some have pretended;
much less that they are under a constitution promising pardon and eternal life
to penitent unbelievers, without their being indebted to Christ, or the grace
of the gospel. And it is an easy, but I think a needless task, to show that all
those texts of scripture, which have been quoted in confirmation of this
notion, have been quite misunderstood. Besides, that such a constitution would
be contrary to the covenant of grace, it would be repugnant I conceive to the
divine perfections. For, as Mr. E^^kine says, in his dissertation on the Sinai
covenant, To suppose God formally entering into a covenant, the condition of
which he knew could not possibly be performed, is a shocking absurdity.


(4.) SUPPOSING perfect personal obedience would entitle a man to eternal life,
yet God's end and design in prescribing duty to men in his word, was not to
direct and require them to work out a legal righteousness, whereby they might
be justified. The divine commands in scripture, we are (...) are not upon the
foundation of a covenant of works, for this obvious reason, that men are
considered and addressed all along as sinners, actually and practically so. It
is then as impossible in the nature of things for such a one to be justified by
a perfect righteousness of his own, as it is for him to recall past time, and
cause that never to have been, which has been. "Consider this ye that forget
God, lest I tear you in pieces." Many other texts there are of the same import.
They who forget God are by the law condemned already, so cannot obtain eternal
life by a covenant of works. It is too late to call upon condemned criminals to
consider and beware of capital crimes lest they die, if perfect obedience be
the only condition upon which they can live: And a covenant of works gives life
upon no other condition. The commands and counsels of God to sinners, cannot
without shocking absurdity be referred to any such covenant. Besides, such
commands as God has given to sinners, cannot possibly belong to a covenant of
works. It has no place or room for such duties as God calls men to, such as
repentance, prayer for pardon, turning from sin to God, believing on Christ and
trusting in him for salvation, attending the means of grace, etc. These duties
imply or presuppose that the subjects are sinners. Therefore the requirement of
these things must necessarily be upon the foundation or foot of some other
constitution than a covenant of works, and for some other end than to obtain
justification and a title to eternal life by sinless obedience.

2. I SHALL now proceed to consider another evasion of the conclusion, pleaded
for. It may be said, allowing that these commands to sinners do not stand upon
the foundation of a covenant of works, yet they are all comprehended in the
divine law, whose obligation lies upon every soul. The law of nature obliges to
obey every command of God, as soon as it is made known to us: And therefore no
man can transgress a positive precept, or an occasional command, without
breaking the law of nature, which requires godliness and humanity to
perfection. But till sinners are justified by faith, they are under the curse
of the law; nor will their attempting to obey any divine command (however it be
their duty) have the least tendency to loose them from their obligation to
punishment; much less will a mere shadow of obedience which is abominable in
the sight of God. Therefore as all men who are not united to Christ by faith,
are at the same time bound by the precept and the curse of the law, though it
be their duty to keep all God's command, yet they have no other encouragement
to hope to obtain eternal blessings in this way, than the law will give: That
is none at at all.

TO this I answer. It is granted the obligation of the divine law is
unchangeable: That sinners are bound to obey every command; Yet till justified
by faith they are obnoxious to the curse: And that the law though it requires
duty, yet gives no hope of life to a sinner. Whatever encouragement then any
one may have, to hope that his endeavors in a way of obedience to the divine
commands may issue in his eternal advantage, it must be drawn from some other
consideration, than barely his legal obligation to duty. But yet it may be
maintained, that every precept contained in God's word, was designed by God to
be not only a declaration of duty to those who are subject to it, but also to
convey an encouraging motive to endeavors of obedience. If then there are any
commands, exhortations and counsels to men unregenerate in scripture (as we
have seen there are) then we may assuredly conclude, not only that it is their
duty to obey, but that there is encouragement thereunto; and that for this
reason that all these commands, counsels and exhortations, stand upon the
foundation of a gracious constitution, which God has established for the
salvation of fallen man. -- This important point I will first prove, and then
show that this consideration infers an encouraging motive to endeavors of
obedience.

FIRST. The commands and exhortations to duty directed to the unregenerate in
the holy scripture, are founded upon a divine constitution of grace, for the
recovery and salvation of fallen man. The revelation of God's will to man,
stands entirely upon this basis, and is fitted and designed in every part to
subserve this wonderful scheme of mercy. After the original apostasy God would
have had no further commands on sinners, he would have prescribed no more
duties to them by supernatural revelation, had he not determined to treat with
them on the foundation of a new and gracious covenant. The obvious scope and
tenor of the scriptures will clearly evidence, that God had a merciful design
in revealing therein his will to mankind. The first revelation made to man
after the fall contained a declaration of grace, and in effect set every thing
which followed upon a new bottom. The mediatorial dispensation was hereby
established in the world. Adam with all his posterity became so far the
subjects of the mediatorial kingdom, that all the commands which they
afterward received from God, directing them in the great concerns of eternal
life, were given through Christ, and upon the foundation of his mediatorial
undertaking: In other words, they were properly laws of the mediator -- They
were all founded upon that famous promise, (in Genesis 3.15.) The seed of the
woman shall break the serpent's head. All the subsequent revelations of God's
will, which mankind were favored with from time to time, always supposed that
God had designs of mercy toward the human race. The divine oracles held forth
this important truth, as it were in the frontispiece, as the grand CAPITAL
POINT to which the other parts referred, that the Son of God was to destroy the
work of the devil. This is the key of the bible, that opens to us the design of
the instructions, counsels and commands, which God has given to man. They all
belong to, and are founded upon that gracious constitution which is here
revealed; and are adapted and intended to subserve this scheme of divine mercy.
And that this is true in particular of the duties prescribed to the
unregenerate will appear, if we consider what the scriptures teach concerning
the nature, and end of these requirements.

AS to the nature or matter of the duties required of sinners, it is in brief,
that they attend to the call of the gospel: consider the import and evidence of
its doctrines and precepts; receive that conviction of sin and misery which is
there laid before them; look to heaven for mercy; behold the Lamb of God that
takes away the sin of the world; believe on him; trust in him; love him;
repent of sin, and show their faith, hope, love and repentance, by obedience to
all his commands. I do not say that men are to do all these things while
unregenerate: That would be plainly absurd. But sinners are required to hear,
and attend, and consider, and pray, and strive, that they may believe, repent,
and obey the gospel. Now we may observe, that all these things belong in due
subordination to the means of salvation, according to that gracious
dispensation which God has established in the world. Since then God has
prescribed to men, as matter of duty, the use of those means, by which the
benefits of redemption are applied, and conveyed to the vessels of mercy; the
requirement of these duties is doubtless upon the foundation of that gracious
plan, which the performance of them is evidently fitted to subserve.

AND this will be yet more manifest, if we consider the end for which these
duties are enjoined. If we can collect from scripture what end they have
relation to, this will clearly determine the point. If the ends, to which these
duties are subordinated, can have no place except upon the gracious
constitution beforementioned, then the requirement of duties for such ends
stands upon that foundation. Now it is certain, that sinners are commanded and
exhorted to hear, and consider, and believe, and repent, etc. in order to
salvation. And it is certain that salvation is obtainable by sinners only upon
the plan of grace.

WHEN Jesus in the text exhorts the Jews to labor for the meat which endures
to everlasting life, it is obvious what end he directs their views to, and what
their endeavors were required for, even obtaining everlasting life. When Peter
directs the Sorcerer to pray to God, if perhaps the thought of his heart might
be forgiven, the end for which he is directed to pray, was that he might obtain
pardon. When God calls secure sinners to consider the doom of the wicked, lest
he tear them in pieces, the end why they are called to consideration, is
plainly that they may escape destruction. When Abraham in the parable says to
the rich man concerning his five brethren, they have Moses and the prophets let
them hear them, the end why they were required to hear them, was that they
might repent, so not come to the place of torment. When Christ bids the
unbelieving Jews search the scriptures, which contain the words of eternal life
because they testify of him, it is not to be doubted that the end of this
direction was, that they might be persuaded by the testimony of the scriptures
to believe on him. Finally, when Christ says, He that has ears let him hear,
we must conclude that men are therefore commanded to hear the call of the
gospel, that they may understand and believe, so be converted and healed.

IT appears then, that these things are prescribed (...) sinners, as means, in
the use of which they are to seek, and may obtain eternal life and salvation.
God would not direct men to use means in order to an end, which they had no
sort of connection with, and were no way fitted to observe. His prescribing
duties to men in order to their obtaining salvation, plainly implies or
supposes that salvation is obtainable. Consequently these precepts are all upon
the foundation of that gracious constitution, according to which sinners may be
pardoned and saved. It is then an obvious inference, that these things are not
required as the condition of a covenant of works, requiring perfect obedience
to the law, in order to justification: Nor are these commands mere declarations
of law and duty, because a sinner's future obedience to a law of works will not
conduce at all to entitle him to eternal life in this way, however perfect we
should suppose his obedience to be; because his past; guilt, which he can never
expiate, binds the curse upon him. And it is yet more evident, that defective
and unholy performances will avail nothing to this end. God's requiring duties
of sinners, in order to their escaping his wrath and curse, and having
everlasting life, is a virtual declaration of grace and mercy: -- Unless we
will be so profane as to charge God foolishly; and say that he prescribes means
in order to an end, which they have no connection with, (...) suitableness for.
-- I proceed now to say --

SECONDLY. If these commands which God has given to sinners belong to the
dispensation of grace, or in other words are precepts of the gospel, then they
carry with them not only obligation, but encouragement to endeavors of
obedience. -- For we may hence conclude, that God has designs of mercy toward
fallen man; and it is in order to execute and accomplish his gracious purposes,
that he sends the call of his gospel to those who are perishing in their sins,
and requires them to hear and attend to it, to consider the import of his
message to them, and the evidence that is proposed to them, that it is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance. There is encouragement to pray
for pardon to that God who is gracious and merciful, with whom there is
forgiveness. There is encouragement to seek the Lord while he may be found, to
call upon him while he is near. To cry for knowledge, and lift up our voice for
understanding, to seek for it as silver, and search for it as for hid treasure:
To wait, upon him for further light and influence, in the use of those means by
which he is ordinarily wont to convey his blessings, and communicate the
benefits of redemption to the children of men. Every just discouragement is
removed. Should the sinner object, these endeavors will not expiate my guilt,
or justify me in the sight of a holy God: It may be replied, they are not
required for any such end, but as the way and means of obtaining the knowledge
of, and faith in an atonement that takes away the sin of the world. Should he
object further, I am dead in sin, unable to do any duty in a holy manner; it
may be answered, that God may and often does make the unholy endeavors of the
unregenerate to subserve his gracious designs toward them. For the efficacy of
the means does not depend at all upon the holiness of a sinner's attending upon
them, but upon the appointment and blessing of God. He blesses his own means,
though there be no spiritual goodness in our performances to recommend us to
his favor. He has not directed sinners to wait upon him in his ordinances,
that they might hereby make themselves worthy of a favorable regard, but that
they might hereby be brought and kept in the way of his blessing. Many have
been regenerated and converted in the use of the appointed means of grace, but
no sinner was ever regenerated and converted by attending to these means in a
holy manner. -- But I pass to consider a third evasion, which may be thus
expressed: --

(3.) ALLOWING that the commands which God has in his word given to sinners are
precepts of the gospel, so carry encouragement as well as obligation to
obedience, yet since all encouraging motives to obedience are derived from the
gospel, or revelation of mercy to the ungodly, through Christ, they can have no
access to the minds of those who do not believe the gospel, which is the case
of every unregenerate man. For whoever believes the gospel, is possessed of
that faith which justifies the guilty, purifies the heart, works by love, and
is the principle of evangelical obedience. When therefore sinners are commanded
to labor for the meat which endures to everlasting life, this implies and
supposes faith, as the principle of obedience. They are first to believe unto
justification, and then obey all the commands of Christ.

I ANSWER, The question we are now considering, is not whether sinners ought to
obey the precepts of the gospel from faith? That is readily owned: But the
whole dispute here, so far as I understand it, may be reduced to two points.

WHETHER the commands to duty, which are directed to sinners in the gospel,
bind them to obey in such a manner as they are capable of before they believe
to justification. And,

WHETHER the word of God does or can convey any encouraging motive to such
obedience, to the conscience of one who does not believe to justification.

THE first enquiry has been answered already. -- For it has been shown, that as
the unregenerate are capable of observing the substance and matter of those
duties we are now speaking of, so the divine command binds this upon them. And
though such obedience be defective in principle and end, yet it is good in its
proper place and kind, and has a happy tendency in diverse respects.

THESE things have been particularly considered, and need not be repeated.
There is certainly more good, and less evil, in attending the means of grace
from natural principle, than neglecting them utterly. And this infers an
obligation on the conscience, to choose the good, and avoid the evil. But if any
are not satisfied, I would further ask, Is it not a sin to reject and refuse
the means of grace? -- If so, does it not plainly follow, that it is a duty to
attend to them? Is it not the duty of those (for instance) to whom the outward
call of the gospel is sent, to hear and attend to it, and not oppose the means
of grace at a distance, so put the word of God far away? Did not the deputy
Sergius Paulus do as he ought to do, when he called the Apostles Barnabas and
Saul, and desired to hear the word? And did not Elymas the Sorcerer sin in
opposing it? And was not the conduct of the Bereans commendable in attending
cheerfully and heartily to the preaching of Paul, and searching the scriptures
daily to see whether those things were so? Yet it was the consequence, and not
the principle and cause of their doing so, that many believed. Besides, are not
sinners exhorted to duties, IN ORDER TO OBTAIN FAITH? Was it not for this end
that Christ directs the Jews to search the scriptures, which testified of him?
And calls every one who has ears to hear? Is not the saving knowledge and
belief of the truth concerning Christ, the meat which endures to everlasting
life, the food by which the just live? And does not Christ exhort the Jews to
labor for this? It is then the duty of men to attend to these precepts, before
they have saving faith. For I think it must appear absurd to the common sense
of mankind, to say that when men are exhorted and commanded to use means in
order to a certain end, they must first obtain the end, before they are bound
or warranted to use the means. I ask further, Is not unbelief a sin? If so, is
it not the duty of those to whom the gospel is preached to believe in Christ?
And does not this infer an obligation to the use of those means by which faith
comes antecedent to their obtaining it? Moreover, it will not be denied that
the word of salvation is to be declared to unbelievers (as well as others) as a
means of faith and regeneration. The scriptures were written at first, and have
been by a particular providence preserved to this day, as a means of
ingenerating, as well as confirming and increasing faith and holiness. Faith
comes by hearing, says one Apostle: And these things are written that ye might
believe that Jesus is the Christ, says another. Whether men are to use means in
order to obtain faith, or not, I think it has never been disputed by any
professed christians, that God may and does use outward means, as subservient to
his working faith in the elect. Now I desire it may be considered, whether
these means by which God works faith, do not imply and suppose an active
attendance in us. Will the written word instruct us if we will not read it, or
hear it read, or be attentive, and take notice of the import and evidence of
the truth there revealed? Or will the preached word have any saving effect, if
we will not hear it with attention? That the word may accomplish the end for
which it is sent, it mus be heard, that is, the sound must not only strike our
ears, but awake our attention, and put us upon considering the meaning,
importance and proof of what is declared. And I am sure that attention and
consideration imply active exertment. If faith comes by hearing, or by report
(as some incline to translate the word) I should conclude, that before I
receive this report, it behooves me to consider, who is the reporter? Whether he
is to be confided in? Whether the testimony be genuine or spurious? What does
it import? And is it of any concernment to me? In this manner unbelievers are
commanded to hear, and it is by hearing in this manner that faith is obtained,
whereby we call upon the Lord unto salvation.

BESIDES it must be added, that before men believe to justification, they may
be, and ordinarily at least are so far enlightened, by the divine word and
spirit, as to be convinced, in some manner, of the truth and authority of
revelation. -- There are such evidences of the christian religion, obvious to
attentive minds, as are sufficient to convince those who are not spiritually
enlightened, that Jesus Christ and his Apostles were divinely authorized: Since
no man could do such miracles as they did, except God were with them. -- And
therefore a conviction of their obligation, to observe the precepts of the
gospel to sinners, may have such access to their consciences, as to bind them
to obedience. Now surely it is their duty, in this case, to observe the divine
counsels and precepts, from such faith, and such principles (though not in the
highest sense supernatural and spiritual) rather than by presumptuous
disobedience to oppose the convictions of their own conscience, and
despitefully resist the Holy Spirit.

LET us now proceed to the other point proposed to consideration, viz. Whether
any just or well grounded encouragement to obey the divine precepts directed to
the unregenerate in the scriptures, can have access to the mind and conscience,
so as to influence the conduct of one who does not savingly believe in Christ?

I ANSWER. -- There may be a well grounded persuasion that God deals with men
in this world in a way of mercy, and not according to the rigor of justice. The
ordinary dispensations of providence give some intimations that God is
reconcilable to sinners, though not clear and distinct, and full enough to
satisfy an awakened conscience. God has not left himself without witness of his
merciful designs, in that he has so kindly provided for us in this world,
supplying our wants, and filling our hearts with food and gladness, as the
Apostle has observed. He has also furnished us with a great variety of
remedies, under those calamities and diseases, to which sin has made us liable.
The fallen angels are not dealt with in this manner. All this kindness and
mercy which is exercised toward men, gives some comfortable intimation. And
therefore the Apostle urges this as an argument, to persuade the Lystrians to
the christian faith. Acts 14.17.
These were an evidence that the state of fallen man was not absolutely
desperate. Upon these words of the Apostle, Mr. Charnock has this reflection:
To imagine that God had no other design in his long-suffering, but that of
vengeance, had been a notion unsuitable to the goodness and wisdom of God. He
would not have pretended himself to be a friend, if he had harbored nothing
but enmity in his heart against them. It is true death is the end of all men,
and of all these mercies of providence: Yet this hinders not but that, they
intimate the merciful dispositions of God toward sinful man: Otherwise how can
we understand the Apostle's words, the goodness of God leads, that is
encourages or allureth to repentance, if all the goodness of God to sinful
man, in the dispensations of providence, give no comfortable hint, not the
least relief against that terror and despair which a conviction of guilt tends
to produce.

MOREOVER, a person who does not believe to justification, may be persuaded
from the testimony of scripture, that God now commands every man to repent, and
be converted, that their sins may be blotted out; to believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ that they may be saved: And consequently that sinners are on probation
for eternal life, under a constitution of grace. Many favors and privileges
are granted to unbelievers, by virtue of that act of grace which has passed,
through the mediation of the Son of God. A reprieve is granted to them, that
they may be treated with, and called to repentance, upon the foundation of a
covenant of grace. It is true, while they are unbelievers and impenitent, the
condemning sentence of the law stands in force against them; and will be
executed upon all who are not when they die united to Christ, and so interested
in the saving benefits he has purchased, according to the new and gracious
covenant. Yet this is not inconsistent with their being upon probation, under
the gracious dispensation of Jesus Christ the Mediator of the new covenant.
While God's forbearance, and their day of gracious visitation lasts, the door
of mercy is open to them: -- They are not excluded from hope. The sentence of
the law will not be executed upon them, unless they reject the grace of the
gospel.

NOW this being the case, here is great encouragement to the unregenerate to
strive to enter in at the strait gate, by a diligent attendance to prescribed
means. For however they are not at present interested in the special benefits
of the gospel covenant, there is gound to hope that they may obtain an interest
therein. God does not require them to seek for that good which he cannot
honorably bestow, or they are incapable of enjoying. The means God has
required us to use for this end are wisely adapted to it: And men are able to
attend to these means by God's common assistance, as has been before largely
proved. There is, as has been shown, a work of the Holy Spirit preparatory to
our believing to justification. And herein so much knowledge of the gospel is
conveyed to the mind, as not only convinces the sinner that it is his duty to
attend to the prescribed means of grace, but also encourages him in this way to
wait upon God. And I doubt not but that in the work of conversion, the
knowledge of the truth revealed in the gospel, together with the comfort and
encouragement which it brings with it, does, many times at least, if not
commonly, enter the mind by such gradual advances, that it is impossible to
determine with any certainty, how far these illuminations and encouragements
were preparatory to conversion, and at what point of time the principle of
spiritual life was first infused; or when we were first enabled to discern the
things of the Spirit of God in a spiritual manner, and beholding his glory
exhibited in the gospel, were thereby changed into his image.

THE sum of what has been offered under this head of argument, is: The
scriptures expressly require and direct the unregenerate to attend to the
outward means, whereby men are ordinarily bro't to the saving knowledge of the
truth. These commands are not founded upon a covenant of works, requiring
perfcect obedience to the law of nature, in order to eternal life. Nor are they
mere declarations of law or duty, without any encouragements to obedience; but
are consequent upon, and belong to that gracious constitution, which took place
in the world upon the promise of a Savior. These duties are enjoined, as means
of accomplishing God's gracious purposes, in the salvation of sinners,
according to that new and gracious covenant, according to which, to him that
works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
imputed for righteousness. The divine command then, considered in the relation
it bears to the revelation of mercy, and the end for which it is given, not
only lays an obligation of obedience upon the conscience, of every one who
hears the call of the gospel, but also carries an encouraging motive to
endeavors of obedience, antecedent to that faith in Christ, with which
justification is connected by the divine promise. And there is therefore
encouragement to the unregenerate to labor for the meat which endures to
everlasting life, in such a manner as they can, though they are morally unable
to do so, in the manner they ought. Their endeavors in a way of attendance to
prescribed duties, however defective and unholy, have, by the appointment of
God, a good tendency, and are well adapted to subserve those ends and purposes,
for which they are designed and required by God. Indeed were it necessary, that
they who obtain eternal life should all work their way to it by perfect
personal obedience to the law, or were any holy qualifications requisite, to
render us worthy objects of divine mercy, no endeavors of the unregenerate
would avail to any such purposes. But God's mercy is rich and free. It waits
not for amiable qualifications in sinners to draw it forth. God often blesses
his own ordinances for saving good, to those who do not attend upon them in a
worthy manner. Sinners are ordinarily regenerated in the use of appointed
means, Ordinarily God in the effectual dispensation of his grace meets with
them, who attend with diligence on the outward means of it. He does so, I say,
ordinarily, in comparison of them who are despisers and neglecters of them.
Sometimes indeed he goes as it were out of the way, to meet with and bring
home to himself a persecuting Saul, taking of him in, and taking him off, from
a course of open sin and rebellion. But ordinarily he dispenses his peculiar
especial grace, among them who attend to the common means of it. For he will
both glorify his word thereby, and give out pledges of his approbation of our
obedience to his commands and institutions. Owen on the Spirit, page 193.
but there was never one regenerated in a holy attendance upon them.

I HAVE now finished what I proposed to offer in confirmation of the doctrine I
undertook to defend. It has required more pains and time than was expected, to
carry the argument through the intanglement, into which it has been thrown, by
the subtilty of disputants. There are I know several things objected, which
will require a due consideration. But it is more than time to finish at
present. Those objections which seem most worthy of notice, shall be attended
to in the next discourse.

SERMON VI. Objections considered.
MY proposed method now leads me to consider some of the principal objections
to the doctrine which has thus far been contended for. Though a well
established truth is not to be parted with, because it may seem to be pressed
with some difficulties not easily removed (for there may be very puzling
questions started about the most indisputable truths both in nature and
religion) yet it is a good service to the cause of true religion, to take up
the stumbling block out of the way. And this is what will now be attempted. And,

1. IT has been objected, that the duty which God requires of man, is either
the righteousness of the law, or gospel holiness: But the pretended duties to
which unbelievers are exhorted, are neither of these. They are not the
righteousness of the law: For that requires perfect obedience, and denounces
death against the soul that sins. They are not gospel holiness: For that always
flows from faith. -- These duties are then of an ambiguous kind, which have no
encouragement or warrant in scripture.

HOWEVER plausible this may appear, if it is closely examined, it will be found
of no weight. -- And that we may judge of the pertinency of this plea, we must
endeavor to fix the meaning of the terms in which it is expressed.

IF by the righteousness of the law is meant a righteousness to be wrought by
man as the matter of his justification, and ground of his title to eternal
life; then it is denied that this is any duty required of man. God has not
commanded or encouraged any one to seek justification and eternal life by his
own works, as the meritorious ground or condition thereof. Christ indeed
exhorts his disciples to be perfect: So does Paul exhort the Corinthians to
perfect holiness in the fear of God. Yet neither of them exhort to
self-justifying duties. Christ says also to the young ruler, if thou will enter
into life, keep he commandments: And to the lawyer, love God with all thy
heart, and thy neighbor as thy self, and thou shall live. But whatever was his
design herein, it was not to enjoin or countenance an impossible, I may say, a
criminal attempt, to merit eternal life by their own works. The Apostles teach
us, that keeping the commands of God from faith in Christ, is the way to enter
into the kingdom of God. But they never teach us to seek justification in the
sight of God by our own righteousness. I allow then, yea I contend, that
neither unbelievers nor believers are warranted by the holy scriptures to
attempt any thing in a way of duty for the purpose above mentioned.

IF by the righteousness of the law is meant obedience to the commands of God,
from a regard to the authority of God; then I imagine that it is the duty of
all, to whom these commands are made known, to obey them, whether they are
believers or unbelievers. And they are warranted and encouraged by the word of
God to endeavor to obey them. -- Gospel holiness is defined by the Apostle,
keeping the commands of God, And when men unregenerate attend to those
instrumental duties which are enjoined upon them, from a persuasion that God
has commanded them to do so; then they so far obey the divine command, they do
as they ought to do, and as they are encouraged to do, as has been proved at
large.

FINALLY, if we understand by the righteousness of the law a perfect compliance
with the perceptive will of God; then it must be said that this is the duty of
all, and that all are warranted and encouraged to aim at perfection, though it
is certain that none will ever attain to it in this world.

TO plead then in opposition to the arguments which have been offered in the
preceding discourses, that no endeavors of obedience, which fall short of
legal perfection, are required or warranted in scripture to be performed by
men, antecedently to their believing to justification, is plainly begging the
question. The contrary has been proved, viz. that such endeavors of obedience
as men are capable of before they are born again, though far short of
perfection, are by the divine command enjoined upon sinners: And that there are
encouraging inducements to such endeavors in the word of God: And that these
encouragements may be so far apprehended and believed by one who has not saving
faith, that he shall be influenced thereby in his conduct. There is something
required of men in a way of duty, which they are warranted and encouraged to
attend unto, previous to regeneration, and which they have a power by the
common influence of the Holy Spirit so to perform, as that those gracious ends,
for the sake of which it is required, may by this means be answered. And if any
incline to express their contempt of this assertion, by calling such endeavors
dubious or ambiguous, neither legal nor evangelical righteousness, it need not
move us. We are sufficiently kept in countenance by the scripture commands and
exhortations to the unregenerate, and by the commendation which the inspired
historian has given to the conduct of the prudent Deputy, and noble B^reans,
which had a subserviency to their obtaining faith.

2. IT is further objected, that to direct men to duties, as the way to obtain
faith and regeneration, is to assert the expediency and necessity of a
preliminary righteousness of our own, to qualify us for the divine mercy: Which
will, in its necessary consequence, shut out those who are utterly unworthy,
from all comfort or benefit in and by the revelation of divine mercy by Jesus
Christ, designed for the relief and encouragement of the vilest and guiltiest
of mankind.

I ANSWER, If it were pretended that men's attendance to the means of grace
qualified them morally for the divine mercy, or rendered them worthy of a
favorable regard, so that it was expedient or necessary that a sinner should
be conscious of some change in himself for the better, as a recommendation to
the mercy of God, before he has any encouragement or warrant to hope in the
mercy of God, and come to Christ for life, then I own there would be ground for
this exception. But this pretense has been often rejected. Our asserting the
obligation and advantage of attending the means of grace, does not in the least
clog the divine proclamation of mercy in the gospel, or forbid the guiltiest of
mankind to take that comfort and encouragement which the saving truth is
designed to convey to them, whenever it finds access to their conscience. Still
it must and may be maintained, that whosoever will may come and take of the
waters of life freely. But no one will have an ear for this revelation of
mercy, so long as he is stupidly insensible of the misery of a state of sin and
guilt, eagerly engaged in a course of wilful rebellion against the light of his
own conscience, and in pursuit of the vanities of this present world. The
saving truth will not be received into the mind and heart of those, who never
attend to those means, whereby the knowledge of it is conveyed. And therefore
God has commanded sinners to use these outward means; and by the influence of
his Spirit these commands are instrumental to bring and keep them in the way of
his blessing. It is indeed the duty of the unregenerate, to labor for the meat
which endures to everlasting life, for they are commanded so to do. Yet it
does not follow from hence, that God accompanies their endeavors with a
blessing, from a regard to their performances, considered as their duties, or
as inferring a worthiness of his favor; but because they are means of his
appointment. To assert the necessity of human endeavors in this view, in order
to conversion, is not surely to hold the necessity or expediency of a
preliminary human righteousness, to render us worthy of, or give us a right to
the divine mercy through Christ.

BESIDES, if the guiltiest and vilest part of mankind are shut out from hope or
comfort by our asserting the obligation and encouragement of men's using the
means of conversion, in order to their obtaining converting grace. Methinks
that doctrine is equally obnoxious to this objection, which teaches that the
self-righteous devotee is twofold more the child of hell, and in greater danger
of damnation than the profane. If the gospel doctrine must be set in such a
light as to carry a comfortable aspect toward the secure and hardened sinner,
why not also toward the self-righteous? But I forbear. The plain truth is,
without subverting the gospel proclamation, or holding the necessity of a
preliminary human righteousness to recommend us to the divine mercy, we may
maintain that the self-righteous must be humbled, and the careless awakened,
and both as perishing sinners, equally destitute of a claim upon God's justice,
wait upon him in the use of appointed means, for that free mercy, which is
extended to all, and upon all that believe without difference; otherwise Christ
will profit them nothing.

3. IT is objected, that the best actions of the unregenerate, are sinful; so
are an abomination in the sight of God: He neither approves nor will accept
them. Is it not then absurd to suppose that God should command and encourage
such actions as he hates, and will not accept? -- I answer,

1. THOUGH the best actions of the unregenerate are sinfully defective, yet
there is in them something good and right in its proper place and kind. This
has been explained and proved under a former head; which I shall not repeat.

2. THOUGH God does not command and encourage sin, yet he may and does command
and encourage men to such actions, which he knows that if they are done at all
will be done in a sinful manner. The best actions of believers have sin
adhering to them: Yet I think it will not be denied, that they are bound and
encouraged to such duties. If God's commands are in themselves good, and he has
good designs in giving them, there is nothing unworthy of the divine
perfections in supposing that our obedience to them is required and encouraged,
however defective it may be. This does not imply his countenancing evil. So far
as our actions are conformable to his commands, they are good, though much evil
may be mixed with them. Again,

3. THESE actions which are materially good, and done according to the dictates
of conscience, are in some respects approved by God. Thus he did approve of
what Jehu did in cutting off the family of Ahab, and destroying Baal out of
Israel. And he accepted the repentance and reformation of the Ninevites so far,
that he repented of the evil with which he had threatened them, though it is not
thought that their repentance was to eternal life. No actions of the
unregenerate are accepted as gospel holiness, or as sacrifices of a sweet
smelling savor, rewardable with eternal blessings. But God usually connects a
blessing with their endeavors in a way of obedience to his commands, yea such
blessings as are subservient to their eternal well-being. Whatever becomes of
our reasonings and conclusions concerning what is agreeable or disagreable to
the divine perfections, facts will and must stand. The plowing of the wicked
however sinful, is commonly followed with the blessing of God's providence. And
the reading, hearing, praying, etc. of the unregenerate, however unholy, is
usually followed with further knowledge, outward privileges, and inward
influences of the Holy Spirit. We may be sure that there is same mistake in
such reasonings, as lead us to conclude, that it is repugnant to God's
perfections to do that, which is evidently and undeniably done by him.

I WOULD not however intimate, that God connects his blessings with the actions
of men unregenerate, out of regard to any goodness or worthiness in what they
do, or as a reward of their obedience. This must be resolved into his sovereign
pleasure. When the man who was born blind, in obedience to the command of
Christ, went and washed in the pool of Siloam, he did surely as he ought to do:
And his conduct was approved. Yet his cure was not the reward of his obedience,
though he had justly remained blind, had he refused to use the means
prescribed. It was sovereign unmerited goodness that ordained both the end and
means. So it is free grace that connects a blessing with our attending the
means of conversion, and not the worthiness of our performances. We do well to
use the means of God's appointment: Yet the divine blessing is not the reward
of our well doing, but flows from the mere favor and mercy of God. The case is
plain enough, if we would not puzzle ourselves with foolish subtilties. If our
using the means of faith and conversion were as certainly and constantly
connected with our understanding and believing the saving truth, as faith is
with justification and salvation, yea if such a connection was as plainly
declared by a divine promise, there would be no more ground to infer, that God
gives us faith as the reward of our using the means, than that we are justified
by the merit or as the reward of our believing. The divine blessing however
conveyed to us, whether mediately or immediately, flows from God's free grace,
and not from a regard to any thing either done by us, or wrought in us. The
idea of merit may as well be separated from our actions, as from our passive
perception.

4. IT is further objected, that if God prompts and assists and blesses our
endeavors, then our friendly correspondence with God is begun. But before men
are united to Christ, and so justified by faith, there is no friendly
correspondence, between them and God: -- They are the objects of his wrath and
curse. All the exercises of saving mercy to sinners are through Christ, in
consideration of his merits, and consequently presuppose our union to and
interest in him.

THE weakness and absurdity of this objection, will appear from the following
remarks.

1. IF all exercises of saving mercy toward sinners presuppose their union to
and interest in Christ, then mankind were interested in Christ before a
Mediator was provided. For I think it will not be denied that the appointment
of Christ to the office and work of Mediator, was an exercise of saving mercy
toward men. And,

2. THEN sinners are united to Christ before they believe on him. For certainly
it is an exercise of divine mercy to send the call of the gospel to men, and
make them attentive to it, and thereby work faith in them. Yet I think it is
granted on all hands, that it is by faith that we become united to Christ.

3. THEN we are united to Christ before we are united to Christ. For when
soever, and however we are united to him, it cannot be refused, that our first
ingrafting into him, is an exercise of saving mercy.

THE truth is, the promises of the gospel covenant, viz. of pardon,
sanctification, and salvation, are made only to those who are in Christ by a
special and saving union: Which union takes place in and upon our believing.
Till then we are under condemnation, and children of wrath. Yet God does in
various ways exercise his mercy toward sinners, before they are justified by
faith in Christ. He gives them the good things of this life. He sends the
gospel to them. He grants them spiritual privileges. He strives with them by
his Spirit, to excite and assist their attendance to the means of grace. And
some he regenerates, and works faith in, so they are united to Christ federally
and vitally, and inherit the promises of justification, and sanctifying grace.
In a word, God takes various methods, as seems good in his sight, with
sinners, to draw them to Christ, that they may be saved. If this be what is
meant by a friendly correspondence between God and man, it is certain that this
is begun before men are savingly united to Christ, and justified by faith in
him. I deny not that these things are the fruits of Christ's mediation; or that
so far as men are partakers of these favors, they are interested in Christ.
But I maintain that these things do not presuppose a saving union to, and
interest in Christ. So the objection must unavoidably fall, as being pointed
against undeniable fact.

OBJ. 5. BUT till sinners are born again and believe in Christ, they are in a
state of condemnation. Is it not then a glaring absurdity, to say that the
scripture which expressly excludes all such from the kingdom of God, should
contain encouragements to them to hope for salvation? A sentence of
condemnation cuts off all encouragements, as well as promises.

I ANSWER. -- It is granted that there is neither promise nor encouragement to
an unregenerate unbelieving sinner, that he may be saved, while he continues
unregenerate and unbelieving. But it does not follow, because a man is in a
state of condemnation, that there is no reason to hope that he may believe unto
justification, and so pass out of a state of condemnation into a state of
salvation. For then the condition of every unbeliever would be absolutely
desperate. The closest connection that ever any one supposed there was, between
a sinner's attending the means of conversion and obtaining converting grace, is
perfectly consistent with the gospel declaration, "he that believes shall be
saved, and he that believes not is condemned already." These words only
import, that faith is necessary to salvation, or that there are no promises of
salvation to unbelievers; which I think was never denied by any professed
christian; and concludes nothing against the strongest assurance (even by a
divine promise) of converting grace to the unregenerate, upon their seeking for
it in the use of appointed means, which is however more than is here pleaded
for. A promise of converting grace is not a promise of justification and
salvation, nor is it inconsistent with a state of condemnation: Especially if
(as we have been told) there are no promises of salvation to the grace of
regeneration, (though inseperably therewith connected) but to the exercises of
the new nature in faith and repentance. -- God promised his people, when under
correction for their sins, that he would give them a new heart: Yet I think no
one will pretend that they were pardoned, or delivered from a state of
condemnation, till they repented.

OBJ. 6. Unbelievers do with their whole heart reject salvation by Christ; all
their endeavors are acts of opposition to the way of life by him. Is it not
then most unreasonable to suppose, that such endeavors should conduce to their
obtaining faith, or a new heart?

ANSWER I. This is not true without restriction. In some sense persons
unregenerate may seek regenerating grace and salvation, as has been explained
and proved at large formally. And they may also in some respects choose the way,
or use the means in which these blessings are obtained. This they do when they
attend to those instrumental duties of reading, hearing, consideration, prayer,
which are the way and means, in and by which God is pleased to enlighten,
humble, and convert sinners, and so bring them into a state of salvation.

ANSW. 2. Such endeavors as imply a rejection of salvation, and the way of
salvation, in some respects, may be a means of obtaining that divine light and
influence, which shall effectually overcome all our opposition to the gospel,
and cause us to embrace it with all our hearts, as a faithful saying and worthy
of all acceptance. This is not hard to conceive of. Many by examining the
evidences of the truth in order to oppose and confute them, have by this means
been happily convinced. Yea it is no absurdity in the nature of things, to
suppose that there may be the most certain and constant connection between
these things. Though men may have no spiritual sense of the glory of the
gospel, or spiritual desire to experience its transforming power, yet their
attending the means of grace and instruction, may have a connection with, and
conduciveness to this happy effect.

OBJ. 7. IF God has encouraged all those to hope in his mercy who heartily
desire it, and ask for it, the encouragement is as great as can be. Mercy is
offered on the lowest terms possible.

ANS. If a man must be conscious of saving desires, or in other words that his
desires of mercy are sincere, holy and spiritual, before he can warrantably
take any encouragement, or hope for any benefit in attending to the means of
grace, then we must say, woe to that man whose confidence in the heartiness and
sincerity of his desires fails him. -- If a saving desire of mercy is necessary
as a condition or qualification, for a man's obtaining any saving blessings
from God, they surely are in a sad case, who want this requisite, and are
unable to produce or create it in themselves. Deplorable is the state of the
unconverted, if they must first have sincere, that is, holy spiritual desires
of converting grace, before there is any ground to hope for their conversion,
or any warrant or encouragement for their attending the means, in order to the
effecting this blessed change.

THERE is encouragement to the endeavors of the unregenerate on waiting upon
God for his saving mercy, yea such encouragement as may reach, their minds, and
influence their conduct, antecedent to their believing to justification, as has
been formerly shown. What the connection is between attending the means of
conversion, and obtaining converting grace, depends merely upon the will of
God: Its nature and degree are as God has seen, fit to ordain. And all
reasonings concerning this matter from the character or state of the
unregenerate, or the quality of their actions, are nothing to the purpose.

8. IT may be objected, that all the encouragements as well as promises of God
to sinners are in Christ. But they who with their whole heart reject Christ, as
all unregenerate men do, are not in Christ. And it will overthrow the gospel to
say that there are any encouragements for such.

THIS has been in effect answered already. If it concludes any thing in
opposition to the doctrine we are pleading for, it concludes against the
possibility of a sinner's conversion or salvation. For I reckon it is a settled
point, that a sinner is not savingly in Christ previous to faith and
conversion. And when any one will tell me, how it is consistent with the
gospel, for God to bestow faith or converting grace upon one who is not in
Christ, I will tell him, how it is consistent with the gospel, for God to
connect the bestowment of this favor with the use of means, yea and declare
this connection too, for the encouragement of sinners in waiting upon him. If
the author should be thought to need an apology, for taking notice of such
trifling absurd objections, as several of those above mentioned seem to be; he
has this to say, that when such kind of arguments are gravely offered to the
public, though men of better abilities may find better employments, yet it may
not be amiss for writers of a lower class, to show, if they can, that something
may be said in answer to them.


9. IT may be objected that the unregenerate are dead in sin. They have no
desires of spiritual life. And to say that they may concur, or work with God in
introducing a vital principle, or preparing themselves for it, is as absurd as
it would be to say, that dead Lazarus did something toward his resurrection.

ANSWER. The nature and consequences of spiritual death have in a former
discourse been enquired into. [To which the reader is referred for a particular
answer to this objection.] And therefore it is sufficient to say at present,
that though an unregenerate man is morally unable to do any acts of religious
obedience in a holy manner, yet he is able to attend the common means of
conversion in such a manner, that by the divine blessing, they may be effectual
for those good ends, for the sake of which they are appointed and prescribed.
--

OBJ. 10. To suppose that the unregenerate are commanded and encouraged to seek
salvation in attendance to religious duties, and that the grace of regeneration
is ordinarily obtained in this way, seems not consistent with the gospel
doctrine of sovereign free grace. For then, we must conclude, that the divine
favor is turned toward the sinner, because of some comparative worthiness
beheld in him; and so he has whereof to glory.

ANSWER. It is granted that God is sovereign in the exercises of his mercy. His
grace is freely bestowed. He owes his favor to none, but has a right to do
what he will with his own. But without the least inconsistence with the
scripture doctrine of sovereign free grace, it may be maintained, that men are
required to seek salvation in attendance to appointed means, and that there is
such a connection between seeking and obtaining, that they who use the means
should ordinarily attain to the end to which they are subordained. Yea if God
be sovereign in the exercises of his mercy, he may then certainly glorify his
grace in such a way, if he please, as well as in another. That doctrine rather
detracts from the divine sovereignty, which pretends from certain reasonings
about antecedent fitness, to determine, that it is unsuitable for the great
God, to extend his unmerited mercy to sinful creatures, in such a way as has
here been pleaded for. This I think may properly be called limiting the Holy
One. Not that we are to suppose that the exercise of wisdom and holiness has no
place in God's sovereign appointments. But we must not object our preconceived
notions of what is wise and fit, against the ways and dispensations of God.

DIVINE sovereignty is manifested in appointing the way and manner in which, as
well as the objects upon whom, the riches of free grace are to be displayed.
God's favors are not the less free, because dispensed in a certain established
order or method, and in the way of means, rather than in any other manner. It
is sovereign goodness that confers on men common, as well as spiritual and
saving blessings: Yet we see, that in the common dispensations of providence,
there is a connection between means and ends. It is sovereign goodness that
gives us the necessaries and comforts of life, with every other temporal mercy:
Yet human endeavors are usually requisite, as means of acquiring these
blessings.

WE must then say, that spiritual blessings are the free gifts of God,
notwithstanding they are bestowed by God and received by us in a similar way;
or else we must say, that the good things of providence are not free gifts.
There is as much reason for our neglecting all care about providing for a
comfortable and honest subsistence in this world, lest we should entrench upon
the sovereign freeness of God's mercies, as to neglect the care of our souls,
upon any such plea, or pretense. -- The common sense of mankind would condemn
his folly, who should refuse to labor for the meat that perishes, or even eat
or drink, or take any care of himself, lest he should disown the free goodness
of God in all his enjoyments. Why is it not then as absurd, to refuse to labor
for the meat which endures to everlasting life, in the use of God's appointed
means, lest it should imply a denial of the sovereign freeness of divine grace?

WHATEVER connection there may be between our attending the means of grace, and
receiving effectual influences from the divine Spirit, the sovereignty of God
in the exercises of mercy may be maintained to be fully consistent therewith:
And the glory of our salvation from first to last will be due to free grace. It
was of God's free grace, that any of the children of men were chosen in Christ
to salvation, before the foundation of the world. It was of grace that the
mediator was provided, and his obedience and sufferings accepted as the price
of our redemption, and the way of reconciliation through him proposed to us. It
was by preventing grace that we have been prompted to attend to the outward
means, whereby the benefits of redemption are applied to the vessels of mercy.
And it is by the special grace and influence of the Holy Ghost, that they
become effectual to conversion and salvation.

OBJ. II. To direct men to seek salvatlon by attending the means of grace, (as
they are called) will encourage them to depend upon their own righteousness,
and vainly attempt to recommend themselves to God by their duties: which will
lead them away from Christ, and the grace of God revealed in the gospel, to
trust in themselves.

ANSWER. Though it be true that self dependence is very natural to fallen man,
and though sinners are perhaps always influenced in some degree by a
self-righteous spirit, in their acts of religious obedience, yet it is not
true, that a diligent attendance to the means of grace has a tendency to
confirm and encourage an undue dependence upon their own righteousness and
strength. It has indeed a tendency to the very reverse, to lead them to a right
view of themselves, which is the only effectual cure of a self-righteous
spirit. Many people seem to think, that sinners which take most pains in
religious duties, and strive more earnestly to enter into the kingdom of God,
are the most self-righteous, and disposed to trust in their own performances.
But this is a mistake. They who are most serious and engaged in striving to
enter in at the strait gate are usually more sensible of their manifold
defects, than such as live in a stupid neglect of religious duties, or a
careless attendance to them. They who are awakened, and earnestly engaged in
the concerns of their eternal state, are more likely to be convinced of the
breadth and spirituality of the divine law, the sinfulness of their own hearts
and lives, and that they have no righteousness by which they can be justified
in the sight of the holy God. I grant that an awakened sinner may be very much
influenced by a self-righteous spirit, in his religious endeavors; but he is
not usually so much under it, as they are, who are careless, and take little
pains about the things of their eternal peace. And if he perseveres with
seriousness and earnestness, pressing into, or toward the kingdom of God,
there is a probability that he will at length be sensibly convinced of the
insufficiency of his false confidences, in which he used to seek shelter when
pressed with conviction of sin, as to abandon them all, and fly for refuge to
lay hold on the hope set before us in the gospel.

FOR it is to be remembered, that the ordinances of Christ on which sinners are
called to attend, are designed and adapted, to convey that light and
instruction to their mind, whereby their mistakes may be discovered and
corrected. The reading and preaching of the word are means of divine
appointment, to turn men from darkness to light. The gospel revelation is
strongly pointed against the error of those who establish and trust in their
own righteousness, rejecting the righteousness and grace of God. Now an
attentive reading, hearing and meditating on the great doctrines of the gospel,
has a tendency, by the blessing of God, to lead them into just views of things,
and detect those errors which lay the bottom of their self-righteous confidence.

MOREOVER, we ought to consider well what we mean, when we speak of regarding
or renouncing our own doing. For it must be acknowledged, that our endeavors
in attendance to duties are, in some respects, and in their proper place,
useful and necessary, and ought so to be considered by us. In other respects
our performances are of no account at all. We must not think that any thing
which a sinner can do will avail in the least degree to atone for his sin, or
merit salvation, or move God's pity, etc. But we must not say that human
endeavors are useless in every respect. They have a subserviency to the
conversion and salvation of mankind, and are therefore required and encouraged
by God. And we may warrantably hope for the divine blessing, when we are
excited and enabled to use the means by which it is usually obtained. I frankly
own, that I cannot understand the consistency of exhorting men to duties, and
yet at the same time requiring them to disregard and overlook them, as wholly
useless in every respect, absolutely good for nothing. And however people may
essay to do so, they will always find it an impossible attempt. They may be
regarded in their proper place, of subserviency to our eternal interest,
without a self-righteous dependence on them. If any one is at a loss how to
conceive of this, let him consider, that the faith, repentance, and good works
of true christians, are in their place useful and necessary to salvation, and
may properly be attended to; and regarded by them in this view. Yet a
self-righteous attention and regard to our own character is always sinful, and
contrary to the gospel: Which shows, that there may be a respect to our own
works, which is not self-righteous. Hence we find Paul rejoicing in the
testimony of his conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, he had his
conversation in the world; and exhorting professed believers to prove their own
work, that they might have rejoicing in themselves, and not in another. It is
not a self-righteous dependence upon their own works, for men to hope for a
blessing in the use of those means which God has prescribed and encouraged them
to, if their hope does not spring from the supposed worthiness or merit of
their own performances, but from the will and gracious appointment of him, who
works all things according to the counsel of his own will.

LASTLY, the words of the Prophet Isaiah may be objected, I am found of them
that sought me not.

ANSWER I. The Prophet in these words foretells the conversion of the Gentiles,
this is the most obvious meaning they exhibit; and they are accordingly
understood and applied by the Apostle. I am sought of them, says God, that
asked not for me, that is by the heathen who once asked not for me, nor knew
me. I am found of them, that formerly sought me not, but paid all their worship
to idols and false gods. But these words do not imply that God manifests
himself savingly to men, before they seek him, by an attendance to those means
whereby he makes himself known: No more than the first clause of the verse, I
am sought of them that asked not for me, imply that God is sought before he is
asked for.

2. IT is granted that God visits men with the call of the gospel, and
influence of his Spirit, previous to their seeking him. That is, divine grace
prevents or is before hand of human endeavors. But this is not inconsistent
with the doctrine I have here been defending. For there is a work of the divine
word and Spirit preparatory to regeneration and conversion; whereby sinners are
influenced and enabled to wait upon God in the use of means, and hear his voice
speaking peace to their consciences in the gospel.

3. THOUGH it be granted, that God may and does sometimes work faith in the
hearts of men without any use of the common means of grace, as in the instance
of Paul's conversion, yet this is plainly extraordinary; and is to be reckoned
among his miraculous operations, as much as revealing his will by an audible
voice from heaven. The same Saul, who was surprised on the road to Damascus,
declares expressly, that this is not the ordinary way in which God calls sinners
to the faith and grace of the gospel. Nothing can be concluded against the
necessity of attending God's common prescribed means, from such extraordinary
dispensations.

THESE appear to me to be the most considerable objections that we are at
present concerned with. Whether they are of sufficient weight to invalidate the
foregoing arguments, let every one judge for himself in simplicity and godly
sincerity. And so I have in some manner considered and spoken to the several
particulars proposed, for the illustration and proof of the doctrine. The next
discourse will finish our present undertaking, with pointing out some of the
uses to which the truth thus far insisted on is to be applied.

SERMON VII. The Uses of the Doctrine.
AS every truth of divine revelation is profitable for doctrine, reproof,
correction, and instruction in righteousness, so we may conclude, that those
truths are especially useful, which are plainly declared, and frequently
inculcated. Such I apprehend is the doctrine, which has thus far been treated
of. To direct you to a right improvement and application of what has been
delivered, shall be the business of this discourse, with which I shall shut up
the whole argument. And as I have dwelt longer upon it than was intended, or
expected, what remains must be dispatched, with all possible brevity. And,

1. WE may hence learn, in what manner sinners are to be addressed, in the
dispensation of the word. In general, the doctrines and precepts of the gospel
must be opened, vindicated and applied. But then the special cases of different
persons require particular applications suited to them. And it must be the
concern of the faithful and wise steward, to give to every one his portion in
due season. He must study to show himself approved of God, a workman that
neeaeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth He must endeavor
to the best of his skill, that each one may receive that instruction, and
attend to those admonitions from the word of God, which are most suitable to
his particular case. The hearers of the gospel are very apt to make a wrong
application of divine truths. Particularly impenitent sinners often comfort
themselves with promises, which belong only to true believers. It is therefore
necessary that men be urged unto, and directed in the work of self-examination;
cautioned against false marks of grace, and the misapplication of true ones:
And then persons are to he accussed according to their different characters,
with such instructions and exhortations, as are best adapted to their case and
circumstances. If we attend to the discourses of Christ and his apostles, (not
to mention the prophets under the old testament) we may perceive a plain
difference in their address, when speaking to sinners, and saints. And we may
and ought surely to aim at the imitation of such unexeptionable patterns.

AS the case of those who are in a state of sin and guilt, is greatly different
from the case of those, who being justified by faith have peace with God; so
there is a manifest difference between the secure, and the awakened sinner;
which ought to be regarded in addressing the counsels of heaven to them. The
first thing to be attempted with the careless sinner, is to put him upon
consideration, and convince him of his sin and danger. For 'till this is
effected, the revelation of divine grace in the gospel, designed for the
comfort and relief of the guilty, will not be attended to, and cordially
embraced. But when by the influence of the divine Spirit, a conviction of sin
is fastened upon the conscience, then the sinner must be solemnly reminded of
the danger of relapsing into his former carnal security; and accordingly he is
to be cautioned against whatever has a tendency to harden the heart, sear the
conscience, and quench the Spirit. The gospel way of salvation must be plainly
declared, the evidence and excellency of the saving truth displayed, an hearty
acquiescence in the gospel covenant urged, and the necessity of a supernatural
influence in order to regeneration and conversion, must be asserted. In fine, a
diligent attendance on the means of grace must be so inculcated and encouraged,
as is best adapted to the design of God in prescribing them viz. that
conviction and humiliation may be promoted, and the sinner led to Christ: Not
that a self-righteous peace and security of conscience be encouraged, or divine
mercy expected as a congruous reward of human endeavors.

SOME it is likely will pervert such counsels and directions to the
encouragement of pharisaical pride, how cautious soever we may be to guard
against such an abuse. But we ought notwithstanding to declare the whole
counsel of God, and keep back nothing that may be profitable to the souls of
men. The doctrine of free grace has also been abused into an encouragement to
sin; yet every christian ought to assert it, and contend for it. Whoever so
perverts the gospel, as to encourage himself either in a proud dependence upon
his own righteousness and strength, or a careless neglect of duty, does it as
his peril, and must bear his iniquity.

2. FROM what has been offered in the preceding discourses, it appears that
they are to be reproved, who indulge themselves in a careless neglect of the
means of grace, or labor for the meat which endures to eternal life in other
ways, or for other ends, than God has required; or who encourage others in such
neglects and mistakes. To each of these cases I shall say something distinctly.
And,

(1.) TO those who do not labor at all, who use no endeavors, to obtain the
meat which endures to everlasting life. And how many are there of this
character, careless sinners, who live as if they had no souls to save or lose;
as if all that the scriptures teach us, concerning the judgment to come, the
joys of heaven and the sorrows of hell, were idle dreams not to be regarded;
and their only concern were to provide for the present life, having nothing to
expect beyond the grave.

I NEED not, I ought not to make any apology, for addressing you with all the
boldness and plainness of reproof for your inexcusable neglect of duty and
interest. At the same time a poor sinner, who must own, that the point and edge
of the severe things he has to say to others falls deeply upon himself, ought
not to glory over the most obnoxious, or bring railing accusations against
them; but remember to pay all men that honor and respect which is due to them;
In meekness instructing them that oppose themselves, if peradventure God will
give them repentance; and that they may recover themselves out of the snare of
the evil, who are led captive by him at his will.

WERE you indeed like the horse and mule which have no understanding, you would
not have sin, though you should live like the beasts that perish. But the
inspiration of the Almighty has given you understanding, and made you capable
of enquiring after God your maker. You have immortal souls, in danger of
everlasting destruction, but yet through the mercy of God, and the mediation of
Christ, capable of eternal salvation. And now is your accepted time, and day of
salvation. The door of hope now stands open to you; and you are commanded to
strive to enter in; to seek the Lord while he may be found, to call upon him
while he is near. You have all fit encouragement to do so. Is it not then folly
and madness beyond the possibility of exaggeration, for creatures in such a
state to compose themselves in stupid security, sinking to irretrievable ruin,
and not endeavor, or use the means which God has prescribed, to obtain a lot
in the heavenly inheritance? Is it of more necessity or importance to you to
make provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, than to secure that
better part which never shall be taken away. Those objects you are now so
eagerly pursuing, while you neglect the care of your souls, will soon fail you.
Your life itself is a vapor, presently vanishing away. All your acquisitions
of worldly goods, will soon be of no more advantage to you than your last
night's dream. But the joys and sorrows of the world to come are weighty and
durable.

I KNOW men are full of excuses, when they neglect to comply with their duty*
Secure sinners may perhaps plead, as I have sometimes heard them, that they
have no power to do any thing required of them in a right manner: That it were
as well to attempt nothing in a way of religious obedience, as not to act from
gracious principles: That the prayers of the wicked are an abomination; and
that God is found of them that seek him not, etc. And I wish there were no
reason to complain of some professed christians, for teaching unsound doctrines
upon this head. The most colorable pleas, whereby sinners may be tempted to
quiet themselves in a careless neglect of their souls salvation, have been in
some manner considered and confused. And though I doubt not but some are so
ingeniously wicked, as to be able to make shrewd replies to all that has been,
or can be offered to this purpose, yet the day is coming, when all their vain
pleas, will be effectually silenced, and their mouths stopped. And they will
mourn in earnest that they have hated instruction, and hardened their heart
against reproof; and that when they had such a price in their hand, they had no
heart to improve it.

(2) WHAT has been offered on our present subject, may be applied for the
reproof and correction of those, who though they take pains in seeking
salvation, yet do not seek in the way that God has prescribed. They make use of
means of human invention, and not of divine institution. Of this error the
church of Rome is to a great degree guilty, whose religious service is quite
overrun with superstition and will worship, yea with idolatry, and abominable
wickedness. And many othrrs are to be reproved, for leaving the ordinances and
commands of God, and betaking themselves to human inventions. We have no reason
to hope, that God will accompany with his blessing those religious observances
which he has not required. These things will rather inflame his jealousy, and
provoke him to withdraw his benedictive presence from those who are occupied
therein.

THEY also are to be reproved, as not seeking in the way of God's appointment,
who allow themselves in the neglect of some means which they are commanded to
attend to, though they do not wholly neglect all. Our attending public
ordinances, will not supersede the necessity and usefulness of the more private
duties of reading, meditation, and prayer. Nor will our observance of these,
excuse our forsaking the assemblies for public worship. And the most punctual
and exact attendance to devotional exercises public and private, does not
dispense with our obligation to watch and guard against temptations, etc.
Surely it is presumption for any to declare practically a contempt of any
divine ordinance, as useless, or unnecessary. God will honor all his
institutions. And perhaps this is one great occasion why many who seek to enter
in at the strait gate are not able, viz. that they are not careful to avoid
every thing which may be an impediment to their entrance, and use all those
means which God has prescribed, in order to their conversion and salvation.

(3.) THEIR error is also to be reproved, who propose wrong ends in their
religious performances. This is a common mistake, and of bad tendency. I grant
that no unregenerate man acts for holy ends: Yet it must be maintained, that
they are capable of acting for such ends as are in themselves lawful and good,
in their proper place, though corrupted by a sinful defect. And though this
defect must not in any measure be countenanced, yet men may properly be
exhorted and encouraged to do what is materially good from a defective end,
rather than not do it at all; as has been formerly declared and vindicated.

WHILE we inculcate the necessity of human endeavors, we must take care not to
countenance or abet the abuse of them. This must be testified against and
reproved with all confidence. And it should be the concern of every one, as he
tenders his soul's salvation to guard against so common and dangerous an error.
In particular, they who by attending the means of grace are seeking to
establish their own righteousness, or acquire a peculiar claim to the divine
mercy, as subjects morally qualified for it, or worthy of it, may find matter
of reproof and correction in the preceding discourses. While you act with such
views as these, you do but spend your money for that which is not bread, and
your labor for that which satisfies not. As the case is with you at present,
God does not require you to endeavor after, or even desire any personal
worthiness, as a recommendation to his favor, or meritorious ground of
justification. The righteousness of Christ so fully and effectually answers the
purposes of an atonement, and ransom, and ground of acceptance, that all
desires of contributing any thing hereto by our own righteousness, as
co-efficient with his merits, is now become not only vain, but criminal and
pernicious. Perhaps it will be said, that if men unregenerate attempt any thing
in a way of religious obedience, they will certainly and unavoidably act for
self-righteous purposes. For they can propose no other ends. And it is in vain
to exhort men to act while we take away the end of action. I answer this is not
the place to dispute these matters, and indeed it is unhappy that a subject so
important and practical has been so embarrassed with disputes. But however let
it be considered, First. Supposing that sinners do always act for
self-righteous ends, their error is nevertheless to be reproved. This is the
fault, and not merely the unhappiness of depraved nature. They are to be called
to diligent endeavors, and at the same time every corruption or defect therein
must be duly testified against. Perhaps believers are never quite free from the
influence of a self-righteous spirit, in any acts of religious obedience. And
it is certain that they are sinfully deficient in their best duties. Yet they
are to be pressed to duties, notwithstanding this corrupt alloy, which is
however to be reproved, and they to be called upon to purge it out more and
more. Secondly. Unregenerate men may, in attending the means of grace, act for
other ends than to establish their own righteousness, in opposition to the
righteousness of God; even for such ends as however defective, are not in
themselves simply unlawful. There are other motives to duty, besides the hope
of working out a justifying righteousness, which an unregenerate man is capable
of being influenced by. Thirdly. The work of conviction and humiliation usually
proceeds gradually, as well as the work of sanctification. It is by degrees
that men are brought off from their false confidences. In some a self-righteous
spirit reigns without control; in others it is much checked and disturbed by
conviction, and even wounded to death. A just view of the divine law will do
this, without a saving belief of the gospel. And when men begin to be convinced
of the vanity of their false confidences, they are capable of receiving reproof
for their past error, and of being upon their guard against deception for the
time to come. And if they do so, and continue attentive to the means of further
light and conviction, there is reason to hope that they will at length come out
of the darkness and delusion of a state of sin, into the light of a new and
divine life. In fine, if the unregenerate are not to be directed to attend the
appointed means of grace, lest they should act from a self-righteous spirit,
then neither ought they to neglect them, lest their neglect spring from the
same principle. Some men may take as much pride in sitting still, as others do
in working. They may glory over pharisees with the same spirit, as pharisees
did over publicans.


WHILE you act with such mistaken ends and views, you do but weary yourselves
in vain; and prevent the means prescribed by the compassionate Physician of
souls, to an intention for which they were never designed. If ever you receive
any saving benefit by attending the means of grace, these false ends must
sooner or later be given up. Nor will you regret the loss of such delusive
hopes, when you find your endeavors animated by more comfortable views, than
while engaged in fruitless self-righteous labors, and your path, as the rising
light, shining more and more to the perfect day.

(4.) THEY are also to be reproved, who encourage in others a neglect or abuse
of the prescribed means of grace. I doubt not, indeed, but some men's hearts are
better than their heads, and that they may be so imposed upon, as to admit in
speculation, and plead for unsound opinions, contrary to their own experience,
temper, and practice, though they are strangely inattentive to it. But that
charity which inclines us to think favorably of them, should excite us with
confidence to reprove their errors. They are earnestly to be opposed, who teach
that the scriptures do not require and encourage sinners to labor for the meat
which endures to everlasting life. Such doctrines are false and dangerous,
tending to quiet the most presumptuous and hardened sinners, in their
destructive courses. And O how dreadful must it appear, to every one who has
any sensibility of heart, to deceive poor sinners to their destruction, and be
cursed by miserable wretches in the flames of hell, as the authors of their
eternal ruin, by encouraging, under any pretense whatever, a disregard to God's
commands!

AND if the abuse of the prescribed means of grace be so great and dangerous an
evil as has been declared, then they are to be reproved, who encourage and
confirm men herein; such are herein physicians of no value. How unhappily are
they employed, who inculcate duties upon sinners only in a legal manner, and
for legal purposes, that they may hereby render themselves worthy of salvation,
and establish their own righteousness, in the place of the Redeemer's merits.
Surely Paul would not have opposed with so much vehemence those who in this
manner frustrate the grace of God, if he had not thought them worthy of sharp
reproof.

BUT I cannot undertake to point out and illustrate all the uses of our
doctrine. I only ask your attention to the EXHORTATION, which speaks in the
first place to the hearers of the gospel in general. Take heed that you neglect
not a diligent attendance to those divine ordinances, in which God has directed
and commanded you to seek to him, and wait upon him. Endeavor, in the best
manner you can, to observe the ordinances and commandments of the Lord, whether
you are in a state of regeneration or not. If you think to wait 'till a saving
change is evidenced to you, by some immediate suggestion, or otherwise, before
you give a practical attention to the precepts of the gospel directed to you,
there is danger of your being given up, either to enthusiastic delusion and a
reprobate mind, or to greater hardness of heart. You will never attain to the
assurance of hope, or be certain that your faith is sincere, 'till its fruits
appear, to the satisfaction of your own conscience. Let no scruples about your
good estate, keep you back from a serious compliance with your duty, according
to your present light and ability. Read the word of God with serious attention.
See that you despise not him that speaks. Hear the word preached. Make the
best use you can of human instruction, but call no man father upon earth. Weigh
well the evidences of every doctrine that challenges a religious regard.
Examine yourselves by the unerring oracles of God. And be daily addressing your
earnest supplications to the Father of lights, and God of all grace, that he
would extend his mercy to you, and grant you that light and grace whereby you
may glorify him, and be forever happy in his favor. This is your duty, and to
this you are encouraged, whether you are regenerate or not. May a person who is
unregenerate pray for the spirit of regeneration to effect that work in him?
Answer, Persons convinced of sin, and a state of sin, may and ought to pray,
that God by the effectual communications of his spirit unto them would deliver
them from that condition. This is one way whereby we flee from the wrath to
come. The especial object of their supplications herein is sovereign grace,
goodness and mercy as declared in and by Jesus Christ. Such persons indeed
cannot plead any especial promise as made unto them, but they may plead for the
grace and mercy declared in the promises, as indefinitely proposed to sinners.
It may be they can proceed no further in their expectations but unto that of
the Prophet; who knows if God will come and give a blessing, Joel 2.14. Yet
is this a sufficient ground and encouragement to keep them waiting at the
throne of grace. Owen on the Spirit, page 361.

Deus non jubet impossibilia, ^ed jubendo monet et facere quod possis, et
petere quod non possis. Augus. --


Exert yourselves then with persevering diligence, in laboring for the meat
which endures to everlasting life. And let this consideration animate you,
that as God is not slack concerning his promises, so he is not wont to
disappoint the hopes which he has encouraged. We make much account of the
encouragement of a good and faithful man, and shall we slight such glorious
encouragement, which a good and faithful God proposes to us. But take heed that
you put not your endeavors in the place of Christ and his righteousness. Rest
not your hopes of pardon and acceptance with God upon the supposed merit of
your own works. This foundation must be forsaken and you must betake yourselves
to that which God has laid in Zion, 1 Pet. 2.6.
or the whole superstructure, how much labor soever you may lay upon it, will
fall. Be attentive to the end of your actions, as well as to your actions
themselves. Guard against such an abuse of the means of grace, as tends to
frustrate the grace of God, and the great design of the gospel, which is, that
the loftiness of man way be humbled, and the haughtiness of men bowed down, and
the Lord alone may be exalted. Isai. 2.11, 17.


CONSIDER, that if through a slothful neglect of the means of conversion you
should perish in your sins, you will be peculiarly inexcusable. You will have
no pretense of inability, or want of encouragement, to plead in extenuation of
your guilt. Prove. 1.20, 22.
Wisdom has cried aloud, she has uttered her voice in the streets, how long ye
simple ones will ye love simplicity, and ye fools hate knowledge? Turn ye at my
reproof. And if men will set at naught God's counsel, and despise his reproof,
if they will walk in the way of their own heart and in the sight of their own
eyes, they will have no cloak for their sin. This will be their condemnation,
that light came into the world, but they loved darkness rather than light. Joh.
3.19.


HOWEVER men may at present quiet their conscience, and ward off a conviction
of their sin and folly, in neglecting to wait upon God for his mercy in the way
he has appointed, you have no reason to expect that God should regenerate you,
while you will not attend to the outward and ordinary means, whereby he is wont
to effect this happy change. You expect not the meat that perishes without
laboring for it; and it would be presumption for you to expect the meat which
endures to everlasting life, while through sloth, love of the world and sin,
you will not seek for it. We cannot obtain a new heart unless God give it to
us, yet he will for this be enquired of by us, Ezekiel. 36.37.
If the Author should be charged, (as others have been) with "strangely
misunderstanding this text," it will be incumbent on those who would support
the charge, to make it appear, either, that the word in the original,
translated I will be enquired of, constantly and certainly implies a new heart
in the subject enquiring. Which is confuted by many other texts, particularly
Psalm. 78.84. where the same verb is used in the Hebrew. Or they must prove,
that no duties are to be performed by sinners preparatory to regeneration. And
if any will do this, without insulting the ashes of those great and good men
who have been of the contrary opinion, (such as the British Divines at the
Synod of Dort, before quoted, Dr. Owen, Mr. Shepard, Mr. Edwards, etc.) they
shall be attended to. But 'till this is done, it does not appear that these
words in Ezekiel have been misunderstood at all, in being applied to the
unregenerate, in the manner they commonly have been. And much less that they
have "been strangely misunderstood."
God may work miracles indeed in feeding a Prophet, or calling an Apostle, but
the ordinary dispensation of the blessings of God's providence and grace is in
another manner.

THE other part of the exhortation belongs especially to those who have some
special opportunities and advantages of being serviceable to others, in their
spiritual interests. Let such be persuaded to endeavor the conversion and
salvation of souls, in the use of those means and ordinances which God has
prescribed. It is no doubt the hearts desire and prayer of every true christian
for others, that they may be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. But
consider, my brethren, that inoperative wishes do not discharge our obligation;
no nor the most fervent prayers to God, for the pouring out of his Spirit upon
mankind for their conversion. There are means to be used by every one of us for
this purpose. We must labor that others, as well as our selves, may obtain the
meat which endures to everlasting life. I know we cannot create a new heart in
others; no more can we in ourselves. It belongs to God to make converts; but it
belongs to us to use the means. May God imprint upon the hearts of all the
ministers of the gospel, a lively sense of their obligation to watch for souls,
as those who must give account; that they way save themselves and those that
hear them. And let parents and householders suffer the word of exhortation, to
labor for the conversion of those, who by the providence of God are especially
committed to their care. Bring up your children in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord: Train them in the way wherein they should go; and travail in birth
for them, 'till Christ be formed in their souls. Command your household to keep
the way of the Lord. Instill pious and Christian instruction into their tender
minds. Bring them acquainted with the holy scriptures from their childhood.
Endeavor to excite their serious and practical attention to the one thing
needful. Restrain them from sin and temptation. Do what in you lies to engage
them to an early acquaintance with God; and that they may remember their
Creator, and Redeemer, in the days of their youth.

IF you, by the blessing of God, should be instrumental to persuade them to
choose that better part which never shall be taken away, how much better will
they be provided for, than if you could give them all the world for their
portion. You have peculiar advantages, and inducements to exert yourselves with
the warmest zeal and affection, in this work and labor of love. Let the love
of Christ, a concern for your own salvation, and the natural affection you bear
to those with whom you are so closely connected, conspire to persuade you
hereto.

BUT though your charity may properly begin at home, it should not end there.
Can we take a view of the sad state of the world, and not feel a tender
compassion toward so many immortal creatures, in danger of perishing
miserably. Let all christians then contribute, in such ways as they are
capable, to the propagation of the gospel among infidels. And let them exhort
one another daily, lest any be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; let
them cause their light to shine before men, that they may see their good works,
and glorify God. But in what ways we are to labor for the conversion and
salvation of our fellow men, cannot here be particularly declared.

GREAT and manifold are the motives, whereby these duties might be inculcated
upon the conscience of a christian. But nothing need be added to excite those
who duly consider, on the one hand, how awful it will be to be charged as the
occasion of eternal perdition to poor souls; and on the other, the divine
happiness of having the blessing of many ready to perish come upon us. He who
converteth a sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death.
And they who turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars forever and
ever.

TO shut up all, such as sincerely endeavor the advancement of Christ's
kingdom, in the conversion of sinners, whatever be their success, may be
encouraged to persevere, as knowing that their labor shall not be in vain.
Though Israel should not be gathered, they shall be glorious in the eyes of the
Lord, and their God shall be their strength.

FINIS.

