A REPRESENTATION OF FACTS, Relative to the CONDUCT of DANIEL MOORE, Esquire;
Collector of His Majesty's Customs at Charlestown, In SOUTH CAROLINA. From the
Time of his Arrival in MARCH, 1767, TO THE Time of his Departure in SEPTEMBER
following. TRANSMITTED By the Merchants of Charlestown, TO Charles Garth,
Esquire, in London, Agent for the Province of South Carolina; AND, Recommended
in a Letter from the Honorable The COMMITTEE of CORRESPONDENCE.

CHARLESTOWN, SOUTH CAROLINA: Printed by CHARLES CROUCH, at his
Printing-Office in Elliott-street. 1767.

SOUTH CAROLINA. By his Excellency the Right Honorable Lord CHARLES GREVILLE
MONTAGU, Captain General, Governor, and Commander in Chief in and over the said
Province, and Vice Admiral of the same.
To all whom these Presents shall come, etc.
KNOW ye, that FENWICKE BULL, Esquire, before whom the several Affidavits and
Attestations to the Papers hereunto annexed were made and taken, is a
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, and one of
his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for Berkley County, in the Province
aforesaid. THEREFORE all due Faith and Credit is and ought to be had and given
to them.

IN TESTIMONY whereof I have hereunto set my Hand, and caused the Great Seal of
this His Majesty's said Province, to be affixed at Charlestown, this Second
Day of October, Anno Domini, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, and in
the Seventh Year of His Majesty's Reign.

Signed, C. G. MONTAGU. By his Excellency's Command, T. SKOTTOWE, Secretary.
L.S.




SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall, or may Concern,
That on this Twenty-second Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY came and appeared Gabriel
Manigault, John Neusville, John Chapman, John Gordon, Thomas Shirley, and Henry
Laurens, Merchants, dwelling in Charlestown, in the Province aforesaid, who
being severally and duly sworn upon the Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, made
Oath and declared, That on or about the Twenty-sixth Day of May last past,
there having been diverse Complaints among the Merchants in the said Place, of
enhanced Fees and Exactions at the Custom-House, since the Arrival of Daniel
Moore, Esquire Collector of the Customs; several of which Complaints were founded
upon Circumstances and Facts, within their own Knowledge; and also having heard
that the said Daniel Moore, Esquire had contrary to the Practice of his Predecessor
in Office, the late Hector Berenger De Beaufain, Esquire demanded and received Fees
for granting or signing Indico Certificates; and further, that he had
particularly required and insisted upon every decked Boat and Schooner going to
any of the neighboring Rivers and Plantations within this Province, whether
laden or light, to take out Registers, and also Permits from him the said
Collector, as well as to enter into Bond; for which Bond and Permit, a certain
Sum of Money was to be paid to the said Collector, and One-third Part of the
said Sum to the Comptroller of the Customs: They the said Gabriel Manigault,
John Neusville, John Chapman, John Gordon, Thomas Shirley, and Henry Laurens,
did then, and at the particular Desire of a great Majority of the Merchants and
Traders in Charlestown, (and understanding at the same Time, that it would
also be particularly agreeable to the Collector to have an Interview and
Ecclaircissement with the Merchants) wait upon him the said Collector at his
own House, as a Committee from the Body of Merchants, to Address and
Remonstrate to him, upon the general Complaints abovementioned. At their first
Visit, the Collector not being prepared to receive them, they the said
Committee retired, and waited upon him again, by his own Appointment, the Day
following; and then Gabriel Manigault, Esquire speaking on Behalf of the Rest,
informed the Collector of the general Complaint of Merchants and Masters of
Vessels, that the Fees taken at the Custom-House were of late greatly
increased, and that it had been also alleged, that Fees for signing Indico
Certificates, contrary to Law and Custom, had of late been demanded, and taken
by him the said Collector: That the Merchants were very sorry that there was
any ground for Complaint, and that it was their earnest Wish and Desire, to
maintain a right Understanding, and to live in Harmony with him the said
Collector, as they had heretofore had the Happiness of in the Time of the late
Collector, Mr. Hector Berenger De Beaufain: To the first Complaint, the
Collector replied, that he could not Account for the Advance of Fees in any
other Way than the Multiplicity of Bonds and Certificates required by late Acts
of Parliament: To the second Complaint, his Answer was by no means
Satisfactory, INASMUCH as his Apology was only this, That upon a Demand made of
Mr. James Poyas, by the Collector's Clerk, for a Fee upon an Indico
Certificate, which the said Mr. Poyas had paid, but murmured at it, as being an
Exaction, the Collector had called to him as he was going out of the
Custom-House, and said, "don't pay it Mr. Poyas, don't pay it;" whereas it was
remarked to the Collector, that if instead of calling to Mr. Poyas not to pay
the Fee, he had forbid his Clerk to receive it, and Chid him for his
Presumption, that would have been more effectual. FURTHER the said Committee
say, That in order to be explicit with the Collector, in one other Instance of
what they apprehended to be an Exaction of Fees, and which was mentioned by Mr.
Henry Laurens, in the Case of the Ship Anne, George Forten, Master, of which
the said Laurens was One-fourth Owner, cleared out a few Days before, for which
Ship no less than Fourteen Pounds had been paid to the Collector only; whereas
in similar Cases, while Mr. Beaufain was Collector, no more than Eight, or
Eight Pounds Ten Shillings was wont to be paid: To which the Collector replied,
That if Mr. Laurens would send Captain Forten next Day, with all his Papers,
that he the Collector would examine into that Affair, and by a particular
Account of the Fees, give Satisfaction, that no more had been taken than was
really due; but if it should appear otherwise, he would make a Return. The
COMMITTEE being satisfied with the Equity of this Proposal, rested upon the
Assurances of the Collector, and soon after retired from him.

THE said Gabriel Manigault, John Neusville, John Chapman, John Gordon, Thomas
Shirley, and Henry Laurens, each for himself, does severally and respectively
declare, That it was always his Wish and earnest Desire, to live in Peace with
the said Collector, and to have paid to him upon every Occasion that should
occur, his full and just Fees, according to Custom, and agreeable to any Law,
and all the Laws relative to the American Trade, passed since the Decease of
the late Collector, Hector Berenger De Beaufain, Esquire That he and they severally
and respectively never had any Design, Intention or Wish, to curtail such due
Fees, or to impede or obstruct in any Degree, the said Collector, in the due,
full, and legal Execution of his Office as Collector of the Customs: And that
to the best of their Knowledge and Belief, jointly and severally, every
Merchant in Charlestown, was, in like Manner, favorably disposed toward the
Collector, and heartily inclined to pay Obedience to Acts of the British
Parliament.

SIGNED, GABRIEL MANIGAULT, JOHN NEUFVILLE, JOHN CHAPMAN, JOHN GORDON, THOMAS
SHIRLEY, HENRY LAURENS.

SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year before written, being one of
His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall, or may Concern,
That on this Twenty-eighth Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY came and appeared Henry
Laurens, Esquire one of the Committee of the Merchants, and others, Traders in
Charlestown, and who has been a British Merchant TWENTY-THREE YEARS; who
being duly sworn upon the Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, makes Oath and
declares, That the Collector Daniel Moore, Esquire often endeavored to persuade
him the Deponent, that there was a Necessity for every Coasting Schooner or
Schooners that passed Fort Johnson, to enter into Bond to him the Collector,
and take out a Permit for Six Months; that there was no Medium between
regularly entering and clearing such Schooners, although in Ballast, and only
going to some of the neighboring Plantations every Voyage, and taking such
Certificates as he proposed; that if they did not comply with one or other,
Seizure and Forfeiture must inevitably follow; and therefore he desired the
said Henry Laurens to use his Influence with other the principal Merchants,
that they might comply with his, the Collector's Proposition; adding, that
several low Persons had offered to take such Permits, but that he chose to
begin at the other End, or with other Sort of People; to which the said Henry
Laurens replied in general, that he by no means thought it improper that some
Part of the Coasting Trade should be under due Regulation; but that in the
extensive Manner that the Collector required, it would Distress the Province in
general; that it would be impossible to comply with it, and that it would
answer no good End to the Public; and besides, that if the Collector's Permits
were to guard them effectually against Seizures from the Custom-House Officers
on board of his Majesty's Ships, he the Deponent was of Opinion that such
Permits might have a dangerous Tendency, and be made a Cloak for illicit and
irregular Trade; but that nevertheless, if there was any Act of Parliament
obliging such small Vessels to take Certificates, he should for his own Part,
pay due Obedience to it as far as possible, and should also recommend the same
to his Friends. The Collector assured the Deponent, that it was in his Power to
compel all such Vessels to enter and clear every Trip they made to and from the
Plantations: To which the Deponent replied, that he believed the Collector
might by an Extension of his Power, create a great deal of Trouble to the
People in Carolina, but that he was likewise certain, the Collector might also
avoid giving them such Trouble, and yet not relax from his Duty; and that in
his Opinion a mere Exertion of Power would finally be attended with no real
Service to the King, nor was it to be set in Competition with the Affections of
a whole Province, or Words to that Effect: And about the same Time the Deponent
asked the Collector to favor him with a Sight of any Act of Parliament from
whence he derived such Power and Authority, and also to inform him what Price
or Fee he would demand for such Half yearly Certificates: The Deponent has
forgot what Answer the Collector gave to the first Question, but he knows that
the Collector never showed him his Authority by Law, in Support of his Demand:
But to the second, the Collector asked him what he thought of Half a Guinea for
the Bond and Certificate; this Deponent answered, that if the Case was really
as the Collector had represented to him, he thought the Collector's Demand was
rather Indulgent. This Deponent further declares, that on the same Day, he
heard the Honorable John Drayton, Esquire and his Son William Henry Drayton, Esquire
severally ask the Collector what was to be the Fee for such Bond and
Certificate; and that the Collector replied to one Three Pounds Fifteen
Shillings Current Money, and to the other Seven Pounds Current Money: That
about the same Time he was informed by John Wragg, Esquire that the Collector had
demanded of him an English Guinea for such Bond and Certificate; and he was
also further informed, and has since found it to be true, that the Collector
had granted several of his Certificates at various Prices, some at Thirty
Shillings, some at Forty Shillings Currency, and so forth: That upon hearing
the Collector himself vary so much in his Demand, and also his declining or
omitting to show this Deponent his Authority, derived from any Statute or Act
of Parliament, as well as doubting the Legality of his Permits to pass Fort
Johnson, he thought and said, that the Collector did not Tread upon firm
Ground, and therefore doubted whether he had any Authority for the Demands
which he had made: And the said Henry Laurens also declares, that about that
Time, while he was further conversing with the Collector on the Subject
abovementioned in the Custom-House, the Collector informed him that Captain
Hawker, of his Majesty's Sloop Sardcine, had siezed one of the Coasting
Schooners belonging to this Province; adding, that if he was to join Captain
Hawker, in an Information or Prosecution against the said Schooner, she would
certainly be condemned as forfeited; to which this Deponent replied, that he
hoped then that HE the Collector would not join Captain Hawker, because if
there was any Transgression, it must have been the Effect of Inadvertence and
Ignorance, since it was evident no Fraud was designed, as the Vessel had
actually come into this Port or Harbor, under the immediate View of the
Custom-House Officers; the Collector answered no, by no Means would he join
Captain Hawker; but at the same Time advised the Deponent very earnestly, to
speak to other Merchants, and to comply with his forementioned Proposition and
Demand, which he added would be their only, or best Way, and then said he, your
Vessels may sail in Safety.

THIS Deponent further declares, That in Consequence of the Invitation or
Permission given by the Collector, he directed George Forten, Master of the
Ship Anne, together with John Hopton, Clerk to this Deponent, to wait upon the
Collector at the Custom-House, with all his Papers received at the
Custom-House, at the clearing out the said Ship, in order to obtain a
particular Account of the several Items, making up the said Sum of Fourteen
Pounds. And that the said George Forten, and John Hopton, did accordingly
attend the Collector at the Custom-House; from whence being returned, they
informed this Deponent that the Collector had received them very angrily, and
said, that as the Merchants were so exact with him, he would be so to them, and
that not one Indulgence should be granted to them after that Time; and that he
the Collector then produced an Account of his Fees for the said Ship Anne,
which amounted to Fourteen Pounds Two Shillings and Sixpence; that he demanded
immediate Payment of the additional Two Shillings and Sixpence, Carolina
Currency, and declared that not one of the Ship's Papers should go out of the
Office until the same was paid: That they attempted to expostulate upon this
new Account, in order to show certain Over-charges therein; but that the
Collector would not hear them, but very wrathfully dismissed them, saying he
would not lose his Time in Disputes: Which several Particulars will appear more
at large in a Protest made by the said George Forten, John Hopton, and Henry
Laurens, on the first of June, 1767, and is hereunto annexed. [ Vide No. 1] And
the said Henry Laurens further says, That notwithstanding the Behavior of the
said Daniel Moore, Esquire as last abovementioned, so contrary to his Promises made
to the Committee of Merchants, as well as to himself in particular; and
notwithstanding his own Conviction, that the Collector had exacted Fees more
than was due to him in that Case abovementioned, by inserting some Charges that
were Fictions, as well as by a Duplicity of others; yet willing as much as in
him lay, to preserve Harmony, and keep up a good Understanding with the
Collector, and also to show all possible Respect to one of his Majesty's
Officers, in so high a Rank as the Collector of the Customs, he went on the Day
following, (to wit, the 29th of May) to the Custom-House, and there addressed
the Collector in respectful Terms, and desired to Remonstrate upon the Subject
of the Charges abovementioned; that the Collector went toward his Desk as if
he meant to examine into the said Complaint, but suddenly turned about, and in
some Warmth, said it was an Holyday, that he was busy, and should be more so
presently: Whereupon the Deponent answered, that he saw the Custom-House open,
and therefore came in, not merely to ask a Favor, but to apply for Redress in
a Matter wherein he thought himself aggrieved, and that he now requested the
Collector to inform him whether he would grant him such Redress or not: The
Collector then desired him to defer the Business until the Saturday Afternoon
following, and then if the Deponent would attend him at the Custom-House, he
would Retrospect the Account aforementioned: And the said Henry Laurens further
says, That having other Business to transact at the Custom-House, he went
there on Saturday Morning, and that the Collector then told him he need not be
at the Trouble of coming in the Afternoon according to Appointment, for he
determined to return no Part of the Fees taken for clearing out the Ship Anne,
and that he took that as an Opportunity to inform the Deponent; whereupon the
said Henry Laurens thinking himself greatly injured, and oppressed by the said
Collector, caused the Protest before referred to, to be extended on Behalf of
himself and others, Owners of the said Ship Anne, (to wit, on the first of
June, 1767). And the said Henry Laurens further says, That some Days after the
said Protest was made, Miles Brewton, Esquire in the Presence of a great Number of
principal Merchants in Charlestown, declared unto the said Henry Laurens, that
he was authorized by the Collector to inform him, that he had further
considered the Fees taken on the Ship Anne, and was convinced that they were
too high by Forty Shillings; which Forty Shillings Mr. Laurens might receive
whenever he would call for it: To which the said Henry Laurens answered, that
he thought the Fees were too high by Four Pounds Ten Shillings at least, but
that he was not contending for Forty Shillings, but for Right and Justice to
the whole Trade, and therein as he conceived, to the whole Province;
nevertheless, as he always preferred moderate Measures, if Mr. Brewton would
promise that the Collector would make Restitution to other People who were in
like Manner aggrieved, and also forbear to exact more Fees than were due to him
in future, he the Deponent should take no further Notice of what had happened
between the Collector and himself; but Mr. Brewton would not engage so
extensively, not being thereunto authorized by the Collector: And the said
Henry Laurens declares, that he has never since received, nor has any offer
been made to him, either of the Forty Shillings, or any other Sum by way of
Restitution, in the Case aforementioned. The said Deponent further declares,
That on or about the Twenty-ninth Day of May last, he went to the Custom-House
in order to clear out his Schooner W^mbaw, for his Plantation in the River
Alatamaha in Georgia, having Four hundred and fifty Bushels of Indian Corn on
board, and to enter into Bond required for Non-enumerated Goods, declaring to
the Collector, that his said Plantation was situated where there was no Port of
Entry, nor any Custom-House within Forty Miles, or thereabouts; and that
therefore he could not return a Certificate or other Documents strictly,
according to Law: That the Collector upon that Representation, declined taking
the Bond required for Non-enumerated Goods; and as the said Henry Laurens
apprehended, he the Collector acquiesced, and was satisfied as to the Return of
the Vessel without regular Clearances, from a Place where they could not
possibly be obtained: And this Deponent further declares, That after his said
Vessel sailed for Alatamaha aforesaid, he went to the same Place, where he
found that the Master of the said Schooner had taken on board her about Fifty
Thousand Cypress Shingles, without the Knowledge or Consent of the said Henry
Laurens, partly for Ballast, (as the said Master has declared upon Oath, there
being neither Stones nor Sand proper for Ballast in that Part of the Country,
the whole Face of the River being Marsh and Swamp Mud) and partly in hopes of
paying a small Part of the very heavy Expenses attending such a Voyage,
undertaken solely for the Purpose of carrying Provisions to a new settled
Plantation, in a wild and unpeopled Part of his Majesty's Colony of Georgia;
that finding the Vessel had taken such Shingles on board, the Deponent in order
to show all possible Obedience to British Acts of Parliament, directed the
Master of the said Schooner Wambaw, to apply to two of the nearest Magistrates,
and to enter into Bond, with one sufficient Surety, to our Sovereign Lord the
King, in a Penalty of double the Value of the said Shingles, conditioned for
Delivery of the said Shingles, agreeable to an Act of Parliament, from an
Apprehension, that Shingles was one of the Articles specified as Lumber in the
Statute of the viii. of GEORGE I. Chapter 12, S. 2; and which Article of Shingles
had always been deemed as Lumber in the Custom-House at Charlestown; and for
Want of better Information in that wild and remote Part of the World, where
Acts of Parliament are not; and that two Magistrates, viz. John Polson, and
Donald Mc Kay, Esqrs. did grant the said Master a Certificate, setting forth,
That he had delivered the Corn beforementioned; that he had entered into Bond,
and also that there was no Custom-House nor Officers within many Miles of the
said Place: And the said Henry Laurens further says, That after taking such
Steps, which were the best that he could take in those Circumstances, he
directed the said Master, with his Schooner, to return to Charlestown, and
gave Orders immediately, upon Arrival of the said Schooner, to enter her at the
Custom-House, and Report the said Fifty Thousand Shingles, the whole net Value
of which was not above Six Pounds Sterling, when Cost and Charges were paid.
And the Deponent further says, That notwithstanding the said Collector had
declined to take a Bond from him for Non-enumerated Goods on board the said
Schooner Wambaw, at her Departure from Charlestown, which tended to mislead
and ensnare the said Henry Laurens; and even to endanger his Schooner to
Seizure, before and after her Departure from Charlestown: That notwithstanding
the Declaration made by the Deponent, that there was no Custom-House nor
Officers at the Port or Place to which his Schooner was bound, and from whence
she was to return; which FACT the Collector has admitted and acknowledged upon
Oath, in the Court of Vice-Admiralty: And also notwithstanding the fair,
candid, and open Procedure of the said Henry Laurens, and his Endeavors to
comply with the Modes and Forms of Law, as far as the Nature of the Case would
admit of; and that no Fraud or illicit Trade had been carried on or attempted
by the said Schooner Wambaw, yet the said Collector refused to admit the said
Schooner to an Entry, unless two particular Friends of the said Henry Laurens,
(in his Absence) should go to the Custom-House, and there in Person, ask it as
a great Favor; which Fact is well attested upon Record in the Court of
Vice-Admiralty: And finally, because the said Persons declined or omitted to
ask such Favor in the Way and Manner that he required, he gave Orders and
caused the said Schooner Wambaw to be seized and libeled in the Court of
Vice-Admiralty, where the said Schooner Wambaw has since been condemned as
forfeited.

AND the said Henry Laurens declares, that on or about the Seventeenth of June
last, he went to the Custom-House with Peter Bachop, Master of another Schooner
belonging to the Deponent, called the Broughton-Island Packet, in order to
clear out the said Schooner for the same Plantation, with Provisions, Bricks,
and a few other Necessaries for the Use of his said Plantation, exactly in the
same Circumstances as the last mentioned Schooner Wambaw; and that the same
Master tendered a Manifest, setting forth the Provision and other Articles on
board, and that the Vessel was bound to Broughton-Island in the River
Alatamaha, where there was no Port of Entry, or Custom-House, and from whence
no Certificate could be returned. That the said Daniel Moore took up the
Manifest, and without Preface or Reason assigned, insulted him the Deponent,
alleging, that he could make his Plantation to be in Georgia or
South Carolina, as it should suit best his Purpose: The Deponent conscious of
the Injustice of such a Charge, inasmuch as the Locality of the said Plantation
had been declared upon Oath before the Collector, at clearing out the Schooner
Wambaw Twenty-one Days before; replied in general, that he knew where he was,
in the King's Custom-House; that he paid all Obedience to his Majesty, and due
Respect to his Officers; but as to the Collector, as Mr. Moore, he heartily
despised him, and that he had heard his Fame Twenty-five Years ago; that if he
had presumed so to insult the Deponent in any other Place, he should have given
him another, or proper Answer; that the Custom-House was not a Place for
Quarrels, and therefore prayed that his Business might be dispatched, and he
permitted to retire: But the Collector continued indiscreetly to Wrangle and
Clamor at the Deponent, and at length called the Deponent aside in the
Custom-House, and there gave him a formal Challenge, to fight at some Place in
the Province of Georgia, which the Collector promised to appoint, and give him
Notice of in writing; but the Deponent does not charge the Collector with
having sent him such Notice, as he never did receive any such.

AND this Deponent further says, That after the said Schooner was cleared out,
she proceeded to the said Plantation, and there delivered the Cargo
beforementioned; then took Ballast of Wood on board for want of Sand or Stones
as aforesaid, and returned to Charlestown immediately, where he applied to
enter the said Vessel by Manifest, declaring that she was in Ballast only,
having no Goods on board for Sale or Merchandise, and that she came from a
Place where there was no Port of Entry, nor Custom-House Officers within many
Miles; but the Collector refused to admit the Vessel, caused her to be seized,
and libeled in the Court of Vice-Admiralty, in which Court the said Vessel has
been acquitted, and Costs decreed against the Prosecutor: Yet nevertheless, the
Deponent has been put to very great Charges, Trouble, and loss of Time
thereby. And lastly, this Deponent declares, That he paid to the Collector
Fees for clearing out the Schooner Wambaw, Three Pounds Fifteen Shillings; and
for clearing out the Schooner Broughton-Island Packet, Five Pounds Twelve
Shillings and Sixpence, making a Difference of One Pound Seventeen Shillings
and Sixpence in so small a Sum, and that there was no Difference in the
Circumstances of the two Vessels, or in their respective Documents, save only,
a Pond for Non-enumerated Goods, which was taken in the latter, and not in the
former Case.

Signed, HENRY LAURENS.
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year before written, being one of
His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Premissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall, or may Concern,
That on this Twenty-third Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY came and appeared John
Edwards, of Charlestown, Merchant, and who has been Resident there for
FIFTEEN YEARS last past, who being duly sworn upon the Holy Evangelists of
Almighty God, makes Oath and declares, That on or about the Eleventh Day of
June last past, he applied at the Custom-House for five Certificates for
bondable Goods landed in Charlestown from Great Britain; that in Consequence
thereof, after comparing the Marks and Numbers of the Packages of the said
Goods, the Certificates were made out, and signed by Daniel Moore, Esquire the
Collector, and delivered to the Deputy-Comptroller, to be signed by him: The
Deponent then asked the Collector what was the Charge for said Certificates,
and was referred by him to his Clerk. The Clerk informed him Ten Shillings each
Certificate, which the Deponent was proceeding to pay, but the Clerk added,
that he must also pay for searching the Cockets; to which the Deponent replied,
that he imagined he the Clerk had no right to make him pay for that; whereupon
the Collector, Daniel Moore, Esquire without saying one Word, came in a Passion
from a distant Part of the Room, took up the five Certificates, tore them in
Pieces, and told the Deponent that he should go and procure a Certificate from
the Searchers before he would grant him any Certificates, and that he might
seek his Remedy where he pleased. The said John Edwards further says, That on
the Twelfth Day of June last past, he went to the Custom-House to clear the
Ship Fair American, John Minshall, Master, for Liverpool; that the Collector
observing one Pipe of Wine inserted in the Manifest; he asked if the King's
Duty was paid for it, and was answered that it was imported by Messrs.
Brailsford and Chapman, of Charlestown, Merchants, and the Duty secured; which
was confirmed by Mr. Hatley, the Collector's Clerk, who assured him, more than
once, that the Duty was secured; nevertheless, the Collector (merely as the
Deponent believes, to impede his Business and to put him to Trouble) refused to
clear the Ship before Messrs. Brailsford and Chapman were sent for to pay the
said Duty. Whereupon Mr. Edward Blake, a Merchant in Charlestown, being
present, went to call the said Brailsford and Chapman, or one of them; and Mr.
Chapman came, and complained that the Collector so much doubted their Credit,
as to refuse clearing a Ship on Account of the Duty upon a single Pipe of Wine,
when the Duty of the whole Cargo, and of which that was Part, was secured by
their Note; and added, that he had brought Money with him to pay the said Note:
-- That the Collector denied that he had refused to clear the Ship on that
Account. -- The Fact being so plain, the Deponent, and the said Master, John
Minshall, being detained upon that Account only, and the Deponent's Veracity
questioned; he the Deponent did modestly assure the Collector, that he had
said, the Ship should not be cleared before the Money was paid; to which the
Collector hastily answered, "it is false." The Deponent then endeavored to
exculpate himself, by repeating the Collector's own Words, spoke in Presence of
so many People as were then in the Custom-House; but the Collector interrupted,
and threatened to turn him down Stairs out of the Custom-House; which the
Deponent conceiving to be grievous and injurious Treatment to one of his
Majesty's Subjects, who had always demeaned himself becomingly to all his
Majesty's Officers; and also a great Impediment and Hinderance to Commerce, as
well as a Discouragement to his Majesty's dutiful Subjects, British Merchants
residing in America, did presume to Reply, That while he had Business to do in
Office Hours, he had a good Right to be in the Custom-House, and that if the
Collector turned him out, it must be at his own Peril. [ To Coroborate the
preceding Paragraph, Vide the following Affidavit of John Chapman.]

AND this Deponent, John Edwards, further declares, That being so unkindly and
unjustly treated by the Collector, as is before set forth, he did not attend
minutely to the Sum paid by him to the Collector for clearing out the Ship Fair
American; but he declares, That on or about the Twentieth of May last past, he
cleared out the new Ship Liberty, John Lesley, Master, for Bristol, and the
Collector himself demanded of him Fourteen Pounds for his Fees; but upon the
Deponent's desiring him to reconsider it, the Collector after whispering to his
Clerk, replied Eight Pounds; which Sum the Deponent paid: The Deponent says,
that he knows of no Difference between that Ship's Circumstances and those of
other Ships as to her Documents from the Custom-House, save only, that she was
not entered Inward, being a new Ship, which might make a Difference of Two
Pounds Ten Shillings, and no more, to the best of his Knowledge; and further,
that from the Practices of the said Collector, ever since he has acted in that
Office, he does in his Conscience verily believe, that if he had paid him the
first Sum of Fourteen Pounds demanded, that the Collector would not have
returned him any Part thereof.

Signed, JOHN EDWARDS.
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year before written, being one of
his Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall, or may Concern,
That on this Twenty-third Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY came and appeared John
Chapman, one of the Copartners under the Firm of Brailsford and Chapman, of
Charlestown, Merchants; and one of the Committee of the Merchants, and others,
Traders in the same Place; who being duly sworn upon the Holy Evangelists of
Almighty God, makes Oath and declares, That he was present at the
Custom-House, and heard the Altercation and indecent Language, as set forth by
John Edwards in the preceding Declaration, (Paragraph the second) from the Time
that he this Deponent is said to have gone to the Custom-House, in the said
Declaration, and till that therein mentioned Altercation ceased.

Signed, JOHN CHAPMAN.
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year above written, being one of
His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S



[Vide the second Paragraph of the preceding Affidavit, made by John Edwards,
which the above Coroborates.]



SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall, or may Concern,
That on this Twenty-fifth Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY came and appeared Henry
Todd, Merchant in Charlestown, and Agent for the Owners of the Sloop Henry, of
Bermuda, declares, That on or about the Second of June last, he cleared out
the said Sloop Henry, and paid to the Collector, Daniel Moore, Esquire for his Fees
Fourteen Pounds Five Shillings; in which are diverse Charges, some so general,
that he cannot understand them; and others which he conceives to be nominal,
fictitious, and contrary to Law, particularly for recording Seamen, which he
has been well informed the Collector has no Right to charge, by any Act of
Parliament, or Precedent from the late Collector, Hector Berenger De Beaufain,
Esquire and more particularly, a Certificate that Bond for Non-enumerated Goods was
given; which Certificate by an Act of the IVth of his present Majesty,
entitled, An Act for granting certain Duties in the British Colonies and
Plantations in America, etc. is expressly required to be given without Fee or
Reward. This Deponent further says, That being almost a Stranger, and not long
acquainted with such Business, he could not take upon him with any Assurance of
Success, to controvert the abovesaid Charge with the Collector, although he had
good Reason to believe that he was aggrieved; but that as he was afterward
complaining to some of his Acquaintance of the great Difference in the Charges
at the Custom-House since Daniel Moore, Esquire presided there as Collector, he
discovered that the Sloop Elizabeth, James Gillchrist, Master, had been cleared
out since the Sloop Henry, and that he paid the Collector only Ten Pounds Fees,
although the Circumstances of Cargo, and loading the said two Sloops were
alike, or nearly alike: For the Truth of which, he refers to a regular Protest,
or Affidavit made by the said Gillchrist, in which the said Gillchrist likewise
shows, that the Collector had exacted more Fees from him than were due. [Vide
Protest or Affidavit, No. 2.]

Signed, HENRY TODD.
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year before written, being one of
His Majesty's Justices, assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall, or may Concern,
That on this Twenty-fifth Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY appeared George Smith, of
Charlestown, Merchant, who being duly sworn upon the Holy Evangelists of
Almighty God, makes Oath and declares, That he has been in Trade upwards of
SEVENTEEN YEARS, on his own Account, during which Time he has loaded and
cleared upwards of Forty Vessels with Cargoes for Great Britain and America;
and that he has observed of late, since Daniel Moore, Esquire has acted as
Collector in the Custom-House, that the Fees paid to him for entering and
clearing of Vessels are greatly enhanced beyond the Fees formerly paid to
Hector Berenger De Beaufain, Esquire the late Collector; and particularly, that on
the Thirtieth of April, 1767, the Collector demanded of him Twelve Pounds
Currency, for clearing out the Brigantine Thomas, John Banfield, Master; to
which Sum this Deponent objected, as being too high; and he finds on examining
his Books, that he cleared out a Brigantine called the Roach, commanded by the
said John Banfield, of and about the same burden as the Thomas, viz. in May,
1764, nearly in the same Circumstances, when he paid only Eight Pounds; and if
there was any Difference, such Difference was only of one Bond, (to wit) the
R^ach was bonded for enumerated Commodities, but none for Lumber or
Non-enumerated Goods; and for the Brigantine Thomas, Bond had been given for
Lumber and Non-enumerated Goods but no Bond for enumerated Goods; but to the
best of his Remembrance and Belief, only the Lumber Bond was given; which
Difference, (if any) of one Bond he apprehends could not possibly Advance the
Fees Fifty per Cent. After the said George Smith, this Deponent, (and who is
Deaf and did not distinctly hear the Words of the Collector) had gone from the
Custom-House, the said Captain Banfield told him, that Mr. Moore, the
Collector, replied, on the said Deponent's objecting to the Fees, if you don't
choose to pay that Sum, you may leave your Papers. This Deponent therefore, to
avoid the manifest Losses and Hardships that must have attended the Delay of a
loaded Vessel at that Season of the Year, when the Worms distroy Ship's Bottoms
every Hour, the said George Smith submitted, and paid the said Sum of Twelve
Pounds to the Collector, thinking himself greatly aggrieved thereby at the same
Time.

Signed, GEORGE SMITH.
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year before written, being one of
His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.



[Vide the following Affidavit of Mr. Dewar.]



SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall, or may Concern,
That on this Twenty-fifth Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY came and appeared Charles
Dewar, of Charlestown, Merchant, and Resident in the said Town upwards of
TWENTY-EIGHT YEARS; and who being duly sworn upon the Holy Evangelists of
Almighty God, makes Oath and declares, That he was present in the
Custom-House, and heard Mr. George Smith complain of the Collector's Fees
demanded for the said Brigantine Thomas, as set forth by him in the preceding
Affidavit; and also heard the Collector answer, that he must either pay the
Fees demanded, or leave the Vessel's Papers; and that he then saw Mr. George
Smith pay the said Sum of Twelve Pounds, as he supposes, because the Collector
was satisfied.

Signed, CHARLES DEWAR.
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year above written, being one of
His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.



[ To Coroborate the preceding Affidavit of Mr. George Smith.]



SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall or may Concern,
That on this Twenty-fifth Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY came and appeared John
Logan, a British Merchant, residing in Charlestown, and who being duly sworn
upon the Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, makes Oath and declares, That he
has been in Trade for NINE YEARS past, loaded many Vessels, and has imported
and exported Goods, Wares, and Merchandises, lawfully, to a very considerable
Amount: The said John Logan says, That on or about the Sixth of June last,
himself and Robert Cleiland went to clear out the Ship Nelson, of London, of
which the said Robert Cleiland was Master, for Grenada; which Ship had been
loaded on Account of Messrs. Nelson and Burnet, Sir George Colebrook, and
Archibald Stewart, Esquire Owners of the said Ship; and that the Collector did then
demand and take for clearing out the said Vessel, the Sum of Fourteen Pounds
Ten Shillings, as does appear by the Captain's Protest, and the Collector's
Bill thereon, which are hereunto annexed; which Sum the said John Logan
believing to be exorbitant, and being convinced thereof in his own Mind from
Comparison of former numerous Instances, of clearing out Ships in similar
Circumstances, he applied to Daniel Moore, Esquire Collector, desiring him to
reconsider the said Charge of Fees; but receiving no satisfactory Answer, he
the Deponent added, that he should be obliged to seek elsewhere for Redress; to
which the Collector replied, that he might seek where he would for Redress;
that he would not return the Deponent one Farthing of the said Sum of Fourteen
Pounds Ten Shillings. And the said Deponent thinking it a Duty incumbent upon
him, as well toward the Public, as to the Owners of the said Ship Nelson, to
seek for Redress under such Oppression; he took Council, and was advised to
inform against the said Daniel Moore, Esquire and to prosecute him for Extortion,
at the next Court of General Sessions, to be holden in Charlestown, the third
Monday in October next: And the Deponent says, That in Consequence of that
Advice, he did lodge an Information with the Clerk of the Crown, and one of the
Assistant Judges of the said Court, and was himself bound, with two sufficient
Sureties, in a Recognizance to prosecute the Collector at the said Court as
aforesaid; and that he was then given to understand by Dougal Campbell, Esquire
Clerk of the Crown, that the said Daniel Moore was likewise to be bound over,
to be and appear at the said Court of Sessions, to answer to the Information
and Complaint aforesaid.

AND the Deponent further says, That within Fourteen Days last past, hearing
that Daniel Moore, Esquire had suddenly disappeared, and that it was supposed he
had gone privately out of the Province, he applied to the said Dougal Campbell,
Esquire Clerk of the Crown and Pleas, to know if proper Security had been taken for
the said Collector's Appearance at the Court as aforesaid; but he was referred
by him to the Honorable Robert Pringle, Esquire one of the Assistant Judges in
this Province, who had granted the Warrant against the Collector when the
Information or Complaint was first made. The Deponent then applied to the said
Robert Pringle, Esquire and was informed by him, that the Collector had behaved
very dishonorably in that Affair, having made several Promises verbally, and in
writing, to call upon him, in order to enter into a proper Recognizance for his
Appearance; that believing the said Collector to be a Gentleman, and a Man of
Honor, he had too long relied upon his Promises, for that he found the said
Collector had only intended to deceive him, and that therefore he the said
Assistant Judge, had issued a Warrant to apprehend and take the Body of the
said Collector; but that he could not yet be found: The Deponent further says,
That the said Robert Pringle, Esquire promised to give him a true State of the Case
in writing; which when the Deponent receives, it shall be hereunto annexed. --
[Vide Affidavit or Protest, No. 3, of Robert Pringle, Esquire and Declaration, No.
8, of Captain Cleiland.]

Signed, JOHN LOGAN.
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year before written, being one of
His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall, or may Concern,
That on this Twenty-third Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY appeared Edward Simons, a
British Merchant and Factor, residing in Charlestown, who being duly sworn
upon the Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, makes Oath and declares, That
having sold to Captain James White, Twenty Barrels of Pitch, to load on board
of his Ship called the Ajax, bound to Pool, in Great Britain; the said Captain
White came to him on or about the Ninth Day of May last past, and informed him,
that Daniel Moore, Esquire then Collector of the Customs, had refused to grant him
a Certificate for receiving the Bounty on said Pitch and other Parcels, until
the several Persons from whom he had bought it should come before him and make
Oath, that the said Pitch was of the Produce of South Carolina; that he the
said Deponent being conscious that this Demand of the Collector's was very
uncustomary; and believing also, that it was not authorized by Act of
Parliament, hesitated at submitting to the Imposition of an unnecessary Oath;
but Captain White urging and pressing him with Arguments, that he should loose
either the Bounty upon his Pitch, or a fine Opportunity of sailing, if he was
detained to contend with the Collector; he the Deponent went with Captain White
to the Custom-House, where the Collector did actually administer an Oath to
him, that the said Twenty Barrels of Pitch was of the Produce of
South Carolina, to the best of his Knowledge: And further, that this Deponent
says, That when he was going out of the Custom-House, he heard the said
Captain James White ask what was to pay? and also heard the Collector himself
reply, so much for each Oath; which Sum to the best of his Knowledge and
Remembrance was Seven Shillings and Sixpence Currency for each Oath.

Signed, EDWARD SIMONS.
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year before written, being one of
His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all whom this does, shall, or may Concern, That on
this Twenty-fourth Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY came and appeared Alexander Chovin,
Merchant and Factor, residing in Charlestown, who being duly sworn upon the
Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, makes Oath and declares, That having sold
Captain James White, Master of the Ship Ajax, Forty-two Barrels of Pitch, which
he the said Captain White had put on board his Ship bound to and for Pool; the
said White came to this Deponent, on or about the Ninth Day of May last past;
and after making the same Complaint of the Collector, and using much the same
Arguments to prevail upon him, as are set forth in the preceding Declaration by
Edward Simons; he this Deponent also went to the Custom-House, and there, and
in order to serve the said Captain White, submitted to an Oath before the
Collector, that the said Pitch was, to the best of his Knowledge, of the
Produce of this Province of South Carolina; which Oath, though true, the
Deponent knew was illegally imposed upon him by the Collector.

Signed, ALEXANDER CHOVIN.
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year above written, being one of
His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall, or may Concern,
That on this Twenty-fifth Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY appeared Thomas Beswicke,
Master of the small Schooner Tryton, burden about -- Tons, who being duly
sworn upon the Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, makes Oath and declares, That
on or about the Twenty-second Day of May, One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Sixty-seven, the Collector granted him a Permit to pass the Fort to Ashepoo,
this Province, in his said Schooner, as appears by the said Permit hereunto
annexed, signed by Daniel Moore, Esquire the said Collector. [ Vide Voucher No. 4.]
That he this Deponent asked what Fee was to be paid for it, and the Collector's
Clerk replied, Thirty Shillings; but that William Henry Drayton, Esquire Owner of
the said Schooner, then standing by, interposed, and engaged to pay whatever
the Demand might be; therefore the Deponent knows not what was done afterward.

Signed,
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year before written, being one of
his Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.



The above Certificate is not signed, or sworn to, because Thomas Beswicke, as
the Time it was drawn out ready, was very sick; and that for the Benefit of his
Health, he is since gone to Ponpon, and his Return uncertain; but the Matter is
confirmed by Voucher, No. 4, accompanying the others of a similar Nature, and
herewith sent.

FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public.
September 30, 1767.


SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall, or may Concern,
That on this Twenty-third Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY appeared Thomas Legare, of
Charlestown, Factor, and Agent to David Graeme, Esquire Owner of a small Schooner
called the Liberty, then under the Care of this Deponent, and who being duly
sworn upon the Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, makes Oath and declares, That
fearing some Damage or Inconvenience might happen to his Constituent if he
suffered his Schooner, though in Ballast, to go to Ponpon, to bring down a Load
of Rice from the Plantations in that Neighborhood, at a Time when the
Collector was threatening to Seize all the Schooners; he sent Henry Ballingall,
Master of the said Schooner to the Custom-House, to enquire what was to be
done, who being returned, informed this Deponent, that the Collector would
grant him a Permit to pass Fort Johnson to Ponpon upon paying of Thirty
Shillings Currency; which Sum the Deponent gave him for that Purpose: The said
Master, Henry Ballingall, went again to the Custom-House, but soon returned
again, and asked for Ten Shillings more, which he said the Deputy-Comptroller
had demanded for signing the same Permit, which the Deponent gave him the said
Captain, and he returned to the Custom-House, and soon after produced a Permit,
dated the Twenty-second Day of May, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven,
for the said Schooner to pass Fort Johnson, signed by Daniel Moore, Collector,
and William Massey, pro Comptroller; the original Certificate is hereunto
annexed, and the Deponent refers thereunto; ( Vide No. 5) and adds, that
Necessity obliged him to submit to a Demand made by the Collector, which he
thought and believes was illegal and irregular.

Signed, THOMAS LEGARE.
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year before written, being one of
His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley-County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall, or may Concern,
that on this Twenty-third Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY appeared Aaron Loocock, a
British Merchant, who has resided in Charlestown TWELVE YEARS, in which Time
he has imported and exported to a very considerable Amount, and who being duly
sworn upon the Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, makes Oath and declares, That
on the Eighthteenth Day of April last past, he applied for, and obtained a
Certificate for a Quantity of Hemp, amounting to 18,000 lb. Weight, at the
Custom-House, in order to prove that the said Hemp was of the Growth and
Produce of his Majesty's Plantations in America, and thereby to obtain the
Bounty granted in an Act of Parliament passed in the Fourth Year of his
Majesty's Reign, entitled, " An Act for granting a Bounty upon Hemp and rough
and undressed Flax from his Majesty's Colonies in America;" for which
Certificate Daniel Moore, Esquire Collector of the Customs, demanded One Pound
Current Money, which Sum the said Aaron Loocock paid him, although he was of
Opinion that the Demand was contrary to the true Intent and Meaning of a
subsequent Clause in the said Act.

THAT he paid it because he feared greater Evils in Case of Refusal; and that
he would have endeavored to obtain Redress from such a Grievance to him, and
abuse of the said Act, if he knew by what Means to have proceeded.

Signed, AARON LOOCOCK.
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year before written, being one of
his Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall, or may Concern,
That on this Twenty-second Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY appeared Peter Mazyck, a
British Merchant in Charlestown, who being duly sworn upon the Holy
Evangelists of Almighty God, makes Oath and declares, That he was by Chance
present at the Custom-House, and heard the Demand made upon Mr. Aaron Loocock,
as mentioned in his, the preceding Declaration; and that this Deponent saw him
pay the Fee of One Pound Currency, as is therein expressed.

Signed, Peter Mazyck.
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year above written, being one of
His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall, or may Concern,
That on this Nineteenth Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY came and appeared John Wragg, of
Charlestown, Esquire who being duly sworn upon the Holy Evangelists of Almighty
God, makes Oath and declares, That he is no otherwise concerned in Trade or
Commerce, than is immediately relative to the Support and Produce of his own
Plantations, and that he keeps a small Schooner of about fifteen Tons burden,
chiefly to carry necessary Articles for the Use of, and to bring down the
Produce or Crops from his said Plantations: That some Time about the Fourteenth
Day of May last past, having Occasion to send Four Thousand Bricks to one of
his Plantations at Coosawhatchee, he applied to Daniel Moore, Esquire the
Collector, for Permission for his Schooner to go to the said Plantation, when
the Collector informed the Deponent that he was about agreeing with Mr. Savage
and Mr. Laurens on the Behalf of the Owners of decked Boats, for giving a
Sufferance for Six Months for the Coasting Trade; this Deponent told him that
whatever was agreed to by them, he would comply with; at the same Time asked
the Collector what Fee he intended to take? to which the Collector said, that
he would not sign his Name thereto under an English Guinea. Some Time after,
and on the Twenty-ninth Day of May, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven,
this Deponent again applied to the Collector for a Sufferance for Six Months;
he told him that he granted none: This Deponent told him that he wanted to send
his Boat to his Plantation for Boards and Firewood; the Collector then said,
that he must clear her out, and get a Pass, and asked for the Register, which
he produced to him; he took Notice that it was an old one: This Deponent
observed to him, that his Name was John, and that the Register was in the Name
of his Father, Joseph Wragg, deceased: He said that would not do, but that this
Deponent must take out a new Register; this Deponent told the Collector, THAT
he could not do, having only his own Negroes in the Boat; the Collector
replied, that did not signify, that he might have any Name put into the
Register; to which the Deponent told him, that he would not swear to a supposed
Name; but however, when the Crop came in, and that he should have a white
Patroon, he would then take out a new Register, if he found it was necessary:
Upon which he gave the Deponent a Pass, in the Name of (Jemmy) his Negro Slave
Patroon, and demanded a Dollar; the Deponent asked if Thirty Shillings would
not do: However, he took Fifteen Shillings Currency for his Fee; and to William
Massey, for the Comptroller, the Deponent paid Five Shillings; which is all
that passed with the Collector and this Deponent.

Signed, JOHN WRAGG.
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year before written, being one of
His Majesty's Justices, assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.



[Vide Voucher No. 6.]



SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall, or may Concern,
That on this Twenty-third Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY appeared Philotheos
Chiffelle, British Merchant, residing in Charlestown, and lately entered into
Trade upon his own Account, and who being duly sworn upon the Holy Evangelists
of Almighty God, makes Oath and declares, That he shipped on board the Ship
Union, William Coombes, Master, for London, Ten Thousand Weight of Plantation
made Hemp: That on the Third of July last he applied at the Custom-House for a
Certificate, and obtained one: That he actually paid Fifteen Shillings to the
Collector's Clerk, for the said Certificate, at the Custom-House; but that he
does not Remember that the said Sum was demanded.

Signed, PHILOTHEOS CHIFFELLE.
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year before written, being one of
His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall, or may Concern,
That on this Twenty-third Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY appeared Paul Townsend,
British Merchant, residing in Charlestown, who being duly sworn upon the Holy
Evangelists of Almighty God, makes Oath and declares, That he has been in
Trade, and an importer and exporter of Goods at Charlestown, for ELEVEN YEARS
last past, on his own Account: And this Deponent further declares, that having
shipped about Seven Thousand Weight of Carolina Hemp, on board the Ship Ud^y,
Henry Clark, Master, for London; he did, on or about the Fourth of April last,
apply at the Custom-House for a Certificate, and obtained one, signed by Daniel
Moore, Esquire the Collector, in order to avail himself of the Bounty granted by
the Parliament of Great Britain on Hemp; for which Certificate the Collector's
Clerk demanded Twenty Shillings Currency; which Sum of Twenty Shillings the
Deponent thereupon paid, and came away from the Custom-House. And the Deponent
has since been informed, that the Collector had no Right to make him pay such,
or any other Fee, for a Hemp Certificate.

Signed, PAUL TOWNSEND.
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year before written, being one of
His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall or may Concern,
That on this Twenty-fourth Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY appeared Christopher
Simpson, British Merchant, residing in Charlestown, where he has dwelt FOUR
YEARS, and being duly sworn upon the Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, makes
Oath and declares, That on the Second Day of July last past, having shipped on
board the Carolina Packet, William White, Master, for London, One Thousand
Eight Hundred and Fifty-four Pounds Weight of Plantation made Hemp; he did
apply to the Collector, Daniel Moore, Esquire for a Certificate, in order to avail
himself of the Bounty granted by Parliament, and obtained one; for which
Certificate, the Collector's Clerk, in the Collector's Presence, demanded
Twenty Shillings, which Sum of Twenty Shillings, he the Deponent did then pay,
in Presence of the said Collector.

Signed, CHRISTOPHER SIMPSON.
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year above written, being one of
His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall, or may Concern,
That on this Twenty-fourth Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY appeared John Ward, British
Merchant, in Charlestown, where he has resided FOURTEEN YEARS past, during
which Time he has imported and exported diverse Goods, Wares and Merchandises,
and paid Duties to his Majesty to a very considerable Amount, declares, That
on the Sixteenth Day of April last, in Office Hours, about Eleven o'Clock in
the Forenoon, having shipped a Parcel of Carolina made Indico, on board the
Ship Minerva, John Barnes, Master, for London; he applied at the Custom-House
for a Certificate, in order to obtain the Bounty granted by Parliament upon
Plantation Indico; that a Certificate was made out, signed and sealed by Daniel
Moore, Esquire and delivered to him, for which a Fee of Ten Shillings Currency was
demanded by the Collector's Clerk, in the Collector's Presence; and that this
Deponent did accordingly pay the said Sum TO THE COLLECTOR HIMSELF: That the
said Ship Minerva was cleared out that very Morning, as appears by the
Custom-House Books; but whether before or after he had obtained the
Certificate, this Deponent cannot possibly aver, but believes she was cleared
out after; or that the Transactions might be said to be both at the same Time;
and that the Officers were put to no extraordinary Duty to grant him the said
Certificate. The Deponent declares, That believing and knowing that demanding
and taking the said Fee from him was injurious and contrary to Law; he had
fully determined to lodge an Information, in order to prosecute the said Daniel
Moore, Esquire in the Court of Vice-Admiralty, in this Province; but that he was
discouraged by a late Decree in that Court, and fearful that a negative Oath
might operate against, and nullify his Oath, made to the best of his Knowledge
and Remembrance, and with strong probable Circumstances in Favor thereof; and
that in Consequence of his failing in full Proof, he should be made liable to
pay Costs.

Signed, JOHN WARD.
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year before written, being one of
His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.



[Vide Voucher, No. 7.]



SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall, or may Concern,
That on this Twenty-third Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY appeared John Champneys, a
British Merchant, and Factor in Charlestown, who being duly sworn upon the
Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, makes Oath and declares, That on or about
the Fifteenth Day of May last, he applied at the Custom-House in Charlestown,
for a Certificate in order to entitle him to the Bounty on Plantation made
Indico, which he had shipped on board the Ship Liberty, Captain Lesley, bound
for Bristol; which Ship was not then cleared out, and did not clear out until
the Twentieth Day of the same Month, as appears by Certificates hereunto
annexed; [Vide Voucher, No. 7] and that Daniel Moore, Esquire Collector of the
Customs, granted him such Certificate; and then the Collector's Clerk, as the
Deponent was going out of the Custom-House, called and demanded Ten Shillings,
as a Fee for the same, to him the said Collector, which the Deponent paid; but
believing, and being well advised that the Demand and taking such Fee was
Injurious to him the said Deponent, inasmuch as it was contrary to Law; he the
said Deponent was determined, as well to prevent such Impositions in future, as
to obtain Redress to himself, to have lodged an Information, in order to carry
on a Prosecution against the said Daniel Moore, Esquire but that the said Daniel
Moore, Esquire having suddenly gone out of this Province, or having concealed
himself, so as not to be found in it, he is thereby hindered and prevented from
lodging such Information, and therefore the Deponent says, That he thinks it
his Duty to make this public Declaration of the Facts above set forth.

Signed, JOHN CHAMPNEYS.
SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year before written, being one of
His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT KNOWN AND MANIFEST to all Persons whom this does, shall, or may Concern,
That on this Twenty-second Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, PERSONALLY came and appeared Gabriel
Manigault, Robert Pringle, William Hopton, Benjamin Smith, Thomas Smith, and
John Savage, British Merchants, who have resided in Charlestown upwards of
THIRTY YEARS, and who being duly sworn upon the Holy Evangelists of Almighty
God, made Oath and declared, That they very well remember and were acquainted
with Thomas Gadsden, Esquire formerly Collector of his Majesty's Customs in
Charlestown, in South Carolina; and also that they intimately knew, and were
acquainted with Hector Berenger De Beaufain, Esquire late Collector of the same
Customs; and that they have seen and carefully examined a List of Fees in the
Hand writing of Robert Raper, Esquire Naval-Officer, but formerly Clerk in the
Custom-House, to the said Thomas Gadsden, Esquire and endorsed on the Back in the
Hand writing of the said Thomas Gadsden, (to wit.) "Collector of Charlestown
Fees in Proclamation Money, 1739-40*" which Fees are set down as follows, Viz.
ENTERING and CLEARING Proclamation Money. A Ship, Snow, or Brigantine, One
Pound, L 1 0 0 A Sloop or Schooner, Fourteen Shillings, 0 14 0 Eeach Oath, One
Shilling, 0 1 0 An attested Copy of a Manifest, One Shilling, 0 1 0 Every
Entry, One Shilling and Sixpence, 0 1 6 Recording a Register, Four Shillings,
0 4 0 A new Register, One Pound, 1 0 0 A Post Entry, Four Shillings, 0 4 0
Registering Seamen, Each Sixpence, 0 0 6 Searching the Books, One Shilling, 0
1 0 A Bill of Store, Two Shillings, 0 2 0 A Certificate for Pitch, Tar, or
Turpentine, Three Shillings, 0 3 0 Every other Certificate, Two Shillings, 0 2
0 Approving Bondsmen in the Naval-Office, and giving Permit to Load, Four
Shillings, Cancelling Bond, Two Shillings, 0 6 0 Vessels clearing by LICENSE
for foreign Port.
Entering the License and Certificate, Six Shillings, 0 6 0 Entering the
Invoices of Rice, Eight Shillings, 0 8 0 A Cocket, Two Shillings, 0 2 0 A Bill
of Health, Two Shillings, 0 2 0 A Certificate, Two Shillings, 0 2 0

* Note, One Shilling Proclamation Money, is equal to Five Shillings Currency.

AND that during the Time that the said Thomas Gadsden was Collector, they are
well assured, his own Fees for clearing out a Ship to Great Britain, or any
other of the British Dominions, taking them in Average, or one with another,
did not exceed the Sum of EIGHT POUNDS TEN SHILLINGS, Current Money; although
they certainly know that he did receive Fees for registering Seamen, which
appears to have been designed and intended by the Act of the xixth of GEORGE
II. Chap. 30, Sec. 3 and 4, to be confined only to his Majesty's Sugar
Colonies; and, that therefore, upon Discovery of the Error, that Charge was
discontinued for near Eleven Years, until the Resignation of the Collectorship,
by the said Hector Berenger De Beaufain, Esquire. And further the Deponents
declare, That during the Time that he the said Thomas Gadsden was Collector,
there was great Harmony and Concord between him and the Merchants in
Charlestown; although to the best of their Knowledge and Belief, he the said
Collector did not relax from his Duty as Collector; nor did he trouble and vex
the Merchants with petit mean Demands of illegal Fees, or frivolous and
treacherous Seizures on one Side; nor did the Merchants in general, Transgress
any of the known Acts of Parliament, or give him Cause to make Seizures, and
interrupt their Trade and Commerce on other. And these Deponents also declare,
with Regard to their Knowledge of Hector Berenger De Beaufain, Esquire and the Fees
that he was wont to take as Collector, for entering and clearing Vessels at
this Port; that during the Course of upwards of Twenty Years, in which he
presided in the Custom-House, he was beloved by every Body, and particularly by
the Merchants in general, for his upright and steady Conduct; and that they can
truly bear the same Testimony of him, as they have already declared of his
Predecessor in Office, Thomas Godsden, Esquire and that they have examined a List
of Fees in his own Hand writing, and find them to be exactly as follows:
"Copy of a Table of Fees, which the present Collector found affixed in the
Custom House at Charlestown, when he entered upon the Execution of his Office."

The COLLECTOR'S FEES.
Proclamation Money. Entering and Clearing A Ship, Snow, or Brigantine, L 1 0 0
A Sloop or Schooner, 0 14 0 Recording a Register, 0 4 0 Each Oath, 0 1 0 An
attested Copy of a Manifest, 0 1 0 Every Entry of Goods, 0 1 6 Each Bond, 0 6 0
A Certificate, for Pitch, Tar, or Turpentine, 0 3 0 Every other Certificate, 0
2 0 A Post Entry, 0 4 0 Each Cocket, 0 2 0 Copying Invoices of Rice, each 0 8 0
A Bill of Health, 0 2 0 Registering Seamen, each 0 0 6 A new Register, 1 0 0
Registering a License and Certificate, for Ships bound to foreign Markets, 0 6
0 Searching the Books or Cockets, 0 1 0

AND these Deponents further declare, That they have examined a certain Book,
kept by the said Hector Berenger De Beaufain, Esquire put into their Hands by David
Rhind, Esquire Executor of his last Will and Testament; and that they have there
seen, that for clearing Ships, Snows, and Brigantines, from the Fifteenth of
May, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Forty-seven, to the Twenty-eighth Day of
December, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-four, to any of the British
Dominions, (entry Inwards included) one with another, did not exceed Eight
Pounds Six Shillings and Nine-pence; Sloops and Schooners Six Pounds Twelve
Shillings and Seven-pence, and for Ships, Brigantines and Snows, bound to
Europe, Southward of Cape Finestere, Eleven Pounds Nine Shillings and
Eight-pence, Current Money, for the said Collector's Fees; that in the Margin
of the said Book, the following Words are written in Mr. De Beaufain's own
Hand, "THE REGISTERING OF SEAMEN WAS DISCONTINUED FROM THE TWENTIETH OF
SEPTEMBER, ONE THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FIVE:" And that from another
Book, received from the said Mr. Rhind, it appears, that the said Collector
received for entering in and clearing out Ships, bound to Europe, Southward of
Cape Finestere, from the Eleventh of March, One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Sixty-five, to the Thirtieth of June, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-six,
both inclusive, Nine Pounds Ten Shillings, Current Money; and during the same
Period, for entering and clearing out for any Parts of the British Dominions,
he took Eight Pounds for Ships, and Six Pounds Ten Shillings, like Money, for
Sloops and Schooners, or not exceeding those Sums. And it appears to us, that
such further or additional Fees or Charges as can or may be legally demanded
and taken by the Collector, for Bonds and other Papers necessary or required by
the Acts of Parliament passed in the Fourth and Fifth Years of his present
Majesty's Reign, relating to the Entry or Clearance of Vessels ought not, in
any Instance, to exceed Three Pounds Currency. And these Deponents do further
declare, That it was always their earnest Desire and Wish, and they have the
greatest Reason to believe ALSO, that it was the earnest Wish and Desire of the
Merchants in Charlestown, to have liquidated and established with the present
Collector, Daniel Moore, Esquire some such, or other reasonable and equitable,
legal or customary Fees, for the Government both of the Collector and the
Merchants. And in their Opinion, nothing on their Part has been wanting to
bring the same to Effect, as they are fully convinced, that they are sincerely
disposed and willing to pay all lawful Duties and Customs; but too tender of
their Rights and Liberties as British Subjects, to subimt tamely to repeated
illegal Impositions.

SIGNED, GABRIEL MANIGAULT, ROBERT PRINGLE, WILLIAM HOPTON, BENJAMIN SMITH,
THOMAS SMITH, JOHN SAVAGE.

SIGNED and sworn to before me, the Day and Year before written, being one of
His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and
Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid.

In Praemissorum Fidem, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




Custom-House, Charlestown. The COLLECTOR'S FEES, As established by Act of
Parliament and Acts of Assembly of this Province, now fixed and agreed upon by
the Collector and the Merchants, this Fifteenth Day of September, One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven.
Carolina Currency. For entering and clearing a Ship, Snow, or Brig, L 5 0 0 A
Sloop or Schooner, 3 10 0 Each Oath, 0 5 0 Attested Copy of a Manifest, 0 5 0 a
Every Entry of Goods, 0 7 6 A new Register, 5 0 0 b Recording a Register, 1 0 0
Each Bond 20 s. and approving Certificate to Cancel 10 s. 1 10 0 A Certificate
for Pitch, Tar, or Turpentine 15 s. and Oath 5 s. 1 0 0 Every other
Certificate, 0 10 0 c Each Cocket, 0 10 0 A Post Entry, 1 0 0 Registering a
License and Certificate for Ships bound to the Southward of Cape Finestere, 1
10 0 Copying Invoice of Rice, 2 0 0 A Bill of Health, 2 0 0 d Searching the
Books or Cockets, 0 5 0 A Sufferance or Permit, 0 10 0 e Indorsing a Register,
0 10 0

a This is no Charge against the Vessel unless when the Master has Goods of his
own, but is to be paid by the Merchants upon every Import or Export.

b This is only for new Registers taken out here, and in no other Instance,
unless when desired by the Master or Owner of the Vessel.

c This is for Ships or Vessels with License to carry Rice to foreign Markets;
the Vessel pays for one, and if there are several Shippers in one Bottom, each
Shipper pays the same.

d This is a Fee to be paid when any Person for his own Satisfaction desires to
make a Search, but not when the Officer does so for his own Government.

e This only when short is a Change of Masters.

If a Register is lost or mislaid, the Master must give Bond with proper
Security for License to load; and for this he is to pay a Fee of Forty
Shillings Currency.

It was Customary with Mr. Beaufain, when Vessels cleared out in Ballast, to
take only half Fees; but this is optional in the Officers, whether to follow
the same Practice or not.

I hereby confirm the above Fees, and agree to their being a Rule for my
Regulation while I am in Office, or until any Alteration may be made by Act of
Parliament.

Signed, R. P. H. HATLEY, D. Collector.

Examples of Vessels Fees from the foregoing List, VIZ.
A SHIP FOR BRITAIN.
Entering and Clearing, L. 5 0 0 Oaths in and out, 5 s. each, L. 0 10 0
Manifests in and out, 0 10 0 1 0 0 This Bond is not required in all Cases, nor
when Bond is given for enumerated Goods either in Britain or here
Non-enumerated Bond 1 0 0 Approving Certificate to Cancel, 0 10 0 1 10 0
Sufferance or Permit in and out, 10 s. each, 1 0 0 8 10 0 If Lumber be taken
in, add for Bond and Certificate, 1 10 0 Bond being given at Home, and a
Plantation Certificate brought there is no Fee for this If Bond be given in the
Naval-Office for enumerated Goods, add for approving Certificate to Cancel, 0
10 0 L. 10 10 0

A Ship for Europe to the Southward of Cape Finistere, with LICENSE.
Entering and Clearing, and Oaths and Manifests as above, L. 6 0 0 Sufferance,
or Permit inward and Cocket outward, 1 0 0 Regestering License and Certificate,
1 10 0 Bill of Health, 0 10 0 This is the whole Charge, though there may be
several Invoices for one Vessel. Copying Invoices of Rice, 2 0 0 L. 1 10 0

A Ship for foreign Ports in America by License.
Entering and Clearing, and Oaths and Manifests as above, L. 6 0 0 License and
Certificate for procuring it from the Governor, 1 10 0 Bond, and approving
Certificate to Cancel, 1 10 0 Cockets, or Sufferance, in and out, 1 0 0
Certificate on the back of the License. 0 10 0 L. 10 10 0 If Lumber be shipped,
add as above, 1 10 0 If Provisions, or other Non-enumated Goods, add more, 1 10
0 L. 13 10 0

Sloops and Schooners paying only Three Pounds Ten Shillings for entering and
clearing, their Fees are consequently Thirty Shillings less than the above.

The above Precedents are founded upon the foregoing List, and I agree to
conform to the same while I am in Office.

Signed, R. P. H. HATLEY, D. Collector.

SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT REMEMBERED, That this Day PERSONALLY appeared John Chapman, and John
Lloyd, both of Charlestown, Merchants, who being severally and duly sworn upon
the Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, made Oath and declared, That they were
present, among a Number of Merchants of Charlestown, (on Behalf of the whole
Body of them) met on the Fifteenth Instant, to fix upon, and agree with Roger
Peter Handasyd Hatley, Esquire Deputy-Collector of his Majesty's Customs, upon
Terms and Fees, as mentioned and expressed on this Instrument or Paper, and
that they saw him subscribe his Name in both Places in the said Instrument or
Agreement.

SWORN to before me, this Thirtieth Day of September, One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Sixty-seven. FENWICKE BULL, J. P. for Berkley County, in the
Province aforesaid.

VOUCHERS, Coroborating sundry of the preceding Affidavits and Papers.
[No. 1.]
SOUTH CAROLINA,
BY THIS PUBLIC INSTRUMENT OF PROTEST, be it known to all whom it does, shall,
or may Concern, That before me FENWICKE BULL, one of His Majesty's Justices
assigned to keep the Peace in Berkley County, and Notary-Public duly admitted
and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the Province aforesaid, PERSONALLY
appeared George Forten, Master of the Ship Anne, of Bristol; John Hopton, Clerk
to Henry Laurens, Esquire of Charlestown, Merchant, and the said Henry Laurens,
part Owner of the said Ship Anne, who being severally and duly sworn on the
Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, each for himself, and not one for the other,
did depose and declare upon Oath as follows, Scilicet.

HENRY LAURENS, deposes and says, That on Saturday the Twenty-third Day of
May last past, he sent his Clerk, the said John Hopton, with Captain George
Forten, to clear out the said Ship Anne at the Custom-House, and other public
Offices, and gave him the said John, a certain Sum of Money, in order to pay
the customary Fees: That upon the Return of his said Clerk, John Hopton, he
brought him the Deponent an Account of the Money paid by him for clearing out
the said Ship Anne; and among other Articles, he observed the Sum of Fourteen
Pounds Currency, paid to the Collector Daniel Moore, Esquire which he the said
Henry Laurens objected to, and asked how that could possibly be; and asked if
he did not include the Comptroller's Fees also: To which his said Clerk
replied, that it was only the Fees paid to the Collector; and that he had also
paid Three Pounds Ten Shillings Currency, as a One-third Part of Fourteen
Pounds to the Comptroller, over and above the said Fourteen Pounds: That he the
Clerk complained to Mr. Hatley, who signed the Anne's Clearances, as
Deputy-Collector, that the said Fourteen Pounds was too high a Charge; and that
Mr. Hatley, the Deputy, answered, "It is no more than is due upon so large a
Ship." The said Henry Laurens further says, That being one of a Committee,
(appointed by the Body of British Merchants, residing and trading in
Charlestown, aforesaid) to wait upon Daniel Moore, Esquire Collector of the
Customs in Charlestown aforesaid, in order to seek for Redress or
Satisfaction, in diverse Cases, wherein the said Body of Merchants apprehended
the Trade of this Province had been greatly aggrieved since the said Daniel
Moore, Esquire came into the Exercise of his said Office. -- He this Deponent,
accompanied Gabriel Manigault, Esquire Messieurs Thomas Shirley, John Neusville,
John Gordon, and John Chapman, nominated to be of the said Committee, and did
on the Twenty-sixth Day of May aforesaid, wait upon Daniel Moore, Esquire
Collector, by Appointment, at his own House in Charlestown; where being met,
diverse Instances of late Charges in the Custom-House, which the Merchants
apprehended were excessive and illegal, were produced by Gabriel Manigault, Esquire
speaking on Behalf of the Merchants in general, to which such Answers were
given by the Collector, as may or shall appear in due Time and Place: That he
the said Henry Laurens took that Occasion and Opportunity to move in the most
respectful Manner, to the said Collector, the Complaint that he (the Deponent)
in particular had to make of Fourteen Pounds paid to the Collector, only for
clearing out the Ship Anne, which he apprehended was an excessive Charge,
because in similar Cases he had never paid the late Collector, Hector Berenger
De Beaufain, Esquire in a Course of many Years, above Eight Pounds Ten Shillings
Currency; and sometimes when a Paper or Document, less than ordinary was
required, not above Seven Pounds Fifteen Shillings and Sixpence: To which the
said Daniel Moore, Esquire replied in general, that he took no other Fees than such
as he found by a List in the Custom-House had been formerly taken there; that
he could Account for the late Difference of Charges on Ships, only from the
Multiplicity of additional Papers, required to be taken or executed, by late
Acts of Parliament; and particularly as to the Case of the Ship Anne. -- That
if Mr. Laurens would send Captain Forten, with all his Papers, to the
Custom-House, he would make out an Account of the particular Items in the said
Fourteen Pounds, and convince him that no more had been taken by the Collector
than his legal Fees. And the said Henry Laurens further says, That in
Consequence of the Proposition made by the Collector as abovementioned, he
ordered his said Clerk, John Hopton, to accompany Captain George Forten to the
Custom-House, there to produce all his Papers, and apply to the Collector for
the particular Articles contained in the said Fourteen Pounds paid as
aforesaid, and bring the same to him the said Henry.

GEORGE FORTEN, Master of the Ship Anne, deposes and says, That he saw John
Hopton pay Fourteen Pounds to the said Mr. R. P. H. Hatley, the Deputy, for the
Collector's Fees only; that he heard him the said Hopton complain that the
Charge was too high, and Mr. Hatley's reply, that it was no more than was due.
And he this Deponent further says, That he signed no Bond at the Custom-House,
received no Cockets from thence, nor did he apply for, or want any: That he
registered no Seamen there, being not required thereunto, either by the
Collector or his Deputy; nor as he conceives, by any Law whatsoever, nor by any
late Practices in the Custom-House; and that all the Articles which he
apprehends the Collector could legally, and according to Custom, charge him for
on Account of his said Ship Anne, at the Time of clearing her out, viz. on the
Twenty-third Instant, are, 1st. L. 5 0 0 For entering and clearing in general.
2dly. 0 5 0 For a Manifest sworn to inwards. 3dly. 0 7 6 For a Permit to
unload. 4thly. 1 10 0 For approving his Bondsman, and Permit to load, and for
canceling the Bond. 5thly. 0 5 0 For a Manifest sworn to outward. 6thly. 0 10 0
For a Certificate of Clearance, if that is not comprehended in the first
Article above, of entering and clearing in genera], which he apprehends, and he
has also been informed, is really so included.
L. 7 17 6 The whole Amount of which, according to the stated Rules of the late
Hector Berenger De Beaufain, Esquire Collector as aforesaid, and his Predecessor in
Office, Thomas Gadsden, Esquire as he has also been well informed, would Amount
only to Seven Pounds Fifteen Shillings and Sixpence, current Money, to the
present Collector, or thereabouts, little more or less. And the said George
Forten, further says, That upon the Information of the said Henry Laurens,
that the Collector desired him to attend at the Custom-House, with all his
Ship's Papers; he went thither accordingly on the Twenty-eighth of said May
last past, at Ten o'Clock in the Forenoon, in hopes of obtaining Redress
whenever the Collector should be pleased to retrospect the Papers and Accounts
before mentioned; and that John Hopton, who had paid the abovementioned
Fourteen Pounds, accompanied him: That when the said Daniel Moore, Esquire came
into the Custom-House, he the said George Forten addressed him the Collector in
the following Words, or Words to the same Effect viz. Sir, I shall be much
obliged to you to give me the particular Articles of your Charge of Fourteen
Pounds, paid for clearing out my Ship the Anne Saturday last: To which the said
Collector in reply, asked, "if he had not a Bill of the Fees as usual from each
Officer?" and the said George Forten answered, you misunderstand me, Sir, -- I
desire a particular Account of your own Charges making up Fourteen Pounds, it is
a considerable deal more than I ever paid before in this Port to the Collector,
for which Reason my Owners at Bristol will require me to explain that Article.
-- That the Collector with some warmth answered, I have no Objection to giving
what you demand; but since the Merchants require so much Exactness in me, I
shall use the same Method toward them, and whatever comes within the Verge of
Acts of Parliament, shall be strictly complied with, and not one Indulgence
shall be granted to them hereafter; perhaps your Fees may exceed my Charge,
which I find they do by Two Shillings and Sixpence; and then producing an
Account of Particulars, amounting to Fourteen Pounds Two Shillings and
Sixpence, demanded Payment of the Deficiency of Two Shillings and Sixpence
Currency, (equal to Four-pence Sterling) otherwise he the Collector declared
not one of his Papers should go out of the Office.

JOHN HOPTON, deposes and says, That upon the Collector's speaking as last
abovementioned, he took up the said Account, of which the following is an
exact Copy, and the Original hereunto annexed compared therewith, by me, the
the said Notary, VIZ. Entering and clearing, L. 5 0 0 Oaths, Manifests, etc. 1
15 0 Men, 1 7 6 Bond, 1 10 0 Permits, 1 10 0 Cockets, 1 10 0 Post. 1 0 0 Cert.
0 10 0 L. 14 2 6 And said to the Collector, Sir, you have charged here to make
up your Sum of Fourteen Pounds paid on Saturday, Twenty Shillings for a
Post-Entry, which was not made, nor even thought of before Monday; therefore
there still appears an over Charge of Seventeen Shillings and Sixpence for
clearing out: The Collector angrily answered, that he knew, or could foresee on
Saturday, that such an Entry must be made, therefore the whole was still right:
That he John Hopton then observed to the Collector, that there was a Charge for
Cockets, whereas none such were had or applied for, and therefore there was no
Room for that Article to be charged: That the Collector then asked where is the
Vessel bound to, is she not bound for Lisbon? he the said Deponent answered no,
she is bound to Bristol, and therefore had no Cockets. -- That the Collector
then with great warmth, said it was no Matter, or he did not care for that, and
added, "I again repeat, that I am entitled to the whole Sum which is set down,
and if you cannot see the Propriety of my Charge, I cannot help you:" And the
said John Hopton further says, That the Collector's Answer being
unsatisfactory, both to Captain Forten and himself, and being prompted thereto
by a Sense of his Duty, he took the Liberty, but with all Deference to the
Collector, to proceed and say unto him, I shall be glad, Sir, to have other
Articles in the Account made plainer, some of which I think were never had, nor
even applied for: In Answer to which, the Collector continuing angry, said, "I
have done, and will do no more in the Affair; I have no Time to lose, and will
not have my Time taken up in Disputes of this Nature." Whereupon the said John
Hopton, (having first paid the aforementioned odd Two shillings and Sixpence
Currency, for which the Ship's Papers were detained) together with Captain
Forten, retired from the Custom-House.

HENRY LAURENS, does further declare, That after having heard the Reception
which Captain Forten had met with from the Collector, so contrary to his the
Collector's Promises, when he desired that Captain Forten should wait upon him
with his Papers; he the said Henry Laurens went on the Twenty-ninth of May
aforesaid to the Custom-House, and then and there, in Presence of Isaac Mazyck,
Esquire and Mr. William Banbury, desired to Remonstrate to the said Collector upon
the Subject abovementioned; assuring the said Collector, that there were in
his said Account certain Articles, which ought not to be charged therein; that
the Collector seemed to be proceeding to examine into the said Complaint, but,
on a sudden, said in some warmth, that it was a Holyday, that he was busy, and
should be more so presently: Whereupon the said Deponent replied, that he
thought himself aggrieved; that he did not come to ask any Favors, but applied
for Redress, which he conceived he had a Right to apply for at the Collector's
own House, or even in the Street, Holyday or no Holyday, and requested the
Collector to inform him whether he would grant him such Redress or not: In
Answer, the Collector desired him to defer the Business until next Day, and
appointed Three o'Clock Saturday Afternoon for the Deponent Henry Laurens to
attend him at the Custom House; at which Time and Place he promised to
retrospect his said Account, in order, as the Deponent understood, to allow and
return for any illegal Charges. And this Deponent, Henry Laurens, further
says, That having other Business at the Custom-House, he went there on the
Morning of the said Saturday, about Eleven o'Clock, when the Collector informed
him, that he had fully considered the Affair of his Fees on the Ship Anne, and
was determined not to return any Part of the Sum of Fourteen Pounds, taken for
clearing her out; and that therefore the Deponent need not be at the Trouble of
coming at Three o'Clock, according to the former Appointment: Further the
Deponent says, That the Post-Entry beforementioned was not foreseen, nor even
expected by him when the Ship Anne was cleared out; that the Alteration in the
Ship's Clearance, (called and charged upon this Occasion a Post-Entry) was on
Account of twelve Barrels of Rice, taken from on board the Ship, in order to
accommodate certain Passengers.

Signed, HENRY LAURENS, GEORGE FORTEN, JOHN HOPTON.

SIGNED, protested, and sworn to, before me, this First Day of June, One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, and in the Seventh Year of His
Majesty's Reign.

In Testimonium Veritatis, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




[Voucher, No. 2.]
SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, ss.
BE IT REMEMBERED AND KNOWN to all Persons whom this Affidavit shall Concern,
That upon this Twenty-second Day of June, One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Sixty-seven, before me FENWICKE BULL, one of His Majesty's Justices assigned to
keep the Peace for the County aforesaid, and Notary-Public, duly admitted and
sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, PERSONALLY appeared James Gilchrist, Master of
the Sloop Elizabeth, now in the Harbor of Charlestown, and bound for
Barbados; and who being duly sworn upon the Holy Evangelists of Almighty God,
makes Oath, That upon Saturday last, being the Twentieth Instant, he the
Deponent paid at the Custom-House for this Port, and to the Collector thereof,
Daniel Moore, only as his Fees, the Sum of Ten Pounds Currency, for entering
and clearing the said Sloop, Scilicet.

Entering and Clearing, L. 3 10 0 Oaths, etc. 1 15 0 Men, 0 15 0 Bond, 1 10 0
Permits, 1 10 0 Cert. 1 0 0 L. 10 0 0 the Original of which is above annexed.

AND FURTHER this Deponent swears, That in conducting the Business with the
Collector, Daniel Moore, as aforesaid, at entering and clearing, he only took
two Oaths, (one at each Time) had one Bond, and had two Clearances, that is to
say, One Clearance for Barbados, and one Clearance for Rice and Naval Stores;
and that this Deponent declares, he had no other Paper or Papers, nor took any
more Oath or Oaths, than what are particularly mentioned as above.

Signed, JAMES GILCHRIST.
SIGNED, and sworn to before me, the Day and Year above written.

In Testimonium Veritatis, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




[Voucher, No. 3.] A Copy of the Letters that passed between Daniel Moore, Esquire
Collector of his Majesty's Customs in Charlestown, South Carolina, and one of
the Members of his Majesty's Honorable Council for the said Province, and
Robert Pringle, Esquire one of the Assistant Judges, about his entering into a
Recognizance to appear at the General Sessions. on the Information of Mr. John
Logan, of Charlestown aforesaid, Merchant.
June 18, 1767. DANIEL MOORE, Esquire SIR,
I Have considered your Matter, and shall be glad of your good Company, at my
House Tomorrow, about Five o'Clock in the Afternoon, to drink Tea or Coffee,
and where I shall be ready to take your own Recognizance.

I am very respectfully, etc. Signed, ROBERT PRINGLE.

ROBERT PRINGLE, Esquire SIR,
I Am to attend the Court of Admiralty Tomorrow, at Five o'Clock, which makes
it impossible for me to wait on you.

I hope some other Day will do as well.

And am, with great Respect, Sir, your most obedient Servant, Signed, DANIEL
MOORE.
Thursday Evening.
DANIEL MOORE, Esquire SIR, June 24, 1767.
I Shall be glad to see you at my House, any Day in this Week, in order to take
your Recognizance.

I am, most respectfully, etc. Signed, ROBERT PRINGLE.

MR. MOORE presents his Compliments to Mr. PRINGLE, and intends waiting on him
some Day this Week. June 24, 1767.

SIR,
AS I am informed you intend to embark for England very soon, and you have not
yet entered into a Recognizance, as you writ me in June; I am therefore, as my
Duty requires me, now to insist upon your Compliance, without any further Delay.

I am, respectfully, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, Signed, ROBERT PRINGLE.
September 3, 1767. To Daniel Moore, Esquire.
THIS is to Certify, that the preceding and above, are exact Copies of the
Letters that passed between Daniel Moore, Esquire Collector of his Majesty's
Customs in Charlestown, and myself; and that he the said Collector has
forfeited his Honor, in not performing according to his Word and Promise, to
enter into a Recognizance; and that he has left this Province in a very
clandestine and abrupt Manner, and gone to Georgia, as I am informed, in order
to embark from thence for England.

Signed, ROBERT PRINGLE. Assistant-Judge.
Charlestown, South Carolina, September 28, 1767.
SOUTH CAROLINA. [Voucher, No. 4.] CHARLESTOWN,
PERMISSION is granted unto Thomas Beswicke, Master of the Schooner Tryton, to
pass the Fort to Ashep^^.

Given under our Hands, this 22 d Day of May, 1767. Signed, DANIEL MOORE,
Collector.

SOUTH CAROLINA. [Voucher, No. 5.] CHARLESTOWN,
PERMISSION is granted unto Henry B^llinghall, Master of the Schooner Liberty,
to pass the Fort to Ponpon.

Given under our Hands, this 22 d Day of May, 1767. Signed, DANIEL MOORE,
Collector. WILLIAM MASSEY, pro Comptroller.


[Voucher, No. 6.]
SOUTH CAROLINA. CHARLESTOWN,
THESE are to Certify, that Jemmy, a Negro Man, Master of the Schooner
Henrietta, is permitted to pass from this Port to Coosawhatchee, having on
board FOUR THOUSAND BRICKS.

Given under my Hand this 29 th Day of May, 1767. Signed, DANIEL MOORE,
Collector, WILLIAM MASSEY, pro Comptroller.

To all whom it may concern.



SOUTH CAROLINA. [Voucher, No. 7.]
I EDMUND BELLINGER, do Certify, that I have sold and delivered to Ward and
Ledger, of Charlestown, Two Thousand Six Hundred and Eight Pounds Weight of
Indico; and that the said Indico is wholly of the Growth and Produce of my
Plantation, situated in the Parish of St. Helena, in Granville County, in the
Province aforesaid.

EDMUND BELLINGER.
SIGNED, and sworn to before me, this Fourth Day of March, 1767.

JAMES PARSONS, J. P.



(ENDORSED)
I JOHN WARD, do Certify, that Ward and Ledger have laden on board the Minerva,
Captain John Barnes, for London, Two Thousand Six Hundred and Eight Pounds
Weight of Indico, contained in seven Casks, marked ^, No. 1-7; and that it is
the same Indico mentioned in the above Certificate.

JOHN WARD.
SWORN to before me, this Sixteenth Day of April, 1767.

DANIEL MOORE, Collector.



SOUTH CAROLINA.
I WILLIAM HAZARD, do Certify, that I have sold and delivered to William
Livingston, Four Hundred and Seven Pounds Weight of Indico; and that the said
Indico is wholly of the Growth and Produce of my Plantation, situate in the
Parish of St. Helena, in Granville County, in the Province aforesaid.

WILLIAM HAZARD.
The above Certificate was signed and sworn to before me, the Twenty-fourth Day
of April, 1767.

STEPHEN DRAYTON, J. P.



(ENDORSED)
I WILLIAM LIVINGSTON, do Certify, that I have sent the within mentioned Indico
to Charlestown, in order to be shipped to Great Britain, by Livingston and
Champneys.

WILLIAM LIVINGSTON.
SIGNED, and sworn to before me, the Twenty-fourth Day of April, 1767.

STEPHEN DRAYTON, J. P.



I JOHH CHAMPNEYS, do Certify, that the within-mentioned Indico was shipped on
board the Ship Liberty, Captain John Lasley, on or about the Thirteenth Instant.

JOHN CHAMPNEYS.
SIGNED, and sworn to before me, this Fifteenth Day of May, 1767.

DANIEL MOORE, Collector.



SOUTH CAROLINA.
I DANIEL PEPPER, do Certify, that Three Hundred and Seventeen Pounds Weight of
Indico was sent to Charlestown, from my Plantation, where the same was made,
in order to be sold, for my Account, by Livingston and Champneys; and is wholly
of the Growth and Produce of my said Plantation, situate in the Parish of St.
Helena, in Granville County, in the Province aforesaid.

DANIEL PEPPER.
The above Certificate was signed and sworn to before me, the Twenty-fourth Day
of April, 1767.

STEPHEN DRAYTON, J. P.



(ENDORSED)
I JOHN CHAMPNEYS, do Certify, that the within mentioned Indico was shipped on
board the Ship Liberty, Captain John Lasley, on or about the Thirteenth Instant.

JOHN CHAMPNEYS.
SIGNED, and sworn to before me, this Fifteenth Day of May, 1767.

DANIEL MOORE, Collector.



SOUTH CAROLINA.
I FENWICKE BULL, Notary and Tabellion Public, duly admitted and sworn,
dwelling in Charlestown, in Berkley County, and Province aforesaid, in
America, DO HEREBY CERTIFY unto all People whom it does or may Concern, That
the annexed three Iudico Certificates, as signed by Edmund Bellinger, William
Hazard, and Daniel Pepper, with their Endorsments, are faithful and true
Copies of and from the Originals, now in the Custom-House at Charlestown.

AND I DO FURTHER CERTIFY, That it appears also by the Custom-House Books
there, that the Ship Minerva, John Barnes, Master, for London, cleared out on
the Sixteenth Day of April, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven; and
that the Ship Liberty, John Lasley, Master, cleared out on the Twentieth Day of
May, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven.

In Praemissorum Fidem, I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal of Office, this
Twenty-second Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Sixty-seven, and in the Eighth Year of His Majesty's Reign.

FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.


[Voucher, No. 8.]
SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley-County, ss.
BE IT REMEMBERED AND KNOWN to all Persons whom it may or shall Concern, That
upon this Twelfth Day of June, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven,
before me FENWICKE BULL, one of His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the
Peace for the said County, and Notary-Public, duly admitted and sworn
PERSONALLY appeared Robert Cleiland, Master of the Ship Nelson, owned in
London, but now in the Harbor of Charlestown, in the Province aforesaid,
bound for Grenada, loaded with Lumber, Provisions and Rice, for the said Island
of Grenada; who being duly sworn upon the Holy Evangelists of Almighty God,
makes Oath, That on Saturday last past, being the Sixth Day of June Instant,
he the Deponent went to the Custom-House for the Port of Charlestown, and
there did clear out, or had cleared out the said Vessel or Ship called the
Nelson, and paid at the said Custom-House the Collector's, Fees, such being
demanded, Scilicit. Entering and Clearing, L. 5 0 0 Oaths, etc. 1 15 0 Twelve
Men, 1 10 0 Bonds, 3 0 0 Permits, 0 15 0 Three Cert. 1 10 0 Recording Register,
1 0 0 L. 14 10 0 amounting to Fourteen Pounds Ten Shillings Currency; and that
John Logan, of Charlestown, Merchant, furnished the Deponent with Money for
the Use of clearing the Vessel Nelson, not only at the Custom-House and to the
Collector as abovesaid, but also at other Offices: That this Deponent came to
this Port only in Ballast, and thinks the Charge excessive, and is informed
(having never been in this Harbor before) that the said Fourteen Pounds Ten
Shillings is illegal and exorbitant, that is to say, so much of the said Sum as
exceeds the Sum of Nine Pounds Ten Shillings Currency; and therefore this
Deponent apprehends his Owners are defrauded, and had extorted from them, by
the said Collector, Daniel Moore, Esquire or his Assistants, full Five Pounds
Currency.

Signed, ROBERT CLEILAND.
SIGNED, and sworn to before me, the Day and Year above written.

FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




[Voucher, No. 9.]
SOUTH CAROLINA.
THIS is to Certify, to all whom it does, shall, or may Concern, that upon the
Fourteenth Day of July, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, and about
the Hour of Nine or Ten o'Clock in the Forenoon of the same Day, John Hapton,
Clerk to Henry Laurens, Esquire called upon me Fenwicke Bull, Notary-Public, at my
House on the Bay, and enquired of me the said Notary, whether or no I was going
from Home, for that he John Hopton believed he should want me to wait upon the
Honorable Daniel Moore, Esquire Collector for the Port of Charlestown, relative
to a Schooner called the Wambaw, the Property of the said Henry Laurens, Esquire
and that by the Desire of Gabriel Manigault, Miles Brewton, and James Laurens,
Esqrs. there being some Kind of Impediment to the said Schooner Wambaw being
permitted to be entered at the Custom-House: To which I the said Notary made
Answer to the said John Hopton, that I would certainly be in the Way, and ready
to attend as a Notary, if called upon for that Purpose. And that about Twelve
Minutes before Twelve o'Clock at Noon, of the same Day, the said John Hopton,
did call again upon me the said Notary, and informed me that the abovementioned
Gentlemen, VIZ. Gabriel Manigault, Miles Brewton, and James Laurens, Esqrs.
were waiting for me at the Custom-House; whereupon I immediately went to, and
found them under the Piazza of the Custom-House, in Consultation. -- I
addressed and told them, that I was ready to wait on the Honorable Daniel
Moore, Esquire Collector, and require and demand any Answer or Answers that they
should think proper to be obtained of and from him the said Collector: That
they then replied to me, That as the said Collector was already under several
Prosecutions, that as my waiting on him as a Notary might appear like
Persecution, they one and all, with great Delicacy and Tenderness, declined
sending me in Form to the said Collector; also saying, that the said Collector
had verbally assured Miles Brewton, Esquire that NO ADVANTAGE SHOULD BE TAKEN. Upon
which the said Mr. Brewton, desired that I would go Home and make a Minute of
the Words which the Collector had used or promised to him upon this Occasion,
which were to this Effect, VIZ. That the Collector, Daniel Moore, Esquire told and
informed him Miles Brewton, that William Brown, Master of the Schooner Wambaw,
from the Alatamaha, and the Property of Henry Laurens, Esquire had appeared at the
Custom-House, and there produced, exhibited, and offered a Manifest and
Certificate, rather out of the common Mode of Business; and that as the Case
was new to him, and also that as he must of Course be at a loss, he the
Collector begged to be indulged with the Liberty of consulting with the King's
Attorney upon the Matter; and that he the Collector assured the said Mr.
Brewton, that no Advantage should be taken of or against the said Schooner
Wambaw, or her Cargo, in any Manner whatsoever. Therefore, and by Reason of the
above recited FAIR PROMISES from the said Collector, a Protest was not then
extended.

IN TESTIMONY OF THE TRUTH, I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal of Office.

FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.


SOUTH CAROLINA.
BY this public Instrument of Protest, be it Known and Manifest to all whom it
does, shall or may Concern, that upon this Sixth Day of August, One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, before me FENWICKE BULL, one of His Majesty's
Justices assigned to keep the Peace for Berkley County, and Notary-Public, duly
admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the Province aforesaid,
PERSONALLY appeared William Brown, Master of the Schooner Wambaw, the Property
of Henry Laurens, Esquire who being duly sworn upon the Holy Evangelists of
Almighty God, makes Oath and declares, That he the Deponent did go to the
Custom-House in Charlestown, by Order of his Owner, the said Mr. Laurens, who
told the Deponent that he would follow him there, in order to clear the Vessel
Wambaw; that upon the Deponent's going there, (which was on the Twenty-ninth of
May, or thereabouts) and informing the Collector that the Schooner Wambaw was
bound to Alatamaha; he the Collector gave orders to his Clerk to write a
Permit. -- That then immediately came and appeared the said Mr. Laurens, who
said that a Permit would not answer the Purpose, that his Plantation was in
Georgia, and told the Collector, that he had and did pay Taxes and Quit-Rents
in the Province of Georgia for the said Plantation, and desired that the Vessel
Wambaw might be fully cleared, as being bound to another Colony; whereupon she
was so cleared, except the giving Bond for Non-enumerated Goods; that a Bond
was mentioned by the Collector, his Clerk, or his Owner Henry Laurens, (but the
Deponent is not positive by which of the three Persons) that he understood a
Bond was not required; that none was demanded from, or given by him or his
Owner Henry Laurens. When cleared, he failed, with Orders from his said Owner,
Henry Laurens, to wait at the Alatamaha until he should Arrive: That as he
understood his Owner was detained by attending upon the Commons House of
Assembly, and afterward by contrary Winds; he the Deponent in the mean Time
wanting Ballast, and none being to be had in the Neighborhood, he took a
Parcel of Shingles on board, which not only ballasted, but loaded the Schooner,
and then lay waiting for his Owner, Henry Laurens: In the mean Time, also
apprehending that it might be necessary, having Shingles on board, to clear
out; he made enquiry if there was any Custom-House or Officers in the
Neighborhood, when he was informed by several Persons that the nearest was at
Sunbury, a Distance of between forty and fifty Miles; a very bad Road, and to
which he was utterly a Stranger, besides Water Carriage fifteen or eighteen
Miles, and against the Stream. -- Immediately upon his Owner's Arrival, the
Deponent was ordered to apply to the nearest Magistrates, John Polson, and
Donald Mackay, Esqrs. at Frederica, to whom he entered into Bond, with one
Surety, etc. and obtained a Certificate from them, (Copy of which is hereunto
annexed) which was the best Clearance that he could possibly obtain, and all
that was in his Power to do in Compliance with the Law, and then sailed
directly to and for Charlestown. That he never received any Orders or
Directions from his Owner, Henry Laurens, or any other Person, to do any Act
contrary to, or elusive of any Act of Parliament; and that his Owner was very
desirous of clearing the said Vessel Wambaw, in exact Conformity to Law, if it
had been practicable: That he the Deponent has been Master of the said Schooner
Wambaw about Twenty-one Months, and never was concerned in any illicit Trade or
contraband Proceedings: That upon his Arrival at Charlestown, he applied to
Mr. John Hopton, Clerk to his Owner, the said Mr. Laurens, and went to enter
the said Vessel Wambaw, at the Custom-House: That the Collector declined to
enter her, notwithstanding that he produced a Certificate from Frederica, as
herein before is mentioned; and after keeping him in suspense five Days, the
said Schooner Wambaw was seized by George Roupell, Esquire as the Deponent
believes, by the Collector's Orders.

THEREFORE I the said Notary, at the special Instance and Request of the said
William Brown, as well on his Behalf as Master of said Vessel Wambaw, as on
Account and for the Owner of the said Schooner, the said Laurens; do Protest
against the Want of a Custom-House or Custom-House Officers at the Alatamaba,
there being none within forty Miles thereof: Also against Daniel Moore, Esquire
Collector, for omitting to take a Bond as was offered, and which tended to
mislead and make the Deponent think it less essential; and also for refusing to
admit his Vessel Wambaw to enter according to Law, as well as for causing the
said Vessel to be seized and detained; and against the said George Roupell for
seizing and detaining the same. And I do hereby Protest, and that solemnly,
against the Want of Officers at the Alatamaha, against the said Daniel Moore,
Collector, and also against the said George Roupell, for all Charges, Costs,
and Damages, that have accrued, or that may accrue to the said William Brown,
Master, and Henry Laurens, Owner, and all others concerned by Reason of the
Premises.

Thus done and PROTESTED in Charlestown, the Day and Year first above written.

Signed, WILLIAM BROWN.
In Testimonium Veritatis, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.


FREDERICA, IN GEORGIA.
WE CERTIFY to all whom it may Concern, that William Brown, Master of a small
coasting Schooner called the Wambaw, having arrived from Charlestown at
Broughton-Island, in the River Alatamaha, and there delivered a certain
Quantity of Corn Provision for Negroes upon the said Island, belonging to Henry
Laurens, Esquire of South Carolina; did then Ballast and Load the said Schooner in
the said River, with about Fifty Thousand Cypress Shingles, in order to Return
again to Charlestown aforesaid; and that he has entered into Bond to our
Sovereign Lord the King, with one Surety thereto, in the penal Sum of Fifty
Pounds Sterling, for the due landing of the said Shingles, according to Act of
Parliament: AND WE FURTHER CERTIFY, That there is no Port of Entry, nor Office
of Customs upon, or within many Miles of the said River.

GIVEN under our Hands and Seals at Frederica in Georgia, this Tenth Day of
July, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven. JOHN POLSON, J. P. DONALD
MACKAY, J. P.

True Copies from the Originals, given under my Hand and Seal of Office, this
Thirtieth Day of September, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven.

FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.




[Voucher, No. 10.]
SOUTH CAROLINA,
BY THIS PUBLIC INSTRUMENT OF PROTEST, be it known and manifest to all whom it
does, shall, or may Concern, That on this Thirty-first Day of July, One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, before me FENWICKS BULL, one of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for Berkley County, and Notary-Public, duly
admitted and sworn, dwelling in Charlestown, in the Province aforesaid,
PERSONALLY appeared Peter Bachop, Master of the Schooner Broughton-Island,
owned by Henry Laurens, of Charlestown, Esquire who being duly sworn upon the Holy
Evangelists of Almighty God, makes Oath and declares, That the said Schooner
Broughton-Island, being quite a new Vessel, and whose Register was dated only
the Twenty-third Day of May last past, never entered upon any Trade, and was
ordered by his Owner to the River Alatamaha, merely to carry Provisions, and a
few Bricks, for the Use of his said Owner's Plantation; that she was cleared
out in Charlestown, for the first Time, on the Nineteenth Day of June last
past, for the abovementioned Voyage only, under a Manifest to which Daniel
Moore, Esquire the Collector, swore the Deponent, setting forth, that he was bound
to a Place where there was no Custom-House nor Officers, nor any within many
Miles. That upon his Arrival at Alatamaha, he landed his said Provisions and
other Goods, and by his Owner's Orders there refused to take on board any Kind
of Goods, Wares, or Merchandises, some such having been offered to him for Sale
or Freight; and that he heard his Owner say he would not take any Goods, as the
Schooner was a large Vessel, and that there might be Trouble and Difficulty
attending for proper Clearances: That there being neither Stone nor Sand
Ballast within Eighteen Miles of the Place where his Vessel did lay; and as his
Vessel would be endangered in going so far light, be the Deponent took on board
the said Schooner Broughton-Island Packet, a sufficient Quantity of rough Wood,
cut in a Swamp, in lieu of Ballast: That he heard his Owner, Colonel Henry
Laurens, often express his Wishes to clear out the Vessel properly, but that it
was impossible; and that considering the Nature of his Manifest at
Charlestown, and the plain Declaration of his Owner to the Collector there,
that the Vessel was bound to a Place where there was no Port of Entry nor
Custom-House Officers, and having transacted all the beforementioned and
particular Matters in presence of Mr. Edward Head, and Mr. Isaac Peace, British
Merchants, residing commonly in Charlestown, but then the Deponent's
Passengers, (who were no Way interested in the said Schooner) he considered his
Return to Charlestown in BALLAST ONLY, as a Continuation and Completion of his
Voyage; and therefore did Return without Deviation or Fraud, and upon his
Arrival he went to the Custom-House at Charlestown, and produced and presented
to the Collector a Manifest, of which the underwritten is a Copy, and prayed
to be admitted to enter.

MANIFEST of the Schooner Broughton-Island Packet, Peter Bachop, Master, from
Broughton-Island Plantation in Alatamaha River, where there is no Port of
Entry, nor Officers within FORTY MILES, and the Roads to the nearest Office
impassable.
Charlestown, South Carolina, July 31, 1767.
Ballasted with Firewood, not for Sale or Merchandise, no Sand or Stones to be
had at that Place.

PETER BACHOP.

That after the said Collector had perused the said Manifest and Clearance from
Charlestown, he replied that he would not suffer the said Schooner
Broughton-Island Packet to enter, for want of proper Clearances from the Port
she came from at Alatamaha.

SWORN to before me, the Day and Year above-written; in Testimony of the Truth
I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal of Office.

FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.


AND BE IT FURTHER KNOWN, That upon the same Day, and in the same Year, after
the Collector's Refusal as abovesaid, at the Request of John Hopton, Clerk, and
Peter Bachop, Master of the said Schooner, I FENWICKE BULL, Notary-Public, did
at their Request, and on Behalf of the Owner of the said Schooner
Broughton-Island Packet, Henry Laurens, wait on Daniel Moore, Esquire at the
Custom-House as the Collector, and in Office Hours, and did then and there
produce the Manifest, Copy of which is underwritten, VIZ.

MANIFEST of the Scoooner Broughton-Island Packet, Peter Bachop, Master, from
Broughton-Island Plantation in Alatamaha River, where there is no Port of
Entry, nor Officers within Forty Miles, and the Roads to the nearest Office
impassable.
Charlestown, South Carolina, July 31, 1767.
Ballasted with Firewood, not for Sale or Merchandise, no Sand or Stones to be
had at that Place.

PETER BACHOP.

Also the Clearance from Charlestown, but no other Papers, (none being to be
had where the said Vessel came from) and prayed to be admitted to enter the
said Schooner with her Cargo, consisting of only rough Pieces of Wood for
Ballast: To which the said Daniel Moore, Esquire replied, my Answer to you as a
Notary is, That I will not permit or suffer her to enter; and in a very short
Time I will do somewhat more.

THEREFORE, I the said Notary, at the special Instance and Request of John
Hopton and Peter Bachop, as well on their Behalfs, as on that of the Owner,
Henry Laurens, Esquire do solemnly Protest against the Want of proper Offices and
Officers belonging to the Custom-House at the Alatamaha; and against Daniel
Moore, the Collector, for ordering the said Vessel, Schooner Broughton-Island
Packet, to be seized; and also against George Roupell, for seizing and causing
the same to be detained: AND I do accordingly Protest against them for all
Charges, Expenses, Damages, and Detentions, already accrued, or may hereafter
accrue, by Reason of the Premises.

Thus done and protested, this Thirty-first Day of July, One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Sixty-seven.

Signed. JOHN HOPTON, PETER BACHOP.

In Testimonium Veritatis, FENWICKE BULL, J. P. and Notary-Public. 1767. L.S.


SINCE the preceding Papers were sent to the Press, an Indictment was prefered
at a Court of General Sessions, Oyer and Terminer, begun and holden at
Charlestown, on the Third Monday in October, 1767, against the Honorable
Daniel Moore, Esquire for Extortion in the Case of the Ship Nelson, as set forth by
the Affidavit of John Logan, No. 8: Of which Indictment, the Proceedings of the
Court, and the Verdict of the Grand Jury, the following is an exact Copy, as
exemplified under the Great Seal of the Province, and transmitted to CHARLES
GARTH, Esquire in London.

SOUTH CAROLINA. AT a Court of General Sessions of the Peace, Oyer and
Terminer, Assize and General Goal Delivery, begun and holden at Charlestown,
on the Third Monday in October, Anno Domini 1767, and in the Seventh Year of
his Majesty's Reign, before the Honorable ROBERT PRINGLE, RAWLINS LOWNDES, and
DANIEL DOYLEY, Esqrs. Justices of our Lord the King. 19 th October, 1767.
PRESENT. Mr. Justice PRINGLE, Mr. Justice LOWNDES, Mr. Justice DOYLEY.
The KING CONTRA The Hon. Daniel Moore, Esquire
THE Attorney General having suggested to the Court, that he had received from
the Crown-Office, an Affidavit made by John Logan, of Charlestown, Merchant,
charging the Honorable Daniel Moore, Esquire with Extortion in his Office of
Collector of his Majesty's Customs for the Port of Charlestown; and also a
Recognizance which the said John Logan had entered into, to prosecute and give
Evidence against the said Daniel Moore, at this present Sessions; that he had
learned that the said Daniel Moore, Esquire had quitted this Province, having
evaded entering into Security to answer the said Prosecution, and was therefore
now not amenable to the Justice of this Court: And the Attorney General having
further suggested that the said Daniel Moore had behaved toward him in such a
Manner as made him, from a Point of Delicacy, decline giving out a Bill of
Indictment to the Grand Jury against him the said Daniel Moore, without the
Directions of the Court, which he therefore prayed. The Court having taken the
Premises into Consideration, and it appearing that the said Daniel Moore bad
been repeatedly guilty of a Breach of Promise to Mr. Justice Pringle, who being
applied to, to bind him over to answer the said Prosecution, had behaved to him
with great Lenity and Politeness, and trusting to his Promises, had delayed
binding him over; the Court therefore considering that the said Daniel Moore
had taken a very ungenteel Advantage of the Lenity which had been shown him, by
withdrawing himself from Justice, directed the Attorney General to give out a
Bill of Indictment to the Grand Jury against the said Daniel Moore, Esquire upon
the Evidence of the said John Logan, which was done accordingly.

SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County,
JOHN LOGAN, of Charlestown, in the Province aforesaid, Merchant, being duly
sworn, made Oath, That Daniel Moore, Esquire Collector of his Majesty's Customs for
the Port of Charlestown, in the said Province, did on Saturday the Sixth
Instant, by Pretext, and under Color of his said Office of Collector,
unjustly, illegally, and by Extortion, take from the said Deponent the Sum of
Five Pounds Current Money, over and above his just, legal and accustomed Fees,
for clearing out at his said Office the Ship Nelson, Captain Clieland.

JOHN LOGAN.
Sworn before me, this 16 th Day of June, 1767.

D. CAMPBELL, J. P. and C. C. and P.



SOUTH CAROLINA, Berkley County, to wit,
THE Jurors for our Sovereign Lord the King, that is to say, Frederick Grimke,
Roger Smith, Isaac Godin, William Smith, John Paul Grimke, William Baker, Henry
Smith, Thomas Dixon, Joseph Cantey, Gavin P^^, Paul Townsend, John Bulline,
William Bampfield, upon their Oath, and Charles Warham upon his solemn and
conscientious Declaration and Affirmation, made according to the Form of his
Profession; PRESENT, That Daniel Moore, Esquire late of Charlestown, in the
Province of South Carolina, on the Sixth Day of June, in the Seventh Year of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord GEORGE the Third, King of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and so forth, (the said Daniel Moore then
being Collector of his Majesty's Customs for the Port of Charlestown, in the
Province aforesaid) at Charlestown aforesaid, unlawfully, unjustly and
extorsively, and by Color of his said Office, did extort, receive, and have of
one John Logan, the Sum of Five Pounds lawful current Money of the Province
aforesaid, over and above the Sum of Nine Pounds Ten Shillings, for and as his
Fee, as Collector of the said Port, for clearing out the Ship Nelson,
administering certain Oaths, and other Matters relative to the clearing of the
said Vessel at the Custom-House, and for executing and doing his Office
aforesaid, whereas in Truth and in Fact, no more Fees were due for the
aforesaid Services than Nine Pounds Ten Shillings like current Money of the
Province aforesaid, to the great Damage of the said John Logan, to the evil
Example of all others, in the like Case offending, and against the Peace of our
said Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity.

The KING CONTRA The Hon. Daniel Moore, Esquire

EXTORTION

A true Bill. FREDERICK GRIMKE, Foreman.

SOUTH CAROLINA.
I DOUGAL CAMPBELL, Clerk of the Crown and Peace in the Province aforesaid, DO
HEREBY CERTIFY, that this Sheet of Paper, and that thereunto annexed, do
contain a true Copy of the Proceedings had in a certain Cause, wherein our
Sovereign Lord the King was Plaintiff, and the Honorable Daniel Moore, Esquire
Collector of his Majesty's Customs for the Port of Charlestown, was Defendant,
upon a Prosecution brought against the said Daniel Moore, for Extortion in his
Office.

DOUGAL CAMPBELL, C.C.and P.
Crown-Office, 5 th November, 1767.
SOUTH CAROLINA. By his Excellency the Right Honorable Lord CHARLES-GREVILLE
MONTAGU, Captain General, Governor and Commander in Chief, in and over the said
Province, and Vice Admiral of the same.
To all whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
KNOW Ye, that DOUGAL CAMPBELL, Esquire, who has certified that the two Sheets
of Paper hereunto annexed, contain a true Copy of the Proceedings had in a
certain Cause, wherein our Sovereign Lord the King was Plaintiff, and the
Honorable Daniel Moore, Esquire, Collector of his Majesty's Customs for the
Port of Charlestown, was Defendant, upon a Prosecution brought against the
said Moore for Extortion in his Office, is Clerk of the Crown and Peace in the
said Province. THEREFORE all due Faith and Credit is and ought to be had and
given to the same.

IN TESTIMONY whereof I have hereunto set my Hand, at Charlestown, this Ninth
Day of November, Anno Domini, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-seven, and
in the Eighth Year of His Majesty's Reign, and caused the Great Seal of the
said Province, to be affixed to the same.

Signed, C. G. MONTAGU.
By his Excellency's Command, T. SKOTTOWE, Secretary. L.S.


OPINIONS refered to in the Note on Page 6, in the Letter from the Merchants to
CHARLES GARTH, Esquire.
EXTRACT from the final Decree pronounced on the 19th of June, 1767, by the
Honorable EGERTON LEIGH, Esquire Judge of the High Court of Admiralty. JAMES
GORDON, Owner of the Schooner ACTIVE, AND HER CARGO. ADVERSUS JAMES HAWKER, Qui
tam.
AND having heard all Parties, by their Proctors and Advocates, relative to the
Legality of the Seizure in this Case; I am of Opinion, upon a View of the
several Acts of Trade respecting this Point, and particularly the 7th and 8th
William III, Chapter 22d, Section 20th, and the Statutes made in the 3d, 4th,
5th and 6th Years of his present Majesty's Reign, that nothing, in these
several Acts can be construed to lay any unnecessary Restraint upon the Trade
and Correspondence of his Majesty's American Subjects, when any Goods or
Commodities are carried merely for the Use and Sustenance of the said Colonies;
or, in other Words, when such Goods are carried only from one Port or Place to
another Port or Place in the same Colony. And forasmuch as it does appear
manifest to me, from the several Proofs in this Cause, that the Vessel in
Question has been constantly employed within the said Province, without putting
further out to Sea than her Burden, or the Coast made necessary for the Safety
of her Navigation to and from this Port; and there is not the least Shadow of
Pretense, that the said Vessel has at any Time been employed in any illicit
Trade whatsoever, or that any Fraud has been committed or intended, whereby his
Majesty's Revenue can be diminished or affected, or the fair Trader undermined
or prejudiced, contrary to any of the wise Provisions of any Revenue-Laws, or
Laws of the Customs. I DO THEREFORE, under the particular Circumstances of this
Case, ADJUDGE, ORDER, SENTENCE AND DECREE, That the said Vessel and Cargo are
not liable, and ought not to be condemned and confiscated.

OPINION of JAMES PARSONS, Esquire.
UPON perusing the Acts of Trade, of the 4th, 5th and 6th of his present
Majesty, I am of Opinion, That notwithstanding the general Words in some of
them, that none of them can be properly construed to extend, or were intended
to extend, to coasting Schooners or Vessels owned in a Province, and whose
Navigation is, and shall remain confined, agreeable to the Proviso in the
Statute of the 7th and 8th of William III, Chapter 22d, to the Rivers or Coasts
of such Province.

J. P. 16 th November, 1767.

OPINION of CHARLES PINCKNEY, Esquire.
I NOW offer you my Opinion, that such Vessels, or Coasters, whose Navigation
is confined to the Coast and Rivers of the same Colony or Province, are by no
Means within the Purview, or Intention of any of the former or late Acts of
Trade, which require giving Bond, taking out Sufferances, Cockets, or
Clearances, from the Custom-House.

16 th November, 1767, C. P.

OPINION of JOHN RUTLEDGE, Esquire.
I AM of Opinion, that none of the Acts of Trade require giving Bonds, or
taking out Sufferances and Cockets, in Case of Vessels whose Navigation is
confined to the Rivers or Coasts of one Colony or Province.

16 th November, 1767, J. P.


