A KEY, To unlock the DOOR, That leads in, to take a FAIR VIEW OF THE Religious
Constitution, Established by Law, in the Colony of CONNECTICUT. With a short
REMARK upon Mr. BARTLET'S SERMON, on Galations iii. 1. Also, A REMARK upon Mr.
Ross, against the Separates and Others. With a short Observation upon the
Explanation of SAY-BROOK-PLAN; And Mr. HOBART's Attempt to establish the same
PLAN.

By EBENEZER FROTHINGHAM.

Ezekiel. viii. 7, 8, 9. And he brought me to the Door of the Court, and when I
looked, behold a Hole in the Wall. Then said he unto me, Son of Man dig now in
the Wall, and when I had dug in the Wall, behold a Door. And he said unto
me, go in, and behold the wicked Abominations that they do here.

Chap. xxxiii. 11. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil Ways; for why will ye die, O
House of Israel?

Isaiah lvii. 14. And shall say, cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the Way, take
up the stumbling Block out of the Way of my People.

Printed in the Year, 1767.

PREFACE.
SINCE it has pleased the Most High, through the Riches of his free Grace, to
give a poor sinful Worm, some Acquaintance with himself, through the Revelatian
of his written Word; and by the same Word some Understanding of the Affairs of
his visible Kingdom -- In some Measure to know what are the just Rights and
Privileges belonging to the Church and People of God. And by this Knowledge, I
trust, that I am put into a Circumstance to form a proper and right Judgment of
these Times, or the present State of this Colony: And if I mistake not, the
People of this Colony have gone off from the Word of God, in their Practice in
religious Matters; and adopted in the Room of God's Word, as a Rule of Practice
in the Affairs of Christ's visible Kingdom, their own human Inventions, as this
Book will discover. And what gives me Countenance and fortify's my Mind with
Courage and Boldness to confront the whole Colony, (Rulers and Ministers) is
not that I think my Abilities is any Ways equal with their's. No, I am far from
such a Thought. But it is from a full Satisfaction that the Cause that I have
undertook in, is good, and the Lord's Cause; and that it has been by his
Direction and Assistance in the Main, that I have gone through what the
following Sheets make manifest. -- A Person with small Abilities, preserved in
the Fear of the Lord, in a good Cause, -- has the Advantage of one vastly
superior to him in Abilities, that takes up on the wrong or bad Side, as
doubtless this Book will make manifest.

But had the Author of the Explanation of Say-Brook Platform, or some equal to
him in Abilities, submitted their Powers to Jesus Christ, in this his Cause;
doubtless Points would have been handled, and Things laid open more to the
Acceptance and Satisfaction of the People than what they are now done. But how
such Men, so prepared by their Creator, to do singular Service for their great
Lord and Master, will answer for their criminal Silence in Christ's Cause, in
the Things which this Book treats upon, is for them timely to consider. For I
am bound in Charity to believe, that those that deny ecclesiastical Councils
having Right to give Rules and Laws for Conscience, or usurp over the Church
and People of God, must also deny civil Ruler's exercising the same Power; and
that the ecclesiastical Laws of this Colony, denies Liberty of Conscience, and
robs the Church of Christ of her sacred Rights and Privileges, I think cannot
be denied. But those that know the Truth, and will acquaint themselves with
said Laws, and the leading Men that see these Laws to be wrong, neglecting
their Duty in taking proper Measures to have these Laws removed out of the Way,
so as not to hurt the Church and People of God, has brought the Necessity upon
me, to venture to break the Ice, that Others of superior Abilities, may be
happily instrumental under God, to give the finishing Stroke, of removing every
Thing, that is a Let out of the Way of the Church and People of God. The main
Thing I have in View through the whole of this Book is, free Liberty of
Conscience -- the Right of thinking, choosing and acting for one's self in
Matters of Religion, which respects God and Conscience; and to contend
earnestly for this important Privilege, I, nor any other Person should not be
ashamed to do, cost what it will: -- if my Reader wilt acquaint himself with
what it cost our Godly Forefathers, that first planted this Land, and Colony,
to establish and enjoy the Liberty that this Book is pleading for, he will
doubtless justify me for this Performance; for my Reader may see Liberty of
Conscience in religious Matters, was the main and leading Point in View, in
planting this Land and Colony. And this is acknowledged by the Compilers and
Establishers of Say-Brook-Plan, see the Preface, Page 1. -- "Among all which,
this has been peculiar unto; and to the distinguishing Glory of that Tract,
called New England, that the Colonies there were originally formed. Not for the
Advantage of Trade and a worldly Interest; but upon the most noble Foundation,
even of Religion, and the Liberty of their Consciences: with Respect unto the
Ordinances of the Gospel, administered in the Purity and Power of them, a
Happiness then not to be enjoyed in their native Soil."

Further writing of our Forefathers, what exercised their Minds, in leaving
England and coming into this Wilderness, say, Page 3. "That which they were
most solicitous about, and wherein their Liberty had been restrained,
respecting the Worship of God, and the Government of the Church of Christ,
according to his own Appointment. Their Faith and Profession of Religion being
the same which was generally received in all the Reformed Churches of Europe."

Now, honest Reader, see how exactly this Testimony agrees with what this Book
holds forth, and the Separates are contending for, it is not about Articles of
Faith; but the Worship of God, and the Government of the Church, what respects
Liberty of Conscience, and practicing in Religion. They that justify our
Forefathers in their contending for their Right, in Matters of Conscience and
Practice in Religion, and condemn the Separates, that have withdrew or desented
from the consociated Churches of this Colony, and through the Knowledge of the
Truth, set up and organized Churches, may read their Character in Mat. 23, 29.
to the End; for you condemn those that persecuted and oppressed our Godly
Forefathers; and you yourselves are doing the same Things to the Separates,
persecuting and oppressing them, who are properly the spiritual Seed of our
Godly Forefathers, and tread in the Main, in their Steps; as they walked
according to the Word of God; and you poor Creatures, are to be pitied and
prayed for, if so be their may be Mercy for you, for you walk in the Steps of
our Father's Persecutors. But upon the whole, if my Labor in this Book, does
not well agree or comport with this Testimony of our Forefathers Principles,
and Practice in planting this Land; then Iprofess to stand ready to retract my
Mistake, upon Conviction offered me; but otherwise, I think no Man ought to be
offended with the following Performance; but rather to consider from whence we
are fallen and repent, and put in practice the Counsel and Advice I have given
to all Ranks and Orders of Men in this Book.

Some of my Readers may think, that I have crowded too hard upon the Clergy in
my Writing. But if they will take the Pains to acquaint themselves with the
Scripture Character of the Ministers of Christ, and those that are Hirelings,
or that run, that God never sent, etc. And compare the Body of the Ministers of
this Religious Constitution of Connecticut, with these Scripture Characters,
they will doubtless see that my Observations are just and scriptural. But I
would recommend to my Readers, a Sermon upon this Head, from 1 John 1.4 to 6,
upon the Trial of the Spirits, by William Dell, Minister of the Gospel, and
Master of Gonvil Caius College, in Cambridge; excepting the Author's Opinion of
Christ in the Believer: which I think is not sound; also his not making a
proper Distiction between the Spirit and the written Word of God, as a Rule,
etc. Also, saying, the Believer is the only Book in which God himself writes
his new Testament. These and such like Things, I recommend not. This Book was
first printed in the Year 1666, Hartford, reprinted in the Year 1766. Now,
Reader, it is worth of special Notice, how aptly this Sermon, printed a Hundred
Years ago, discribes our present Clergy in this Land. Surely this Author could
not be prejudiced against our present Ministers, before they had any Being;
however my Readers may think that I am, when I have done nothing, but what was
done a Hundred Years ago in the same Nature, according to the Scriptures. But
to close this Preface, I freely submit myselif, and this Performance, to be
tried by the Word of God, there to stand or fall.

E. FROTHINGHAM.

The Author's Apology.
IT is probable, that some will object against the Performance, which the
following Sheets make manifest, and say, that it is great Weakness in me, to
pretend to appear again in public Print, since my former Performance was so
much despised, and rejected by our good and learned Ministers, and the Body of
the People of Connecticut: And more especially, since my Book has been
confuted, and the Errors of it laid open by substantial Pieces, written for
that End, etc.

I answer, My principal or leading Motive, in my former Writing (nor yet in
this) was not, who, or how many should be convinced, nor yet how much Credit it
would get among Mankind; either among the Learned or Unlearned; but principally
to discharge what I thought was my great Duty to God and Men, and unburden my
distressed Mind, and keep a chaste Conscience to him that has Redeemed me by the
infinite Price of his precious Blood. My ground Principle of Action in Duty, is
not how much Success or Prosperity I shall have in the Duty; but to get
fruitful Intelligence in my Understanding, by God's Word and Providence, of
what his Will is, in my Duty. This is enough to lay a solid Foundation of
Action; leaving the Event with Him that governs all Things according to the
Councils of his own Will. (...) my Divine Lord and Master did not convince the
Scribes and Pharisees, nor the Body of his Covenant People the Jews, that he
was the Christ of God; nor prevail with them, to be truly religious; vain will
it be for me; a poor sinful, imperfect Creature, to think to succeed, more than
He who is the Wisdom of God, and Perfect in all his Works and Ways. Yet
notwithstanding, I humbly apprehend, that it is my Duty to labor in Love to
God and Souls -- to offer that Truth which is suitable to convince all rational
Minds, (that are open and free to weigh Things according to their own Nature)
what God's Will is, and Ways, and the Manner of his Working; as it respects our
Duty to God, and each other. And so commit the Performance entirely to God's
wise and righteous Disposal.

2. As to my Book's being confuted, and the Errors of it laid open; what is
done of this Kind, that has not come to my Knowledge, I can have nothing to
say. But that which I have seen, I have a just Right to consider; which has
been in three Pieces, wrote by three different Men. The first, I think, was Mr.
Bartlet's Sermon, from Gal. 3.1. The second, some short Remarks made by Friend
Bowls, of New London, the third, a laborious Piece, wrote by Mr. Ross of
Stratfield, Entitled, "A plain Address to the Quakers, Moravians, Separates,
Separate-Baptists, Rogereens, and other Enthusiasts, on immediate Impulses, and
Revelation," etc.

As to these Three Men's treating me; to speak the Truth of my Neighbor,
Friend Bowls has treated me more like a Christian, than Mr. Bartlet or Ross.
For Friend Bowls took Pains to send a Man on Purpose, (as the Man told me) up
to Middletown, from New London, to know whether he understood me right, in some
Passages in my Book, respecting what I meant by the House of God, and about the
Sabbath, and some other Words, etc. showing a Disposition to get my Mind, just
as I understood myself; which Conduct, so far is commendable. But as to his
Opinon about the Sabbath, and the other Things he faulted me in; I not having
his Piece by me; and being satisfied that his wild Notions about the Sabbath,
and the Scriptures, are in a Circumstance, that there is not the tenth Part of
Danger, that Persons will be ensnared by him, as there is by Mr. Bartlet and
Ross's Performance. Therefore I shall leave Friend Bowls at this Time, with
his own Opinion of Things, to stand or fall to his own Master; and say, although
Mr. Bartlet lives in the same Town, with me, and not scarce three Miles
Distance, yet he never showed the neighbourly or christian Part to enquire,
(like Friend Bowls) whether he had got my Mind, before he published it. But I
should not fault him here, if he had done Justice to me, and the Truth, as it
is written in my Book, which he has quoted to. The Reason why I did not write
an Answer to his Sermon, when it first come from the Press, was this, That all
that understood experimental Religion, the Essence of a saving Faith, of the
Teachings of the Holy Ghost, and carefully read his Sermon, knew that there was
nothing of Weight in it -- A mere vain Amusement to tickle and please the Ears
of the carnal World; and feed the Minds of the Enemies of God and his Cause! so
that the Sermon itself is sufficient to show the falicy of it, to all fruitful
discerning Christians, that I need not write a Word to uncover it to such. And
those that are Mr. Bartlet's high Favorites, that do not examine or search the
Scriptutes for themselves, but take what he says as an Oricle. Now if I could
write or preach the Mind of God, as perfect as the Apostles; such Persons,
would likely reject the Truth dispensed by me. That if it were not for a middle
Sort of Persons, that are not so tightly glewed to the Ministers, and yet have
not attained to any great Clearness of dividing between Truth and Error; who
have some Mind to try all Things, and to hold fast that which they themselves
understand to be according to Truth; I shall have no need to reply a Word to
the Sermon. But for their Sakes, and all that will labor calmly and uprightly
to read Mr. Bartlet's Sermon and my Book, I shall remark as follows.

1. Mr. Bartlet has made a sad Mistake, through the whole of his Sermon, which
is common for all Persons to do, that are so unhappy as to fall on the wrong
Side of the Question. He has begged the whole Matter in Debate, for he has
settled the Point, that he and his Confederates in the Ministry are right and
their Churches; and never bro't a Scrap of Scripture or Reason to prove that
they are so. Whereas my Reader may remember, that the whole Scope and Burden
of my Book (which Mr. Bartlet condemns) is to show the Contrary, both from
Scripture and Reason, that the standing Ministers and Churches in this Colony
are not practicing in the Rule of God's Word. Doubtless there are converted Men
in the Ministry, and converted Persons in their Churches, which we have soberly
dissented from. But we all profess to know, that converted Ministers or Church
Members, is not the Rule of Faith or Practice in Religion, but the written Word
of God. Surely then had Mr. Bartlet acted wisely, and as a Minister of Christ,
he would have shown to his Hearers or Readers, from the Scriptures that he and
his Confederates was speaking and walking according to the Law, and to the
Testimony; but he has not done it; and the Scriptures gives the Reason, Isa. 8,
20, "Because there is no Light in them."

2dly. It must be allowed by all, that a Man to vindicate himself in any
important Affair, will produce the best Evidence and Reason, that he is Master
of, which I suppose Mr. Bartlet has done. Therefore, let any proper Person that
knows what the Work of a Minister of Christ is, and that can distinguish Truth
from Error, read Mr. Bartlet's Sermon, and he may see that there is no
Character nor Fruits of a Minister of Christ through all the Sermon. For a
Minister of Christ in his Performance, will discover some experimental
Acquaintance with the Lord Jesus Christ. But his Sermon gives no Scripture
Evidence, that he knows Jesus Christ.

3dly. A Minister of Christ discovers an Acquaintance with the Work of the
Spirit of God upon the Heart, in the whole of its Work upon the Sinner, till he
is bro't to bow to the Foot of pure Justice. Search Reader, and you may see,
that Mr. Bartlet has not shown the Need of any Holy Spirit, (scarcely) nor
pointed out his Work, in all his Sermon; indeed he has hardly intimated, that
there is any Need of any Holy Ghost in Religion.

4thly. A Minister of Christ discovers an Acquaintance with the New Birth, John
3, 5. How the Work is wrought, and the Operation of God's Spirit upon the
Heart, that is made holy, and what the Exercise of the Mind is, that has
Communion with God; also what are the Scripture Marks of Growth in Grace, and
Heart Holiness. All which Mr. Bartlet has left out of his Sermon. -- And why?
-- Whether it was his Zeal against me, made him forget the Essence of his
Sermon; or his Want of experimental Acquaintance with the Holy Spirit's Work,
before and after Conversion, or the Want of an Author at Hand, wrote through
the Spirit's Help, to have borrowed some Matter, etc. I leave him to say.

5thly. Once more. A Minister of Christ experimentally knows what saving Faith
is; and that it is the Gift of God; also the Exercise of the Mind in the Soul's
first Union with Christ. But the Author has seen fit to deny the Description of
the Essence of a Saving Faith, which I have given in my Book, and to call me a
Seducer, a Man of corrupt Mind, reprobate concerning the Faith; also that I am
the Person described; 2 Pet. 2.1. "Who privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them." See P. 50 -- 53. And at the
same Time, left his poor Hearers or Readers, without describing what the
Essence of a Saving Faith is; through the Whole of his Discourse, although the
Subject Matter naturally led thereto; for there can be no Gospel-Obedience to
the Truth without saving Faith: And more especially, when he undertook to show
the Description that I gave, was corrupt, and so consequently Soul-damning.
What criminal Injustice is the Author guilty of, to leave his Hearers without
any Knowledge of the true Way? When does Providence call louder upon Christ's
Ministers, to describe Saving Faith in the Love, Fruits and genuine Effects of
it, than when it is corruptly set forth by a seducing Teacher (as The Author
calls me) and yet no Description of the true Faith held forth by him? Poor
Souls, that submit to such a blind Teacher! that after all the Noise your
Teacher has made about your being seduced and corrupted in your Faith; his
Labors among you give no Evidence that either he, or you have got any Faith,
that will stand your Souls in Stead, in the last Day. Neither are you ever like
to come to the saving Knowledge of Jesus Christ, by such Improvements, through
Time; for a Cart-Load of Sermons upon the Negative, will never produce the
Positive, and Negative, Negative, is the Sum total of the Author's Sermon.

6ly. In P. 50, and 51, the Author writing of me, says, "And since God in his
holy Providence, has permitted such a Seducer," (with a marginal Note, setting
my Name at large in the Margin) lately to make his Appearance amongst us; who
comes in the Manner and with the Spirit of those whom the Apostle cautions us
not to receive, 2 John 10, 11. And he who has been permitted to draw away some
from their Steadfastness in the Order of the Gospel; has one of the most
discriminating and distinguishing Marks, which the Apostle gives of a seducing
Teacher. 2 Timothy 3.8. Men of corrupt Minds, reprobate concerning the Faith; and
that he is unsound in the Faith, appears in his printed Book, in which many
Errors are contained, and among others, one that shows the Faith that he holds,
is not the Faith of the Gospel, as it stands in his Book, Page 114, where he
describes a Saving Faith thus, That it is the assenting to, and receiving Jesus
Christ, for what he is in himself, and not for what he has done for the
Creature. Now this Description of Faith excludes the Satisfaction, if not the
whole Mediation of Christ, out of the Essence of saving Faith. Thus the Author
writes of me and my describing the Essence of a saving Faith. And in Page 53.
ranks me with the worst of Heretics. But I read, the Curse causeless shall not
come; also the Wicked is snared in the Work of his own Hands -- and let his Net
that he has hid, catch himself -- into that very Destruction let him fall,
Psalm 9.16. and 35, 8. Therefore, Reader, be pleased carefully to consider what
I have wrote; which the Author takes to be such damnable Heresy, which you may
find in my Book, Page 115, 116, the whole Passage is as follows, One Reason
why some Persons oppose us in our declaring against this doubting, is from a
Conceit they have, that we hold Doubting a Sin, place the Essence of saving
Faith, in a Knowledge that we are converted: But this is their Mistake; for we
hold, that the Essence of a saving Faith, is the Soul's assenting to, and
receiving Jesus Christ for what he is in himself, and not for what he has done
for the Creature; for many a Time a Believer has such a Discovery of Christ, in
his Glory and Excellency, that all the Faculties of the Soul, go forth in the
receiving of him in his Fullness, with an immortal Thirst, begotten by the
Spirit of God, to be made completely holy, as he sees God is holy* and at that
Moment he may not have one Thought what Frame he is in, or what God has
implanted in his Heart. But usually upon such a Discovery, the same Spirit of
God that led out the Soul to receive Jesus Christ, for what he is in himself,
discovers to the Soul what Grace and Actings of Grace, God has implanted in the
Heart, according to what we read, 1 Cor. 2.12, etc. Thus it is expressed in my
Book, and purposly, to remove the Mistake, that some had got of our Opinion of
saving Faith, supposing that we held the Essence of a saving Faith, to believe
that we was converted, or that Christ loved us in particular, or that our Sins
was pardoned, etc. all which is contrary to our Opinion, and well agrees with
the Author's Opinion of Faith, opposite to mine. -- For consider the Word
Essence; it is that which constitutes the peculiar Nature of any Thing, and
makes it to be what it is, and without which it cannot be. Therefore the
Author's denying my Description of the Essence of a saving Faith; and
commenting upon it, as he has done in two or three Pages, plainly holds forth,
that a Person that has the Essence of a saving Faith, must have a fruitful
Understanding of the Offices of Jesus Christ; and also Assurance of his
Interest in Christ's Favor, or that his Sins is pardoned; so that Assurance is
brought into the Essence. Also, that there can be no saving Faith without
Assurance. This is contrary to the Scriptures, John 14. and all sound Divines
that ever I read. For if a Sinner, in his first closing with Christ, does not
except him for what he is in himself, but for what he has done for him; then it
follows, that he must know what Christ has done for him, before he has the
Essence of saving Faith; which brings the Person to have Assurance before he
has the Essence. And I suppose this will not suit the Author: Yet I think this
must be the genuine Improvement of his Remarks upon my Description of Faith. --
For consider where the pinching Point is, viz. and not for what he has done for
the Creature. Note this not, is the Difficulty* And why? Because it excludes
all legal Righteousness, Self and Selfishness, out of the Question, in the
Person's excepting and closing with Jesus Christ. My Description of the Essence
of a saving Faith, plainly supposes a regenerating Work of God's Spirit upon
the Person that thus acts, Faith upon the Son of God; and that the Person, in
divine Scripture Light, beholds that in Jesus Christ that is infinitely
excellent in itself; either divine Wisdom, Power, Justice, Truth, Purity,
Holiness; or high, deep and boundless Mercy; all which attracts the Soul with
Delight, Union and Complacency, all which is entirely one Side the
Consideration (at this Time) of what is done to, or for the Person; neither is
the Person, at this Time, concerned about going to Hell, but is entirely taken
up in what he beholds, out of himself, in another, even Jesus Christ, or some
of his glorious Perfections; in which View, he is surrounded with the sweet Awe
of God, divine Peace and Serenity of Soul, at the Foot of pure Justice
satisfied, and in some Measure happified. Yea, those Perfections of God, which
struck Terror and racking Distress upon the Person, while under the Law, now
are the Delight, and great Satisfaction of the Soul, being in Union therewith.
And all this is a one Side the Consideration of any Thing done for the Person;
and is discovered in the Word of God, which I call the Essence of a saying
Faith. But it is the further Work of the Spirit of God, through and by his
written Word, to enlighten and inform the Understanding of the Person, what is
wrought in him, and done for him, and to instruct him into the Mystery of the
Personality of the Trinity; to distinguish the Offices of Jesus Christ. In
which Knowledge the Believer grows through Time, and ia a vast Eternity: But
does not properly belong to the Essence of saving Faith; because saving Faith
is wrought in the Heart, before this fruitful, extensive Knowledge, etc.

7thly. Let our Attention be to the very Expressions themselves, and see
whether the Author had any just Cause to write as he has in Page 50, to 53.
Observe, For we hold that the Essence of a saving Faith is the Soul's assenting
to, and receiving Jesus Christ for what he is in himself, and not for what he
has done for the Creature. Now had I have placed God, the Person of the Father,
as the first Object of Faith, the Author might have had some Color to suppose
that I was an Arian or Socinian. But in as much as I have placed Jesus Christ,
the sole Object of Faith, as he is God-Man, and so the only Mediator between
God and fallen, sinful Man, there can be no Cause for his Opposition. For
consider the Soul, assenting to Jesus Christ, must imply something discovered
in him, worthy of Approbation and Choice. Also, the receiving Jesus Christ, for
what he is in himself, must imply the Submission and full Consent of the Will,
with the chaste Embracing of Jesus Christ, with the Affections: And how is it
possible for this to be done, unless Jesus Christ is received essentially in
all his Offices, as a Savior? for I understand the proper Meaning of the Word
Jesus, is the Savior, and the Word Christ, is the Anointed Son of God, or the
Anointed Savior. Which Expressions contain all that Jesus Christ is, in this
Gift of God the Father, to a lost World, or to the Soul that truly receives
him, as offered in the Gospel. So that all that can be supposed that Jesus
Christ is to a Sinner, in all his Offices, must be implied and contained in a
Person's receiving Jesus Christ as I have expressed. That upon the Whole, what
the Author is pleased to call Heresy, and so soul-ruining, I soberly and
solemnly believe to be according to sound Doctrine, and soul-saving, according
to the Experience of all the Godly that ever was, is, or shall be till Christ's
second Coming. I will cite a Passage out of two godly Authors, Dr. Ames, in a
Book entitled Conscience, with the Power and Case thereof. Chap. 10, of Love
toward God. Quest. 1. Whether is God to be loved for his Goodness and
Perfection in itself considered, or for his Goodness toward us, and Benefits
conferred upon us? -- Ans. 1. The most perfect Kind of Love stands in this,
that we love God for himself; that is, that the formal Reason of our Love being
(as the Schoolmen speak) the lovely Nature of God, and that our Love be carried
toward him as toward the last End. 1st, Because that Love is perfect. 2.
Because if we love God, only for his Goodness toward us, then we love him for
ourselves, and so we love ourselves more than God.

2. Mr. Edwards writes as follows, showing the Sign of gracious Affections,
Page 134. 2. The first objective Ground of gracious Affections, is the
transcendently excellent and amiable Nature of divine Things, as they are in
themselves, and not any conceived Relation they bear to Self, or Self-Interest.
-- "Page 135. "A Change made in the Views of his Mind, and Relish of his Heart,
whereby he apprehends a Beauty, Glory, and supreme Good in God's Nature, as it
is in itself. This may be the Thing that first draws his Heart to him, and
causes his Heart to be united to him, prior to all Considerations of his own
Interest or Happiness, although after this, and as a Fruit of this, he
necessarily seeks his Interest and Happiness in God" -- Page 136. This infinite
Excellency of the divine Nature, as it is in itself, is the true Ground of all
that is good in God, in any Respect. But how can a Man truly and rightly love
God, without loving him for that Excellency in him, which is the Foundation of
all that is in any Manner of Respect, good or desirable in him? They whose
Affections to God is founded, first on his Profitableness to them, their
Affections begins at the wrong End; they regard God only for the utmost Limits
of the Stream of divine Good, where it touches them and reaches their Interest;
-- " Page 139. "Whereas the Exercises of true and holy Love in the Saints arise
in another Way. They don't first see that God loves them, and then see that he
is lovely. But they first see that God is lovely, and that Christ is excellent
and glorious; and their Hearts are first captivated with this View, and the
Exercises of their Love, are wont from Time to Time to begin here, and to rise
primarily from these Views; and then consequently they see God's Love, and
great Favor to them, etc. Thus writes these Authors, and well agrees with the
Description that I have given of the Essence of a saving Faith, which I wrote
Years before I read these Authors. But to return, and say, as to the rest of
the Errors, which the Author says is in my Book, I shall leave, till he is so
kind, as to tell me what they be; for I must suppose that the Spirit, and
Temper of Mind that governed in him in this Affair, led him to take Notice of
that which was most gross, and contrary to his Opinion of saving Faith; yet it
appears to all Christians, to be sound Doctrine (as I trust and believe.) Had
the Author placed his own Name in the Room of mine, he would no Doubt, have
made a right Application of his negative Performance. But I mean to write in
Soberness; for Soul-Blood is heavy Blood to account for. My Heart has been in
Pain for the Author, and the poor, perishing People under his Charge. I have
not altered my Opinion of the Author's standing for more than twenty Years. I
have been informed by his Hearers, that he opposed the Work of God's Spirit,
ever since the glorious and blessed Work of God in the Year 1740, 1741, and so
down to this Day of Reformation. Whitefield, that wonderful Instrument that God
has improved for great Good to Souls -- I have been informed he has called him
a Deceiver and Imposter. -- And it is easy for all that knew Whitefield and his
Religion, to know the Author's Standing; which calls for the Bowels of Pity and
strong Cries to God for him, that he may not die with the Blood of his Hearers
in his Skirts. This Piece was prepared for the Press, several Months before Mr.
Bartlet's Death


2ly. I shall proceed to take some Notice of Mr. Ross's Performance, as before
mentioned. (A plain Address to the Quakers, Moravians, Separatists,
Separate-Baptists, Rogereens, and other Enthusiasts, etc.) But I must confess,
that his Performance is such, that it is difficult to make any other Reply than
a general one, by Reason that he has been so unchristian-like in his treating
of me, to rank me among a Number of Persons and Professions that I stand no
more in Connection with, than he himself; and never point me to any Thing that
I hold in Principle or Practice, counter to the Word of God, etc.

First, I think, Mr. Ross, quite forgot in his Performance, the Apostle Paul's
Caution, Romans 2.21. "Thou therefore which teaches Another, teach thou not
thyself? Thou that preachest, a Man should not steal, do thou steal?" etc.
for he has charged the Separates almost with every Thing, but what is good, in
his Book; insinuating to the Public, as though we was some of the wildest Sort
of Enthusiasts, setting as a Scarecrow in the Front of his Book, an Account of
the Dutartres, and the Life of John Lewis; which Accounts are very shocking
Instances of dreadful Delusions. And then, through the main of his Book, has
discovered a great Zeal without Knowledge; and has asserted some Things of the
Separates, which is not true; and applied the whole of his Performance wrong,
as to the separate Teachers, and their Churches; yet, at the same Time pretends
to be a Man of God, an Instructor of the deluded and ignorant, when his Book
gives him no such a Character.

2. Consider, Reader, is it not reasonable that Mr. Ross should prove that the
Separates are guilty of the many Errors that he has charged them with, in his
Book? Whereas he has done Nothing to prove his Charges, but his own bold
Assertion, or the bare Assertion of some others in the like Presumption with
himself. Christ directs us as in Mat. 7.12. "Therefore, all Things whatsoever
ye would that Men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law
and the Prophets. -- How harsh and unchristian-like should I be to Mr. Ross, to
charge him with being an Arian, because there is some in the Kingdom; or that
he was a Deist, because that there was some in the Colony; or that he was a
Drunkard, or Thief, because some that waited upon his Ministry was so, and he
innocent of these Things. This Metephor I think, fairly represents Mr. Ross's
Conduct to me, and my Brethren, in this Reformation. And if he should see these
Lines, I would entreat him to compare his Conduct with the Text cited.

3d. In Page 28, the Author has ranked Elder Pain, and myself, with Others that
I know Nothing about, and quited a Passage out of some Author -- but what
Author I know not. -- He has not fixed any Name to it, that his Readers may
think, that I or Elder Pain was the Author of that Quotation. Part of which is
as follows, That though the Scriptures contain a full and sufficient
Declaration of Christian Doctrine, yet they do not contain the whole Will of
God, which is necessary for us to know, etc. This Opinion I hold to be corrupt,
as well as the Author; for I hold that the written Word of God is the alone,
and only Rule of Faith and Practice, and contains all that is needful for us
to know in Time, to fit us for a happy Eternity; so this Charge against us
falls through for Want of Proof.

Again, in Page 40, the Author, by the Margin Note, has ranked me with
Enthusiasts and Deists, which, when I read, bro't to my Mind a zealous
Minister's Observation upon my Book (as I was informed) viz. that there was not
a Word of Divinity in it. His Deacon replied, if there is not a Word of
Divinity in it, there is a great Deal of Scripture in it. So I must reply to my
Antagonist, with the Deacon, If I am a Deist, my Book has a great Deal of
Scripture in it, for it was upon the Scriptures I founded my Principles, and
vindicated my Arguments to prove the same. Had the Author been vindicating the
Truth, or the Cause of Christ, as he vainly pretends, it appears to me it would
been his proper Work to have cited his Readers to the Pages in my Book, where
those dreadful Errors are (if to be found) that he charges me with. It cannot
be denied but that I have used the Scriptures frequently in my Book, to
vindicate what I call and firmly believe to be the Cause of God. Therefore, he
should have shown where I preverted the Scripture, and applied them wrong. But
Nothing of this is done. If he thinks that it is a gone Case with me, as he
intimates in the Beginning of his Book; yet I would charitably hope, that he
does not think that to be the Case with all that read my Book. Therefore he
should have cited his Readers to my Errors, that he has loaded me with, to save
them from being destroyed by me; unless he concludes that his Readers has no
Right to hear and try Things, Principles and Doctrines for themselves; but are
obliged to take all from his bold Assertion, as an Oracle; which, I think, is
the whole Scope of his Book, by Reason that he has never undertook to prove,
through his Book, that I, or any of my covenant Brethren, in all this
Reformation, are guilty of one Fact or Error, that he has repeatedly charged us
with; unless it be in Page 88, where the Author, in a weak and childish Manner,
presumes to write as follows: To prove that I have laid no unjust Charge
against you who have separated from the standing Churches or New England, in
what I have now alleged, I might bring many Testimonies from sundry worthy
Persons: But I shall content myself at present with the united Testimony of Mr.
President Edwards, and Mr. Bellamy, in a Book written by the Latter, and
recommended by the Former, etc. and so cites a Passage out of Mr. Bellamy to
prove his Charge. -- Had he a cited a Passage out of Mr. Flavel's Works, wrote
against the Errors of them Times a hundred Years before we had any Being, he
would have proved his Assertions as well as he has now done. For where has Mr.
Edwards, or Mr. Bellamy, shown from our Writings, or any other Ways, that we
hold these Things, charged against us? Mr. Edwards is doubtless gone to Heaven;
and I would charitably hope that Mr. Bellamy may get there too, so as by Fire,
1 Cor. 3.15. But I belive that he will love the Separates better than he has
done for many Years back, if he ever does, etc.

Also, in Page 126, the Author has cited another Passage out of Mr. Bellamy's
Dialogues, and says, Mr. B. has had a pretty large Acquaintance with the
Separates, etc. But I think not so large as to speak the Truth of them; for in
the Passage, now cited, he says, I behold, 1st. the Love, the self-moving
Goodness of God, in the Gift of his Son; but not (as the Separates imagine)
that he loves me in particular, and is reconciled to me -- and so on: Which
Assertion is very false and slanderous, according to what Knowledge I have got
of myself and Brethren; yet as false as it is, it will serve the Author's Turn,
to prove all his Assertions against the Separates. But I desire Mr. Bellamy and
Mr. Bartlet, since they are Brethren together, in the same Cause and
Profession, to compare their Witness against the Separates together, and see
how they agree or rather disagree. The One condemns the Separates for holding
to a Faith that stands connected with selfish Views, supposing that the Person
imagines that there is some Favor bestowed upon him, that moves the Person to
believe, and love, etc. -- The Other condemns the Separates (or rather myself)
for holding a Faith that sixes entirely in Jesus Christ, and receives him
alone, for what he is in his own eternal Excellencies, exclusive of any
previous Knowledge of any special Favor bestowed upon the Person, etc. I close
this Remark with leaving these two Persons to dispute this Difference out that
is between* them, and get agreed; otherwise their Witness against the Separates
will not be legal.

4. I had it upon my Mind to have made many Remarks upon Mr. Ross's Book, but
find, if I go where my Mind leads, I must write a large Volumn, instead of a
short Apology. Wherefore I conclude what follows, under this Head, may serve
for a sufficient Answer to the Author's whole Performance, as it respects the
Separates.

1st then. I think I have a just Right to exclude out of the Controversy that
is between me and my Author, the Quakers, Moravians, Separate-Baptists,
Rogereens, and other Enthusiasts; and leave them to vindicate themselves, as
they see fit.

2. I have a just Right to exclude all that bear the Name of Separates, that
have, or do meet with us in public Worship, that are not Church Members, under
covenant Bonds to walk in all the Laws and Ordinances of Christ: And in this
Case shall adopt the Apostle's Words in 1 Cor. 5.12, 13. "For what have I to do
to judge them also that are without? Do not ye judge them that are within? But
them that are without, God judges." So that I, nor any of my Brethren in the
Ministry, are no more to account for these out of Covenant, than the standing
Ministers are for every corrupt, profane, immoral Person, that waits upon their
Ministry. Now, having excluded these out of the present Controversy, the Matter
in Debate is brought into a small Compass. And who has a Right to look upon me,
or my Brethren, guilty of the Things charged, without Evidence to prove the
Facts charged? I suppose that I have a just Right to look upon the Author's
whole Performance, as it respects me and my covenant Brethren, a sinful, and so
a shameful Way of slandering his Neighbors, Indeed it appears to me, that in
the Method that he has proceeded in, against the Separates, that if Paul was
here in this Reformation, he could not escape his Slanders. But I leave the
sober, understanding Reader to judge, etc.

I had a Design of transcribing several Passages out of the Author's Book, that
those that have not seen it, might have the Advantage of seeing and judging for
themselves: But upon a second Thought, find it will enlarge my Book beyond my
present Design. Therefore I shall content myself with transcribing One, which
may show the Spirit and Temper of Mind in the whole Book. As in Page 54. If you
were really humbled, how come you to be so wise in your own Conceit, and to
have such a high Opinion of your own Gifts, Experience and Grace; and so much
Contempt for all but yourselves? Whence is it that you don't pay any Regard to
the Reason and Judgment of any Man, or Number of Men, let them be never so
wise, learned and godly; but trample on all Churches, and their Determinations,
but your own, with the greatest Disdain? Did you not make this one grand Plea,
for your Separation from us, that our Churches were not pure enough for such
holy Persons as you? Were you not afraid such eminent Saints as you, would be
polluted by having Communion with such Sinners as you think we are? Is it not
then a downright barefaced Insult on common Sense, for you to pretend to
Humility, when your whole Conduct loudly declares that you are lifted up beyond
Measure with Pride? But probably it was powerfully impressed on your Minds, you
were more excellent than your Neighbors, if you had such an Impression on your
Minds, your own Conscience, and Reason doubtless opposed it at first, because
there were sundry Things that rendered it very improbable. But there was
something so agreeable in the Impression, you at Length gave Way to it, and now
act upon it. -- Now, can you think, can any Body believe, that an Impression
that has puffed you up with Pride, and inspired you with Disdain toward
Thousands that are really superior to you, could come from God? -- What though
you despise fine Clothes, and new Fashions, and exclaim against them; -- and so
on -- thus the Author writes. Now, honest Reader, if you have not the Character
of a Minister of Christ in Mind, I would advise you to take the Bible, and read
it carefully, see 1 Timothy 3.2 to 7. Tit. 1.7, 8, 9. Matthew. 28.19, 20. Now see
what there is in this Book, that agrees with such a Character the Scripture
gives of a Minister of Christ: What sound Doctrine, Scripture or Reason is
there used to convince us, if we were in Errors, as he supposes? Not a Scrap.
And indeed I see not why such a Declaration does not lie against all Persons,
in all Ages of the Church that have true Faith in Jesus Christ, and take his
written Word as the only and alone Rule of Faith and Practice. For although Elder
Pain, and myself, in our Books published, have labored to prove, and, I think
made it evident, that the religious Constitution of this Colony is not founded
upon the Scriptures of Truth, but upon Men's Inventions. Yet the Author, nor
any Body else, that I know of, has undertook in any sober, serious Manner, to
show where we have missed the Mind of God, and so preverted the Scriptures that
we have bro't to vindicate our Principles and Practice. -- And till something
of this Nature appears, it will be a fruitless Chase to follow every party,
proud, superstitious Person, as the Author appears to be by his Book; which
Performance is suited to please the Enemies of the Cause of Christ, and to
blind the Eyes of the ignorant, and lead them to believe a Lie. But I must
dismiss the Author, and his Book, desiring and praying, that he may see his
unscriptural and unchristian Performance, and have his Heart truly humbled, and
his Soul saved.

3. It is probable that it will be objected by some against me, for the
following Performance, saying that I am a deluded Person, a Mischief-Maker,
despising and undermining our good Ministers and Churches, in this Colony,
endeavoring to make Divisions and Separations in the Churches and Societies,
in Order to break up our good Constitution, etc.

I answer, as to my being a deluded Person, I shall leave my Principles and
daily Practice, with this Book, to apologize for me, and show how far I am in
the Truth, or out of it.

2. As to my despising your good Ministers and Churches, the Word of God
directs me not to have Men's Persons in Admiration, but to judge of them
according to their Fruits, Matthew. 7.20. or to esteem them for their Work's
Sake. 1 These. 5.13. And by this Rule my Esteem cannot be very great, for Want
of gospel Fruits and Works to gain it.

3. As to my endeavoring to make Divisions and Separations, etc. my Study and
painful Labor is, to obtain, through free Grace, a right Understanding of
Christ's whole Will, as it is revealed in his written Word; and also for
sanctifying Grace, to practice the same, whatever it cost me. -- But if my
Principles or Practice be counter to the written Word of God; then be so kind
and christian-like, as to show me wherein. But if it should happen that by my
holding to, and practicing the Truth, Divisions and Separations arise; then I
think that it is high time for those that make the Objection, to look about
them, and to know where their Standing is.

4. It is an allowed Point, that every One has a Right to vindicate his own
Character; which Principle brings me under a Necessity to examine the religious
Constitution of this Colony, and carefully compare it with the Word of God,
before I comply with it; otherwise I must be accounted no better than a Papist,
Mohammedan or Pagan. -- Therefore, to escape this reproachful Character, I may
lawfully be justified for going through the following Performance in my Remarks
upon the religious Constitution of this Colony. And in as much as it is likely
that those that make the Objection against my Remarks, are those that highly
esteem the Constitution; I need no more, but turn them to the Platform.
Saybrook Confession, Page 5. This Confession of Faith we offer as our firm
Persuasion, well and fully grounded upon the Holy Scriptures, and commend the
same unto all, particularly to the People of our Colony, to be examined,
accepted, and constantly maintained. We do not assume to ourselves that any
Thing be taken upon Trust from us, etc.

Here my Reader may see I am directed to examine for myself, and not take upon
Trust from them. So that instead of faulting of me for examining their Plan for
myself, I think that I ought to be commended for complying with their wholesome
Counsel. For if I disregard their Counsel, they further say, For an orthodox
Christian to resolve his Faith, into Education, Instruction, and the Persuasion
of Others, is not an higher Reason than a Papist, Mohammedan or Pagan can
produce for his Religion. P. 6. Thus I find, written by that grand Council at
Say brook; received by Ministers, Churches, and the General Assembly. So that
if they will be confident with themselves, it is a sufficient Apology for all
my Remarks upon the Constitution, provided my Remarks be just, and according to
Truth; and if I have written otherwise, let him that discovers it show me
wherein, and I shall be indebted to him for his Kindness.

5thly. As to my breaking up your good Constitution -- it is one Thing to say
it is good, and another Thing to prove it to be so, from the Scriptures. My
principal and main Design, is to vindicate what I soberly and solemnly think to
be Truth, and the sacred Rights of Conscience. And if it should so happen, that
what I have written be the Truth, and should uncover the Constitution, tending
to its Overthrow, I may be out of the Question; for the Controversy will
properly fall between the Espousers of the Constitution, and the Author of the
Truth. And there I would humbly leave the Cause to have its final Issue; and
only say, I have no Man or Men's Persons as such, in View, in my Writing. But
would as much as is proper, separate Ministers, Civil Rulers, and Churches,
from the Constitution, and consider this Religious Constitution as it is
compiled or written, as though it was not established in this Colony; but
presented here from some remote Part of Christendom, for Examination, to see if
it was according to the Word of God, and the sacred Rights of Conscience. In
this Light I would earnestly and humbly entreat of the Reader to consider and
weigh it, and my Remarks upon it; -- and when the Truth is understood a one
Side; all Persons then, as Truth is embraced or rejected by Persons, we have a
Right to speak of, and make Application. Mat. 7.16 to 21.

E. FROTHINGHAM.

Some Remarks, upon the Religious Constitution, of the Colony of Connecticut,
established by Law, etc.
BY the Religious Constitution, I mean certain Laws in the Colony Law Book,
called ecclesiastical; with the Confession of Faith, agreed upon, by the Elders
and Messengers of the Churches, met at Say-Brook, especially the Articles of
Administration of Church Discipline.

In order to prosecute the following Performance, I shall endeavor to build
upon the Rock Jesus Christ (as he reveals himself in the written Word) as laid
in ZION, a chief Corner Stone, elect, precious, 1 Pet. 2.6. Isa. 28.16. "For
other Foundation can no Man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 3 11. Pray observe. Not the Prescriptions of Man, or Men, Colonies nor
Kingdoms; but strictly, and absolutely what is in the Scriptures of eternal
Truth, before Kingdoms or Colonies was constituted or set up. -- Jesus Christ
is the alone and only Head of his Church, Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22. Col. 1.18. And the
only Judge and Lawgiver, Isa. 33.22. It is to him, all Mortals that are happy,
of any and every Profession, Rank and Order must have Recourse, by a
supernatural Agency of the Holy Spirit; whose Office it is to regenerate the
Heart, and implant that Faith which operates in divine Love and Union to Jesus
Christ the Head; which Faith has a renewing and transporting Power upon the
whole Man. 2 Cor. 3.18. and engages the enlightened and sanctified Mind to be
strictly conformed to God, in all his religious, civil or moral Actions. Phil.
3.8 to 15. Tit. 2.14. As Man by nature, is naturally inclined to transgress
God's righteous and just Commands, and so under just Condemnation. John 3. 18
-- 36. So also those that are converted, and truly united to Jesus, have a new
Nature through which they freely and delightfully do God's Will; it is their
Liberty, Privilege and Happiness to keep God's Commands. Ephesians. 2.10. 1 John 5.^.
and whilst the Believer so abides, there is no Condemnation to him. Romans 8.1.
Yea, that Person that, in pure sanctifying Light, sees Jesus Christ to be all,
and in all, Col. 3.11. cannot, nor will not comply with any Articles of Faith
or Practice, compiled and established by Men, that he cannot see agreeable to
the Law and to the Testimony, Isa. 8.20. or the written Word of God; although
there may be Men united therewith that he esteems as Men of Wisdom, Gifts and
Grace. Yea, if these Articles of Faith should be established by the Laws of a
Colony or Kingdom; these are all too sandy a Foundation for an upright Soul to
act upon, neither will he comply with such a Constitution, although he be
threatened with Prison, Faggots and Fire: For the Language of his Heart is, "The
Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, He will
save us." Isa. 33.22. Again, that Person that by Faith sees Christ to be All in
All, sees that his Conscience is not his own to give, to please this Man or
that; but that Jesus Christ challenges the sole Right of Conscience, yea, the
whole human Soul, with all its Powers and Faculties, to be entirely at his
Dispose. Therefore, this Person rejects all Challenges of Men, whether in the
civil or ecclesiastical Authority. Romans 14.4. Indeed, it is a granted and
allowed Principle, by all true Protestants and Christians, viz. the Right of
private Judgment, or Liberty of Conscience, in Matters of Religion. And right
Reason shows that it ought to be so; for no Man, whether Saint, Priest, or
civil Ruler, can stand between the great and terrible God, at the Judgment Day,
to plead off his Neighbor from the Execution of strict Justice. Therefore, it
is the most unreasonable Thing possible, for any Man, or Powers Civil or
Ecclesiastical, to interrupt or deprive their Neighbor of the free Exercise of
their Conscience, in Matters of their Soul's Concerns. Thus far I would hope
that I have wrote what the Reader's Conscience witnesses to, that Liberty of
Conscience, is a Person's unalterable Right, etc.

I now proceed to take into serious and close Consideration the religious
Constitution confessed by the Body of the People in this Colony; and will
endeavor to show wherein it appears to me, as I understand the Word of God,
that it is not founded upon Jesus Christ, as he shows his Mind in the written
Word. -- And shall begin with what I find relative thereto in the Colony Law
Book.

1st then, See Colony Law-Book, Page 165. Be it enacted, by the Governor,
Council, etc. That the Inhabitants of any Town, or Society, or Parish,
constituted by this Assembly, who are, or shall be present at a Town or Society
Meeting, legally warned; shall have Power, by the major Vote of those so met,
to call and settle a Minister or Ministers among them, and to provide for his
or their Support and Maintenance, provided that no Persons be allowed to vote
in any such Affairs, unless such Person or Persons have a Freehold in the same
Town or Society, raced at fifty Shillings, or forty Pounds Estate in the common
List; or are Persons of full Age, and in full Communion with Church, in;the
said Town or Society.

1. This Constitution Plan, gives the General Assembly (which is, and always
should so remain, a civil Body, to transact in civil and moral Things) Power to
constitute or make a spiritual or ecclesiastical Body. This, I think, is
against, and contrary to the Law of Nature, for any Species of Beings, rational
or not, to produce, bring forth, and make that which is contrary to its own
Being or Nature. Indeed, civil Bodies may make, and constitute civil Bodies,
but not religious or spiritual Bodies, for that must be above their Nature or
Power. -- But to come to something more weighty. Jesus Christ claims the sole
Right of making and constituting Churches, or ecclesiastical Bodies. See Psalm.
127.1. "Except the Lord build the House, they labor in vain that build it."
Psalm 102.16. "When the Lord shall build up Zion." -- Mind, Reader, the
Scriptures does not say, When General Assemblies, nor Kings, nor Parliaments,
makes religious Societies or Churches: No, no; for they cannot convert one
Soul, nor make no man religious: They may make Multitudes of abominable
Hypocrites, which the Lord abhors; but not one meet Person for the Church of
Christ. The Members of Christ's Church are made by the Power of his Word and
Spirit, through the Means and Instruments he sees sit, in his high Sovereignty,
to use and work, by. Isa. 66.1, 2. Zech. 4.6, 7, 9. 1 Pet. 2.4 to 10. When
Christ, by his Word and Spirit, has converted Sinners, and instructed their
Minds by the Scriptures, in the Affairs of his visible and spiritual Kingdom,;
they being understandingly agreed in the Unity of the Holy Spirit, covenanting
to walk together in all the Laws and Ordinances of Christ's House -- this is a
Church of Christ, a spiritual House, etc. Amos 3.3. Romans 10.10. 1 John 1.3. 1
Pet. 2.5. I earnestly request of the Reader to turn to the Texts I cite in this
Book, and labor to consider them well, that you may better understand what is
right and what is wrong, in this Enquiry after the Truth.

Having briefly shown that it belongs to Jesus Christ, and to him alone, to
make and constitute religious Societies or Churches; I think it is plain, that
this religious Constitution that I am laboring to uncover, usurpes the Power
above Christ, or, as Paul says, 2 These. 2.4. "Who opposes and exalts
himself above all that is called God." I feel concerned how my Reader will
endure the plain, naked Truth. I would not for the World, write any Thing
designing to stir Corruption and Party in the Reader. Neither dare I for a
World, keep back what I think the Cause of Christ calls for; least I should
offend my Reader. Matthew. 28.20. Luke 12.2 to 6. I desire the Reader to keep in
Mind the Caution I have given, viz. to consider this Constitution, as much as
possible, as though it was sent here from some remote Part, to read, and compare
by the Word of God, etc. To return to the Words of the Plan, which are, That
the Inhabitants of any Town or Society, or Parish, constituted by this
Assembly, etc. -- Which supposes no Persons have a Right to form themselves
into a religious Society, without their Leave. No, if King George the Third,
our rightful Sovereign (in the civil Kingdom) should, upon any Occasion, come
into the Bounds of Connecticut, he has no Liberty to worship God, according to
his Conscience, unless this constitution Head sees fit, in their great
Clemency, to indulge his Majesty with Liberty, etc. For the Truth of this
Assertion, I appeal to the C. L. B. Page 169. where the Church of England
Professors came courtesing and bowing to, and confederating with, this
Constitution; to the discovering their great Weakness and Folly, when the Word
of God, and the religious Constitution of the Nation, is on their Side.

To proceed. I have another Figure to use, in Order to discover this
Constitution, which is more striking and shocking; which is to say, That if
Jesus Christ was to come Personally into Connecticut, with all his Disciples,
he could not gather and settle a Church, unless he would crouch, and come down
to this Constitution Plan; or that, in its Clemency, would allow Jesus Christ,
and his Disciples, Liberty of Conscience. If my Reader will put on Patience,
and read with Meekness, I trust you will find this Figure made out, from the
Constitution Plan, comparing one Part with another, to take the true Intent of
it: For it is plain, I think, to any Person that does not shut his Eyes against
the Light; that this Plan challenges the sole Right of making Religious
Societies, and the Government of Conscience. Yea, I think that it assumes the
Prerogative that belongs to the Son of God alone. And how that will pairs in
the Court of Heaven, judge ye. For see C. L. B. Page 139. Nor shall any Person
neglect the public Worship of God, in some lawful Congregation, and form
themselves into separate Companies, in private Houses, on Penalty of Ten
Shillings for every such Offense, each Person shall be guilty of. Here, Reader,
you may see a flat Contradiction, in those that hold to this Plan, and yet
pretend to hold Liberty of Conscience; when, as the Case may be, and has been,
there is no Gap for one Breath of gospel Liberty: For if we exercise our Gifts
and Grace in the lawful Assemblies, we are had up, and carried to Prison, for
making Disturbance on the Sabbath. I myself have been confined in Hartford
Prison near five Months, for nothing but exhorting and warning the People,
after the public Worship was done, and the Assembly dismissed. And whilst I was
there confined, three more Persons was sent to Prison; one for exhorting, and
two for worshipping God, in a private House, in a separate Meeting. And quick
after I was released, by the Laws being answered by natural Relations unbeknown
to me, then two Brethren more was committed for exhorting and preaching, and
several others afterward, for attending the same Duties; and I myself twice
more was sent to Prison, for the Minister's Rates. I must write a Volumn to
acquaint my Reader with the Lord's marvelous Lovingkindness toward me in
Prison, and the Measures he took for my Deliverance. But these Facts may show
the Reader, that unless we become all Spirit, and take Wing up in the Air, to
attend social Worship where gross Constables, Grand-jurors, Courts and Prisons
cannot come, we cannot escape this Constitution Power. Furthermore, that my
Charge against the Plan is true, consider the express Word of the Law, Nor
shall any Person neglect, etc. Note here, Jesus Christ is a Person, and the
glorious Person of the God-Man; and upon Supposition he was here, with all his
Disciples, the Plan has made no Provision for them; they wouldly equally
exposed to the Laws as any poor Separate. And I think this cannot be denied by
Persons of Honesty that will consider the Constitution Plan. -- For if Christ's
holy and jealous Eye should see the lawful Worship so remote from his Father's
Will, Rules, and Laws, that, consistent with his Honor and high Dignity, he
could not worship with them; then we have all Reason possible to believe that
he, and his Followers, would meet with the like Treatment, from the People of
this Constitution, as he did from his own professing People, Jews, and Scribes,
and Pharisees, in the Days when he was here upon Earth.

Again, That the Plan that I am laboring to hold up to the rational,
unprejudiced Mind, denies the sacred Rights of Conscience, is further evident
-- C. L. B. P. 232. That such Inhabitants of Towns and Societies as have
obtained, or hereafter shall obtain Liberty of the General Assembly, to
procure, and have the preaching of the Gospel among themselves, for certain
Months in the Year, distinct and separate from the established Place of worship
in such Town or Society to which they belong, etc. The Reader may see that this
Part of the Plan perfectly agrees with the Passage last cited, and challenges
the Government of Conscience out of Christ's Hand. For consider what Christ
says, and what this Plan virtually says.

1. Christ says, as in John 4.21 to 24. But the Hour comes, and now is, when
the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth, for the
Father seeks such to worship him. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him,
must worship him in Spirit and in Truth. Thus says the Son of God; but the
Plan virtually says, Not so, Lord -- we do not like your Opinion -- it tends
to strike up all our good regular Churches, that we, in our Wisdom, have made
and established by Law: For you give Liberty of Conscience, and allow every One
to judge for himself, which Worship is spiritual, and which is not -- and that
opens a Door for Separation from our Churches that we have made, and so crumble
us to Pieces. Also, to despise the good Ministers that we have made for the
People, and opens a Gap for those that think they are converted, and gifted,
and called of God to improve their Gifts, to set themselves up as public
Teachers: And such an Allowance tends to make Divisions and Sub-divisions --
and there will be no End, if this Liberty of Conscience is granted. Therefore,
Lord, it shall not be so -- we do not like your spiritual Scheme of Worship --
it tends to wild Disorder and Enthusiasm. You say we shall not worship in this
Mountain, nor yet in Jerusalem -- but we say we will -- and draw the Lines
precisely, for every ecclesiastical Body -- and the Committee that the County
Court appoints, See C. L. B. Pages 153, 254.
shall fix the very Spot for Worship, and all People, within the Compass of
those Lines, shall worship in that very Spot, Spiritual or not -- a converted
Minister or not converted, for a Teacher -- and we have decreed, in our Wisdom
(let Christ say what he will in the Scriptures about spiritual Worship) that if
any Person neglect the public Worship, where we have fixed the Spot, and meet
in private Houses, he shall incur the Penalty of ten Shillings, and be
committed to Prison till paid.

2. The Scriptures says, Zech. 4.6 -- 9. Not by Might, nor by Power, but by my
Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts -- his Church shall be built. But this
religious Plan says (in its own Nature) Not so, Lord -- for our Churches will
crumble to Pieces, if they are not upheld by the civil Power: The civil Power
made them, and they must uphold them.

3. The Scriptures show, that it is the Love of God, true Love to him in the
Heart, that lays the Foundation, and engages a Person to keep God's Commands. 1
John 5.2.3. 2 Cor. 5.14. But this Plan says, No, not so -- there would be no
Regard paid to God's Commands, if it was not for our religious Constitution.
Again, God forbids that Men should be forced to fear him by the Precepts of
Men, Isa. 29.33. But this Plan says, That there would be no Fear of God in the
Land, if it was not for our religious Laws, and the wise Plan that our civil
Rulers have established. Mind, Reader, Jesus Christ, in the Power of his Word
and Spirit, is all out of the Question, with this religious Plan.

4. Once more, in this Division. Jesus Christ challenges the sole Right of
Conscience -- that a Man's Judgment, and his whole All be wholly subjected to
him alone. Rom 14.4. Who art thou that judged another Man's Servant? To his own
Master he stands or falls. Chap. 12.1, 2. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. But this Plan
says, Not so, Lord -- if we have not the Government of Conscience, our good
Order, good Ministers and Churches will all be dashed to Pieces -- the
Indulgence we, in our Clemency, have already granted, has given us a dreadful
Shock -- and if we resign up Conscience to your Government, it will be all up
with us, as to our Religion and good Order. Now, the Language that this Plan
has, in its own Nature, is shocking; but it further says, in all the
ecclesiastical Laws, That, let Christ and Conscience say what they will, we
will be obeyed, or the Penalties we have annexed to Disobedience shall be put
into Execution, etc.

Thus, Reader, I have endeavored seriously and uprightly to assert and show my
Lord and Master's just Right, as being the only Lord of Conscience: Also,
wherein the Constitution claims that Authority over Men's Consciences, which
belongs only to the Son of God. Having traced this Plan, to find where its
Bounds are, and the Spot fixed for public Worship; I now come to take into
Consideration, their Choice of their Minister.

Observe here, the Persons qualified to vote, are those that have a Freehold in
the same Town or Society, rated at fifty Shillings, or forty Pounds in the
common List, or, etc. -- Here I would note, that we do well to consider, that
the Choice of a Minister is a Matter of as great Importance as any Thing that
respects the visible Affairs of Christ's Kingdom, here below. If the Minister
be uncoverted, he is likely to lead the Flock down to Hell. See Matthew. 15.14.
An unconverted Minister is an extreme heavy Judgment from God, upon a People;
and a Man qualified according to the Scriptures, sent by Christ to a People, is
an exceeding great Blessing: Therefore the Choice of a Minister is of vast
Consequence, one Way of the other. Yet see how this Constitution treats it --
Observe, if any Person be in its Limits, having fifty Shillings Freehold, or
forty Pounds Estate in, etc. although he should be a Deist, Arian or Socinian;
yea, if he be an Atheist, and have a Mind to vote, to keep out a Minister of
Christ, I know not who can hinder him by that Plan; but if he be a profane
Swearer, a Drunkard, or a Thief, they are as good Voters, according to this
Plan, as the most holy, knowing, upright Man in the Church. Let us view this
Part of the Plan carefully, and compare it with the Scriptures.

1. Christ says, Matthew. 7.18. A good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit;
neither can a corrupt Tree bring forth good Fruit. Consider, if the Church
should consist of twenty male Members, all converted, holy Men, and choose a
Man qualified as well as Paul was, and the Society Members be more in Number,
although they should be all scandalous as before mentioned; yet if they have the
Money Qualifications can out vote in the Church, and prevent them of their just
Right and Choice. -- What is this, but depriving the Spouse of Christ of the
sacred Rights of Conscience? Surely this cannot be a good Tree, that bears such
bad Fruit!

2dly. The Scripture clearly divides Saints from Sinners, in their Acting in
religious Affairs, or the Affairs of Christ's Kingdom, Ezekiel. 44, 7, 2 Cor 6.14,
15, 16. "Be ye not unequally yoked together with Unbelievers; for what
Fellowship has Righteousness with Unrighteousness?" and so on. Again, see John
15.18, 19. "If ye were of the World, the World would love his own: but because
ye are not of World, but I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the
World hates you." 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. "But the natural Man receives not the
Things of the Spirit of God, for they are Foolishness unto him; neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned. But he that is spiritual,
judges all Things; yet he himself is judged of no Man." 1 John 4, 4, 5, 6. "Ye
are of God, little Children, and have overcome them; because greater is he
that is in you, than he that is in the World. They are of the World, therefore
speak they of the World, and the World hears them. We are of God; he that
knows God hears us." Chap. 5, 19. John 17. 9.14. But this religious Plan
confronts the Word of God, and says, the wicked and Righteous may act
together, in the most Important Affairs of Christ's Kingdom, viz. in choosip"g
a Minister for the Church: And a Drunkard, or profane Swearer, or Thief, is as
good a Voter as the most godly Man in the Church.

3dly. By this Plan of constituting and forming Churches, and settling
Ministers, if the Society Members be more than the Church Members, and should
be so disposed (not liking the Minister the Church has chose) conform
themselves into Church Order, with the Help and Approbation of neighboring
Ministers, and choose a Minister that suits themselves. Now this new formed
Church, if it should so happen that there was not one holy Man in it, and the
first Church all truly Godly, and in the gospel Rule; yet the last formed,
having the major Part of the Society, have Power to choose a Man contrary to
the Minds of the first Church, and vote away their Estates to support him. And
what is still more striking, is, that Money is the sole Cause of striping this
first formed Church, of all her sacred Rights and Privileges, that well might
Paul say, Tim. 6.10 "For the Love of Money is the Root of all Evil:" For this
Church falls below the Title of being lawful, and becomes unlawful, when they
have not altered neither in Principle or Practice, and are not only obliged to
have their Estates halled away, to support a Man and Worship which they know to
be contrary to God's Word -- but which is more shocking, to be compelled to
attend that Worship themselves, or suffer the Penalty for their Non-attendance.
Now if this is not to commit a Rape upon Christ's chaste Spouse which he has
bought with his precious Blood, I know not what is. Surely the Lord Jesus will,
ever long, revenge such Injury done to his dear Bride, in dreadful Things in
Righteousness, and meet such his Enemies in Robes dressed in Vengeance. Read Isa.
51. 22, 23. Chap. 63.1 to 7. Ver. Chap. 66.1 to 7. Zech. 8.2.

My Reader may object and say, I carry Things to Extremes; and suppose Things
that never was, nor like to be. Answer, I will grant it is likely that every
Member in a Church may not be holy at Heart; also, that there is no Church in
the Constitution but what may have some Saints in it. Let this be accepted,
then there is no Thanks due to this religious Plan. That what I have now set
forth, does not happen daily, the Constitution admits of it, and, in Fact, has
brought forth my Observation, in the very Nature that I have set it forth, only
some Difference in the Circumstance. Witness the Affair at Canterbury: -- To
give the Reader a full Narrative of that Affair would make a Volumn; but a
short Hint I think is necessary, to give Evidence to what I have noted.
Therefore, according to the best of my Memory, as I have been informed,
Canterbury Church was first gathered and founded upon the strict congregational
Principles of our godly Forefathers; and being destitute of a Minister, they
labored to get one qualified according to the Scriptures: But the Society
(with their money Qualification) being most in Number, prevented. After much
Debates and Labor between the Major Part of the Church and the Minor, with the
Society, they differing about a Minister; the minor Part of the Church withdrew
from the Church, and formed themselves into a new Body, under this Plan that I
am uncovering: Then they with the major Part of the Society, made the major
Part of the Whole, and so chose a Man to suit themselves. The Church opposed
the Choice -- First because it was their Right to choose their own Minister. --
Secondly because they looked upon the Man that the Society had chose, not
qualified according to the Scriptures, as their Objections show, and dare not,
for their Soul's Sake, submit to the Choice, but strongly opposed the Man's
settling (they being the major Part of the Church, it was their just Right to
have the Choice of their Minister, and that according to the Scriptures, and
the constant Practice of our Forefathers 1 Cor. 14.15, 16.) When the Council
assembled together to ordain the Man that the Society had chose, the Work was
so heavy in the Circumstance of Things, that it was three Days, I think, before
it was accomplished. The Matter was so glaring, to proceed to ordain a Man over
the Church (that had always been the first standing Church in the Town) right
against the Church's Consent; that although the Constitution clothed them with
Power to go forward, yet I suppose that their Consciences would not suffer
them, till they had got the Society to vote their Consent, that the General
Assembly should set the Church off to be an ecclesiastical Society. And the
Council also ordered their Moderator to prepare a Memorial to send to the
Assembly for the same Purpose. (In so doing they put a Plaster upon their
Conscience, which was sore, and so healed it, for a Time, never examining into
the Nature of the Diseases.) So they went forward, and ordained the Man (that
Money had chose.) I was Personally present when the Church gave in their last
Testimony against the Council's Proceeding to Ordination; and so the Church
withdrew out of the Meeting House, as the Council went forward to ordain, etc.

Here Reader, let me inform you, what I firmly believe in the Affair. That from
the Acquaintance I got of this Church, that withdrew, they was the first Church
of Christ, that ever my Eyes beheld, bearing the Fruits and Characters that the
Scriptures give of a Church of Christ. See John 17, 6. "I have manifested thy
Name unto the Men which thou gave me out of the World. Ver. 14, "I have given
them thy Word, and the World has hated them because they are not of the World,
even as I am not of the World, etc. It appeared plain to me as Christ says,
that because he had given this People an experimental Acquaintance with his
Word, which they conscientiously endeavored to practice according thereto;
therefore the Society or World hated them. But I testify that Jesus Christ was
graciously present with them, in their withdraw, with the enlightening,
quickening, leading, teaching Influences of his Holy Spirit. The Word of God
fell with divine Power upon the little despised Flock of Christ: That I could
truly and understandingly say, it was good for me to be there, etc. But to
return, to Matter of Fact, which was, that this Church now fell below the Title
of being lawful; also under Tribute to the Society; and more dreadful still,
according to the Plan, obliged to attend Public Worship on the Lord's Day, and
hear the Man that Money had introduced into the Pulpit, against the Church's
solemn Warnings and Rejections. Here Reader you may see my former Observations
was just; for this Church was always owned to be a Church of Christ, and lawful
ever since Canterbury had a Church, till now. But now she is stripped of all
sacred Rites, and most valuable Privileges. And how? -- Why by this religious
Plan, operating according to its own Nature. -- But what is her Crime? -- Why
she has at this Time proved chaste to Christ, her only Head and Husband; in
that she would not leave his Word, Rules and Laws, for Men's Inventions and
Traditions. But my Reader may further object, and say, I carry Things too far,
and endeavor to make Things worse than they are; for the Society has voted
their Consent to have them set off, and the Reverend Council also. Answer, What
if this supreme Head of this Plan, does not see fit to alter what they in their
Wisdom have planed, as a standing Rule of Practice for Societies to proceed in,
in order to settle Ministers, nor to give Relief any Way that answers the
tender, grieved, upright Conscience? I ask in Meekness, who shall answer at the
Bar of God, for all the abominable Oppression and Persecution done to this
Church, for fifteen Years together, notwithstanding all their voting; not only
pushing them out of the Meeting House, that was built for them, in that
Principle and Profession to worship God in, and robbing them of their Property
in it, but, additional thereto, straining away their Substance, Horses and
Oxen, stripping them out of their Teams, in the midst of Business; seizing
Cows, Sheep, and poor People's Meat out of their Tubs, and other Utensils,
exceedingly wanted in their Families? And what is still beyond, seizing and
imprisoning the Bodies of this Flock of Christ, whilst their poor Families are
left to shift as they can! Neither have they done any Wrong to their Neighbors
of this Constitution; no, not touched a Hair of their Heads; but only lived in
the Principles and Practices that they was educated and brought up in, with the
additional Blessing of the Out-pourings of God's Holy Spirit upon them. Some of
my Readers will likely say, that the Society is not to blame for this
Oppression, nor the Reverend and good Council, nor the Constitution. Therefore
I ask my dear Reader again, with my Heart full of Pain and Distress, for poor
Connecticut, who must answer for all the dreadful Oppression and Persecution
committed (not only in Canterbury, but many other Towns in the Colony) under
the Light of the Gospel, when the Judge of Quick and Dead, shall be seated upon
his great white Throne of impartial Justice, and Criminals, be they who they
will, shall have no Excuse to make for their cruel Oppression and Persecution?
No, not that crowned Kings have enacted, etc. nor yet that any haughty Monarchs
of the Earth, with their decreed religious Establishments, nor the
Establishments of Colonies, or ecclesiastical Councils nor Societies Votes; nor
that this was the only Religion and Practice that was in Credit among Men. No,
all such Excuses shall be swept away, as Refuges of Lies: And God, the great
and terrible God, and poor Oppressors and Persecutors, have a Meeting to have
Things settled in strict Justice for one whole Eternity, when the strong Arm of
Vengeance shall be made quite naked and bare, to execute divine Wrath upon the
miserable Creatures. But I return to the Narrative. This Church of Christ, so
oppressed, in suitable Time after the Ordination aforementioned, sent a Prayer
to the Hon. General Assembly, asking nothing but what was their just Right,
owning the Assembly as God's Ministers in the civil Kingdom; and Jesus Christ
to be King in Zion, and the only Lord of Conscience. They also carried the
Church's Records, showing that they was the Church first formed in Canterbury.
-- Also, the Society's Vote, and the Reverend Council's Prayer, but was denied
their Request, and obliged to bear the continued Oppression (notwithstanding
all the Doings of the Society or Council) they bowed down, and let the Wicked
go over them for many Years. Isa. 51.22, 23. in which Time they sent several
more Prayers, without any Relief. And all this While they remained in some good
Measure chaste to their dearest Lord and Master; yet, notwithstanding, not
continuing to watch and pray always: But a few Years back, through some Means or
other (and I think it is high Time for them to know what, and repent in Dust
and Ashes) have proved unchaste to Christ, and have played the Harlor, in
submitting to this unscriptural Plan, that claims that Government over them,
which is due to none but Christ alone. The Truth of this Charge may be seen in
the Society-Vote, which the Separates (as they are now called) voted
promiscuously with the Society; which Vote may be seen in the Society and
Colony Records; a Copy of which is in my Keeping, but too long to transcribe.
Had not this Case been public, I should not for my Right Hand, tell it in
Gath, nor publish it in the Streets of Askelon. But they themselves have given
Occasion, 2 Samuel 1.19 20. "Let it be for a Lamentation, till their Captivity is
returned, etc." So I will return to the Wall, where I have, through Grace, dug,
and found a Hole, and enter in at the Door, and take another Turn in this
Chamber of Imagery. Ezekiel. 8.6 to the End.

Observe, Reader, in the Page 165, where I first began my Search in this Plan,
showing the Qualifications that Voters must be found in, that choose a Minister,
they acting in their Direction, says, That the Minister or Ministers, which
have been or shall be so called and settled, shall be the Minister or Ministers
of such Town or Society, and all Agreements which have been or shall be made by
the Major Part of the Inhabitants of such Town or Society qualified and meet as
aforesaid, with such Minister or Ministers, respecting his or their Settlement
and Maintenance, shall be binding and obligatory on all the Inhabitants, etc.
Now, Reader, I conclude, that you will readily grant, that that Plan which is
formed for a Rule of Action, and flatly contradicts itself, so as no Judgment
can be formed from the Plan, to fix the Action, cannot be founded upon the Word
of God, but must have its Origiginal from some other Quarter. Thus I
understand, is the Case of this Plan. For here you see, in the Passage now
cited, the Minister so chose and contracted with, shall be the Minister. Pray
mind, the Matter is positively fixed -- shall, etc. Now turn to another Part of
this Plan, and see how flat the Contradiction is. C. L. B. P. 169. Here you may
see the Hon. Assembly see fit in their Wisdom, to take into Consideration, with
good Liking, and great Approbation, the Agreement of the Rev. Ministers and
Messengers met at Say-brook; and to put their Sanction upon what they had
agreed to, decreeing that all such that united therewith should be accounted
lawful, or established by Law. Now their being Enlargment made to the former
Plan, we do well to see what it is. S. Brook Conf. P. 112. That, according to
the common Practice of our Churches, A sad Mistake -- for no such Practice had
ever been in the Churches, till this Plan introduced it.
nothing shall be deemed an Act, or Judgment of any Council, which has not the
Major Part of the Elders present concurring, and such a Number of the
Messengers present as makes the Majority of the Council, etc. Now, let us put
these two Parts of the Plan together, and hear what it speaks, as the Case may
frequently happen, walking in this Rule, i. e. the Man chosen by the major Part
of the Society, so and so qualified, shall be the Man; also the Man chosen by
the major Part shall not be the Man. And why? -- Because the Vote of the major
Part of the Elders present is wanting; and so no Judgment can possibly come
forth upon this Plan, in this Case. Please to look of it well; and do not be
offended, because I take Pains to hold it up before your Eyes, just as it is in
its own Nature. -- For so it speaks -- This Man shall be the Minister for the
Society, and the same Man shall not, etc. Now what shall the Minister, legally
or lawfully chosen by the Society, do in this Dilemma? Why, if he has got a
right good Bargain by the Contract, and he chooses to hold the Society to the
Agreement; he must certainly have his Price agreed upon (unless the Society
proves Knaves) and for this Reason, the Bargain was completed, both Parties
agreed before either of the Parties knew how the Matter would turn, in the
Man's being separated to Office-Work. The Society must know, that the Man
cannot invest himself into Office, and he standing ready to have it done for
him, not wanting, on his Side the Question. -- Therefore I think that the
Society must make the best that they can of their Bargain; for this Plan has
bro't forth its own Nature to them, gave them a Minister, and yet no Minister.
And since they choose such a Rule to walk by, they have no Body to blame, but
themselves. Yet I am jealous that there is Hundreds in Connecticut that would
be highly offended at their Neighbor for speaking against this Plan; when at
the same Time, the poor, superstitious Persons know but little more of their
own Plan than the Child unborn. A stupid, ignorant, careless Mind about Soul
Concerns, and the Affairs of Christ's Kingdom, I testify, is a very heavy and
sore Judgment of God upon this Land; for Wars, then the Oppression of a
Stamp Act, etc. Now, as to the Proof of this last Observation upon the Plan's
contradicting itself; I need no more but remind my Reader of Wallingford
Affair; the Rupture and Confusion this Plan brought forth there in settling a
Minister. For the Truth is, the first Socity there got a Minister according to
the Constitution, and the same Time contrary to the Constitution; which is to
say, they got him, or chose him according to the Plan, in C.L.B. Page 165, by
the major Vote of the Society, and contrary to P. 169, which establishes
Say-brook Plan; and that requires the major Part of the Elders present to
concur, which the Society had not; but the minor Part withdrew from the Council
and ordained the Man, etc. Indeed this Affair at Wallingford, has been a
preaching Providence to me, and has been instrumental with other Things to
introduce me into the Labor of Writing this Book, to see the Learned,
contending one against another, as their printed Pamphlets make manifest, and
all for a Shadow. For whoever is acquainted with their Debates may remember
that the Constitution has been the Bone of Contention -- One Party says it
means so, and the Other Party says not so, but such and such Constructions it
will bear. But the Word of God is all out of the Question, on both Sides; for
neither Party has gone so far Back, as to introduce that to settle the
Controversy, or produce what that says in the Matter. Constitution!
Constitution! is the all and all with them: Which has brought a Necessity upon
me, (although most uneaqual) to produce the Word of God, and compare the
Constitution with it, to know wherein it differs from that sure Standard of
Faith and Practice. But I return to consider the Method which this Plan has
formed and fixed, in Order to support that Worship which is established by it.

First then I shall turn the Reader to consider and look upon a more ancient
Plan, formed and decreed in the high and supreme Court of Heaven. See the old
Law Book, which shows how God's Worship was, and is to be supported. Deuteronomy.
18.1.2. "The Priests, the Leavites and all the Tribes of Levi, shall have no
Part nor Inheritance with Israel; they shall eat the Offerings of the Lord,
made by Fire, and his Inheritance: therefore shall they have no Inheritance
among their Brethren: the Lord is their Inheritance, among their Brethren; the
Lord is their Inheritance, as he has said unto them." Pray mind the Direction
given, "they shall eat the Offerings of the Lord made by Fire;" and what they
be, may be seen, in Number. 18. 9. "This shall be thine of the Most Holy Things
reserved from the Fire every Oblation of theirs;" and so on through the Chapter Mind
V. 20. "And the Lord spoke unto Aaron, thou shall have no Inheritance in their
Land; neither shall thou have any Part among them; I am thy Part and thine
Inheritnce among the Children of Israel," This, in short, from the Old
Testament; all which shows that their is no Allowance for the Priests and the
People, to come into any legal Contract or Bargain; because the Lord has fixed
the Way and Manner, of the Priests' Support; which was the People's attending
in a free Way and Manner, to wait upon the Worship of God, with the Offerings
that he had appointed; and no civil Power concerned to punish the Neglect. See
Mal. 3.8.9. "Will a Man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me, but ye say, wherein
have we robbed thee? in Tithes and Offerings. Ye are cursed, with a Curse, for
ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation." Note here, God does not say, ye
have robbed the Priests, or one Another. "But ye have robbed me." Nor ye have
broke your Words, or ye have not fulfiled your civil Contract: therefore fulfill
it, pay up the Arrearage, or else the civil Rulers shall take Care that it is
fulfiled, etc. No, no, not a Word of this in all the Scriptures. What then? why
repent, and turn to God and his Ordinances, and now practice in your Duty. --
Bring ye all the Tithes, etc. and I will pour you out a Blessing, etc. It
cannot be though it that God would have taught his People to break legal or civil
Contracts. Therefore, we may assuredly gather, that there never was not any
between the Priests and People, excepting One; and that may be read at large in
Judges 17 Chap. and this agrees with the Constitution Plan, and in my humble
Opinion, is the only Text in the Bible that comes to the Case of a Minister and
People contracting together for the Minister's yearly Service, etc.

2ndly. Let us turn our Eye a Minute to the new Law Book, decreed by the same
Authority as the Old beforementioned, and see what it says about the
Ministers of Christ, and their Support. Matthew. 10.8, 9. "Freely ye have
received, freely give. -- Provide neither Gold, nor Silver, nor Brass in your
Purse." Luke 10. 7. "And in the same House remain eating and drinking such
Things as they shall give, for the Labourer is worthy of his Hire." 1 Pet. 5.2.
"Feed the Flock of God which is among you, taking the Oversight thereof, not by
Constraint, but willingly, not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready Mind." 1 Cor.
9.13, 14. "Do you not know that they which minister about holy Things, live of
the Things of the Temple? and they which wait at the Altar, are Partakers with
the Altar? Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel." Here take Notice, that the New Testament perfectly
agrees with the Old, and refers back to the Support of God's Worship under the
Law, and then ordains the like Plan under the Gospel, differing Nothing in
their Nature, only in their Circumstance. Under the Law, God's Worship was
supported from God's special Command, by the People's Free-offerings: So is the
Rule now fixed by the Decree of Heaven. Note -- Even so has the Lord ordained
-- that the People should freely contribute to the Support of the Gospel now,
etc. But I mean not to discourse this Point here, in as much as I have already
done it somewhat largely, in my Book, printed in the Year 1750, holding forth
in a Discourse, the great Privileges of the Church of Jesus Christ, to which I
would refer the Reader for the full Proof of this Point: And so pass on to hear
what this religious Plan says in this Affair, counter to the Word of God --
which is something to this Purport -- Lord, we do not like your Plan -- for,
according to that, long Experience teaches, that sometimes Ministers will be
pinched for the Want of many Things -- they may suffer Hunger, Cold, Nakedness.
2 Cor. 11.28. therefore we choose to prevent all these Difficulties. You say
that they should have no Inheritance with their Brethren (by any legal Bargain)
but we do not like that Plan -- we decree that they shall have so much
Settlement, and so much Yearly -- near as good a Home Lot, and as fine a House
as any in the Society -- we choose that they should be as grand, and live as
high, and wear as good Clothes as any in the Society, and appear like honorable
Gentlemen. -- Furthermore, your Plan holds forth, that the Minister should live
by the free will Offering of the People; but we think that is high Presumption
-- for by that Rule, three Quarters of our good Ministers would starve, or take
to some other Business, for to get their Bread: Therefore we are bound by the
Law of Prudence, in the Exercise of the utmost of our Wisdom, to tax every one
according to their List, in the Compass of such Lines as we in our Wisdom have
set, to secure to our Ministers, the full of their civil Contract, made with
the Society's Committee -- and that by the civil Power of the whole Colony,
distraining of Goods or imprisoning the Body, to effect our Design. I note
here, that if the Collector should have his Conscience waked up (as has been
the Case, and may still be) to think it is Oppression to strain away the Goods,
or imprison the Bodies of those that never worshipped with them, nor stand in
no Connection with them in religious Matters, or whatever the Difficulty be; if
the Collector has not made up with the Minister in two Months after his Salary
becomes due, then the Select Men, or Committees, have Power to take out a
Distress, legally invested with Power to get, out of the Collector's Estate,
what is behind, due to the Minister. So that the Constitution regards not God,
nor Conscience -- they shall not stop its Design, etc. But if the Select Men, or
Committee, neglect their Duty to the Collectors: And if it should be by the
Light of Truth, shining in their Consciences, showing that the forcing Men to
pay, contrary to their Consciences, and where they never contracted, was
repugnant to the Word of God; then they must be fined three Pounds. But how
shall these Neglects and Penalties be recovered? Why since it is of such a
criminal Nature, it must be by the King's Attorney, to be sure. See C.L.B. Page
166. All which shall be recovered by Action, brought by the King's Attorney, to
the County Court, in the same County, and no Appeal or Review shall be granted
in such Case, etc. Now, how near this agrees with the Laws of the Medes and
Persians, the Reader may judge. Also, how repugnant to English Liberties and
Customs. I shall close this Head by observing, that the Manner of God's
working, in the carrying on the Affairs of his visible Kingdom, is by improving
the common and special Gifts of Grace that he has given to the Children of Men,
according to the End for which he has given them. But this Plan counterworks
God's Method of working. For Instance: There may be two Men, equal in Estate,
listed alike; one of them created with a special Gift of Hospitality, and
acting in the Liberty of his Mind, will give double to the Support of the
Gospel, as the other, and the other not to be charged with Covetousness. Again,
two Men may be equal In the List -- One through the Means of his superior Gifts
of managing civil Affairs, may give as much again as his Neighbor, and not
hurt his Estate or Family; and the next Year the same Man may be equal again in
the List, and he that gave most, be able to give more still, and the other be
upon a sick Bed, or through the Means of some cross Providence, not be able to
give any Thing; yet, being equal in the List, this Plan has an equal Challenge
upon Both; which I think is counter to the Scriptures, and Providence, and well
agrees with the Story of the Iron Bedstead, which required all to be cut off
that was longer, and all too short, to be stretched to its Length. etc. I shall
now proceed to take another Turn in this Chamber of Imagery.

1st. It is readily granted, that the Word of God is the alone Rule of Faith
and Practice. A Church that is destitute of a Pastor, ought then to have
Recourse directly to the Word of God to be informed, with the Qualifications
which that asserts shall be found in the Man to be set over them in the Lord.
And if it should so happen (as I believe it may again and again, in this Day of
dreadful Apostasy from God and his Word) that the Church cannot light of a Man
in the Qualifications which the Scriptures gives, so that they are without a
preached Gospel a Year or Years, what then? Why this Providence has stripped
the poor Flock, of the sacred Rights of Conscience, and there is another Head
than Christ imposed upon them. -- Who shall provide a Minister for them? Let
Christ say what he will, about the Qualifications of his Ministers, or charge
his Church never so solemnly to be aware of disqualified Persons. See the last
cited Page with Page 167. And that if any Town or Society, shall be for any
Year or Years without a Minister preaching the Gospel to them; such Town or
Society shall, in the said Year or Years, pay such Sum or Payments as the
General Court shall appoint; of which Payment or Payments the Collector, or
Collectors, who shall collect the same, shall make a Certificate to the next
County Court, of that County, which Court shall dispose of, and improve the
said Sums for the Use of the Ministry in the Town or Society where it is
collected, as soon as Opportunity may be had for it, according to the
Discretion of the Court. Thus is decreed by the Plan: But if it were needful, I
should inquire, What if Opportunity should not present for a Year, or more, for
the County Court to hire a Man? What is to be done in such a Case? For every
Plan ought to reach its own Design. But this is not so likely to happen, if we
consider how plenty those are which this Plan calls and makes Preachers. See 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. "For the Time will come, when they will not endure sound Doctrine;
but after their own Lusts, shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having
itching Ears. Observe, this Plan has no Regard to the Scriptures for a Rule to
walk by in this Case: For the Word of God invests the Church with Power to
choose a Man to preach to them; but this Plan, in the Case now set forth,
invests the County Court with that Business. Indeed it appears to me, that this
Plan can keep to themselves as many Teachers as they please, if they have but
Money enough, and common Sense or Abilities to learn: And if it should happen
that they fall some short of common Sense, a good Stock of Money will likely
supply that Defect; for if you take a fair Prospect of this Plan, Money is the
essential Foundation, and has the casting Vote through the whole Constitution.
Therefore, since the Case may be so, that the County Court must thrust
Ministers in upon us, whether we will or not, I think it is high Time for all
Freemen of this Colony to wake up in earnest, and not rest Night nor Day, till
they obtain, through free Grace, the saving Knowledge of the Truth, so as to
distinguish the Affairs of Christ's Kingdom -- also, to discern between the
Righteous and the Wicked. Mal. 3, 18. 1 Cor. 2.14, 15, 16. that they may choose
wise, diserning, godly Men, to be Members of the General Assembly; so that
they, being concerned for the Honor of God, and the Good of Souls, may put no
Judges into the County Court, but such as love Zion's Prosperity, and well
distinguish from the Word of God, who are qualified for the Ministry, and who
not: otherwise you are in the utmost Danger possible, of having blind Guides
set over you, and Christ shows the awful Consequence, Mat. 15.14.

2ly. Once more, and I shall dismiss this Part of the Plan which the Colony Law
Book holds forth. See Pages 153, 154. -- Here the Plan commits the whole Affair
of inspecting and ordering the building of Meeting Houses for public Worship to
the County Court. And although there be nothing that effects Conscience, in the
Matter of Building, yet there is in the Manner of Building, because the Plan
requires Force, Taxes, and Prisons, to effect its Designs, which is contrary to
the Word of God. Exodus 35.4, 5. "This is the Thing which the Lord commanded,
saying, Take ye from amongst you an Offering unto the Lord -- whosoever is of a
willing Heart, let him bring it." Chapt. 36.5.6, 7. Ezra 2.68. "And some of the
chief of the Fathers, when they came to the House of the Lord which is at
Jerusalem, offered freely, for the House of God, to set it up in his Place."
Thus the Scriptures decrees, through all the sacred Volumns; for perfect Wisdom
never contradicts his own Plan. There is no civil Tax, nor civil Rulers, nor
Prisons concerned in the whole Affair. But this Plan is formed quite a one Side
of the Scriptures, and leaves no Room for a proper, scriptural Trial, to know
whether its Adherents act from Love to God or not, for Love or not Love, party
Envy or Hatred, it is all of a Piece with this Plan; for it has found out a
Way, if there be Power enough in the Colony, to drive their Designs through,
hit or miss (as we used to say) if there was any Right to use the civil Sword
in the Affair, I think they discover poor Policy, and fiery Zeal to use it
before there is Need: For if the Society agrees to a Man upon the Spot to set
their Meeting House, and presume to do it without first procuring the Court's
Liberty, they incur the Penalty of forty Pounds to the Treasury, etc.

I should in the next Place, enter upon the Consideration of Say-brook Plan;
but there is two Pieces that stand something in my Way, which I must endeavor
to remove, in order to go straight forward with my Design. The first, an
Explanation of Say-brook Platform; the second an Attempt to illustrate and
confirm the ecclesiastical Constitution, of the consociated Churches in the
Colony of Connecticut, wrote by Mr. Hobart of Fairfield Pastor of a Church
there.

As to the first of these Books, the Purport of which is to show the true
Intent of Say-brook Platform, or Plan -- First I shall observe and say, if the
Author of this Explanation had said, that the Say-brook Plan ought to have been
so compiled as he has explained, he would have said Something to the Purpose or
what Truth requires; or if there can be such a Thing in Divinity, or in
Christ's spiritual Kingdom, that a bad Thing can be made good; then I must
grant that the Author has done it completely. But this is what I much question,
and cannot yet believe: I rather choose to believe what Christ says in this
Case, Matthew. 12.33. "Either make the Tree good, and his Fruit good; or else
make the Tree corrupt, and his Fruit corrupt; for the Tree is known by his
Fruit." Now I will readily grant, that in any Composer, whether Articles of
Faith or Practice, that when it appears, that there is an accidental Word or
Sentence dropped that does not comport with the Whole, it ought to be
corrected. But the Case is far otherwise here in my Opinion. Observe, here is
Articles compiled, plain and explicit; and if they do not agree with the Rest
of the Plan, they alone must bear it. I cannot like the Method the Author has
taken, to make this Plan good. I think by the same Rule of Proceeding, a Man of
his superior Abilities, may make almost any corrupt Plan to pass; for almost
every corrupt Plan has Something in them sound and good. Therefore take that
which is sound for the Principle, and explain the Rest to comport therewith,
and almost any Thing will pass, in such a Way of reconciling Things. But I am
inclined to think that the Compilers and Enacters of them Articles, designed
they should be as they really are expressed, for two Reasons. -- First in the
Consideration that the Reverend Council at Say-brook, was Men, doubtless of
considerable Abilities, well understanding Terms and Distinctions, in
Principles, who had been instructed all their Days, in the Congregational
Principles and Dispcipline; that, had them Principles suited the Council, there
they was compiled to their Hand, and nothing wanted, but to adopt them in as
they had the Articles of Faith. But to me it is evident, that the
Congregational Plan of Government did not reach their Design.

Secondly, I have from Time been informed, that about that Time Say-brook Plan
was agreed upon, and for some Time before, the Body of the Clergy grew uneasy
with their Lot, as being Servants to the Churches (as Christ has appointed
their Lot) but chose rather to be Lords. Therefore them Articles of Discipline
was compiled just according to their Spirit and Design, and added to the
Articles of Faith in the congregational Plan. I am further confirmed in this
Opinion, by what I find wrote by Mr. Increase Mather of Boston, in the Year
1700, in a Book, entitled, "The Order of the Churches in New England
vindicated." Page 12. If the begun Apostasy should proceed as fast the next
thirty Years as it has done these last, surely it will come to that in
New England (except the Gospel itself depart with the Order of it) that the
most conscientious People therein will think themselve concerned to gather
Churches out of Churches. See also in Page 8; in both which it appears to me
that this godly Man had a right Understanding of them, and these Times also,
and foresee what God is now doing in this Reformation, in separating from this
Constitution; which Constitution he then saw in Embryo, but not then brought
forth. But to return: The Council at Saybrook, adding that usurping Form of
Discipline to the congreational Plan, is the Cause (in my humble Opinion) of
all the Contradiction and Blunder. Indeed, I think the Nature of this, Mr.
Hobart has made evident in his Reply to this Author: But he is far, very far
from making the Application that I do, or consenting to the Case that I assign,
etc. But I have a Right to think for myself, and must descent from the Author
and Mr. Hobart too: They both labor to make the Plan good, but in very wide
and differing Senses. And as to each of their making out what they undertook, I
think they have both failed of making good their Design: Yet this I gather from
their Writings, that the Author of the Explanation, discovers a Mind to
vindicate the congregational Principles. I am far from being so uncharitable as
Mr. Hobart is, that he intended the Destruction of the Constitution. I soberly
think the Author errs upon the other Hand, else he would never took so much
Pains to make a bad Thing good, and try to patch it up, so as to make it stand.
It appears to me his principal Aim and Design was not to altar Nothing in the
Constitution, excepting to take away the Horns that the Clergy has placed upon
their Heads, to push all the diseased of the Flock, Ezekiel. 34.21. Also, least
they should grow so sturdy and strong as to push the civil Authority too, as
those in their Cloth, in former Ages, have done. Therefore, so far as the
Author has vindicated the free Liberties of the Churches and People of God, I
am willing, from my Heart, that all due Honor should be conferred upon him. But
is to Mr. Hobarts' Writings, they discover to me that he stands in the very
Spirit and Breath of what the Articles of Discipline hold forth, in the
strongest Manner; which I believe was the very Design of those that established
that Plan, and that he chooses to wear the Horns, because they add to his Power
and Dignity. And indeed, if his Wisdom, or those that like the Plan, can find
out a Way to keep the Horns from hurting their Neighbors, they may wear them
as long as they like. But from the Spirit that too much governs in these
Persons, I am jealous that they will not be kept from doing Mischief.
Therefore, upon the Whole, I believe it is best for the civil Authority to
break them off timely, least they are hurt by them. Yet, notwithstanding my
Opinion of Mr. Hobart, in this Case, I am willing to refer my Reader to what he
has wrote in his Reply to the Author's Explanation; showing that he has
entirely missed the Design of the Establishers of Saybrook Plan: Connecting of
it with what I have briefly observed, serves my present Design, so that I can
calmly set it aside, and go forward, to take into serious Consideration, Mr.
Hobart's Vindication of the same Plan.

The Reader may observe, that when I shall have Occasion further to note any
Thing from the Explanation of the Platform, I shall use the same Distinction
that I have already done, saying the Author, etc. and when I am replying, or
remarking upon Mr. Hobart's Book, I shall say, the Writer, etc.

The first Thing that I shall take Notice of in Mr. Hobart's Book, is in P. 5.
where he is remarking upon the congregational Government that, the Author would
establish. There, I think, he does not treat Things fairly, but uses Craft and
Guile, intimating that the congregational Government was what the Articles of
the Saybrook Plan holds forth, viz. that it belongs to the Consociation, and
not the Brotherhood, to determine, and finally judge all ecclesiastical
Matters; and that the Discipline that the Author pleads for, which our godly
Forefathers held, is the Brownist's Scheme. This may startle some ungrounded
Persons, and so make Proselytes to his Scheme, and all through an unjust
Representation of the Matter. I understand the Distinction thus;
Congregationalists a Sect of Independants, between Presbyterians and Brownists,
etc. What is the Presbyterian Government? By the Church's Officers, Pastor and
Lay Elders, excluding the Brotherhood. What is the Brownist's Principles?
Answer. As I understand them, they hold the Power, in every Respect, in the
Brotherhood, and are so rigid, as to deny all sister Relation to any Church
under Heaven; not allowing their Elders to administer but of the Church that
they have the Charge of; denying Councils of Churches, etc. The
Congregationalists are between them in this Respect; they hold, that all Power
is in the Brotherhood also. But then they hold a Sister-Relation with other
Churches, in the same Profession; a Communion together in each other's Graces
and Gifts; and, when there is Need, a Council of Churches, to give Counsel and
Advice, in any difficult Case, and no further. What then is the Plan the Writer
is laboring to establish? Ans. I understand it thus: The Pastor of a Church
has Power to negative the whole Church, and then to take the Case out of the
Church, and carry it to the Consociation; and the Brethren have no more to do
in the Case, but to be finally issued in the Council. But who are the Actors in
the Council? Why the Clergy only. Indeed there is Messengers there, but they
are only as so many Ciphers, except it be to wait upon their Pastors. Thus
stands the Case: And I think this Plan robs the Church of their Right, as much,
if not more, than the Presbyterian Order: for they allow the Laity to act in
their Discipline, but this allows none but Clergymen to make their decisive
Judgment. And yet the Writer would fain insinuate into his Reader's Mind, that
the Plan he is a pleading for, is Congregational, when, in Fact, it is as far
remote as the Presbyterian, if not, in some Respects, farther. It is nothing to
the Writer's Purpose to say, that the Council is a Consociation of Churches,
because the Messenger, or Laity, are excluded from Power of Action, in these
decisive Councils, as I shall show in its Place.

Again, in this 5th Page, the Writer says, The Churches of Connecticut had,
for more than half a Century, made Trial of that loose Form of Government and
Discipline which this Writer (meaning the Author of the Explanation) would now
recommend to us, and they found by sad Experience, that it was impossible to
maintain Purity, good Order and Peace, on that Plan. But I would hope the
Writer will not be offended, if we suspend the Belief of this Assertion till
some proper Proof is produced to make it evident. For it is well known by all
that was acquainted with the Churches under that loose Government (as he is
pleased to call it) and that know these Times, that the Case, in Fact, is quite
the Reverse: The Churches was much more pure and peaceable then, beyond what
they be now. I could produce a Multitude of Facts to make this evident, were it
needful; but rather than swell my Book, I choose to refer my Reader to the Hon.
Roger Woolcott, late Governor of this Colony, in a Letter he wrote to Mr.
Hobart, the Writer, upon this very Point; which Letter I earnestly recommend to
the Perusal of all, for I think it ought to be taken Notice of in Honor to his
Memory; that in such an advanced Age that he had arrived to, when he wrote that
Letter, he should give such a clear Witness to the Truth, against the Tyranny
that the Writer is laboring to have continued over the Churches.

Again, the Writer, showing the Cause why these Articles now in Debate, was
introduced, says, The leading Men, both in Church and State, saw and lamented
the Confusions they were brought into, etc. This is doubtless true; and I am
quite willing that the Writer should take all the Advantage and Honor that
arises therefrom, to himself; only I would note upon it, that proud, ambitious
Men, being crossed in their aspiring Designs, are usually flung into Confusion
and Perplexity; Witness proud Haman, etc. Now the Discipline then, in being in
the Churches, served to check and curb such aspiring Minds. But I will venture
to say, and likely in as much truth, as the Writer, and in more Propriety, that
the good Men in that Day, yea, the truly godly, and most spiritual, was in
Distress, and great Concern for the Churches: Witness Mr. Mather's Writings,
Mr. Wise, and Others. Discoursing in the leading Men, both in Church and State
(which my Antagonist meant) an aspiring Spirit, to rob the Church of her
richest Treasure, and so bring her into Slavery; which, in Fact, is awfully
brought to pass, in this religious Constitution (which I am laboring to
uncover, and hold up in View of the rational Mind.) For see how is the Churches
Priest-ridden, in many Places. When there is any Thing to be transacted, the
Minister leads forward, which is his proper Work; but then he proposes and
draws up the Result, and finally issues the Case, all in and from himself (of
what is acted in the Church.) And where is the Church? Why they set (not as the
Spouse of Christ, that has sworn to exercise herself, with all the Powers of
Mind, and the Members of her Body, to show her chaste Love and Loyalty to her
exalted Head and Husband, 1 Cor. 6.20.) but as a Company of Underlings or
Slaves, almost afraid to say that their Souls are their own, with their Tongue
within their Teeth, and their Hands useless, and Silence does all on the
Church's Part, and the Seats they sit upon does just as much. And if it should
so happen, that a Brother should speak contrary to the Motion made; silence is
required, and the poor Slave shuts up his Mouth, and down he sets, uneasy
within, etc. Here in short I think, is the true State of the Case in some
Churches. I must entreat my Reader not to be offended with me for setting
Things in their own Light -- but view it well, and see if it comports with the
Scripture Character of the Church of Jesus Christ. But I must return to my
designed Business, and leave those Outworks, since their Strength is taken
away; and encamp against the strong Hold, and cast up a Bank, and mount the
Cannons of eternal Truth, and point them at the Spot where to make a Breach,
for an Overthrow, and through the Divine Grace assisting, and Wisdom from
above, I hope for Success to accomplish my designed End, etc.

To come to the Case in Hand. The Writer has laid down four Propositions, as a
Foundation to establish his Building upon. I mean not to take them in their
Course to reply to, for that will make my Piece too long. I shall endeavor to
take a shorter Method, and purpose first to discharge my Artillery, and
forthwith storm the Fort, etc.

To proceed. The Writer has undertook to prove, that there is two Churches
instituted by Christ, one inferior, the other superior; the inferior Church is
a small Body of Christians, congregated together to worship God in private
Houses, and also may exercise some Discipline, but not to determine the Case
finally; but to be carried to the superior Church, which is, as he says, a
Consociation of Churches, made out of these small Churches: Which superior
Church is to hear all Causes ecclesiastical, judge and finally determine the
same. Also that these two distinct Bodies are known in the Scripture by one
Name; the Church in the single Tense. Hence the Writer in his Way and Manner,
with a great Deal of Craft and Sophistry, presumes to make out the Being of
these two Churches, from the Scriptures, etc. I observe as to the Word Church,
being versed in Scripture, to denote two Bodies, I readily grant; but not in
the Sense the Writer means, that I utterly deny; neither has he brought a Scrap
of Proof, but what he has spun out of his own Bowels, to make out his Scheme.
Search the Scriptures, and you may find, the Word Church, is used to describe a
single Congregation of Saints, be they more or less, covenanted together to
maintain the Worship and Discipline of Christ's House: see 1 Cor. 14, 23. Chap.
5, 4, 5. Also to describe all the churches of Christ, throughout Christendom,
as one church, which he has bought with his own Blood: see Ephesians. 1.22, Chap.
3.10. Col. 1.18. But not one Text, I presume, can be found in the Bible to
prove the church the Writer would fain establish. But his church is a Tribunal
he has erected in his Imagination contrary to the Scriptures, adding thereto.
Therefore the Writer may read his sentence, Rev. 22.18.

Now according to my Purpose, I shall storm this Fort, and enter at the Gap the
Writer has left. See Page 30. "There are some Texts which represent the church
as having the Power of Discipline; when yet it cannot be certainly determined
from any Thing in the context in what Sense the Word Church is used. The Design
of these Texts may be to represent the church in each of these senses we have
given of it, as vested with this Power, of this sort, I shall at present
mention but one, Mat. 18.17. Tell it to the Church. But if he neglect to hear
the Church let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man and a Publican. Here the Word
seems used in a general sense to denote any Society that Christ should
afterward erect and dignify with that Name, etc." Here Reader, allow me to use
Plainness for my Heart is filled with Pain in discovering what craft and
sophistry the Writer uses, to shun the Truth and to establish his darling
Scheme; for if you mind, he would fain insinuate into his Readers Mind, that
this Text is so general, that it is difficult to tell from the context the true
Meaning; only as it may be taken to establish both the churches his scheme has
made; when in Truth there is nothing more familiar, plain and explicit, than
this Text, and context, expressive of Christ's Mind and Will to his Church, as
one individual Body, congregated together to attend upon the Laws he has
ordained to be carefully observed, for the Health, Unity, and Preservation of
the Body. Pray observe how plain and familiar Christ's Directions are,
respecting the Rule of Duty in the Government of his church, both in the first,
second, and third Step, and fixes the last Judgment in the church, saying,
Verily I say unto you (but what you? a Number of consociated churches, with
their ministers in council: No, no, the Text knows nothing about such a church,
but you Brethren that have solemnly covenanted to walk together in all the Laws
and Ordinances of my House) whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound
in Heaven. Thus Jesus Christ who is the Wisdom of God, has fixed the Government
of his church, the final sentence against the Offender to be given by the
church, one individual Body of Christians, etc.

Therefore if I may be allowed in Meekness to use scripture Language, I shall
say, the Fox has crossed his Track, and got catched in the Trap of impregnable
Truth, and will be held fast. For as a Fox that smells a Trap is afraid of
being catched therein, steps with Fear; but ere he is aware, steps his Foot
right in the Trap, and is catched. Thus the writer had got to a critical Spot,
and would fain have passed it, but has stepped right into it, and Truth has
caught him. For in the Passage last cited, he goes on and says, "And as it is
evident that particular worshipping Assemblies, are called churches in
scripture; it includes them; nay, since these are the churches which private
christians are most acquainted with, and can with the greatest Ease apply to,
it may be allowed, that the Direction primarily intends such churches." Thus
Reader, you may see, the Writer is come to a final close with his new formed
church, erected in such superiority and sovereign Power, over the church of
Christ, for he here confesses that Christ primarily intended to commit this
power of binding and loosing to a single church, then it follows, that the
writer must own, that Jesus Christ never intended to contradict himself, and
place a church with superior power (over this that he has put the last
sentence, and that by his decree) so as to revoke the sentence thus passed.
Thus I think that the writers whole scheme is faped at the roots; or to repeat
a military figure that I have used, the castle is stormed and taken. But if the
writer should be fond of this new formed church, notwithstanding what has been
said, I think he must know that it has lost its grandeur and power. For let the
number, be more or less consociated together in council, they are obliged by
the writer's own confession to knuckle, and come down and fall in the rear, and
have their works tried by the individual churches that they respectively belong
to; because Jesus Christ has invested every church with power to deal with
their own members, and to pass the final sentence upon the transgressor.

2dly. In order for the writer's making out this superior church, I think it is
necessary to prove from the scriptures by some certain facts, that those small
churches that meet in private houses, exercised some discipline among
themselves, as he says. But not any discipline I presume can be found was ever
exercised in them houses, saluted as churches. The writer has shown none. I
have searched every passage he has cited, and find nothing of that nature --
but the scriptures are free for every one to search; therefore I advise my
reader to search carefully, to know for yourself.

3dly. I think it is necessary also for him to show that there is such a church
instituted by Christ, superior to the other invested with power to pass a final
sentence, etc. The texts the writer has bro't proves no such a church as he
would; and before I can fall in with that opinion, I must find from scripture
record, when these small churches meet, the time and place to form this
council, a church over themselves, in superiority, and who was athorised to
send out the letters missive, and who was the messenger to carry the same, and
when met what causes they tried, and what their sentence was, etc. For if we
must be informed about Paul's cloak, and no record of such a grand council,
invested with power from Christ, to transact the most important affairs that
respects Christ's visible kingdom here on earth. This is too unaccountable for
me to believe as yet!

4thly. The writer to make out his two churches, is obliged to do it by
conjectures, suppositions, etc. Hence from this sandy bottom he shows their
being so many converts in Jerusalem, and a time of persecution, that they was
obliged to meet in small bodies in private houses (which was the inferior
churches) and to transact their weighty affairs to meet in a consociation of
these small churches, to make one superior church, and if so, although the
persecution had been very hot, they could with prudence make it out pretty
well. For this grand church could get into a pretty small place, a great deal
less than those small churches could meet in; for he allows they may contain
two or three hundred, and the churches supposed to be seven; and seven churches
to send their pastor and two messengers makes but 21, there is no more wanting,
but the complainer and offender with their evidence, which added to the
council, probably would not make out more than 30, and it is quite likely that
a poor man's house would do for them. But I think the writer has made a miss in
his conjectures, and since his whole building stands upon such a bottom, I
think it would have shown his cunning, to let his thoughts have penetrated a
little further, to see how his conjectures would meet in the close, and not
betrayed his weekness. For observe, he allows these inferior churches to be
about seven, and to contain about three hundred at the most, to make one
assembly; which makes 2100; and it is certain that there was only one single
body congregated together for divine and public worship, out of which 3000 was
converted, Acts 2.41, 46. Continuing with one accord in the temple -- But the
writer conjectures, that they met in that day, in a private, or a poor man's
house. Now it matters not where they meet, since they was together in one
place, not consociated by delegation; and if I may be allowed to conjecture, as
well as the writer, I should think it possible, if not probable, that a third,
if not half of these seven assemblies was not church members, and deduct but a
third out, and there remains 1400. Again, on the other hand* I may reasonably
conclude, that that assembly contained some thousands besides what was
converted, for there was many that mocked, and doubtless many that was a sort
of neuters, and many that was under some convictions, and not converted; all
which is common in a great assembly, where the power of God is displayed
amongst a mixed multitude. But be this as it will, 3000 and more was certainly
convened in one spot for divine worship. Therefore putting all together, the
writer's own conjecture of the sum total of those small churches makes but
2100. So that here is room enough left for the church to grow a great deal, and
transact all her affairs, and no necessity of a consociation of churches, etc.
But as to these small churches in private houses, I rather think there the
saints meet at times in christian conferences, and for social worship, being
part of the church assembled together in a place, and not the whole church. So
that part is called the church; for, elsewhere the scripture speaks of the
whole church meeting together, Acts 15, 22, 1 Cor. 14, 23. Which was to judge
and transact weighty matters. But in these houses, saluted as a church,
doubtless there was social worship attended that did not need the whole church,
etc. But if I am mistaken in this matter, it makes not one way nor the other,
inasmuch as there is clear facts in scripture, that particular churches was
invested with power by Jesus Christ their head, to deal with their disorderly
members and proceed to pass the last sentence of rejection, etc. Did I like the
business, I could easily follow the writer in every part of his performance,
and discover his craft, and take off the false gloss he has cast over it; but I
choose to leave it to those that like the business better than I do. And only
add, two passages of scripture, to that in the 18th of Mat. which I humbly
conceive is sufficient to confront all gainsayers whatsoever, see 1 Cor. 5,
notwithstanding the writers vain and fruitless conjectures upon this chap. that
this was a consociated church, the chapter is able to speak for itself. Observe
Paul's salutation unto the church of God, which is at Corinth, called to be
saints, chap. 1.2. Note here, not called to office or to be officers, no, but
saints, which means a church made up of brethern, and that this church is a
number of brethern in covenant bonds to God and each other (and not a classical
church) is evident by the three last verses of the 5th chapt. where Paul
directs how one brother shall deal with another; perfectly agreeing with
Christ's direction in the 18th of Mat. Also shows the distinction between a
brother in covenant, and one that is not. There cannot be a church process
against a person that is not a member, but those that are in covenant, and the
scandalous, the brethern are obliged from Christ's and Paul's direction, to
follow, till repentance or an exclusion from the church. That this church was
not a consociated church, is further evident in the 12th chap. in the which
Paul gives description of the church as a natural body, consisting of many
members, and in the description he takes in the female, as well as the male, as
may be seen in the foregoing chap. and chap. 14.34. Now how the writer will do
with the females in his council, is for him to say. Again, observe the 14th
chap. 23. the apostle speaks of the whole church meeting together for social
worship; therefore it confirms the point that the church of Corinth was but one
body, although they might meet in small companies in private houses for some
convenience at times; yet they all come together in one place to make one whole
body, etc. 2dly. Rev. 2.2. Here we have certain facts asserted, a person tried
by the church, the facts charged made out. But the writer says, this is a
consociated church; and where comes his evidence? why, there is nothing
appears, but that it came from the same source, as all the rest, spun out of
his own imagination. For observe Christ's salutation to the church. Unto the
angel of the church, etc. not to the angels of the churches, met together, a
consociated church: No, mind Christ's charge against the church, Nevertheless I
have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first love. Note --
against thee. Therefore seeing what was amiss, he addresses them as a single
church; not as churches, or a church of elders: no, nothing of this in the
bible. Therefore to close all my remarks upon the writers high church above the
church. For to suppose that it is in the power of one church or more to make
another, and that superior to itself, or them, I soberly think it is repugnant
to the word of God, to sound or right reason, and the very law of nature.
Therefore properly speaking it is jargon -- I don't understand it -- and the
clergyman that has formed it, may share all the glory of it to himself. And may
the Lord God Almighty, have mercy upon him, and acquaint him with Jesus Christ
and the character he has given of his Dear Spouse, bought with his blood; and
also what is required of the man that Christ has qualified to be a servant to
his church. So I dismiss the writer.

Having removed these two pieces, or blocks out of my way, I shall return to
the chambers of imagery, for further search, and so take notice of a few things
there, and then dismiss the search. Therefore, what remains for me to consider,
is to make some short remarks upon the articles of discipline, formed for a
rule of practice in the latter end of Saybrook confession or plan. Here I would
first refer the reader to what I have already wrote upon these articles in my
book, printed in the year 1750; in which performance I have examined all the
scriptures brought to support these 15 articles, and shown that they have no
foundation from the scriptures; but are founded upon the sands of men's
inventions; and there I have lest them for the rain and wind of divine truth to
beat upon for their overthrow in due time. Therefore to add somewhat thereto in
this performance. I shall first take notice of the 14th article, page 115.
"That the said associated pastors, shall also be consulted by bereaved
churches, belonging to their association, and recommend to such churches, such
persons as may be fit to be called and settled in the work of the gospel
ministry among them. And if such bereaved churches shall not seasonably call
and settle a minister among them, the said associated pastors shall lay the
state of such bereaved churches before the general assembly of this colony,
that they may take such orders concerning them, as shall be found necessary for
their peace and edification."

I shall consider the two measures this article proposes for a bereaved church
to get or have a minister.

First, a bereaved church is obliged to go to this council for a minister, be
the case how it will; if the bigger part of the council should be enemies to
the power of godliness, it makes no odds with this plan, or if the church, has
the knowledge of one qualified according to the gospel, and the council does
nor see fit to advise to him, it is all up with the church, as to that man; and
then they must be at the association's direction, to go from Dan to Bersheba,
or place to place, and ride post a great while perhaps, and be at great expense
-- and at length they get a man upon trial, which shows himself by his
conversation and public performance as ignorant of any saving knowledge of
Jesus Christ, and his spirit's work upon the hearts of men, as when he was
born: yea, upon close conversation with him, a mere enemy to the power of
godliness. But to be short, the church must be under the council's thumb, the
man they say, or none. Here the church is stripped of her sacred and most
valuable right. For although this article seems to have a friendly look, and
concern for the bereaved church, and seems to offer help by way of advice. Yet
this visage is taken off by and by; for if the poor bereaved church, to keep a
chaste conscience is obliged to refuse the men directed to by the council; then
this council in their friendly pretense of concern for the bereaved church,
acquaints the general assembly with their case. But why the general assembly?
they are a civil court, God's ministers in the civil kingdom. No matter for
that, says this plan, we have not the civil sword, nor power to force our
ministers upon the churches; therefore we want their help to effect our
designs. The assembly can shift places as they please, and set half a day as
God's ministers, for our good in the civil kingdom, and the other half
constitute themselves a spiritual court, and carry all our designs through etc.

Therefore secondly, the general assembly becoming a spiritual body, can say
who shall be a church of Christ, and who not; where men shall worship God, and
where not; who shall preach the gospel, and who not; and order concerning a
bereaved church, as shall be, for their peace and edification, says the
article. Well, but how does the general assembly order for their peace and
edification? Answer, you may see in the other part of the plan, that stands
connected with this. C. L. B. page 166 and 167. There shall be such sums of
money raised, as the assembly shall appoint, and be committed to the county
court, to hire a man, and thrust him upon the society and church, although the
church be never so opposite thereto. And such ministers have their character
drawn by infinite wisdom, John 10, 1.10. -- The same is a thief and a robber --
the thief comes not but for to steal and to kill, and to destroy. Now reader,
when man in the right exercise of his reason, can think that this plan is for
the peace and edification of the church, to be thus tyrannized over, except he
be in the papist principles? But that my dear neighbors may see themselves, I
must turn them to see the flat contradiction there is in their plan. See
confession of faith, page 65. "God alone is Lord of the conscience, and has
left it free from the doctrines and commandments of men: so that to believe
such doctrines or to obey such commands out of conscience, is to betray true
liberty of conscience." page 66. "But the acceptable way of worshipping the
true God, is instituted by himself, and so limited by his own revealed will,
that he may not be worshipped according to the imaginations and devices of men,
etc." Here I would observe to those that are zealous for the constitution, and
take offense at my writing. In these passages is contained the whole of all
that I would be after, and contending earnestly for, with ministers and rulers.
Indeed these lines now cited out of your articles are worthy to be written in
letters of gold. But how extremely contrary hereto is all our ecclesiastical
laws? and how flat is the contradiction between these articles of faith, and
your practice in forming societies, and churches settling and supporting
ministers? I will venture to say, it will puzzel and outdo the wisdom of a
Solomon to reconcile the several parts of your plan, and make it consistent
with itself, or the word of God. I suppose the author to the explanation of
Saybrook plan, thought he had done the business. But how came he to pass by in
total silence all the ecclesiastical laws? Who but himself can tell? I am ready
to guess that if he glanced his mind upon them laws, he knew it was beyond him
or an angel, to reconcile them with those articles, which he took to raise his
superstructure upon, etc.

Secondly, I shall take some notice of the 12th article which is but a branch
of the same corrupt tree, a little nearer the root. See the last clause of the
article, "Who also shall have power of examining and recommending the
candidates of the ministers to the work thereof, etc. But what is the
examination? Likely in general, what proficiency they have made in their
learning -- what knowledge in logic, or in geography, or in head divinity, or
something remote from the thing. Not are you converted -- give a narrative of
your experience -- let us know upon what you found your hope -- what have you
experienced under the law work -- what manifestations have you had of the way
or life by Jesus Christ -- or what knowledge have you got of the Holy Spirit's
work upon the hearts of the godly, in its different operations -- also, what
acquaintance with the mystery of iniquity's working -- satan in his angelic
light, to ensnare souls -- or do you know of the scripture qualifications for
church membership, and the qualifications for her officers -- how the church is
built -- what are her ordinances, and how she is governed, etc. Now, if I have
been informed right, there is nothing of this nature passes in the examination
of a candidate for the ministry, I was informed once, that a godly messenger
propounded the question to a young candidate, whether he was converted or not,
and he replied, to the godly father, it is none of your business, and so it
ended, I have been informed, that some of these councils say, that they have no
business to examine these candidates, whether they be converted or not; that
would offer an affront to such a young gentleman, to ask such a question: And
indeed viewing their appearance, temper and frame of spirit they discover, it
looks likely to me, to be so. Now, if it should be so in fact, then the main
and principal thing that shows a man to have the essential qualifications for
the ministry, must not be sought after. Wherefore I think it is high time for
the churches in this colony to wake up to purpose, and reassume their just
rights and privileges, and take it out of the hands of the clergy, who now
reign as Lords over them, as this article testifies, by which the church is
robbed of every minister, but what they see fit to license.

Thirdly, I must come to the center where they form their tribunal, in order to
make the supreme court, that, shall pass the final sentence upon the
transgressor; see page 111, "that according to the common practice of our
churches, no thing shall be deemed an act or judgment of any council, which
has not the major part of the elders present concurring, and such a number of
the messengers present, as make the majority of the council. etc. Observe the
craft and falacy that is used to introduce this article, as though it had been
the common and stated practice of the churches, to be governed by the major
vote of the elders or clergy: when in fact, it was repugnant to their
principles and practice, which Cambridge platform shows. But however, it
would serve to blind the eyes of those, that are willingly blinded; and appear
with that face as though that wise and reverend council, was not a going to
impose any thing new upon them; till in fact, the halter was slipped over the
churches neck, and the ministers hold the end of it to this day. There is here
and there one, that is partly waked up to feel that the halter hurts them, and
they complain about it, but all to no purpose, seeing they like the
constitution, they must bear the gall of the halter as well as they can. To
return, observe the article fixes the government in the major part of the
elders present concurring. What propriety then can there be in saying any thing
about the messengers more or less, for the court is already constituted with
all its members, that is invested with power to give the final sentence, as the
next article shows? but I could not but smile in my self, when I was reading
the author of the explanation of this plan, when he came to this article; I
thought that notwithstanding all his superior abilities, here he got graveled,
to make out his congregational plan the chain got broke, and he could not join
it together only by some queries, finally leaving it to others to consider and
determine etc. Indeed it appears to me, that the compilers of these articles
intended to exclude the brethren entirely out of the government of the church
or council; for observe, how indifferently and slitely they treat the
messengers from time to time, in these articles. Observe this article,
"provided that if any such church, shall not see cause to send any messengers
to the council, or the persons chosen by them shall not attend, neither of
these shall be any obstruction etc." So also in the foregoing article, speaking
of the church says, "if they see cause to send messengers." Again, in the
tenth article, showing how much the council shall be formed to act in their
high dignity, say, "and notify the said time and place to the elders and
churches of that county, who shall attend at the same, the elders, in their own
persons, and the churches by their messengers if they see cause to send them
etc." Here observe, the elders in their own persons, this is absolutely
necessary to constitute this high court, but the messengers not necessary; they
may stay at home and welcome, except they are disposed to take a ride and so
wait upon the elders, put out, and fetch up their horses; cut tobacco, fetch a
coal of fire, etc. Observe, the article makes a distinct body, the elders by
themselves as if they stood in no relation to the churches; and then the
churches by themselves, and they stand for a cipher. Indeed I think it will
puzzel a wise man to find out what the messenger's work is, if not something as
I have hinted. Take the 4th article which excludes messengers out of the
question, and let these passages now cited be connected with it, and I think it
will make a sober man smile to see how gravely they write in the 9th article;
"That all the churches of the respective consociations shall choose if they see
cause, one or two members of each church to represent them in the councils of
the said churches, as occasion may call for them who shall stand in that
capacity, till new be chosen for the same service, unless etc. mind this
article -- if they see cause -- here to be sure the churches ought to take
notice, that matters can be accommodated as well without them as with them; and
as Gov. Wolcott well observes, in his letter, "The church's messengers are only
as so many dead weights in the council" for the whole plan that is laid for
government, in their articles, makes it a matter of indifferency, whether there
is any messengers or not; and if they go* their vote weighs nothing; yet this
article makes a great noise about choosing and standing in the same capacity,
and for the same service; and this is what I mean will make a sober man smile
(that when the messengers are excluded out of the question) to tell about their
service: which I think will puzzel a wise man to find out what their service
is, except, etc.

Fourthly, and lastly, I freely grant, that when a church is got any difficulty
among themselves, respecting doctrine, discipline, or any point that they want
light in, it is scriptural and right for the church to call a council of such
as they think in their consciences is most likely to help them, let them live
in what town, county or colony soever: and for a church to be limited to such
lines as this plan fixes, is an abridgement of their just rights, the scripture
says whether Paul, Apollos or Cephas, all are yours, 1 Cor. 3, 22. Further I
grant, that when a church has dealt as they think in the rule of God's word,
with a member or members, and the same person or persons count themselves
wronged, they moving to the church, for the favor to call a council out of the
sister churches, that the church would lay before said council, their
proceedings with the person or persons that suppose they are wronged by the
church, in order that the council may give their advice; in such case the
church ought to comply with the motion, and when the council have heard the
case on both sides, then to give their advice, where they see it is wanting,
whether to the church, or to the person or persons dealt with, and what they
see in the advice according to the scriptures, cheerfully to comply with, and
subject to, and no more; never to give up their own judgment for men nor
Angels. Gal. 1.8. Every church or single person standing right are willing to
have their works tried, for they know that they are imperfect, and wherein they
mistake, they are willing to know it, and what they hold according to truth
will bear trial, and remain the same, etc. But supposing the church has
actually done wrong to these persons, and refuse to grant them their request of
a council, in such a case, the agreived persons have no right to call a council
to summons the church to their bar for trial, as the constitution do, claiming
a right to try pastors and churches, and to pass the final sentence. No, it is
my fixed principle as I understand Christ in the 18th of Mat. that there is no
ecclesiastical power or court above a church of Christ, or to summons a church
of Christ to answer to, under the whole heavens. But in such a case the proper
step for the agrieved person to take, is to make application to the next sister
church he thinks is able to help in the case; and that church he applies to,
for the sister relation, in a tender concern for the cause of Christ, and the
sacred rights of every Sheep of Christ's fold, ought to enquire of this church,
what the person they have dealt with has done; and so ask the favor of letting
them have a hearing of the case, in order to give advice for healing: but if
the church still refuses to let their works be tried as Christ directs, John 3,
20, 21, after due patience and all proper measures are taken to have a proper
hearing, and the church still obstinately refusing, then the church that has
been using proper means to retain the sister relation, in order to preserve
themselves chaste to their only Lord and master, and not to suffer sin to be
covered over, have a just right to withdraw the hand of holy fellowship from
such a church, and so leave the church that, refuses to have their works tried,
to stand or fall to their own master, and no usurpation in all the affair; for
every church is, or should be a free body, and have a right to act as they
think is most pleasing to Christ their only head, without being controuled by
any ecclesiastical power whatsoever; and as the church acted freely in giving
the right hand of fellowship, so also the case requiring, they have an equal
right to withdraw their hand of fellowship; and in case the agrieved person or
persons are found innocent, the church that has withdrawn the hand of
fellowship, should take them into fellowship, and give them their place in
Christ's fold. Thus I think something of this nature is necessary to preserve
the rights of conscience, and the sister relation of churches in the unity of
the spirit in the bond of peace, etc.

To return to the articles, and say by a figure, how would a godly person be
surprised that was well acquainted with the affairs of Christ's visible
kingdom, coming from far to this colony, seeing a people favored with the free
use of searching the scriptures, which are perfect, and give plain and familiar
directions, how they should walk with God, and one another, composing these 15
articles, in Saybrook plan, and decreeing them to be the rule of practice in
the affairs of Christ's kingdom or to govern the church of Christ by* Surely he
would think that they criminally and shamefully neglected a due and proper
regard to Christ's direction, John 5.39. Search the scriptures, for in them ye
think ye have eternal life; and they are they which testify of me. Note, here
the scriptures not only testify that Christ is the end of the law for
righteousness to them that believe in him; but also they testify of Christ, in
holding forth his mind and will in all practical godliness, and visible
obedience in all the affairs of his moral and divine kingdom here on earth.
Therefore, finding these articles forming so many different bodies in degrees
of divinity one above another, it must be shocking to a sober mind that knows
Christ has formed but one, viz. the church, and further to consider how many
meetings there is stated at different places and times in a year, with a show
of business of great importance to be done by them, as if the scriptures was
very imperfect, and did not reach the churches case in all things, (it is true
that they do not reach their case:) Therefore it is necessary for them to
prescribe rules that should supply the defect; so that putting the scriptures
and their prescriptions together, the church will have a complete plan to walk
by. See article 10, page 114. "And all councils may prescribe rules as occasion
may require; and whatsoever they shall judge needful, within their circuit, for
the well performing and orderly managing the several acts to be attended by
them, or matters that come under their cognizance, etc." I must think for an
article to be found, the compilers of it must be able to say, thus and thus, we
find written in the word of God is our direction, etc. But I must confess it is
beyond me to account for these new rules prescribed any otherwise than thus,
That these bodies or councils there spoken of, have no countenance or precedent
from the scriptures: so no provision made for them in the word of God, which
puts them to the necessity to prescribe and enact rules and laws to answer
their own ends. --

Again, I am obliged to think that it is a piece of poor policy, and no
christian prudence exercised therein, to have so many meetings of these
councils, stated so often in a year; which cannot be attended without a great
deal of precious time being taken up about them, and a great expense that must
come from some quarter or other in this difficult day; when at the same time,
perhaps, there is no knowledge of any business to be done, unless they are
still wanting in rules to practice by. -- My reason dictates to me a council
convened together, always pre-supposes that there is matter of difficulties
already commenced, and is prepared for hearing, in order to give counsel and
advice, which is the only work that a council has to do. But if I understand
this plan a-right, business or no business they must meet so often. Indeed I am
slow of believing that these elders understand what is required of them in the
solemn charge they have taken of the people they are set over; for many of them
hold that they have not time, neither is it their duty to visit their flocks,
unless they be sick or sent for; yet they can find time frequently to visit
some of the rich, where they can be sumptuously entertained, and an agreeable
conversation to them, which entirely excludes Godliness out of it.

Again, although they cannot find time to visit their flocks, yet, when it serves
their interest, they can find time to keep school, although there has been a
legal bargain made, and they have (properly speaking) let or hired themselves
out to the society for so much a year, and perhaps at great wages too, four
times as much as a common laboring man can get; and perhaps deceive the
people, by reading other men's works, when the careless people thinks it is
their own composing, etc. take their settlement and 2 or 3 years salary, and it
is as much as common tradesmen or laboring men get all their days. And although
they have solemnly engaged to serve the society with all their powers and
abilities, in season and out of season, which includes all their time; yet they
can break their solemn engagements, and rob the society of their time, by
keeping school, or to merchandise and trade, or farm it, (some of them) almost
as much as if they had not let themselves out. -- But I will venture to say,
not a man in the society that hires his neighbor in his own business for a
month or a year, will indulge him to go off in like manner to his own business,
without deducting that time out of his wages. And good reason it should be so,
and that in the case of the ministers bargain also. -- But it is time to attend
to what the word of God says of ministers in this matter; see Jerem. 23.1.2.
Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture, says
the Lord. Therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel against the pastors that
feed my people, ye have scattered my flock, and driven them away, and have not
visited them, behold I will visit upon you the evil of your doings, says the
Lord. Observe -- and have not visited them. -- Micah 3.5. and 11. Thus says
the Lord, concerning the prophets that make my people err, that bite with their
teeth, and cry, peace, and he that puts not into their mouth they even
prepare war against him. -- The heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests
thereof teach for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for money; yet will
they lean upon the Lord and say, is not the Lord among us? none evil can come
upon us. Ezekiel. 34.4. The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye
healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken,
neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye
sought that which was lost; but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them.
Zecha. 11.17. Woe to the idol shepherds that leaves the flock. Please to read
these chapters out. Acts 20.28. Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all
the flock over the which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the
church of God which he has purchased with his own blood. -- Mind reader -- to
all the flock -- the poor as well as the rich etc. Thus the Lord Jesus requires
ministers to visit all their flocks, and to know their standing; but the body
of the ministers of this constitution, I think, virtually say in word and
practice, no Lord. You did not well consider how large our flock was, nor how
much time it would take to visit them all; for if we strictly attend your
direction, we shall not have time enough to recreate ourselves, nor wait upon
our good friends that come to see us, to have a little pastime together.
Furthermore, we shall be straitened for time to attend upon our consociations,
that are of such great importance; which meetings the scriptures was too short
in not making provision for them; yet by experience we find these meetings
necessary to accomplish our designs. It is a great advantage to us to leave our
studies, and to take our horses and ride to these councils, for we are put to
no trouble; we have our messengers to wait upon us, and all rare dainties
provided for us at our meetings; and we find it for our health, and that it
britens up our senses to pass a few civil jests and jokes; if we do tell some
large stories, we do not mean to deceive or lie, but only jest; I was upon a
special occasion called to visit one of these ministers, and whilst I was
present, one of his Brethren in the ministry with two women, came in to see
him, and one of the women asked him where his wife was? (she appeared to me to
be full of vanity) he with as great air of carnality, replied in the kitchen:
partly turning his body, and pointing with his hand to the kitchen; when at the
same time the minister was a single man, and the woman he made suit too, lived
in another society, some miles distant; and more of this carnal nature passed
between them, and what made this instance more shocking and surprising to me
was, that in a few breaths before, he was reminded of his wickedness and high
character, and how examplary he ought to live; may a merciful God pity such
carnal ministers that put on a sabbath day countenance in the pulpit, as though
they would teach souls the way to heaven, when in the week time, their carnal
conversation and practice tends to lead poor souls down to hell!
and when refreshed with a few glasses of wine, we have weightier matters to
consult. Pray what be they? why to converse freely among ourselves, to know how
much we ought to raise our salaries, and what addition is proper to be made to
them etc. -- My reader that is acquainted with these councils, will be best
able to tell how near the conjectures come to the mark. But to return and say,
if I have been wanting in making full proof that those councils have no power
of jurisdiction over the churches, I refer my reader to what is written upon
this head in the explanation of Saybrook platform -- also to a book wrote by
Israel Holly, pastor of a church of Christ in Suffield, a word in Zions behalf.

Nextly I will proceed to answer some objections which doubtless will be made
against this performance, by those that are zealous for the religious
constitution of this colony.

Objection first. Your plan denies the wicked or unconverted to vote in
choosing a minister, and allows only the godly or church members to choose
their minister, which we think is not just, for two reasons; first, the
unconverted in the society must be obliged to hear the church's minister, when
they are excluded any right of choice: secondly, it must be against reason to
tax them to support a man that was excluded from choosing. -- Answer, first the
objector says your plan denies etc. -- But he would equally spoke the truth,
if he had said the word of God denies etc. -- For upon that my plan is founded,
as I have already shown, and could fill a volume in vindication of it: read
Ezra 4.1, 2, 3. Nehemiah 2.20. 1. Corin. 2.14, 15. But let us reason the point
a little -- if the society members have the right to choose the minister, than
the church has not. But if the church has the right, the society have not. For
the church and society are two distinct bodies. So in their nature and
formation, the one is qualified to act by money, and the other by a visible
profession of faith in Christ; and perfect wisdom has never placed these bodies
in that position, which tends to destroy his churches right of choice or acting
in his rule. But you may say, they should unite together in their choice --
answer, What if the society refuses to join with the church, who can help in
such a case? or if they vote together, and upon trial, the church members and
society members are equal and their be a tie, what shall be done? or if the
society has the vote, who in the exercise of right reason and knowledge of the
truth, can think that a money qualification shall either rob the church of
Christ of her just right, or force a man upon her contrary to her judgment,
both which is absurd and unreasonable? therefore it remains the churches right
to choose her own ministers, and that from Scripture and reason; for she is
obliged in her choice, to choose the man that Christ has qualified and directed
to -- a holy godly man, gifted and qualified therefore; which man the society
with their money qualification, are likely to hate and despise, Gal. 4.29. and
where is the power short of the arm of Jehovah, that can make a person or
people love God or his ministers? -- Furthermore. The objector makes a mistake
about my plan, to say the society or any man must be forced; for there is no
force in my whole plan, upon any man or men, to hear the church's minister. The
church of Christ never did force, neither has she any disposition nor power
thereto. She keeps open and free worship, without money or price; any
otherwise, than what the congregation is willing to give freely; she uses no
other force than scripture and reason; and what that does not effect, is left
undone by them through time; they invite, entreat, and beseech, and warn, and
so leave every individual to stand or fall to their own master. And as to the
civil powers having any thing to do in the affair, that must be denied, till
their warrant is shown from the written word of God -- The 2d thing in the
objection is, that it must be against reason, to force persons to support a man
in the ministry, that they was excluded from choosing. Answer, I grant that it
is against reason and scripture too; but perhaps the objector has not well
considered his own plan. When did any that like the colony plan, say it is
unreasonable to tax widows, rich or poor, they are no voters in choosing a
minister, nor any man that falls short of fifty shillings or forty pounds in
the common list, although they be as holy as Enoch, and not in the church? these
are all excluded voting. And who says this is against reason? Or who faults
the plan, for taxing them that are of another principle and church, and have
chose, and maintain another minister? I would in meekness advise those that
make the objection, to look well at home first, and get things rectified and
made reasonable there before he faults his neighbor; for in my plan, there is
no force, nor civil power concerned in the case; neither is there any injury
done to any man's civil interest, nor conscience in this whole plan that I am
so earnestly contending for. -- The church of Jesus Christ, wants no man's
attention or purse further than he is pleased to act and give. The ministers of
Christ teach the whole counsels of God, that respects their duty to the people,
and in its place they teach, that they that are taught in the word, should
communicate unto him that teaches in all good things, Gal. 6.6. but if the
people refuse to contribute etc. the church has nothing further to do with them
that are without; 1. Cor. 5.12, 13. they and their money retained in
covetousness will perish together; as to any thing that the church can do, if
the Lord in mercy does not prevent. But to close my answer to this objection, I
shall refer my reader to what Mr. Mather, before cited, has wrote upon this
head, see question 9. page 67. Ought all that contribute toward the
maintenance, to have the privilege of voting in the election of a pastor?
Answer. It would be simonical to affirm, that this sacred privilege may be
purchased with money, or that contributions can entitle to it; for 1st this is
against the scriptures, and that in more respects than one; and so on he writes
etc. Objection 2. By your plan ministers ought not to make any civil contract
with the people, nor any tax be made for their support, nor civil powers to be
concerned in the whole affair; and if so, our good ministers will be starved
out of their pulpits, and we shall have no regular ministers nor churches in
the Land in a few years.

Answer. I have sufficiently answered the first part of this objection, and
shown from the scriptures that ministers have no precept nor example in all the
bible, to make any civil contract with the people for their support: nor have
civil rulers any direction from God's word, to put forth civil power in that
affair; so that it will be time enough for me to make a further reply, when the
force of my arguments are taken off, and I am shown wherein I have perverted
the scriptures that I have brought to vindicate my principles in this affair.

But let us attend a little to the second part of the objection, viz. our good
ministers will starve etc. It is likely those that make the objection, little
think what is fairly contained in it, for if the ministers be good, then it
reproaches the wisdom and power and faithfulness of Jesus Christ, that he
should set up ministers and leave them to starve in his work. It intimates that
Christ has got careless of his cause, and not true to his word, all which is
most abominably wicked. Christ says in Mat. 28.19 20. Go ye therefore and
teach, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and
lo, I am with you always even unto the end of the world. Amen. Therefore I am
slow to believe, that any minister that obtains grace to abide in these
conditions, will starve in a land of plenty; although all civil powers is against
him. And more especially when I consider that God is uniform in all his ways,
and works, and sends none a warfare without providing all things necessary
therefore, 1 Cor. 9.7. Who goes a warfare any time at his own charges? 2 Timothy
2.4. Again, Luke 22. And he said unto them, when I sent you without purse, and
scrip, and shoes, lacked ye any thing? and they said, nothing. Pray mind, that
Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today, and forever. For he has hitherto
supported his ministers from age to age, when all civil power was against them.
Witness the apostolic age, and the reformation from popery, and the present
day, in which civil and ecclesiastical powers was, and is against Christ's
ministers and cause: Yet Christ found out ways to carry his plan and designs
through even down to our day. Witness the dessenting ministers at Old England;
they have been comfortably supported for more than one hundred years, without
civil power, collectors or prisons, having any concern therein. It must be a
strange paradox indeed, to conclude that the religion of Christ should loose
its proper virtue and nature of influencing and governing men's hearts, lives,
and practice, only by passing over from Old England, to new, and by that time
it takes place in Connecticut, it is so enfeebled, that it cannot produce the
same effect upon the hearts and lives of Men, here, as there; but to make up
the deficiency, there must be added the power of the civil arm, the general
assembly, superior and county courts, justices of the peace, collectors, and
prisons, wasting of goods, and life at the end, for what the law has done to
preserve it, all threatening the person that puts not into the ministers
mouths. Micah 3.5. And he that puts not into their mouths, they even prepare
war against him. Observe further. It cannot be distance of place that alters
the religion of Christ. See this side the briny ocean, the same effect is
produced here as there. For more than one hundred years Boston and Charlestown
(the place of my nativity) have supported their ministers by a free
contribution; there is no civil power exercised in the affair; and one would
think a hundred years experience in any practice, is long enough to know
whether it will answer the end or not. But the truth is, it has been tried as
long as Christ has had a ministry here upon earth, and has never failed. This
day still speaks with a loud and striking voice, the truth and covenant
faithfulness of the ever blessed Son of God. Witness the support of myself and
brethern in the ministry in this reformation; for consider you that made the
objection, how comes it to pass, that we lay-teachers have been supported, some
of us, near 20 years, and some of us considerable families, and but low in the
world, and but few that wait on our ministry, in some places, in comparison of
the lawful assemblies, and them few mostly low in the world, that do scarcely
bring the year about, as we used to say; and besides all this disadvantage, our
substance haled away from us, to support your ministers, by the civil power,
(falsely so called) and sold at the sign-post, for a song, or trifle; great
waste made at times of our substance; which we procured by the help of kind
Prodence in hard labor; additional hereto, at times our bodies seized, and
carried off to prison, and our business left? The reader may easily think how
when the head of a family is thus confined, our friends are in tears, at our
being haled away in such a manner, and the poor collectors like Cain, with
their countenances fallen, and full of wrath, or a paleness and trembling
seizing them, like Belshazzar, when he saw the handwriting upon the wall. Now
notwithstanding all this, we are comfortably supported through the abundant
goodness, and pure mercy of our ever true and faithful Lord and Master, who
makes out to a tittle, all his gracious engagements to his ministers, church
and people. That you do not hear us murmuring against our flocks crying, more
salary, more salary! or we will leave you, etc. No, this has not as yet been
the case: but there is no thanks nor praise due to us, for we and our little
flocks, are as liable to be entangled with human schemes, worldly mindedness,
distrust of God and covetousness, as our neighbors; the difference lies not in
us, but in our good, gracious and sovereign Lord, whose free grace, wisdom, and
power, and righteous plan effects these things in us, and for us; and all the
praise is entirely and forever due to him alone. Therefore with liberty I would
propound this question to those that may make the objection, viz. What is the
reason, that we get along under all these disadvantages (being deluded as you
say) and you being in the truth, under all the advantages possible almost, and
your ministers starve without the civil law to support them? Pray, let this
take your attention! and do not let it pass without a just solution. But
perhaps some will think, that they have solved the question, viz. That it is
the high false zeal, that seperates have, that makes them so bountiful toward
their ministers in supporting them? I answer, that this is quite unlikely, for
this reason, they are equally inclined to love the world as their neighbors,
and it is altogether unlikely, that, such a high false zeal should last in such
a steady uninterrupted manner for 20 years; more specially when there is so
little zeal of late years among them, either good or bad. But if I may show my
opinion in the case, I rather think, that it is more from light and knowledge
of the scripture rule of supporting the gospel that they act then from high
false zeal. For having understood that the gospel is supported by the
contributions of the people, they act, zeal or no zeal; yet doubtless sometimes
love to God and his cause, sensibly governs in the hearts of the saints; and
then they find the word of God fulfiled in them, that it is more blessed to
give, than to receive, Acts 20, 35.

Secondly. If it be true, as the objection says that these ministers and
churches would crumble down, the ministers have no support, if the prop of the
civil law was taken away, and they have no help from that quarter. Then I think
it unavoidably follows, that the ministers and churches of this plan, are not
formed nor made by Christ, but by and from men in their own inventions, for
Christ's church and ministers have lived from age to age, when all civil power
was set to destroy them; witness the fields of blood the church has waded
through from time to time, which church history testifies of. I think that
church that cannot subsist without civil power to uphold it, has the scripture
mark of a false or harlot church, Rev. 17, chap. 13. So on the contrary, that
religion which is from Christ, implanted in the heart, has that governing and
authority in its own nature, upon the subjects of it, that from divine love to
the author of it, they freely move forward to do all that duty, made manifest
to the understanding; without fear of punishment either from God or man.
Punishment as a ruling motive is out of the question. The saints of God do not
attend duty for fear of hell, but pure, chaste love governs in some degree in
the heart, to do duty, see 1 John 5, 3. For this is the love of God that we
keep his commandments, and his commandments are not grievous. Here reader, (as
deluded as you may think I am) I testify is the very essence and soul of true
religion described. The subjects of it see such wisdom, justice and
righteousness, power and purity, shining forth in all God's commands, as
ravishes the heart with such holy delight and complacency: so that the persons
liberty, joy and happiness lies in keeping the same. This, this religion wants
no civil power under heaven to support it; but false religion, or that which
men's wisdom has planned, cannot well subsist without civil power, to be its
prop. Now if there be any truth in the objection, (as I am prone to think there
is) then it follows, that the religious constitution of this colony is not of
God, but has its original from men's wisdom, and may be seen described in the
word of God, by all that will not shut their eyes against the light. I will
point my reader to his character, see Ezekiel. 44, 6 to 10. and thou shall say to
the rebellious, etc. Here God faults his church for bringing into his house
unconverted persons, through which means his holy things was polluted, and this
is the state of poor Connecticut; they have let down their watch, in admitting
members into their churches, almost any person, that has common grace to keep
him from out-breaking sins, may be admitted into the churches of this
constitution, although their conversation discovers reigning enmity in their
heart against God and the influences of his Holy Spirit upon the hearts and
lives of the godly. This is and should be for a lamentation; because it opens
the door wide for a revolt from God, and his rules and laws, which the text
plainly shows. Our godly forefathers saw this dreadful evil, and trembled
with fear. See Mr. Mather, before cited, in the epistle page 8. "If we espouse
such principles as these, namely, that churches are not to enquire into the
regeneration of those whom they admit into their communion, that admission to
sacraments is to be left wholly to the prudence and conscience of the minister.
-- That explicit covenanting with God, and with the church is needless. That
persons not qualified for communion, in special ordinances, shall elect pastors
for churches. That all professed christians have a right to baptism. That
brethren are to have no voice in ecclesiastical councils. That the essence of a
minister's call is not in the election of the people; but in the ceremony of
imposing hands etc. We then give away the whole congregational cause at once."
Thus this godly man writes. But it would have suited me much better, if he had
said, we give up the cause of Christ in the affairs of his visible kingdom, all
at once -- for I lay no stress upon names of distinction. What I would is to be
a true follower of Jesus Christ, and let men call me as they like.

Now candid reader, see how exactly this passage (which was Mr. Mather's fears)
describes the standing and practice of these consociated churches, as exact as
if he now lived and took the description from the present practice of these
churches. But this was printed ten years before Saybrook plan; and quite likely
that Mr. Mather understood what these lordly ministers had got upon the wheel
to bring about, which was the cause of his testimony against it. And this
further confirms me in my opinion, that those that compiled them articles of
discipline in Saybrook plan, understood themselves to mean as the articles say
and as Mr. Hobart pleads. And that the explainer of that plan quite mist the
mind of those that composed and established them. Here I think is something
worthy of notice, that this learned, godly minister law things as I now do,
many years before I was born, for I never saw his book until after I began this
piece: and if he is deluded, so am I: but if he was in the truth, so shall I be
found in the truth, in these my observations upon this plan. Further Mr. Mather
writes, page 32. "Answer 2, the practice of the churches in New England, as to
this particular, is lawful, laudable and edifying: it is lawful for churches to
desire those that offer themselves to holy fellowship, to give an account of
their faith and repentance, and when a church desires it, no capable person
ought to refuse it; for, first, there is a scripture warrant for this
practice," etc. Now opening the church's doors to let in graceless persons,
(which as I understand is the practice of all the churches in the constitution)
makes way for the other heavy stroke, as in the text last cited, ver. 8. And ye
have not kept the charge of mine holy things, but ye have set keepers of my
charge in my sanctuary, for yourselves. Observe, when a church lets down their
watch, and lets in unconverted persons into the church, then it is natural for
such members to choose unconverted men for their ministers, to be over them, as
the Lord complains in this text. And so the old proverb is verified, Like
people, like priest; unconverted members, and unconverted ministers: which is
doubtless the shocking case of the main of this colony and land. I actually
fear that the churches of this constitution abound with unconverted members,
and the land with unconverted ministers. A Heavy judgment of God upon the land!
and that because christian professors have not kept the charge of God's holy
things: not duly respecting the rules Christ has given his church to walk by,
in admitting her members and ministers. Therefore, I firmly believe, that these
scriptures following are rightly applied to this generation. Micah 7.4. The day
of thy watchmen, and thy visitation comes, now shall be their perplexity.
Zech. 11.3, 4.5. There is a voice of the howling of the shepherds, for their
glory is spoiled. Thus says the Lord my God, feed the flock of the slaughter;
whose possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty, and they that fell
them say, blessed be the Lord, for I am rich: and their own shepherds pity them
not, Micah 3.5.6, 11. And he that puts not into their mouths, they even
prepare war against him. Therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not
have a vision, and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine, and the
sun shall go down over the prophets' and the day shall be dark over them. Isa.
3.12, 14. O my people, they which lead thee, cause thee to err, and destroy the
way of thy paths. For ye have eaten up the vineyard; the spoil of the poor is
in your houses. etc.

Likely some of my readers will say, that I am a very censorious person to
charge the church members and their ministers, with being unconverted. Answer.
I am willing to put my credit upon a fair gospel trial. -- Christ says a tree
is known by its fruit. Let them that experimentally know Jesus Christ, and his
spirits work and operation upon men's hearts make the trial; carefully examining
church members, member by member, and minister by minister, to see what they
knew of a work of grace, or the sanctifying operations of God's spirit. And I
firmly believe my credit will stand good with all such as know the gospel
fruits of true christianity; and as for the rest, I expect to lie under their
censor. But they will do well to take good heed lest they be found at last to
be the persons, that they charge me to be, and I innocent of the charge. But
this I will venture to affirm, that upwards of fifteen years ago, the holy
spirit of God led me to see the standing of the churches of this constitution,
in the 44th of Ezekiel. before mentioned, and equally true it is, that their
character is drawn in Isaiah 29, 13. Wherefore the Lord said, for as much as
this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me;
but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught
by the precept of men. This passage of sacred writ perfectly agrees with the
objection, which says, if the churches and ministers have not support by civil
rulers, they will all crumble down, and so says this text, viz. That there is
no more of God among them, than God's precepts make. Here is a perfect glass,
that all my dear neighbors, and friends, that hold the constitution, may see
their face in. For take away men's precepts and your religion is all up, by your
own opinion, so that here I shall slip out of the question, and close my answer
to this objection, for you and the scriptures have settled the point, and both
agree that there is no more religion in this constitution, than what is made by
men, and that is poor enough.

Objection 3. I am quite dissatisfied with your writing, for it appears plain
that your whole aim is to strike up the whole of our religious constitution,
root and branch, and that will undo the colony -- all manner of wickedness and
profaneness will prevail -- we shall be as bad as they are at New York or
Rhode Island -- there is no fault in the religious constitution, but the want
of more tolleration; and I wish the assembly would release all the separates,
for I do not want their money to support my worship.

Answer. I freely confess my design is, the Lord willing, graciously to help
me, to hold this religious constitution forth in its own nature, in the light
of the scriptures, that is may be seen to be what it is, for I firmly believe,
that all persons who see it in scripture light, will hold up both hands (if
need be) for its final overthrow. Sure I am, that it is the duty of all that
see and know that Jesus Christ is anointed king in Zion, the rightful Lord of
conscience, to improve all their knowledge, grace and gifts for its overthrow,
and if Divine Light and truth proves its overthrow, nobody ought to be
offended thereat; and if scripture and right reason, be admitted into the mind,
with its own weight and force, and it does not prove its final ruin, then I say
let it live and prosper. But then I must beg liberty to deny the consequence
drawn in the objection, that it will undo the colony, to fling up the
constitution. I am obliged, as I understand the scriptures, and the nature of
things, to think quite the reverse; that in fact the colony will be ruined, and
an undone people, if it is not flung up, and every man left, to choose articles
of faith, minister, and place of divine worship for himself, and not be
controuled by civil powers. We do well to weigh this point thoroughly; and in
order to it, it is absolutely necessary to distinguish between the civil and
divine kingdom. Not rightly dividing here is the cause of the greatest
difficulty, now subsisting about religion. Observe, civil rulers as they answer
the character given them in the word of God, as his ministers for the people's
good. Romans 3. 1 to 5. I understand the whole of their work, is as follows, 1.
Under God, (and as set by him for that end) to preserve life. 2. Property. 3.
Liberty. Life when it is exposed by the designs of wicked men, or otherwise,
the rulers aid is wanted; property, by the execution of wholesome and righteous
laws to preserve every one in their just, legal rights and properties. Liberty
by defending every one of different sects, in their sacred rights of
conscience, not allowing one sect to disturb another, while they are peaceably
and publicly worshipping God, as they think is best pleasing in his gracious
sight. Here I understand is the extent of rulers work. It does not belong to
them to say, who is qualified for church membership, or not; who shall be a
church, or who not; nor to say where persons shall worship, and where not; or
what lines shall be the limits of a church, or who is qualified to choose a
minister, and who not; or who shall preach, and be a minister and who not. To
sum up all, they have nothing to do (as civil rulers) with any thing that
respects the religious worship that God requires of his church and people. This
I have shown in the beginning of my discourse.

Thus dividing between the civil and divine kingdom, let us consider what hurt
is done to any man's civil interest, by different sects worshipping God in
different places in the same town. Society lines must be denied, till civil
rulers show their warrant from the word of God, to make them; and all civil
business necessary to be done, may be done in the town limits, and what is
otherwise, belongs to every religious community to say. This is not a new
started principle of mine; see Saybrook confession, page 101, head 5. "Though
parochial bounds be not of divine right, yet for common edification, the
members of a particular church ought, as much as conveniently may be, to live
near one another." The reader should keep in mind how common a thing it is for
this plan to contradict itself: the laws have fixed parish lines, and every
person must be subjected to them bounds, although their teacher be as Christ
says, a thief and a robber, John 10, 1. Or let conscience say what it will
about the worship -- To return to the point, there can no hurt come to any
man's civil or natural right, by different sects, being allowed, and preserved
in the privilege of worshipping God, as each party thinks most agreeable to
God's word. Since I have lived in Middletown, there has been 5 different
worships in the town, within the compass of a mile on the Lord's day, besides
the constitution, and church of England, and separates, there was a number of
Dutch, in one private house, and the neutral French, in another, and no damage
accrued to any man's property, or civil interest, any more than if they had all
worshipped under one roof; and had there been added, Baptists, Quakers, and
Moravians, it makes no odds, as to men's civil property. If any person of either
of these professions breaks the civil law, he lies open to punishment, equally
so, as if there was but one profession in the town. I think it will not weaken
the hands of civil rulers, that rule for God, to have different professions in
a town or colony. For consider persons in different professions, finding
themselves favored with an equal share of liberty, with the rest of their
neighbors, and fellow subjects, it will in my opinion have a natural tendency
to knit their affections, and dutiful regard to their rulers, stronger, if it
can be, than if they was all of one opinion in religion. The contrary is also
evident, that when persons know that the Most High, is the alone absolute Lord
of conscience; and that no mortal breathing has any right to hinder them from
thinking and acting for themselves, in religious affairs; and now for civil
rulers to set up and establish the sect that pleases them, and deprive all the
rest of their equal share of liberty, and force their neighbors to go against
the light of their consciences, or suffer fines and imprisonments, or great
waste of goods, etc. Sure I am, that nothing is more likely to alienate good
subjects from due affection, and dutiful regard to their civil rulers, than
such a practice; for the best of men have the remains of corruption in them,
and when they are thus unjustly treated, they need the strong hand of
sanctifying grace, to keep them at the feet of their oppressors and
persecutors. The law of nature, reason and grace, will lay subjects under
strong obligations to their rulers, when equal justice is ministered to them of
different principles, in the practice of religion: they will all as one unite,
and offer all dutiful subjection, and aid to their rulers, to help them through
their work, in the administering equal justice for the good of the whole. But as
things now are, possibly some of as good subjects, as is in the colony, are
obliged from a due regard to the Lord Jesus, to refuse subjection, and
obedience to the civil rulers commands, when they are putting into execution
their ecclesiastical laws, and not from any dislike to their persons neither.
Whoever are acquainted with church history, know that the establishing
religious constitutions, and compelling others that differ therefrom, to
subject thereto, has been the bone of contention through Christendom, from age
to age, and the unhappy cause of rivers of blood being shed, to maintain their
constitutions. I will venture to affirm, that no religious constitution,
established by a civil law, in a kingdom, or colony, where God works by his
word preached, through the spirits aid, can be preserved, without they
persecute more or less. Probably all that esteem the constitution of this
colony, look upon it the best that they know of, in all the reformed nations:
yet it brings forth this bitter fruit of persecution, and oppression, more
than the national establishment. I presume, that through Great Britain, or the
whole nation, there cannot be found that done by civil law against the glorious
work of God's spirit, that has been poured out of late years, as has been done
in this colony. But this is certain, that the church of Jesus Christ, as such,
never persecutes, nor does the scriptures ever show that they never put any to
prison, for the sake of religion, or for conscienciously discharging religious
duty. But the false, antichristian church has from age to age, and so has this
of this constitution, imprisoned the saints for nothing else but their
attending christian duties plainly commanded by the great God; the duty of
exhortation, and of expounding the scriptures, and preaching the gospel, and
worshipping God according to their consciences. Therefore it remains for you
who have thus acted, to get under that character, given you in Rev. 2.10.
Behold the devil shall cast some of you into prison; meaning those persons that
are under the devil's influence, of pride, malice, and superstition, and
persecution, shall cast the saints, etc. Wherefore it appears to me, that
instead of the colony's being ruined by enacting full and free liberty of
conscience, it is the most likely, if not the only remedy to save it from
confusion, and final ruin: for such a liberty has a natural tendency to unite
all parties in good neighborhood, to strive together in all civil things for
the good of the whole civil body, and the contrary for its ruin. But the
Saybrook plan asserts, that there is no warrant for the magistrate to abridge
sober conscientious professors from their liberty of worshipping God as they
shall think fit, see page 74. Yet their ecclesiastical laws, confronts their
articles; and no marvel, that when a plan contradicts God's word, that it
should frequently contradict itself, etc. That there is no foundation to
establish a religious constitution, by force of civil laws, I think is evident
by what follows, first consider who, or what profession shall have this
establishment? you will say those that are orthodox, and sound in the faith.
But that is to say nothing to the case, because every one is so to himself, and
doubtless thinks he is in the right way to heaven, although in fact, he may be in
the way to hell. Witness the papists, they think that they are in the very
apostolic order, therefore force all to comply with their religious
constitution, that they may be saved. But you may further say, those that are
truly sanctified and holy in heart, and take the scriptures for their only rule
of faith and practice. Answer. How shall civil rulers, as such, know such a
people, in order to establish them? do you not deny the knowledge of the
saints? But granting that they be known by their fruits. Yet I dare affirm,
such a people would utterly refuse such an establishment, and for these
reasons, first, in that they that are holy in heart, know that all grace,
light, knowledge, faith and holiness, is entirely the free gift of God, out of
the power of any mortal to convey, and that they themselves are poor sinful
beggars, that daily want more grace for themselves; so that they neither set up
themselves in high dignity, above their neighbors, nor want to be invested
with any power for that end; but only say to their fellow professors and
neighbors as in Mat. 25.9. But go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for
yourselves. Note here, they are pointed to the same fountain of all grace, and
there left to stand or fall, accept or reject, etc. Secondly, these persons
seeing that the written word of God is the alone rule of faith and practice, in
all their obedience, and divine love to the author of that rule, is the soul
spring to move a person forward to obey what that rule injoins. So that they
detest and abhor the notion of civil powers being concerned in all the affair.
Further they know, that the utmost that civil power can do, in such affairs, is
but to make men miserable hypocrites; for they cannot make one true follower of
Jesus Christ, with all their force. Indeed I must confess it is beyond me to
account for (any man of good sense and reason, that is experimentally
acquainted with true religion) pretending to plead up for a religious
constitution, to be established by civil powers; for in truth there is nothing
for civil rulers to do in the whole affair. It is agreed on by all, that there
is a perfect rule already given in the scriptures, for faith and practice; and
we look for no addition or supplement thereto. And it is equally granted, that
civil rulers cannot make any man believe in Christ, nor love or obey him in the
least of his commands. Therefore in meekness, I ask the zealous advocates for
this constitution, what is the work that God assigns to rulers to do in a
religious constitution? And what part of sacred writ shall I find their
directions given them? You will likely say in the old testament, in the books
of Moses, for he was a civil ruler, and he ordered the affairs of the church
and worship of God. Answer. When our civil rulers can show that they depend
upon and go to God as Moses did, for their direction. See Number. 9.8.9. And Moses
said unto then, Sand still, and I will hear what the Lord will command
concerning you. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, etc. Observe, here was a
matter of difficulty respecting some that was defiled by a dead body: Moses nor
the Levites does not prescribe in this case, but God alone: So that I would
charitably hope, that the advocates for this plan will not say, that our rulers
when they enacted these ecclesiastical laws, stood thus before God as Moses
did, to have God immediately by a voice tell them, that this act shall be so,
and that so; or that every man that had fifty shillings or forty pounds in the
list, should be as good voters for to choose a minister, as the most godly,
etc. Nor yet that they was immediately inspired by the Holy Spirit to plan them
laws: So that unless this is made out of our rulers, the objection must fall;
but the truth is, that under the Mosaic dispensation, there was no king or
lawgiver to Israel or the church, but God himself, until Saul was given; at
which time Israel had their minds alienated from God, and did not like that he
should be their alone king; but they chose to have some imperfect man set over
them to be their king, like other nations. Yet it is plain, that in the days of
Moses, he acted nothing from himself, but God alone was the sole legislature;
he gave out the laws civil and ecclesiastical. Therefore it was, that in that
dispensation they stood so together, or that Moses gave the laws of both
tables. And if our civil rulers had the like direction from God himself, we
might safe enough submit to their prescriptions in religious affairs; but till
this is made out, we have no warrant to regard them in any of their
ecclesiastical prescriptions.

Again, I think it will bare to say, that no man that holds liberty of
conscience, can admit of a religious establishment by civil powers, and be
consistent with himself. This will appear very evident in the following
metaphor, as thus, -- supposing Peter has the right to make the establishment
as best suits him. By the way observe, that an establishment is nothing, if it
has not compulsive power to have all in its limits, subject to this plan; and
if so, where then is John's right of private judgment, or James's liberty of
conscience? I think it is all struck up, at the supposition of Peter's right to
make an establishment John and James's liberty is resolved into Peter's will;
and what if Peter will not tolerate John and James? for mind it is granted,
that Peter has a right, etc. Here then it is plain that John and James are
finally deprived of their right, etc. I earnestly want, desire and pray, that
my honest neighbors might rightly understand themselves, when they say,
Liberty of conscience in Connecticut, and at the same time say also, We have
got a good religious constitution. I dare bid the challenge to all mortals
breathing, to extricate and deliver John and James out of their difficulties,
while Peter maintains his right of establishment. In this figure is the true
state of this colony. The cry is, that their is liberty of conscience here; but
it is not true, for the seperates have gone to the general assembly, with their
prayers, from year to year, asking nothing but their just right, full and free
liberty of conscience, and have been, and are still denied their request.

Again, the objection says, the fault is not in the constitution, but the want
of more toleration. Let us consider this in the former figure. The objector
supposes, that Peter ought to tolerate John and James, because they appear to
be honest well meaning persons, and although they have made a mistake in
religion, yet it is hopeful they may be Christians; -- they do not disturb
their neighbors that differ from them in religion, and they are as loyal
subjects in civil kingdom, as their neighbors: therefore they ought to have
liberty of conscience, and not be compelled to worship, or support a worship
contrary to their solid judgment. Thus far some will say, that are zealous for
the constitution, and little think that they have in effect destroyed their
good constitution. For consider, if it be reasonable and right that John and
James, should have liberty, then it must be equally right that Mark and Luke,
being in the like case as John, should have equal liberty. Also, Job and David,
being well acquainted with the scriptures, and look upon Peter's plan contrary
thereto, and so dare not for a world comply therewith, by reason of an infinite
superior power, requiring their obedience otherwise. Therefore they challenging
as their just right, the like liberty that John and the rest have got. Now
reader, you may easily see what will become of Peter's good constitution, by
and by in this practice, which is, and must be acknowledged to be right, by all
that hold liberty of conscience; for there is the same parity of reason, that a
hundred religious communities should be released as to release one. But the
truth of all is, that allowing liberty of conscience the right of thinking and
acting for one's self, in religious matters, to be true doctrine according to
the word of God (which doctrine has always been acknowledged to be sound and
good by all true protestants and christians) then I think it unavoidably
strikes up all religious constitutions (established by civil power) under
heaven. For right reason dictates, that if John had a right to think and act
for himself in religious matters, it is impossible for Peter to have any right
to hinder him: otherwise we shall make perfect wisdom the author of confussion.
Again, in other words, if it be the mind of God revealed in his word, that John
shall choose articles of faith and practice for himself, and a church and
minister that he believes to be of God; then it follows that no powers
whatsoever has any right to hinder, or prevent him from enjoying what God has
enjoined upon him and commanded. This all must grant, that no man or men may
alter what the Almighty has granted or decreed; and he has decreed that every
one shall stand or fall to his own master, is plain in the scriptures, and in
this respect no man has a right to judge another man's servant, etc.

Again, The objection says, that if the constitution be flung up, all manner
of wickedness and profaneness will prevail, and we shall be as bad as they be
at New York or Rhode Island, etc. I reply, it is a sandy foundation indeed, to
set up a constitution upon a bare consequence. The thing to be settled, is not
what will be, but what is; which is to say, Is the constitution right, or is it
wrong? This should improve the attention of all; for it is a matter of the
greatest importance, to know. I think that I have sufficiently shown, from
scripture and reason, that it is altogether wrong, contrary to the word of God;
therefore it ought to be rejected, let the consequence be what it will. But let
us consider the matter carefully, paredventure there is a mistake made about
the consequence, for if this religious constitution has such virtue and power
in it, to preserve from all manner of wickedness and profaneness, how comes it
to pass, that all manner of wickedness, has so much prevailed in this colony,
since it was set up? Let the aged, greyheaded fathers, look back and consider,
how the times was, before this constitution was established by law, as to
profane swearing, the sin of uncleanness, and neglect of family government;
also the sin of oppression, brother going to law with brother, drunkenness and
sabbath breaking, pride and haughtiness; and then turn his thoughts, and see
how the times are now, as to these sinful practices. And I dare say they must
know that the times are vastly worse now. That the constitution in all its
glory and power, does not prevent these growing evils; so that the objection
must be fruitless. Indeed it is my solid opinion of the constitution, that it
has opened the door for the growth of all the wickedness that now prevails in
the land. My reasons are as follows, first, for admitting in unconverted
persons into the churches. Secondly, making money an essential qualification to
vote for ministers. Thirdly, these disqualified persons, voting into the
ministry unconverted men. 4. The ecclesiastical laws, assuming that authority
and rule that belongs to Jesus Christ, and exercised in his church. 5. The body
of the colony combining together, to despise and reject the holy spirit of God,
as it operates upon the hearts of the children of men. 6. Civil rulers and
officers under them, criminally neglecting to put into execution, those civil
laws of the colony, that are good and wholesome; suited to suppress the growth
of the many wicked practices now prevailing amongst us etc. These things being
the natural fruits that the constitution bears, is the cause of the many evils
prevailing in the land. Again, Christ says Matt. 12.33. Either make the tree
good, and his fruit good, or else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt,
for the tree is known by its fruit. Now if this constitution be a good tree,
how comes it to pass, that it brings forth so much corrupt fruit since it has
been planted in this colony? what wickedness is there now prevailing in the
colony! how much profane swearing, not only among the seafaring tribe, but town
dwellers, and children, and servants, black and white, using such language
enough to make one's flesh crawl, which I have often heard with my own ears;
And how does the sin of drunkeness prevail? men wasting their estates and lives
with strong liquor! and the shameful and dreadful sin of uncleanness among our
precious youth, and what revelings and carousing, singing and dancing at the
sound of the viol is the youth indulged in, both by parents, ministers and
rulers, a practice that the devil glories in, through which he debauches
hundreds, and destroys thousands, but glosses it over with the name of civil
recreation; but in truth is right down enmity to God, and leads down to eternal
damnation. Again, if this constitution is so necessary to preserve from sin,
why are the subjects of it, so carnal and worldly upon the Lord's day? I have
been informed from time to time, since I left that worship, that in some places
it is common for the youth, and some heads of families too, to get together on
sabbath day noons, and talk about the world and secular things, and about this
and that news, and to be very light and carnal in going to, and coming from
public worship, and young people getting together in companies in the street,
full of vanity on sabbath evenings, and the body of the people attending
secular business after sunset; I suppose it is not common for people to tackle
up their teams a sabbath evenings, yet as I was in Providence, called to pass
the highway last sabbath evening, I passed by a man with his team with a load
of apples, I supposed a going to the cider-mill, and people at work at the
cider-mill, all which is contrary to the good and wholesome laws of this
colony, and I think contrary to the laws of God. But where is the authority and
under officers in such towns, that have held up their hands to heaven, and
solemnly swore in the name of the ever living God, to put into execution, etc.
I think the day is it hand, when they will stand speechless before their Judge,
unless they speedily wake up and repent of their sinful neglect of duty; and
hence forth attend to their great duty, as God's ministers to be a terror to
evil doers.

Again. If the constitution is suited to preserve mankind from wickedness,
whence is it, that the subjects of it, are so much puffed up with pride,
haughtiness, and vain glory, unmerciful to each other, constantly harassing
each other in the civil law, wasting goods at the sign-post, brother taking
brother by the throat, (as it were) as Christ calls it, and thrusting one
another into prison? I might add, the party envy, and hatered among church
members, and in neighbourhoods, and upon some occasions like a spreading
leprosy, spreading through a society, when some things are transacted that
effects men's pride and will; such as setting a stake to fix the spot for a
meeting house, or in seating a meeting house, both which has flung societies
into contention and confusion; notwithstanding their good constitution, which
they have to regulate them. Thus I think it is evident, that it does not reach
the end proposed by it. -- So a fruitless thing. Now reader consider, what
propriety is there in the objection? these evils are brought forth while the
constitution is in its greatest glory. And we poor seperates that have
renounced it, and have nothing to do with it, nor to glory in, but our
infirmities are preserved, from the most of these evils but no thanks is due to
us, but all to free grace, and the plan of God's word, which we endeavor to
walk by, and not the plan of this colony. Again. As to the profane swearing,
and sabbath-breaking, that is at New York and Rhode Island. It is not owing to
the want of a religious constitution that such evils prevail in these
governments. For according to my observation, the East end of Long Island, are
as civil, kind, courteous and religious people as any in this colony, and where
there is one suit at law in their courts, I believe there is fifty at ours.
They have no religious constitution there established by civil law; but every
one is at liberty to act in religion as they think is most pleasing to their
Maker and Redeemer; and that is right, for so it ought to be through
Christendom. But the cause of these evils prevailing in these governments, is
the criminal neglect of civil rulers, in putting their wholesome laws into
execution; or perhaps unqualified men put into authority, may be no small cause
of these evils prevailing. But did civil rulers in any government or colony
stand in the place where God has called them to stand, they would soon have
God's blessing upon their faithful administering equal justice to mankind, and
so become a terror to evildoers, and a praise to those that do well. Which
great blessing may the God of strict justice, and great mercy, speedily send,
lest the land is wasted with their own wickedness; for it appears to me, that
there is no need of a stamp act to waste us; our own practice, which the land
is now in, will do it: their manner of living above themselves -- their making
haste to be rich, and to effect it, undertaking business that they are not
called to; their trusting in trade, and suing each other, and underhand
dealings, men not regarding their words, and such like. The effects hereof will
crumble and waste the land, without any very singular visitation, unless there
is a reformation in these affairs. And it is my humble opinion, that it would
contribute much more to the peace, comfort and prosperity of this colony, and
to the due honor of our civil rulers, if they would fling up concerning
themselves (as civil rulers) with ecclesiastical affairs, what respects God and
conscience; and let their wisdom, power, and utmost attention be, to plan some
proper and righteous measures, to deliver the people out of their perplexing
and distressing difficulties, that are of a civil and temporal nature. Here
they may work for their great Lord and master, get due honor to themselves, and
be a great blessing to the colony. Otherwise we may expect divisions to
continue of every kind; ruler against ruler; people against people; wastings
and confusion in church and state; heavens frowns to abide upon the colony.
Pray Most High, in thy great wisdom, power and mercy, prevent these great evils
falling upon us, and for thy own most holy name sake, graciously deliver us
from the many evils we are now under, by turning us to thyself, by forming thy
holy image in our hearts, and thereby bringing us to love the supremely, in thy
pure, holy nature, and each other fervently, Amen, so be it good God, for Jesus
Christ's sake. Amen.

Objection 4. You have made a great complaint and outcry against our religious
constitution, saying it deprives you of liberty of conscience, and at the same
time will not allow us liberty of conscience, for we believe the constitution
is according to the word of God, and we are bound in conscience to maintain it,
but you in your zeal are laboring to destroy it.

Answer. This objection has a plausible show with it, as though I was
inconsistent with myself, and has been the means of casting dirt in the eyes of
many seperates in the eastern parts of the colony. Poor hearts, that are so
easily beguiled (by the cunning craft of men) of their just right, and forgot
Christ's caution in Rev. iii. 11. Behold I come quickly: hold that fast which
thou have, that no man take thy crown, Observe! these persons have known that
the constitution comes right a cross their sacred rights and privileges; so
that it is morally imposible for them in the most mildest manner, to ask their
right without striking the constitution; although they should not say one word in
their prayer to the assembly to put down the constitution, yet that which
crosses their right, in its own nature, must be broke in upon, to give them
their right. But to come to the matter in hand. There is no more propriety in
the objection, than there would be for an Arian to complain against a faithful
minister of Christ, that he denied him his liberty of conscience, because in
his doctrine he proved from the scriptures, that Jesus Christ was equal God
with the Father, of the same substance, coequal, etc. or there would be as
much reason for a man that intends to go to heaven, by his legal righteousness,
to tell a minister of Christ, that he denies him liberty of conscience, because
he in the right discharge of his duty in preaching, makes it out from
scripture, that the poor deluded man, upon that bottom, is a going down to
hell. Romans 3.20. Therefore by the deeds of the law, there shall no flesh be
justified in his sight. Gal. 3.10. Now consider, what have I done to deprive my
neighbor of the liberty of his conscience, any otherwise than showing from the
scriptures, the iniquity and unrighteousness of the constitution, that it is
planned counter to the word of God, and my unalienable right. So that if I have
crossed my neighbor's conscience, it must be an erroneous one, and not a good
conscience. The objector little thinks how much he betrays himself, to be in
the spirit of Saul. Acts 9.1. And Saul yet breathing out etc. Chapt. 26.9. I
verily thought with myself that I ought to do many things contrary to the name
of Jesus. Indeed such a conscience as Saul had, (the truth I have through grace
held forth) has hurt and galled. I think there is too much papish blood running
in the veins of those that make the objection; to establish their religious
constitution, are obliged to destroy, or deprive their neighbor of his just
right, and to usurp that power that belongs to Christ alone; else they complain
that they have not liberty of conscience. I think that this is the very case of
those that make the objection; for the sum total of what I would, or have done,
in this performance, is only to open the gap for the children of men, to have
full and free liberty of conscience, to worship God and practice in religion,
as they think is agreeable to his holy word; and to grant this will in its own
nature destroy this celebrated constitution; and I doubt not but some persons
see it must be so, that have respect for the constitution, and liberty of
conscience too: such persons would do well rightly to understand themselves,
and be consistent with themselves. Secondly, all the use that civil power can
be put to, in the whole affair, is, first, to force or punish those that do not
conform to the plan, or secondly to force those that like the plan to comply
with its precepts. Now the first is generally denied through the colony, that
civil rulers ought not to compel men contrary to their consciences in the
worship of God. The second is a paradox indeed, to have the civil rulers with
their fines and prisons, to force men to do that which they like and choose to
do. Whoever punished himself with stripes or corporeal punishment, unless he
was a papist, or a distracted man, for his coming short of what he thought he
should do? So that turn the case which way you please, it appears
demonstratively evident, that there is not, nor can not be any civil power
rightly concerned, or exercised in religious affairs, as such. The written word
of God is the only and alone rule of direction in faith and practice. Civil
rulers must be very presumptuous and heaven daring to attempt to add or
diminish from the sure word of prophecy; and it is morally certain that it is
not in their power to force or make men believe in the author of the
scriptures, or cordially obey its precepts. Therefore, of necessity civil
rulers must be excluded out of the question, they ought to be content to be
where God has placed them, in the civil kingdom. But as to the civil
constitution of this colony, we esteem it highly, and in all our memorials to
the assembly, have shown our satisfaction therein. Indeed we have suffered
ourselves to be defrauded, or to abide under oppression and persecution, rather
than do any thing that should tend to destroy the civil constitution of the
colony. For when we had been at great charge and pains to prepare a petition to
present to the king in council, and sent two brethren to Old England with it,
they informed me, that they advised with the most knowing and approved
counselors in such affairs, and they told our brethren that it was quite
probable, that if our petition had a proper hearing, that it would strike up
our charter; for there was such facts done, by the execution of certain laws,
the copies of which facts, we had produced from public records, and sealed with
the colony seal. Such as these, apprehending persons for preaching the gospel,
for exhortation, for worshipping God in private houses, fining and imprisoning
for such great christian duties. Wherefore these counselors advised our
brethren to drop their petition, and come home, and lay the case before our
churches, and proceed in another method, viz. To sue a collector, and carry the
cause through the courts, and go home to England by way of an appeal. They
judged that such a method would not endanger the charter like our petition.
Upon which with some other considerations they complied with the advice and
came home, and laid the case before the the church's committee, and they fell
in with advice; having a great value for our civil constitution; and if any
measures could be attended to introduce us into our sacred rights of free
liberty of conscience, and preserve our civil privileges, we chose to comply
with it. Upon which we prosecuted that plan through the courts, and got things
almost ripe for England, and through some fault the cause died in the birth.
And here we lie under these unrighteous ecclesiastical laws, till kind
providence interpose, and appear for our relief. And if our civil rulers (whose
work it is as God's ministers) do not appear to give us an equal share of
liberty, with the rest of our neighbors, they alone will bear it. When he that
is in the highest heavens, hears the groans that comes up before him, from
secret places, and the sighings of the prisoners; his omniscient eye sees how
many briny tears his oppressed and persecuted children eat in their strong
cries for mercy, for this colony and land. Wherefore I am prone to think that
the time draws near, for Zion's deliverance, when the Lord Jesus will awake as
one out of sleep, and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine, and
smite his enemies in the hinder parts, and put them to a perpetual reproach,
Psalm 78, 65, 66, read also the 68 Psalm. I further think, that it is too late
in the day, for those that know the truth, whether learned, or unlearned, ruler
or not, separate or not, to hold their peace, and think to be neuters, now the
battle is pitched in the open field, (not against any man's person, but against
sin, men's inventions and traditions) for the cry is, who is on the Lord's
side, who, and those that will not come up to the help of the Lord, to the help
of the Lord against the mighty; by suitably improving all their knowledge,
grace and gifts in Christ's cause, may expect to meet that bitter curse, Jud.
5.23. Curse ye Meroz, (says the angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly, the
inhabitants thereof, etc.

Again. It appears to me, that the religious constitution of this colony is a
forfeiture of the charter grant, because it exercises that oppression and
persecution, contrary to its first intent, and is the direct cause of
contention and division, which is repugnant to the principal design of
constituting this colony. I will transcribe a passage out of the charter, which
I understand to be the hinge upon which the whole privileges turn. C. L. B.
page 5. And for the directing, ruling and disposing of all other matters, and
things, whereby our said people, inhabitants there may be so religiously,
peaceably, and civilly governed, as their good life, and orderly conversation
may win and invite the natives of the country to the knowledge and obedience of
the only true God, and Savior of mankind, and the christian faith; which in
our royal intentions, and the adventurers free profession, is the only and
principal and of this plantation. Thus says the charter. Pray reader remember,
that it was well known by the grantors, what our forefathers left England for;
that they could not submit to the religious constitution of the nation: but
chose to relinquish all their civil and natural rights in England, and venture
all the hardships of a wilderness state in the midst of a cruel and savage
enemy, principally, and solely for the free liberties and privileges of the
gospel, where there was no religious constitution to interrupt the sacred
rights of conscience. Pray mind the words of the grant -- and the adventurers
free profession is the only and principal end of this plantation -- Now I think
right reason says, that if this free profession be the only and principal end
of this colony, then when that principal end is taken away and destroyed, then
the privileges of the colony is forfeited and gone. And that this free
profession is denied and gone in this colony, ever since this religious
constitution has been established, my writing shows, as the sunbeams at noon
day; also the daily practice of this colony according to their constitution.
Witness, young deacon Drake of Windsor, now in Hartford prison, for the
ministers rates and building their meetinghouse, although he is a baptist,
(christians renouncing their infant or former baptism, is a practice I utterly
reject, as unscriptural, an error in the judgment attended with many snares,
Prove. 20.25) yet notwithstanding he has made this mistake, he is accounted a
harmless, godly man; and he has plead the privilege of a baptist, through all
the courts, and been at great expense, without relief, till at last the
assembly has given him a mark in his hand; and notwithstanding this, they have
thrust him to prison for former rates, with several aggravations, which I shall
omit. But as to what the constitution does to relieve the poor deacon, he may
there die, and the cry of blood, blood, go up into the ears of a just God, who
will e're long avenge the wrongs done to the innocent, by this murderous
constitution, that will show no mercy. The civil law makes provision to support
criminals in prison; also supposes that debtors have estate, but refuse to pay
their just dues, but in case they are actually reduced to poverty, the poor
man's oath gives them relief. But in this case, the civil law has made no
provision to save life; for it is a case of conscience, and all the money upon
the face of the earth cannot buy a pardon for conscience, when it is defiled
with sin; and the scripture says, whatsoever is not of faith, is sin; and no
separate that can go to prison for a minister's rate, can pay the same in
belief, it is duty, or according to the rule of God's word. Therefore here they
are to starve or freeze, as to what the constitution has done to save life. It
is is true, they have been preserved, and provided for, that have been put into
prison in Christ's cause; the Most High has been very gracious and merciful to
them, in providing relief, in great straits; their very enemies have ministered
to their necessities in my certain knowledge: but no thanks due to the
constitution. I will endeavor to give a short narrative of the trial and
experience of a man, that I have had some acquaintance with, who some years
ago, when in a low state of health, was put into Hartford prison, for his
minister's rate, who conscientiously had left the minister for some years, upon
point of principle. He was confined in a cold turn of weather in January, and
he was put were he could not have a fire, nor clothes sufficient to preserve
him from the cold, he walked in the prison chamber to keep his blood in
circulation, to preserve life, till he was almost ready to drop on the floor,
and there die; when he cast his eyes round upon the prison walls, there he read
death, death, as real as ever he saw it in a dying person's, corpse or grave.
His distress was to be secured from the cold. He put up his desires to heaven,
as he walked, that the merciful God would find out some way in his kind
providence, to preserve life; he seeing no way how he could be preserved from
the cold, was over borne with distress for some way to preserve life. He
repaired to one corner of the prison and in secret prayer, poured our his
desires to that merciful God, which hears the groans of the prisoners, in
which duty he saw the cause he was suffering in, was God's cause, in which he
might venture life and all. But before he got through his prayer, his mind was
seized with serenity, a divine calm; all fear of freezing was gone, yet no
information in the understanding, which way he should have relief; so he
remained some space of time; till exercising his thoughts how he should be
relieved, and seeing no way, distress came on his mind again, as hard as ever,
for he found his strength was almost gone, that he could not walk much longer;
that he must by and by resign, and let the cold, and grim death do its office;
and as he again cast his eyes round the prison -- death, death, presented
itself on all sides; no way could he see for relief, unless a miracle was
wrought to preserve him -- but he though it that he would once more repair to a
corner of the prison, and pour out his soul to God, that he would in his great
mercy, find out some way for relief, and whilst he was lifting up his heavy
heart to God, and eating his briny tears; behold his mind was seized again as
before, with a heavenly calm; all fear of freezing gone, a sweet divine peace,
and serenity of soul, and so closed his prayer with blessing and praising God,
for giving him relief in his mind; and set down, musing and thinking, what he
should learn by such operations, it being such an experience as he never had
before, in the circumstance of it, to be relieved in the mind, and no way
opened to the understanding, how, and whilst his mind was exercised thereupon.
The case of Jeremiah, who was likely to perish in the dungeon, was brought to
his mind; the whole of which may be read in Jer. 37, 38, chap. But the 20th
ver. in the 37 chap. passing through his mind, viz. Therefore, hear now, I pray
thee, O my Lord the king, let my supplication, I pray thee, be accepted before
thee, that thou cause me not to return to the house of Jonathan the scribe,
lest I die there. Now whilst he was thinking on what instructions he could get
from this text; the next verse was brought fresh in his mind, viz. Then
Zedekiah the king commanded that they should commit Jeremiah into the court of
the prison. Thus Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison* -- Upon the
whole, and in short, the person got this instruction, viz. That Jeremiah was
persecuted for the truth, and likely to die in the dungeon, and his life, then
under God, was in the king's hand, and that it was the king's great duty, as a
ruler and minister of God, to relieve Jeremiah, and he had a just right to
beseech and entreat the king to relieve him, and save his life; upon which the
person see that his own life under God, in that straight, was in the prison
keeper's hands; he had power to relieve him, or let him freeze to death there.
He had a close examination of his heart, to see what motions governed him in
seeking relief, whether it was not to shun the cross. But to his great comfort,
he found a measure of uprightness prevailing in him. No disposition to shift a
hair from the naked truth. He see it his duty to get liberty, to tell the
prison-keeper an honest story; just as things appeared to him, and to desire
liberty to lie by his fire, in order to preserve life; and if granted the
favor, it would be the Lord's doing's; but if he denied the request, and
ordered back to his chamber, where he then was, the person felt in his soul a
surrendery to the sovereignty of God, and dropped at his foot, and gave up his
life upon the very spot; and said amen, the will of the Lord be done. This and
much more did the person experience. Upon this he used means to get liberty to
speak with the prison-keeper (who was then confined to a sick bed) and the
favor was granted -- he acquainted the prison-keeper with his case, just as he
understood it; and asked the favor to lie by his fire, at first no answer was
given, only the prison-keeper tried to persuade the separate to pay his rate,
and go home, and not deny himself of his privileges and expose his life. So he
rested calm in his mind with his heart affected, with the goodness of the Lord,
that he could warm himself at the fire, about the space of a quarter of an hour
(if I remember right) then the prison-keeper gave his consent, that he might
lie by his fire that night, which was all that the poor prisoner then
requested; for he knew not what a night, or day would bring forth. But from
that time forward, all the while, he was at prison, he was as the text says,
in the court of the prison, never was locked up more, but had the liberty from
the garret to the celler, and had the liberty to pray and sing with his
christian friends, under that part of the (...) that the prison-keeper lived
in; when at other times he has been like a raging madman against the saints,
when they have been praying and singing in the prison, locked up in their own
room etc. Now this person's deliverance from prison is also worthy of notice;
as I was informed by a person of undoubted credit, who was personally
acquainted with the affair, which is as follows. When this separate was
carried to prison, there was a man that lived in that neighborhood, there at
the prison a tippling with his cups, that used to be the worse for liquor from
morning to night when he could get it; and a bitter enemy to the seperates, has
threatened to knock his wife's brains out for going among the seperates. But
seeing the collector put this person into prison, seized this man's conscience,
he went home convicted of his own wicked practice or drinking too much, broke
it off, was never seen in liquor whilst the separate remained in prison;
confessed his fault to his wife for drinking too much, and spending so much
money for strong drink, when (said he) there is a good man in prison, that has
hurt no body, confined and suffering for the ministers rate, when I have spent
so much money for strong drink, and abused myself with it. Also he confessed
his fault for abusing his wife, for going to hear the seperates, and promised
that he never would again, and gave her liberty to go when she thought fit: he
tried to get his neighbors to join with him and pay the rate, and release the
man, but to no purpose. He visited the person in prison several times, to
contrive some way to get him out; indeed according to the account, the man was
in horror in his conscience all the time the innocent separate was confined,
which was more than a fortnight, at length he received for his hand labor,
eight pounds of money, old tenor, and unbeknown to his wife or any body else
but the prison keeper, he went and paid the prison-keeper's whole demand, which
was above seven pounds of the money he had received, and ordered the
prison-keeper to let the separate go home, upon which he was released, but the
prison-keeper would not tell him by what means, neither did the person know
till some time after. Thus reader the earth helped the woman, Rev. 12.16. This
narrative may serve to encourage and strengthen those that love Christ's cause
more than their worldly interest or their own life; also to convict and shame
those that dare not trust the Lord with their substance and lives, but to save
them both, pay the collector his demands, and that in a grudging manner and
have no peace with God, nor conscience in their doings. But to close this
narrative. I would let the reader know the end of this man, that was so
bountiful to the separate. After he had released the Lord's prisoner, the poor
man by little and little, took to his cups like the dog to his vomit, till he
had finished his race, and doubtless died in his sins. But I will return to the
point I was upon, showing wherein it appears to me, that this constitution in
the force and cruelty that it exercises over men's consciences, is a forfeiture
of the charter grant. Pray mind the words of the grant, viz. "so religiously,
peaceably and civilly governed, as their good life and orderly conversation may
win and invite the natives of the country to the knowledge and obedience of the
only true God, and savior of mankind, etc." Now dear reader think seriously of
the conversation, practice and government which this constitution exercises
over men's consciences and property in religious things; and judge ye, what
influence can such a practice have upon the heathen, to win and invite them to
the knowledge and obedience of the only true God, or Jesus Christ. Indeed it
appears to me, that nothing hardly, is more likely to prejudice the heathen
against the peaceful gospel of Jesus Christ and the christian religion, than
such a practice; and to leave them under the strong delusions of the devil to
believe a lie, that they might be damned. Yea I believe a Turk, to look on and
see what this constitution power has done among us, since the first out
powering of God's spirit, would rather be confirmed in the belief of Alcoran,
and laugh and smile, to see a people professing to be good christians, thus
treating one another. But to close all respecting this religous constitution,
and to make up my want in taking every rag of covering off, that the thigh of
it, may be quite naked and bare: I would join to this book, the renowned
Locke's Letter on Toleration; in which my mind is expressed, beyond what my
poor weak abilities is able to demonstrate. Joining this letter with my
performance, makes a complete joint, a uniform plan in the whole: not that I
mean to equal myself with Lock, no, by no means: but the cause of truth and
equity, and the just rights of all men, that I have in an imperfect manner
endeavored to plead, he has abundantly established and confirmed, by
ungainsaying arguments: through which means his fame and name is had in great
esteem in many kingdoms, (as I am informed.) And whoever of my readers shall
think that my writing tends to hurt the church or state, (which indeed is not
my design) I earnestly beg the favor of such, to get Locke's Letter, and
peruse it calmly and thoroughly, through which means perhaps, you may think,
more favorable upon what I am striving (under God) to have effected, and
brought about. Also I would earnestly request of all, such as are true Briton's
and christians, that set a high value upon liberty of conscience, that they
move forward to get Locke's Letter reprinted, two thousand of them is now
wanted in this colony, as a means to let light into the understanding, that the
people may see where their standing now is; also what they should be as to
gospel liberty. What will all our temporal liberty do us, if we be deprived of
the most important liberty, which respects our souls future and eternal being?
etc. Again I would recommend to my readers serious perusal a Book entitled, A
seasonable plea for the liberty of conscience, and the right of private
judgment in matters of religion, without any control from human authority.
This book was doubtless wrote to uncover the religous constitution of this
colony. Also I would recommend to my readers serious perusal a book entitled,
A short view of the difference between the church of Christ, and the
established churches in the colony of Connecticut. Wrote by Solomon Pain,
pastor of the church of Christ in Canterbury. This book I understand is much
despised by the body of this generation. Yet he being dead, yet speaks. And
the true witness that he has given in the book, in my humble opinion, will
sooner or later, roar like thunder in the consciences of those that despise it;
and be like mountains of lead, to sink such dispisers down under the wrath of
God, who finally reject the truth. The Most High has condescended to speak
heavy things to Connecticut, through that instrument; who I firmly believe is
now bowing before the throne of God and the Lamb, crying grace, grace, worthy
is the Lamb that was slain, etc. What remains for me to do in this piece, is to
give some advice, council, caution and warning, to the people of this colony;
And if my dear fellow countrymen, neighbors and friends, would heartily fall
in therewith, I doubt not but Connecticut would see better times, than ever
they have yet seen, both in church and state.

First then in general. My earnest request in all humility, is to all rational
persons that have souls to save or loose; whether high or low, rich or poor,
male or female, old or young, free or bond. That you take into serious and
close consideration, what a case your souls are now in -- whether converted or
not -- whether careless and stupid about death, and the final judgment, or
earnestly concerned to be prepared therefore. I earnestly advise you to search
the scriptures daily; for they are able to acquaint you with yourselves, through
the Spirit's help, and to make you wise to salvation; see that you don't read
carelessly, nor out of custom, or only to furnish your heads, to talk better
than your neighbors; but principally in the consideration that it is the word
of the ever-living God, by which you must be saved or damned: and keep in mind
always, when you take the bible in your hands, that it is the command of
Christ, John 5, 39. That you read with that care and attention, as not to let
the word slip: but through the scriptures obtain the knowledge of him, whom to
know aright, is life eternal. Mind what Christ says, Mat. 6.33. But seek ye
first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you. Never let the matter rest, till you know whether you are
converted or not. John 3, 3. Jesus answered and said unto him, verily, verily,
I say unto thee, except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
Know reader, that if you are not newborn again, made holy in heart, your case
is dreadful; there is no peace belongs to you, night nor day, Isa, 48.22. There
is no peace says the Lord, unto the wicked. John 3, 18. But he that believes
not, is condemned already. Ver. 36. And he that believes not the Son, shall
not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. Pray see your case described
by Christ himself; and sure I am, it is no case to be easy in; for you know not
how soon the avenger of blood will over-take you, for you are slighters and
despisers of the blood of Christ, all the while you remain out of Christ,
secure in your sins. Death you know is certain, and as to you, the time very
uncertain. What, if that grim messenger should lay his cold hand upon you
tonight, or tomorrow, and you be found out of Christ? Nothing then, my dear
friends, but an eternal hell of immense wrath, of a dreadful sin-revenging God,
to be your endless portion! no, not a drop of water to cool your inflamed
tongue a whole eternity! O, eternity, eternity, of unmixed wrath, and divine
vengeance, where there cannot be a drop of mercy conveyed to the poor lost
sinner! Read for your awakening, Luke 16, 19, to the end. Therefore my dear
friends, into whose hands these lines may fall, suffer me to get your consent,
and prevail with you, now this moment, without delay to engage in your soul's
concerns. Make sure of an interest in Christ above all things; and know that
your duties, prayers, tears, nor any thing done by you, cannot recommend you to
a holy God. And if you are ever saved, it must and will be by rich and free
grace. Ephesians. 2.8.9. For by grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of
yourselves, it is the gift of God. Not of works, lest any man should boast. Now
if the children of men could be persuaded in earnest to attend upon those
duties God requires in his word, through which he works by his free spirit, and
not rest in their duties; but follow on to know the Lord, (Hos. 7.3.) till they
obtain through free grace the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ. What a blessed
and vast alteration should we have in the land for the better! And how would
party prejudice, superstition and men's tradition, be laid aside; when every one
looked to God and the scriptures, to find the way to eternal life! Now it is
altogether just and reasonable, that all persons should be so engaged to know
the truth as it is in Christ.

2dly. And to be more particular. First, my earnest desire is, that every
individual head of a family, would wake up, and seriously consider, what the
Most High requires of you in that relation; how careful and upright you should
be in all your civil dealings, in the whole of your practice; ever mind the
law, which you and I must by and by be tried by. Mat. 7.12. Therefore, all
things, whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them,
for this is the law and the prophets. Secondly, consider the religious duties
incumbent upon you in your families, and attend to them constantly; always
keeping in mind the necessity of the Lord's help in all duties, in closet
prayer, family prayer, daily reading the scriptures in your family; also
instructing and catechizing your household, frequently instructing them in the
essential doctrines of the gospel; living in a serious, godly conversation,
such as ministers grace to the hearer. Read for your help these texts, Deuteronomy. 4
9.10. chap. 6 to 9. Titus 2.2 to 6, 1 Pet. 1, 15. 2 Pet. 3.11. The neglect of
these duties is one of the great sins of the times. Family prayer is much
dropped in the land (if I have been informed right) more especially in populous
towns; and family instruction more so. What a shameful and sinful case is it,
that there is so many prayerless heads of families! Poor miserable creatures!
who live as if there was no God, no heaven, nor hell. The very heathen
idolaters that worship stocks and stones, and devils, will rise up in the
judgment day to condemn such prayerless persons; they never had the means to
know the true and proper object of prayer, but you have, that restrain prayer
before God. Poor hearts! what shall I write to you -- you live as without God
in the world -- your practice says, that you are Atheists, and that you are
self-sufficient, and can subsist and preserve yourselves and families, through
your own inherent strength, power and wisdom; only as you expect to meet with
fate and chance. Read your character and doom, Romans 1. 28, to the end. Jer. 10,
25.

3dly. Labor to get the true knowledge of that rule and government that your
Maker requires you to stand in, and exercise daily in your families. The
scriptures give you sufficient direction in your duty; read for your help the
following passages, Genesis 18, 19. Prove. 19, 18. chap. 22, 6. chap. 23.13 14. chapter
29, 19. Col. 3, 17, to the end, chap. 4. 1. Ephesians. 6, 1 to 9. What a beautiful
good and ravishing sight it would be, to see a family well ordered and
governed: the man in his place, in right government from Love to God, and his
dear family. -- The woman in dutiful subjection to her husband. -- The children
and servants knowing and abiding in their place, watching the word of command,
cheerfully complying therewith, without murmuring or complaining, or one child
turning off the duty to another. Heads of families should see that they they
require of their children, what is needful to be done; and then let their word
be as a standing fixed law in their family, and see that it is duly regarded.
The right sort of government has not a great deal of whipping in it, but first
instruction, counsel and caution is used abundantly, and the ordinance of the
rod, is the last, and when that must be used, it should be done effectually,
out of pure duty, and in a praying frame of spirit; and without doubt, it will
have the blessing of heaven attend it, for good, etc. Some of my zealous
neighbors and their teachers, say, That the seperates are the cause of the
judgments of God upon the land. But the time is at hand, when doubtless they
will know otherwise, to their surprise: if I may show my opinion in the case, I
must say, irreligious, prayerless families, wicked, ungoverned families is the
principal cause of the calamities of the times, (next to the opposition made
against the work and spirit of God in the land) as good family government is an
exceeding great blessing to church and state; so the criminal neglect thereof
tends to the ruin and destruction of both. The shameful and sinful neglect of
family government, is one of the crying sins of these degenerate times; it
forebodes an overthrow to church and state, unless kind heaven interpose in
great mercy, by the out-pouring of God's holy Spirit, which this colony, as a
people, have hitherto despised. But it is high time for them to wake up to
purpose, and search the scriptures, to know what the Holy Spirit's work and
office is; that if the Highest should stoop so low, as once more to pour out
his Spirit upon this land, they might happily know it, and be sharers in its
saving influences. But who can tell the dreadfuls the land is now groaning
under, by reason of the criminal neglect of family government. How are our
precious youth ruined, instead of their being trained up for heaven, to be a
generation of God's praise, they are trained up in the way that leads down to
hell! and without speedy repentance, are like to be a generation of God's
dreadful wrath. For what liberty have they to go on in revelling and
banqueting, chambering and wantonness, singing and dancing at the sound of the
viol. Also the youth, if not heads of families, clubing together, to play
cards, cursing and swearing, drinking to excess, and committing uncleanness
from time to time; out at all seasons in the night; the young men and women
upon the bed together, an allowed practice, by many heads of families, thus to
suffer their children to be in the way of temptation; and no marvel that an
angry jealous God gives up the precious youth to commit uncleanness with
grediness. But I despare of good times in this land or colony, separate or not,
if family religion and instruction and government is not set up in the midst of
us. Indeed this generation is got so relaxed and remote from the thing, that if
the head of a family comes pretty near the rule in governing his house, he is
singled out from the rest of his neighbors, and counted almost as cruel as a
Turk -- they cry he will spoil all his children, and make them mopes, not fit
for society, they say, etc. I confess it is likely they will be accomplished
with so many excellent, moral virtues, and such common grace and modesty, that
they will no ways suit the ungoverned ribble rabble, the carnal and profane.
Also, if grand jurors may be indulged neglecting their office, and when they
endeavor to attend their office, and make presentment according to law, and
the authority be indulged with taking no notice of their presentiments, then
farewell good times from this colony and land, and prepare for your day of heavy
visitation.

A word to my brethren in this reformation. There is too many of you greatly
wanting in this great duty of governing your families aright. Suffer me to
entreat you for the Lord's sake, and your own and families good, to wake up in
earnest, and labor for a full acquaintance with your duty, in your families;
also for sanctifying grace, to practice in your knowledge. How short do you
come of living up to your light! neglecting your duties in your families,
betrays the cause of Christ; his high and holy name is reproached through your
sinful neglect. More is justly expected from you, in walking in right rules,
than from your neighbors: Therefore watch and pray always. Labor to train up
your children for heaven; using all proper scriptural means to get a portion
for them in the favor of God; and that will be better for them than all the
world beside. I close this head, by turning my reader to that shocking instance
of God's holiness and jealousy manifested against good old Eli, for his
remissness in governing his house, using words only, when severer government
was necessary for the good of his sons; which neglect brought the curse of God
upon his family forever. Therefore, dearly beloved brethren, take warning that
you do not through your neglect of duty bring down the curse of a jealous God
upon your precious children, to the latest posterity. 1 Samuel 3, 13. For I have
told him, that I will judge his house forever, for the iniquity which he
knows; because his sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not.

Thirdly, I would earnestly entreat such as are freemen, to wake up, and
seriously consider, of what great importance it is, for the peace, health and
prosperity of the colony, that such men are chosen into public offices and
rule, as are suitably qualified therefore. I think it is a right and safe way of
proceeding in such cases. First to take into close consideration, the work
necessary to be done. Secondly, consider the gifts and qualifications necessary
to perform that work called for. Thirdly, see where the man or men so
accomplished, with such qualifications are; them are the men, that God says in
his word and providence should be put into office over you. It matters not what
denomination they are of, as to religion, if they be solid good suitable men.
Also that you ever keep in mind, in your choice of rulers, to introduce such as
have a special gift of Government. Not men that are proud, haughty; or
high-spirited, soon angry; they are not fit for rulers; but men that are of a
steady, solid, resolute mind, whose face is as flint to do strict and equal
justice, entirely leaving their honor and profit to the disposal of their Lord
and Master; and who are as deaf as an adder to all flattery and frowns; and
wield these word of justice aright; thrusting it into the bowels of all sin and
wickedness, that falls under their jurisdiction. To have men in civil
government, that have not the gift of government, is one of God's heavy
judgments upon a people. See Isa. 3.4. And I will give children to be their
princes, and babes shall rule over them. Ver. 12. As for my people, children
are their oppressors, and women rule over them: O my people, they which lead
thee, cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths. How much this
respects our times, is well for all seriously to consider.

4thly. I shall beg liberty with all submission, humbly to address our civil
rulers in this colony, as follows. In as much as I am warranted from the word
of God, to entreat elders whether in age or office. 1. Tim. 5.1. Therefore I
earnestly entreat, that you would duly consider that the best of you are liable
to mistakes, as well as other men. Liable to proceed in enacting laws, and
putting the same into execution, without duly, and understandingly, considering
whether they are consonant with the written word of God; for I presume that it
is the fixed principle of our honorable and general assembly, to enact no laws
repugnant to the word of God. Therefore that you may be consistent with
yourselves, you well know, it becomes you to be well acquainted with the
written word of God, to know the bounds that your great Lord and Master has set
you; otherwise how can you know, whether your acts and decrees, will comport
with your directions therefrom? Pray be pleased to take into close
consideration your ecclesiastical laws, well consider them in their own nature,
and then let your utmost attention be to the scriptures, well considering who
they have placed to be lord of conscience, and the sole dictator and director
in all religious worship; and how the same is supported, laying your religous
worship by the scriptures, will give you the advantage, (if your minds are
upright) to see whether your plan is according to the scriptures, or not.

And possibly if you could in a calm sedate mind, peruse what is in this piece
wrote thereupon, you may obtain some light, to see the disagreement that is
between the scriptures and your religious plan; and so conclude that through
some means or other, before your day, these ecclesiastical laws was introduced,
before they had got a foundation for their being from the scriptures; and if
so, then consequently it must be for your honor, and the peace and comfort of
this colony, to make them null and void. Indeed sirs, I think consistent with
your principles, you cannot step one step further, in putting them into
execution, before you see their warrant from the word of God; and if you do
not, I presume no man will be hurt by them any more. With all submission suffer
me to remind you of your solemn oaths, in which with your lifted up hands to
the omniscient God, you swear by the ever living God, to promote the public
good and peace of this colony, and will further the execution of justice for
the time aforesaid, according to the rules of God's word, and the laws of this
colony. Your honors well know that the word of God is prior to our colony laws,
the later but as yesterday, and the former from eternity; and it is upon this
belief, I suppose, that you dispense with that precept in the C. L. B. p. 139,
"Nor shall any persons neglect the public worship of God, in some lawful
congregation, and form themselves into separate companies in private houses, on
penalty of ten shillings," etc. Because you see this is counter to the word of
God, so cannot be of any force; and if this be not the case, it is beyond me to
say, how you do to dispense with your neglect, for this twenty years, etc. But
I am obliged in charity to conclude, that you know that this branch of law, has
got mean tekel written upon it: and if so, why does it stand there for wicked
men to use, to gratify their malice and spit against the poor seperates that
mean to hurt nobody, but only keep a chaste conscience in worshipping the
living and true God, as they understand his mind in his written word. I am
prone to think, that it would make the honorable assembly blush to hear a true
narrative of what was transacted at Wallingford, upon a few seperates in
prosecuting this law. I will endeavor to give a brief hint, as I had it from
the persons had up -- which is as follows, --

A wicked man in that neighborhood, went to his peculiar friend, a petty
lawyer, who drew a complaint against the seperates; he took it, and went to a
justice of peace, who was abed, and got him up, and the justice signed the
instrument, and off he goes with it to an officer, which undertook the work. He
gets some of the simple neighbors to assist the officer, and a negro wench to
be the Judas to lead the band; for she knew where the persons lay, and by this
time it got to be about midnight; they marched to the first house, enters the
same, and seizes the man and his wife a-bed, and secures them; and then went to
the next house, and to get into the house, the negro wench frames and tells a
lie, and so by that means enters with the band; the mother of the young women
perceived several persons with the wench, and called her two or three times, to
come into the room where she and her husband was a-bed, and not go into the
room to disturb the girls, for she thought that there was some evil going
forward; but the wench did not mind her; but led the band through two or three
doors, and entered the room where was two or three young women fast asleep, in
two beds; they had no light, but went feeling about the beds to find the women;
two of them told me, that the first that they perceived, was a hand upon their
shoulder, and a voice saying, by virtue of this, you are my prisoner -- the
first was much surprised, the rest soon understood what was going forward. By
this time they call for a light; but the woman of the house forbid their
lighting a candle there; the negro wench (which it seems was the right hand man
among them) went to a neighbor's house, and got a light, and the officer read
his warrant: but the poor man was something in the case of Beelshazzer, when he
saw the handwriting upon the wall, he trembled so, and in such a surprise,
that he could not read his instrument right; one of the young women was obliged
to tell him. After he had served his warrant, he set keepers over the young
women all night, and so departed, til the morning -- morning being come, the
officer carrys his prisoners before the authority: But, behold! the old
gentleman was sadly surprised, to see a company of girls brought before him;
for it so happened that the justice never read the instrument, that he signed
the night before, and was ignorant of the affair til now. He sent for more
authority to sit in council with him, upon this new surprising business, which
business proved too mighty for them all; for the wicked man that made the
complaint, was no man in law, to prosecute such an action; else likely they
would have made something out; (I am prone to think had that authority
understood their work as God's ministers, to screen and protect the innocent,
and punish the wicked, they would have frowned upon that wicked man, and all
that was aiding and helping with him) but nothing of this nature; but vastly to
the contrary, for they kept them innocent persons months exercised in the
affair, before they dropped the action -- adjourned the court, and adjourned it,
til it died. But besides all this, this same wicked man (not having answered
his malicious designs) forms two more vexatious lawsuits, against those same
innocent persons, one for theft, another for slander, makes one of them a (...)
cause, through their craft, in order to cast the charge upon these seperates;
and in the midst of this wickedness, he is apprehended for breaking the king's
peace, threatening the lives of his neighbors; laying violent hands on one of
these young women, and blood came out of her mouth and nose, and she swore the
peace against him -- yet he is suffered to carry on his design, to his mind, in
some measure; for he entered his action with that authority which it is likely
suited him to a notch; that wanted no evidence but what was in his own breast,
to condemn the poor seperates. But it so happened in kind providence that they
got a lawyer from New Haven, that was doubtless helped by God, to plead the
cause of the innocent. Otherwise it is likely, the court would have condemned
them. But after the authority had kept these prisoners in custody four days,
(if I don't mistake) and treated them with all contempt, scorn and slander, the
court was adjourned twice, and in the close nothing was made out against these
persons, although this wicked man got near twenty evidences; but the court, by
his own declaration had more in his breast against the prisoners, than all them
evidences, and so made a bill of cost against them, which was above 3 pounds.
These seperates did not understand the law, about the charge, and they
understood that their antagonist had other actions planning against them, and
they was satisfied how they should go before that authority, and see no end to
charges arising: therefore desired some space of time to consider of it -- but
the authority would allow them none; but ordered them forthwith to prison; it
being some in the evening, the constable put them under keepers that night, and
the next day carried them off to New Haven, in two horse carts, a man and four
young women, (but it happened so that they had no halter about their necks) and
put them in prison, where they lay four days, in which time they found several
friends, who gave them advice, and by engaging to pay the charges, which was
about five pounds lawful, they was released from prison, etc. I have given but
a short sketch of the affair -- it would contain some sheets of paper to give
the whole. I shall leave the reader to judge for himself, about the whole
affair, and think for myself; and I think such a practice brings a blot and a
scandal upon the whole colony, to put, or suffer such men to be in public
authority, whose practice cannot be equaled a this side the Spanish
inquisition. For honest sober persons, that never have hurt, nor havs no design
to harm any body, to be seized at midnight, asleep in their beds, and dealt
with in form and manner, as has been done to them; for nothing else but
worshipping God, as they really think is according to his mind and will: also
for their endeavoring to live according to the direction in God's word. I
soberly think, if such a practice is allowed, or such authority is kept in
their posts in this colony, the name or Connecticut will stink in the nostrails
of all true protestants through this kingdom, and as far as such conduct is
known, in the reformed nations. Pray think, how does such a practice comport
with the charter grant, that requires a religious and peaceable government, to
seize the king's peaceable subjects at midnight, asleep in their bed's, for
nothing but worshipping God? But you may excuse yourselves and say wicked men
has done it. Be it so; but do not let us lay more to them than belongs to them
-- take away the wicked constitution, and wicked men will have no such a
foundation to work upon. What if a grand juror, a lawful officer, had entered
the complaint, what is there in the constitution to hinder him doing his office
at midnight, any more than at midday; if he will risk his own credit, the
constitution will bear him out as well at midnight, as at noonday.

3dly. I think it well becomes the honorable assembly, according to your
character, and dignity, to be much in searching the scriptures, which are able
to furnish you with all needed wisdom, to examine those laws, which are already
enacted, and more especially, in as much as your oath obliges you to act
according to God's word; and what laws is not for the health, peace and
prosperity of the whole, or repugnant to the word of God, pray let them be
repealed; and enact what may be wanting for the health and happiness of the
whole.

4thly. That you look well to the qualifications of those men that you put into
office, as you desire a reformation to be carried on in the colony; that they
be men sober, solid, excelling in government, firmness of judgment and
resolution. Indeed the rule requires them to be fearers of God. 2 Samuel 2.3.3.
The God of Israel said, the rock of Israel spoke to me. He that rules over
men, must be just, ruling in the fear of God.

5thly. Since the Most High has invested you with the power of putting in civil
officers, to put into execution the good and wholesome laws of this colony; then
I should think it remains with you carefully to inspect all such, and see that
they faithfully attend to their work. I am much mistaken if there is not a
great want here. Justices of the peace, and grand jurors, with other officers,
are sadly wanting in the faithful discharge of their office, of being a terror
to evil doers. I am very slow to believe, that profane swearing, drunkenness,
uncleanness, revelings and card playing, and so much bad company in taverns,
lightness and vanity upon the sabbath, would so prevail in our land, if
officers stood where they are called of the most high to be; for the Lord is
uniform in his working, and would graciously grant them that aid and divine
solemnity and power, as would strike the wicked with dread and fear of just
punishment; so that our officers would soon become a terror to evil doers, and
a praise and encouragement to those that do well, of any denomination. For my
part I despair of these evils being removed till there is a reformation in
those officers, (and heads of families reform) or others that will be faithful
put in their places, unless the merciful Lord Jesus pour out his spirit
marvelously upon the land, and that will effect the work to purpose.
Nevertheless, (if God withhold) duty belongs to every one faithfully to
discharge in their relation and place, leaving the success with him that
righteously enjoins duty etc.

6thly. And with all humility I would offer a word of caution and warning, to
such rulers as are in an unconverted state; doubtless there is some of our
rulers that are not converted, made holy in heart -- Christ says, that by
their fruits ye shall know them. Matt. 7.16. It is evident that some of them
bring forth fruits that show they are not holy sanctified men, yet they may
under God, by improving their authority by common grace, be a blessing to
mankind in the execution of civil justice, and protecting the church and people
of God, (not lording it over God's heritage.) Cyrus although ignorant of God, was
a wonderful instrument for good to the church of God; and Jehu did well in
executing that which was right in God's sight, for which God see fit to honor
him with placing his children upon the throne, to the fourth generation; but
all the while not holy at heart. 2 Kings 10. But alas! I fear many of you come
greatly short of Jehu, and do the work of the Lord negligently, and instead of
having the temporal blessings of heaven, procure to yourselves and family, the
curse and frowns of heaven. Jer. 48.10. It is justly expected that civil rulers
since they are God's ministers, and are called to act for a holy God of
inflexible justice; that above all men among us, (excepting ministers of the
gospel) ought to set the best example in all things in their lives and
conversations. But it is, and should be for a lamentation, that so many of them
are light and carnal men that live in the spirit of the world, which is enmity
to God, Romans 8.7. also are mockers, and scoffers at the work, spirit and power
of God, that scorn and hate the subjects of God's free grace; will such be
entreated and prayed in Christ's name, seriously to consider how far you act
out of your character, as acting for God; 1 Cor. 10.32. setting the case that
your neighbors are deluded. Ought you not to have bowels of pity for them, and
use scripture and reason as proper means to convince them of their errors? for
it is a shocking consideration to think of persons perishing in their
delusions, and to make a mock at such, must be most unreasonable and sinful.
But if it should so happen that these persons mocked, should be the true
fearers of God, the favorites of heaven; How unreasonable is it then, to treat
them in such an irreligious manner? all such would do well to consider how they
shall be able to meet that omnipotent being, that will ever long, avenge all
the injuries done to his redeemed ones. Pray read for your conviction, Psalm
105, 14.15. Zec. 2, 8. Isa. 26 chap. and chap. 28, 14 to 22. and chap. 51,
21.22.23. Mal. 4, 1. Acts, 13, 40.41. and know unless you are brought to
repentance unto life, and with Saul, to love that religion which you now hate
and mock; you must die like men, although in outward dignity you be exalted as
Gods, Psalm 82. and be brought down to hell; Isa. 14, 9. May the good Lord in
his abundant mercy, prevent, and make you partakers of his rich and free
pardoning grace. But by this time some of my readers may object and say, that I
am a poor deluded creature not worth regarding. Answer. However that be, it is
(as I trust and believe) the truth of God that I hold forth, and that cannot be
deluded; and if I am not worth any regard, the truth that I have held forth is
worth all men's regarding. Further you may say, that I am in a harsh party
censorious spirit: if that should be so, sure I am, the truth is meek and free
from party; yea far from censoriousness, and never wants charity; and I humbly
believe, however I may be wanting of a right temper and frame of mind, it is
the truth that I have held forth in the main, and that will never be found
wanting; therefore I beg liberty to be out of the question, and let truth and
conscience settle things right; then my desires will be answered.

7thly. A word of counsel and caution, to such rulers as are serious and godly.
As I find myself concerned for your honor and true happiness, I would hope it
may apoligize for me in addressing of you in the following manner.

First. Pray be entreated (by one that is unequal and most unworthy) to
consider the great advantage you are put into, to do much for the advancement
of the Redeemer's kingdom, your advancement to high honor and seats of
dignity, should lay you sensibly under the most strong bonds and obligations
possible, to improve all your knowledge, gifts and grace, for the advancement
of Christ's despised cause. I think it well becomes you to get a right
understanding of the sacred rights and privileges of the church and people of
God. Also that natural right of thinking and choosing in religious matters,
which all mankind are born into the world with. You well know that when the
free spirit of God takes the government of your hearts, and you are brought
near to your great Lord and master, in sensible union and communion, and your
thoughts turn upon the deplorable state of your christless friends and
neighbors, your bowels yearn with compassion for their precious immortal
souls; when it is thus with you, then you want to use no weapons for their
help, but the sword of the spirit which is the word of God; scripture and
reason with your strong cries to God for mercy for them, is the utmost that you
are disposed to use for their help. Although you are invested with the civil
sword you well know that the civil power cannot convince the understanding, nor
change the heart, is entirely useless in religious matters. Surely then it will
be for your highest honor, to exercise all your abilities, and improve all your
influence and power to exalt Jesus Christ, lord of conscience, the alone king
and head of his church and people. Jesus Christ is infinitely worthy of your
utmost attention and care, to hold up his royal and spotless robes, which if I
mistake not, this generation is trampling under foot -- despising the gracious
influence of his holy spirit, scorning the spotless righteousness of the Son of
God, which only can make the soul comely, beautiful and happy. Also that you
exercise yourselves to the utmost in all scriptural measures, to set the royal
majestic crown upon Christ's dignified and exalted head; which if I mistake
not, the religious constitution of this colony has (as much as in it lies)
taken off; or in other words, banished him from his rightful seat of government
in Connecticut. Therefore you ought to see to it, you that are godly rulers
(and in a mistical sense, near akin to your spiritual David) that you are not
the last to invite and bring the king back to his house, and rightful seat of
government in his church, etc. 2 Samuel 19, 11, 12. Furthermore, I would humbly
and earnestly request of your honors, that you use your utmost endeavors to
cast up the free gospel highway, through this colony, that the ransomed of the
Lord may return to Zion with songs of praise; and that every let and hinderance
may be removed out of the way of your exalted Lord or Savior; so that he may
march through the length and breadth of this colony, without interruption from
men's inventions or traditions, and gather churches when and where he sees fit
in his wisdom, and organize the same, with such officers as he has described in
his written word, fitted and qualified therefore. Suffer me to acquaint you from
certain scriptural knowledge, that Jesus Christ has a dear spouse, that he has
betrothed to himself in righteousness, bought with his own precious blood, here
in this colony, that is under persecution and oppression, which this book has
sufficiently shown. Therefore it is your business as God's ministers in the
civil kingdom, to appear for her relief; yet it ill becomes you to use the
civil sword in the affairs of Christ's kingdom, which is spiritual; but it well
becomes you to use it for to break the arms of the oppressors, and let the
oppressed go free. Jer. 21, 12. Psalm. 72.4. This your righteous Lord and
Master, will require at your hands; these churches have improved the best of
their wisdom, (placing Jesus Christ the only Lord and head of his church) to
get relief, and all without success. Wherefore I think it is high time that you
show yourselves in your practice, ministers of God so. Zion's good; and if you
rightly apply yourselves to your work, the strong, fervent, and constant
prayers of the Godly of every profession, will much more than countervail the
mocks and scoffs of the proud and haught, which you must expect to meet with,
if you are faithful in the great and important trust committed to you. Pray
mind your Lord's caution, Mark 8, 34, to the end. And let none of these things
move you from moving forward, for a glorious reformation in church and state.

Secondly. Be persuaded to wake up to purpose, from a due concern to glorify
and serve the Lord in your day and generation; and stand in the civil kingdom
where the God of Justice has assigned you your lot, and labor to get much
acquaintance with God in his exalted greatness, majesty, power and purity,
which is suited to fortify your minds with suitable courage and holy boldness
in your work, forthwith draw out the sword of civil justice out of the sheath,
and let it be furbished and made bright for execution; hold it daily in your
hands, and as occasion serves, thrust it into the bowels of growing vice, sin
and immorality; and I firmly believe there would soon be an alteration in our
towns for the better, and may the Most high God, grant a united agreement in
all civil officers of every rank and order, to move forward in his holy fear
and divine wisdom, for a reformation throughout our colony and land; the praise
shall be given to God alone, and the peace and comfort of it be enjoyed by the
people, and you that are the happy instruments of it through free grace, be
rewarded with the blessings of time and eternity.

8thly. That I may be quit of the blood of all men, I must warn unconverted
ministers of every profession, to wake up, before the avenger of blood overtake
you. What men upon the earth have more to answer for than unconverted
ministers? some of whom have the blood of hundreds cleaving to them --
miserable, presumptious wretches, who have forced themselves into the ministry,
for a maintenance, and a purse of honor, or some other selfish motive! Perfect
wisdom has drawn your character all over the scriptures; read it in the old
testament and new. Isa. 46.10.11.12. Jer. 23. chap. Ezekiel. 13 chap. and 34.
Micah 3 chap. Mat. 7.15 to 23. chap. 15.13, 14. John 10, 1 to 14. Rev. 2.2. You
are called foxes, dumb dogs, thieves, robbers, wolves, liars which come to
steal and kill. -- You plead much for a line of succession, down from the
apostles: but your idea and application is corrupt; yet your proper line is
easily traced in the word of God and church history, down to Christ's day, an
uninterrupted line. Therefore read your character, in the characters of your
predecessors, in which you may see your own faces, Mat. 23. here is your
picture drawn, not by a poor separate (who you disdain in your hearts, as
Goliath of Gath, did David) but by the Son of God, whose flaming jealous eye
looks through and through all your sophistry and false glosses, that you use to
deceive the people. Christ has given you your proper name, and assigned you
your just doom, in the 33 ver. Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye
escape the damnation of hell? You are called serpents, because of the craft,
guile and deceit you use to delude the people under your care; using all the
art and craft that you are masters of, to make them believe that the work of
God, is the work of the devil; or if you cannot get along with so rank a hold,
you will give some faint, hypocritical acknowledgement of it; but the
instruments improved in it are disorderly, etc. A viper, because if the most
high God sends his Holy Spirit to convince and convert sinners, and call them
out from your dead, dull, blind ministration, or life-less reading, instead of
preaching, then you will vent out your venom, spite and malice against the
spirit, work, and people of God, and weary out your sober sort of hearers, with
reading about delusions, and false seducing teachers, claming against the
spirit and power of religion. Poor blind guides! that from your first entering
your grammar, to your becoming lords over societies, and masters of large
fleeces, every degree of advancement is suited in the policy of satan, to call
forth every spark of pride, that is in you by nature, that by the time you have
been settled a few years, you bear a nearer resemblance to lucifer, than you do
the humble ministers of Jesus Christ; and unless you repent a repentance unto
life, you must have the most aggravated damnation of any men living. May the
merciful and almighty God, that met a mad, persecuting Saul, meet you in his
great mercy, and put forth his conquering power, and bring down the pride of
your hearts, and save your souls from the dreadful hell that now awaits you,
whilst in your sins.

9thly. I beg liberty to use freedom and unbosom my pained heart, to such as
are converted ministers, in the consociated churches. Your Lord, and my divine
Master, allows me to address you by way of entreating you, since you are
elders; therefore, pray take into close consideration, how it was with you in
years past, when the Spirit of Christ dwelt and governed daily in you; what
divine peace you had with God, and the dear saints! what a spirit of prayer and
divine etraction, and outgoings of soul to God! Indulged by heaven at times,
to get very near, sensibly near to God in prayer, to ask, as it were, what you
would, and through free grace it was done for you. What sensible views of future
and eternal things! How sweet and sensible was the love of Christ upon your
hearts at times, and present and real was the terrors of God's law! Both which
animated your souls in the great and important work, that you was entirely
engaged in. How did the cries and entreaties of the starved saints and earnest
invitations of awakened sinners, take fast hold of your minds, and suitably
effect your hearts; when upon their urgent invitations, you could once in a
while leave your few sheep, with the keeper of Israel, and out into the field
of the gospel, to feed Christ's sheep and lambs, and to fish for souls; not
with a bundle of dry sermons, wrote out every sentence and word, that your own
wisdom and gifts had formed; no, whatever you might have wrote at times, you
had the Spirit's help lead and aid in the inditing, and when you improved, your
mind lay open to the holy Spirit's further aid, its quickening and leading
influences, that when new matter presented to your understanding which you had
neither penned down, nor premeditated; you freely surrendered your powers to
the Spirit's light, lead and power. Romans 6.16. chapter 10.15. Furthermore you never
regarded society lines, nor ministers, as a foundation of action. If when you
was invited to preach, in this or that society, the minister consented, and the
meeting house open, you rejoiced therein; but if not, it hindered not, for some
private house was prepared, or barn, or horse-block, or the shade of some tree,
and the gospel which Christ gave you, was as sweet and precious to you and the
hearers, as in a meeting house; whilst you was subjected to Christ, in the
teaching, leading, sanctifying influences of his spirit. You regarded not the
religious constitution of this colony in your daily practice. And some of you
in my hearing said, civil rulers had nothing to do to make laws about religion.
Therefore for a short time you went on in a scriptural line of duty, doing the
work of the day, in the day, preaching sometimes day and night, and every day
in the week, in some special seasons of the out-pourings of God's Spirit; and
when you came (...) on Saturday evening, had no time to study nor write, you
neither picked up an old sermon, nor went to change with another minister: But
your prayer, strong and constant cry, was to God, that he who called you into
the work, would graciously condescend to furnish you with suitable matter for
your great work. You improving the little time you had, in a way of duty;
searching the scriptures, meditation and prayer, and the kind Lord has led your
minds to some suitable portion of God's word; you following the light and lead
of the Holy Spirit. Truth has opened to your understanding, sufficient, with
your trust in God for a solid foundation of action, for you see doubtless, that
preaching is the gift of God; the Lord works in and by your rational powers and
faculties, by the power of his spirit. Sometimes it pleased the Lord to give
you an heart effecting sight of his dread majesty, and lay death and hell as it
were naked in your sight; at other times to discover his high, deep and
boundless mercy, and ravish your souls with a view of his divine glory, etc.
Thus in short, I am ready to think, your former experience, witnesses to the
substance of this observation, in which time, you and your unconverted brethren
in the ministry, was at odds, and meet in two companies, as much as we and they
are two; you had no share in their effections or pulpits; then we poor laymen.
You could escape the lash of their scoffs and mocks, no more than we now do;
and they remain the same men (most of them) give no scriptural evidence of
being converted, and made holy in heart; but remain still haters of the holy
Spirit's work and operation; and you and they have got together again, (to
appearance) easy and quiet in one scheme and practice. And this, this dear
sirs, is a great stumbling block to thousands, and is too high for me to
account for. If you are now workers together with the Lord; pray call to mind
these passages of scripture, which doubtless you took special notice of in the
day when your names was cast out as evil. See Mat. 10 chapter John 15.16, to the
end. chapter 16, and 17. 1 Cor. 2. chapter 2 Cor. 6.14, to the end. 1 John 4, 4, 5, 6.
ch, 5.19.20, Gal. 4.29. 2 Timothy 3. 12. These scriptures in a very striking
manner divides between Christ's followers and and the world's followers, or
between them that live in the rule of God's word, and them that do not, plainly
showing, that their is no agreement or fellowship between them. I think you
ought to take it into close consideration, how or whence it is, that you and
they are in such fellowship together; whilst they remain enemies to Christ and
his cause; this ought not to pass without a right settlement. I am obliged to
think, that you have let down your watch, and have said a confederacy, where
your worthy Lord and Master says there should be none. Isa. 8.12. Also I think
you disregard your Lord's direction, Jer. 15, 19, 20. Therefore thus says the
Lord -- and if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my
mouth: let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them. Pray observe,
you have not taken the precious from the vile. You admit into church
fellowship, unqualified persons, and so have forced us out from among you, for
you have little or no gospel discipline among you, and the gifts and graces of
God's Spirit. Romans 12.6, 7, 8. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. Your church members despise and
reject; also you have refused to divide between wicked rulers and such as are
godly, and have kept back, and not declared the whole truth, to let the rulers
know where they have gone out of their work, as God's ministers for our good;
and enacted laws, which (doubtless) you know are repugnant to the word of God.
Had you stood as the valliant of Israel, as the Lord's faithful heralds in your
pulpits, showing the rulers where they missed their work, as God's civil
ministers, how know yet but that you might have been happily instrument^^ (...)
turning your hearts to God. Jer. 23.22. Also your practice in taking into the
ministry, unconverted men, or at least them that you knew to your satisfaction
give no scriptural evidence of that work of God's Spirit upon their hearts,
which you know all men must have that are made holy in heart. And from the
acquaintance that you have had with some of your brethren in the ministry, for
years in conversation and hearing them perform their service; I doubt not but
you think in the uprightness of your hearts, that they are yet unconverted. And
if so, what a sad, sad case is this, when the poor creatures are leading their
flocks down to hell! for so Christ settles the point. Mat. 15.14. You holding
your peace in such a distressing and dangerous case, is what has filled my
heart with pain for you: and how you can be quit from blood guiltiness, is
beyond me to say. Yet it is easy to say by your practice of uniting all
together, the righteous and the wicked. you forfeit your right to God's
gracious presence, in your work. Mat. 28.20. Jer. 15, 19; or of being honored
of God, to be his mouth to his people. Again, with all humility, suffer me once
more to entreat you to consider, how will you be able to answer for your
practice to your Lord, when he says, but return not thou unto them: and you
right in the face of this prohibition, have joined with the dark, blind, formal
professors, and unconverted ministers, who are heart enemies to our dear Lord
and master, who hate Christ and the manner of his working. It appears to me, if
you see your own practice in scripture light, your mouths would be forever
stopped, from faulting us that have conscientiously discented from you; not
from any dislike to your persons; but from your unscriptural practice, that we
might keep a chaste conscience to our only Lord and Redeemer. Wherefore pray be
persuaded to look carefully into these things, that you may see what is amiss,
and repent, and turn to God, and the rule of his word; and move forward in holy
boldness for a reformation; get where your works will not be burnt up, (1 Cor.
3.13, 14, 15.) and you able to stand through free grace, where you can bid your
coming Lord, welcome to do his whole will to this generation.

10thly. I would address those that are christians in the consociated churches,
in a few lines. Pray be persuaded to wake up to purpose, and seriously consider
what a church of Christ is, and the qualifications of her members and officers,
as they are described in the word of God. Also how they are united together and
what their work is; then consider whether your churches bear that character, or
not; and how it comes to pass (...) your ministers become your lords instead of
being your servants. And whence is it, that your churches oppress, persecute
and imprison their innocent neighbors, that have done them no wrong? And as
you are in covenant in church relation, I think it well becomes you seriously
to consider what the scripture says to you. 2 Cor. 6.14 to the end, and see
that you get where you may meet your Lord without surprise or confusion. How
you put up with your ministers conduct toward you, is beyond me to say; for
some of them flattered you, that they were congregationalists, and held with
you in principles, till they got settled, and got you fast bound in their iron
fetters, and made you slaves, then they practice in the constitution; and you
brethren have got so stuned and infeabled by their craft, that you neglect your
great duty of bringing your ministers up to the rule of God's word, which would
soon discover their deceit. If you begin a labor with them, you being so
entangled with them, ten to one, if they do not circumvent you in your design,
and prevent you getting a church meeting, to consider things in the rule; or if
you press things so hard, as to get a church meeting, the minister likely will
work his scheme so as nothing can be done in the church (where all matters
should be settled) but carry the case to the consociation, and then brethren
you may depend upon it, your minister will go off with flying colors, and you
must fall in the rear. For if he has delivered heresy, in the pulpit, the
council will likely work it so, as to make it palatable with the body of the
society; or if their be immoral practice found with the minister, the venerable
council can put forth their compulsive power, and draw up a confession for the
minister, and force him to own it, and the church to accept it, and so think
they have done pretty well -- and nothing done in the mind of God: Yet they
have gained their designed end; for after the matter has rested, so as the
minister has got a little credit, they will dismiss him, and off he goes to
deceive another people, etc. If my reader is dissatisfied with this
observation; inquire for things of this nature at Middletown, Middle-field,
Marlborough, Turkey Hills and Sharon.
To return. The Most High God speaks to you, my brethren, as you may hear, and
see. Isa. 8. ver. 11 to 20. Rev. 18, 4.2 Cor. 6.17. If you will hear and obey
the voice of God, well -- and if not, I am quit of the evil that is likely to
overtake you, in your sinful confederacy.

11thly. A word to those that are in high esteem of this religous constitution.
Pray consider that you are imperfect as well as others, and possibly you have
hitherto mist in your opinion; therefore be persuaded to search the scriptures,
and take a review of your constitution, and carefully read this book for your
help, and likely you may find occasion to alter your mind etc. But you that
will close up your eyes against scripture and reason, and in pride and
superstition reject the light offered to you in this performance, you shall
bear your own punishment; I am henceforth quit of your blood, that shall be
upon your own head, for I believe the righteous and just Judge of quick and
dead, is near to plead the controversy between the separate churches, and the
ungodly, persecuting, oppressive constitution of this colony; wherefore it
should concern you my dear fellow men, without delay to prepare to meet the God
of strict impartial justice, who is dressed in vengeance, coming forth to meet
those that despise and reject his kingly government, and refuse submission to
his right and equal commands. Luke 19, 27.

12thy. A word to my brethren in this reformation, that have refused to pay
rates to society ministers, and now pay them. Dear brethren, remember what
David said, Psalm. 141, 5. Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness
etc. And now suffer me in love to use freedom with you, for your paying is
grievous to me, and stumbling to your neighbors; wounding to the cause of
Christ, tending to harden poor sinners in their sins; seriously consider! Ought
you not to be consistent with yourselves in your christian practice? and so
tell your neighbors, that when you refused to pay your rates, that you was
deluded, and got wilful, and acted in a party against the good rule of
supporting the ministers by rates, that you are heartily sorry for your past
conduct, and now promise to be obedient to the good constitution. Or if you
acted in the fear of the Lord when you refused to pay and went to prison, some
of you to keep a chaste conscience rather than to pay, being instructed from
the word of God, that the gospel ought to be supported by freely contributing
for that end, without civil, powers forcing away men's estates, or imprisoning
their bodies; you having soberly dissented from the constitution and worshipped
God else where, as you thought agreeable to his word, and chose to be passive
submitting your bodies and estates to the disposal of providence. Had peace in
your conscience and the divine presence of Jesus Christ, took joyfully the
spoiling of your goods, knowing in yourselves that ye have in heaven a better
and an enduring substance; Heb. 10, 34. in which time you loved Christ's cause
better than your wordly interest. Observe brethren if this was your case! (as I
suppose it was) then I think for you to be honest men consistent with
yourselves, you ought to tell your brethren and neighbors, (that your contrary
practice has stumbled) that you have shamefully declined in religion, and lost
a sense of the worth of precious never dying souls, and the sweet presence of
Christ, that filled your hearts with holy fear of sinning against God, when you
refused to pay etc. But now you have got wordly, careless and covetous, and do
not love to have your goods spoiled, and pay what they unjustly demand to
prevent it; but you are obliged to pay it grudgingly with a coveting mind, far,
very far from any true joy in the whole affair; your practice in paying your
rates will not admit of any joy in God, which if duly considered, is suited to
convict you that your paying is wrong, if you would not shut your eyes against
the light, for you should know all that God requires may be done with delight
in God, and peace of conscience and good will to men; therefore I think that
you ought to let your poor neighbors know, that you pay your rates through
coveteousness, that you love your estates better than their souls, or the cause
of Christ, refusing to bear Christ's sweet cross. If you would be thus honest,
possibly you might offer some conviction to your neighbors for their good, for
they would know where you be. But your refusing to pay some years back, and
saying you acted duty or was called of God so to do, and now tamely submit and
pay etc. I think is a flat contradiction in your practice, which lies with you
to reconcile. But you are excusing yourselves, and saying it is not a
censurable evil to pay, there is no warrant to deal with a church member etc.
Pray brethren seriously consider what is in your words and practice! you grant
it to be an evil, but not a censurable evil to pay; so that if your credit is
not hurt, nor you brought under discipline, you may do what evil you please,
(almost) to save your idols and temporal interest. But dearly beloveds, is this
a mark of a child of God, or fruits that the godly bring forth? no surely, very
far from it, what a holy and jealous God hates; suffer me my brethren to use
freedom with you, and to be in my gift and not in Zion, (which is to be close
and plain) therefore I testify if you live in the known indulgence of any evil
in your hearts, which no mortal eye may see, you are not fit to be a member of
the church millitant, and much less fit for the church triumphant. But what do
you mean brethren, by saying a censurable evil? is there any sin or evil that
is known to be so, and indulged and lived in, that is not censurable? if so, be
so kind as to let me know what that sin is, and where Christ has given the
indulgence; for I freely confess, I never learned Christ, nor his religion so.
I freely own, that we are very imperfect, whilst in this life, and come short
daily and hourly; and sin has too much influence in us. But then the godly are
far from indulging any sin, in heart or practice -- are constantly at war, more
or less against all sin and evil, in heart, lip or life, all their days are in
the field of battle, waring against all sin. Read these scriptures, Romans 7.24.
1 Cor. 5.6.7.8. Mat. 7.20 to 27. Lu. 9.57, to the end. Mat. 10.37.38.39. 1 John
3.17, to 21. chapter 5.17.18. Labor brethren to get a true or right understanding
of what these scriptures contain, and what it is to be truly godly; for I am
jealous that there is too many that are externally in this reformation, that
bear the name of seperates, and church members, that never was separated from
an immoderate love to the world, or their heart idols; never made holy in
heart, and when weighed in the balance, will be found wanting. Again, I am not
without fears, that the devil is laying a plot, to blow up these reforming
churches, in the land, even upon this principle, and practice, viz. that there
are some sins and evils which may be indulged in churches. I readily grant that
there is a great deal of labor, patience and forbearance to be used, with
persons ignorant, that their practice is evil, when in fact it is. But when a
person knows that either his words or actions is evil, contrary to the
scriptures, and the person be indulged in his evil, or wrong way, because his
sin is small, this is beyond me, and I believe beyond the scriptures too, for
they require us to be holy in all manner of conversation. 1 Pet. Also, whether
therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. 1
Cor. 10, 31. That you may know how strict I understand the laws of Christ's
house to be, take my mind in the following supposition, (as thus) supposing a
church member is apt to jest or joke in the spirit of the world, (which the
world calls civil) and he be reproved therefore, and retract it and own it
wrong; if he should fall seven times in a day, and return again, and show
repentance, (Luke 17, 4.) we are bound to forgive him; but if he should jest
but once, and justify himself in it, as being but a common infirmity, or small
evil, that ought to be indulged in this imperfect state; this I testify lays
foundation for that labor, that should not end, till the person is bro't to
repentance, or excluded the holy fellowship of the church. This my principle
may be too strict for some of my readers; but likely you will all grant in this
striking light, that where a person commits facts that show enmity to God, and
stands to justify himself therein; that in such a case, after due labor, he
ought to be excluded from the church. Therefore, read for your conviction, Romans
8.7. Because the carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to
the law of God, neither indeed can be. James 4.4. The friendship of the world,
is enmity with God. Here it is plain, that the spirit that leads a man to jest
with the carnal world, strikes at the whole government of Christ's house,
cannot be subject to Christ's laws; but must be cast out, etc. Again. It is
generally allowed, that he that practices contrary to the word of God, and
allows himself so to do, is censurable. This I think is the case of every man,
that has seen the scripture method of supporting the gospel by freely
contributing therefore, so refused to pay the society minister's rate, and now
pay it; such a person's practice is contrary to the following scriptures. Isa.
8.11. 12. Here the Lord says, walk not in the way of this people, saying, say
ye not, a confederacy, to all them to whom this people shall say a confederacy;
but you that pay, say (at least in your practice) no, Lord, it will not do now
to follow your directions, if I do, they will waste my estate; I must walk in
their way for the present, and confederate with them, in paying the rate, they
demand, till I am set off by them. Ver. 20. To the law and to the testimony, --
the Most High requires us all to walk; but your practice says not so Lord, I
must comply with men's inventions, and traditions, to save my substance, etc.
But I should note here, that there is no must in the case, only what comes from
a distrust of God, and a covetous heart. You say, if you do not pay, they will
waste your estates; you speak presumtuously, what you do not know, for it has
often happened to them, that endeavor to walk uprightly with God in this case,
and practice their principles, that the collector has been restrained from
taking any thing; also when they have been suffered to go forward, hardened in
their sinful practice, and strained their neighbors goods, or imprisoned their
bodies, some tender consciences have been waked up to see the injustice and
oppression done to their neighbors, that they have paid their rates for them,
so none of their goods have been wasted; or it may be possible, if not the
case, that the Devil out of policy, when he sees his kingdom shaking, may
influence his instruments to club together and pay the seperates rates, in
order to save his scheme and kingdom, from shaking to pieces.

My goods have been strained away, and carried off, and kept awhile, and
returned again, without any concern or care of mine, one way or other. Through
which means (I suppose) my substance and all the flocks in the society rested
quiet for years together. But had I been so foolish, and inconsistent with
myself, and the word of God, as to have paid the collector's demands; I should
doubtless have opened the door for the oppressor to have wasted the substance
of the flock. Again, see Phil. 3.16. Nevertheless whereunto we have already
attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same things. You
brethren that refused to pay from the knowledge of the scripture rule of
supporting the gospel and now pay, you go against this precept, and in your
practice, neither walk by the same rule, nor mind the same things, and for no
other reason only to save your estates, or unrighteous mammon. That in your own
imagination, the scriptures are not to be regarded in this case, for your
wisdom has found out a better way, much more prudent and saving, to preserve
your substance etc. But know brethren of a certainty, that the scriptures shall
not fall to the ground unfulfilled, Luke 17.33. Again see Gal. 2.18. For if I
build again the things which I destroyed, I make myself a transgressor. It
appears to me brethren, that Paul was more honest and upright than you be; he
reasons justly according to the true nature of things; but you have got wiser
(in your imagination) than the inspired Apostle, and have found out a way to
build again the things that you destroyed, in word, principle and practice; and
hold yourselves innocent. You ought to remember how you have acted in years
past, when some of you sensibly loved the Lord, his cause, and the salvation of
souls, above all things created. What prayers you put up to God, that this
wicked oppressive scheme of supporting a pretended gospel by force, (wasting
men's estates, and imprisoning their bodies for that end) might be detected and
brought down, when your hearts was in some measure right with God, and your
practice agreeable thereto; then you gave this oppressive scheme a blessed
shock, and If you had kept in love with Christ's sweet and worthy cross, and
practiced steadfast in your principles; it is likely to me that kind providence
would find out some way of relief by this time. But now by your paying, you
sink and deny your former testimony, harden your poor neighbors, that begin to
wake up, and their consciences to scorch them for their cruel oppression
toward you; they improve your paying to heal their chaffed consciences, for
now there is no goods wasted, nor violence used, for you pay their demands
yourselves, and it is got to be brave times in such societies, where there is
no public witness held up, that the gospel should not be made merchandise of.
But pray brethren think, think of the dreadful consequence of your practice.
You take your substance which Christ has purchased with his precious blood, and
put into your stewardship, and charged you to improve the same to his glory,
and give the same to support unconverted ministers, (which doubtless is mostly
the case) whom the scripture calls wolves, dogs, thieves, robbers, which steal,
kill and destroy. Joh. 10.1.10. Mat. 7.15. Yea, properly speaking, such are
soul murderers, leading their flocks down to hell. Mat. 15.14. Now you take
your substance, which the Lord challenges as his, to be otherwise improved to
his glory, and pay with your own hand, or under disguise, let your wives or
children pay to support all this dreadful, soul-ruining practice. Dear
brethren, labor above all things to get near to God, and take a view of your
conduct in scripture light, perhaps hell is peopled through your means of
paying to support blind guides, for such miserable ministers, if they get the
money, care not who goes to hell, or what becomes of souls, when their selfish,
covetous ends are answered.

Again. You are told, to be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer
and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your request be made known unto God.
Phil. 4.6. But when you pay, you go abreast to this blessed direction, for it
is anxious care, sinful fear of losing your substance, makes you pay. You are
much without a spirit of prayer, and cannot bless God for your paying, because
you pay grudgingly and cannot pay otherwise. Mat. 7.18. There is no
thanksgiving concerned in the whole affair. But if you stand steadfast in the
truth, and refuse to pay, or have any concern with the collector, more or less,
only to hold up truth to him, in meekness and love; then through free grace you
can cheerfully and sweetly comply with every part of this blessed direction,
which is worth mountains of gold and silver, and ought to be retained in every
heart as a most valuable, rich treasure, so as to practice the same, as in
Psalm. 119.11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against
thee. Did you submit to the direction here given, you would never pay another
rate; and if all the brethren through the colony, that has come into this
reformation, would from love to God, and the rule the scripture gives to
support the gospel, refuse to pay another rate, I much believe you would in a
few years see some way found out in providence for your relief. Light in this
affair is got so far into the understanding of this generation, that such
oppression followed, would soon shake many a church or society into pieces,
that would presume to practice in it, to drain away the substance of their
neighbors, who stand in no relation with them in religious matters, who differ
from them in many things in principle and practice, it is against the light of
nature, reason and scripture. My daily prayer is, that a just and merciful God
would hasten the final overthrow of this oppressive practice of supporting
religious worship, by rates, force, wasting of goods and prisons. But you that
pay are instruments of keeping back the work of God in this affair, and prop up
that which the Lord would have flung down. Wherefore be entreated to consider
your character, and hear the voice of the Lord to you. Rev. 2.4.5.

13thly. A word to my brethren in the ministry, who are gifted, anointed, and
called to the work by Jesus Christ. Suffer me to address you in the words of
the apostle, Acts 20, 28. Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the
flock, over the which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the
church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. You do well
beloveds, always to keep in mind your great and absolute need of Christ's help,
and that your standing is by faith and fruitful obedience to the whole of
Christ's will, Romans 11, 20. Matt. 28, 20. If you have counted the cost aright
in entering into the ministry, you have counted it as Paul did, see Phili. 3, 7
to 7. chapter 4, 11.12.13. 2 Cor. 6, 3 to 11. Here brethren is your pattern next to
Jesus Christ; and if you copy after this brave hero, who went on undaunted in
his work, and fought the good fight, and kept the says, you will doubtless
find a crown of righteousness provided for you at the end or your faithful
race, as well as for Paul. 2 Timothy 4, 7.8. Whilst we are in the church militant,
we ought always to keep in mind, that the grand adversary of souls is laying
snares for our feet, behind and before; therefore I look upon it quite
necessary for a minister of Christ, to be well acquainted with Satan's devices,
understanding the manner of his working in the false operations that attend a
person void of humility and divine love. The person deluded, lays great
stress upon his feelings, and the impressions upon his mind, neglecting a due
examination from what spirit they come; he can neglect duty here and there, and
commit this fault, and that as suits his mind, and cry grace, free grace; and
in his vain imagination, leave Christ to make up for his misconduct, when the
truth is, the person that has the true operations of the holy spirit, and
obtains pardoning mercy from Jesus Christ, is led to take up his cross and live
a life of self denial, and through Christ's free spirit, engages in all self
mortifying duties required from love to Christ, satisfied in his will, sensible
of his own weakness and inability thereto, ever looking out of himself for
renewed strength from Christ, to perform all the duties required to the glory
and honor of Christ. Again when a person has been snared with Satan's angelick
light, a false spirit and comes to see it, the devil stands ready to catch the
mind with a legal spirit, and fix it down to the letter, and get the person to
be very regular, and as he thinks use a great deal of christian prudence, (when
it is wordly wisdom) which drops a man short of living a life of faith on the
Son of God, daily and hourly looking to the Lord for wisdom, righteousness and
strength; upon which a person will get settled upon his leese, living upon his
graces, light, knowledge and seize, without growing in grace, or getting
further victory over the corruptions and idols of the heart. If a preacher, he
will content himself with light and gifts, in speaking a word of knowledge
without divine love, or the energy of the holy spirit penetrating into the
heart; sanctifying and conforming to God's holy law etc. And if a hearer, he
will content himself with assenting to the truth preached, and when his case is
truly discribed, conscience says truth, truth: yet the person does not wake up
in earnest, to put them truths into practice; he will be pleased in hearing,
but not in pain in his heart, for divine strength to do the will of God; he is
inclined to lay all over upon the minister to do all in public worship, and if
the minister is assisted by the spirit of God, to hold forth the truth clearly
in some demonstration of truth, he is mightily taken therewith; but if duty is
put to him, he is shut up, and pinched in his mind, till he is discharged of
that duty; then he is pretty easy without the presence of God, till some trying
duty presents, then he is tried again. Thus in a legal spirit, backsliders in
heart live and lay a foundation of repentance, from dead works. Heb. 6, 1. And
thus Satan will try upon the right hand and left, to ensnare teachers and
hearers, to turn them aside from living in the life, power, and practice of
pure religion, even that which is pure and undefiled before God and the Father.
These things brethren I hope you well know, and that it is the will of your
Lord and Master, that you take forth the precious from the vile, Jer. 15, 19.
otherwise you have no good foundation to expect to be honored with, being
God's mouth to the people. Be entreated to labor to get a good understanding
of the laws of Christ's house, that the church do not admit into their
communion, unqualified members through your default; that those admitted, live in
some due measure up to their holy profession. Consult the written word of God,
the power and spirituality of it, in all the affairs of Christ's kingdom, that
the wisdom of God might govern in you, (and not your own.) If any of you should
think that I am too rigid in discipline, or any of my principles, it is true I
am as exposed to err as any man; but wasting and destruction seldom comes into
Zion upon this quarter. You brethren do well to take heed that you are not too
slack, and remiss, in those important affairs; wasting and desolations has
overtook the church of God, from age to age, in this quarter; and I am in fears
what will happen to this reformation, if you that are watchmen, do not wake up
in earnest, and die daily to yourselves; declaring the whole counsels of God to
this generation; standing as the valiant of God's spiritual Israel, with the
naked sword of divine truth always in your hand, and with clean garments free
from the blood of all men; which great favor may the Almighty and merciful God
grant for Christ's sake, and Zion's sake, AMEN.

Errors, to be corrected.
Page 4. line 28. for but, read by. P. 44. l. 14. for transporting, r.
transforming. P. 47. l. 15, r. with the Church. P. 56. l. 13. r. Isa. 29.13. P.
59. l. 7. r. out vote the. P. 60. l. 22. for conform, r. and form. P. 63. l.
17. r. 1 Cor. 5, 12. P. 73. l. 9. r. Page III. P. 75. l. 9. r. far worse. P.
85. l. 18. r. heap to. P. 120. l. 26. for much, r. such. P. 126. l. 24. for
Divinity, r. Dignity or Power. P. 133. l. 24. r. that they was. P. 144. l. 21.
r. governing Power. P. 151. l. 15. for God's, r. Men's. P. 153. l. 16. r. Romans
13. P. 158. l. 25. r. from under. P 165. l. 6. r. in the. P. 222. l. 9. r.
haughty. P. 214. l. 18. r. 23.3. P. 223. l. 26 r. Isa. 56.10, 11, 12. P. 229.
l. 2. r. could not. P. 230. l. 31. for your, r. their.

