A BRIEF NARRATION OF THE CAPTIVITY OF Isaac Hollister, Who was taken by the
INDIANS, Anno Domini, 1763.

Written by Himself.

Printed and Sold at the Printing-Office in NEW LONDON.

A brief Narration, etc.
ON the 15th of October 1763, as I was at work with my father, on the banks of
the Susquehannah, the Indians, to the number of 135, came upon us and killed my
father on the spot. My brother Timothy, who was at work about half a mile
distant, underwent the same fate; as did likewise 14 or 15 others, who were at
work in different places.

The Indians, after they had burnt and destroyed all they could, marched off,
and carried me up the Susquehannah river 150 miles, to a town called by them
Wethouooungque; and when we had arrived there, they tied me with a rope about
my neck, and an Indian was ordered to lead me, while others beat me with their
fists: This they continued to do until I can about a quarter of a mile. When I
arrived at one of their huts, they tied me to one of the spars of the hut,
where I remained all that night. The next day they let me loose, but would not
let me go out of their sight.

Here I tarried about three months, in which time I underwent many hardships,
and had like to have famished with hunger and cold, having nothing to cover me
but an old coat and an old blanket, which was almost worn out. My employment
was to fetch wood every day upon my back half a mile, which made me almost
weary of my life. -- At this place was brought a young Dutchman, who was taken
at the same time and place that I was; and when we had convenient opportunity,
we laid our heads together to contrive an escape; to this end we stole every
thing we could without being discovered, and hid it in the hollow of an old log.

It was about the latter end of March, as near as I could judge (for it rained
successively three or four days, which melted away all the snow and brake up
the river) when we had got together about 40 ears of corn, and six cakes of
bread each, about the bigness of an hand. The Dutchman though it it now time for us
to endeavor to make our escape, but I was very averse to his proposal, telling
him it would be better for us to wait till the spring was farther advanced, and
the weather grew a little more warm: that we might endure the severity of the
nights when we should have nothing but the cold ground to rest our limbs on,
and the heavens to cover our almost uncovered bodies; but he was so stiflly
bent in his opinion of going off the first opportunity, that I was obliged to
come into his measures. The next day at noon we were sent after wood at the
usual place, when instead of returning back, we sat out with a design to reach
the nearest English settlement we could. -- We ran all the afternoon till
evening, when we made a stop and built a fire, where we remained during the
night. Early next morning we set out again, but had not gone far before the
cold proved so severe that it froze the ends of my toes, and my mockasins being
very thin and almost worn out, my toes wore off as fast as they froze. This so
far disabled me that it was with great difficulty I could travel, yet we
continued our way until about noon, when unable to go any farther, we stopped and
made a fire, and after we had warmed and refreshed ourselves, we set out again,
and about sun set we arrived at a very thick swamp in which we were securely
covered by the prodigious thickness of the hemlock, with which the swamp
abounded. We made a large fire, and notwithstanding the fatigues of our march,
and the pain that might be expected to arise from my toes being froze, and
being as we aprehended out of danger of any enemy, we rested very comfortably
all night. The next day very early we got on our way again; but the weather was
so cold that we were unable to proceed very far before we were obliged to make
a halt, and to build a fire to keep us from freezing. -- We stayed in this
place two days, when the weather began to moderate to such a degree that we
could pursue our rout with less danger of being overcome with the severity of
the season: Sometimes we traveled all day, at other times but two or three
hours in a day; sometimes we stayed two or three days in a place, although many
times we had tolerable good weather. This remisness began to make me very
uneasy -- I used all the arguments I possibly could with my companion to
persuade him to expedite our escape, but all to no purpose. Sometimes I got
hold of his hand, with a view to force him along, but nothing would move him --
It looks to me very probable, had we made the best use of our shattered limbs,
we might have reached some English fort or settlement before his death. In this
dismal condition I knew not what to do -- leave him I could not, for we had but
one hatchet, and the nights still pretty cold, so that we could not endure them
without a fire. -- Thus we moved on slowly for several days, until all our
provisions were spent: By this time we had arrived at a small creek which
extends its course about S. E. and empties itself into the Susquehannah.

We had not gone far down this creek before we stopped, and built a fire, and sat
down, but were soon surprised at the appearance of an Indian, who came very
near before we discovered each other. He no sooner saw us but he turned short
about, and ran down by the creek; and as soon as he was out of sight, we made
all the haste we could to a hill which lay a little before us, on the south
side of which the snow was all gone and the ground dry, by which means we made
our escape. -- The Indian soon alarmed his companions who lay at a little
distance and pursued us, but the ground being so dry and hard, it was
impossible for them to track us, which made them soon give over pursuing. --
After tarrying on this hill two days, we proceeded on our way, but had nothing
to eat but the bark of trees, on which alone we lived to days, without eating
any thing else. The fourth day after we left this hill we began to grow weary
and faint, but the fear of an enemy banished all hunger from us. We continued
traveling till the seventh day, when we stopped again, when my companion, as I
suppose was overcome with fasting (though he never complained) and began to be
unable to help himself. I nursed him as well as I could. The second day he made
an attempt to go to a spring at a small distance, but was so weak he fell down
several times before he could get there, it was with difficulty he got back
again; after this he never was able to walk any more. -- I know whether he
apprehended his end to be so near, but the third night he died. The afternoon
before his death he said but few words, though I often tried to discourse with
him. In the evening he told me, that if he died first, he would not have me
afraid to eat of his flesh, for I am determined, says he, to eat of yours, if
you should die before me.

And now I was left all alone, stripped of every comfort of life, and knew not
which way to turn myself. I thought the absolute necessity I was in, would
excuse my pursuing the advice he gave me, of eating his flesh as soon as dead:
I went immediately about performing the disagreeable operation, and cut off 5
or 6 pounds of his legs and thighs: -- I left the rest, and made the best way I
could down the Creek. I had not traveled but four days before I arrived at an
Indian town, where I was soon discovered; and being taken up by them, they
conveyed me to one of their huts.

They demanded of me from whence I came? and after I had answered their
demands, they gave me some parched corn to eat.

The next day all the Indians left their habitations, and carried me directly
back to the place from whence I had made my escape.

My old masters being so vexed at my leaving them, that they were resolutely
bent to have me burnt: But a counsel being called upon the occasion, they
thought death too severe a punishment, considering I was but young, and
concluding that I should not have attempted an escape, had not the Dutchman
enticed me away. Therefore they contented themselves with ordering me to be
whipped on the naked body.

Accordingly, next day I was brought forth, stripped stark naked, and ordered to
run; while the Indians, who were ranged in a row, at certain distances, in a
most cruel and barbarous manner, belabored me with their whips, -- by which
they sometimes laid me level with the ground, by their blows. -- Thus they
continued to lash me, until I had run about 40 rods, when I received a
prodigious blow from one of them, which settled me to the ground as quick as if
I had been shot through the heart. I was so stunned by the blow, that it seems
I should never have recovered again, had not an old squaw run immediately to my
relief, and helped me into her hut. By this time my whole body was covered with
gore and blood.

I tarried here after this about 14 days, and then they sent me up to the
Senecas about 150 miles off. I lived here one year, in which time I suffered
almost insurmountable hardships: being some times almost famished to death with
hunger, at othertimes greatly suffering from the cold, and some times near
perishing with both. For the most part of the time we had nothing but ground
nuts and herbs to subsist upon in the summer, and red plums in the winter.
Several of the Indians actually starved to death.

From this place they carried me to Alaganey, a branch of the River Ohio, and
from Alagany is the name of a place upon the river of the same name.
Alaganey down the river to the place where it empties itself into the Ohio.
After staying here about a month, they carried me down the Ohio three hundred
miles. -- Here I found my indian father and mother and was very kindly received
by them, and all the other indians. They supplied me with a good blanket and
other necessary cloathings and provisions in great plenty.

And now the happy time began to draw near, when I should be released, for
after I had been in this place three or four months, to my great joy an Indian
came from Sir William Johnson, with orders that all the prisoners should be
released.

And after they had striped me of almost every thing I had about me, I was
conducted by my guide to Fort Du-Quesne, where I was delivered up to the
commanding officer, and clothing was ordered for me.

But having undergone so many hardships during my stay among the savages, I
looked like a mere skeleton. -- I remained here about eleven months; at the end
of which I was sent to Philadelphia, where I tarried about three months, from
thence I went to New Borough, where I arrived the (...) Day of April, 1767, to
the great joy of my mother, brothers and sisters. Being absent three years and
six months.

I would take this opportunity to return my most unfeigned thanks to all those
gentlemen and ladies who were so generous as to contribute a considerable sum
of money on my behalf.


