THE CONDUCT OF THE Late Administration EXAMINED. WITH AN APPENDIX, CONTAINING
Original and Authentic DOCUMENTS.

Fuit quondam ita firma haec Civitas et valens, ut Negligenti^^ S^natus, vel
etiam Injurias Civium far posset: Jam no^ potest. Aerarium nullum est,
Auctoritas Principum cecidit. Consensus Ordinum est divulsus, Suffragia
descripta tenentur a Paucis, bonorum Animus ad Nutum nostri Ordinis expeditus
jam non erit; Civem qui se pro Patriae Salute opponat Invidiae frustra posthac
requiretis.

Cicer. Orat. de Harusp. Resp. LONDON: Printed. 1767.

BOSTON: Reprinted and Sold by EDES and GILL, next to the Prison in
Queen Street. 1767.

THE CONDUCT OF THE Late Administration, etc.
THE reader will see in the motto prefixed to this tract, the reasons for
undertaking it: the state of the commonwealth is such, whether we consider the
debt, the factions, and the venality of the kingdom; or the little prospect
there is of finding another minister who will oppose himself to the two latter,
for the sake of alleviating the former; that it can no longer support our
vices; though it has still perhaps strength sufficient to bear an application of
the proper remedies. But these remedies cannot be hoped for 'till our former
conduct, the motives, and the effects of it are generally understood. A
persuasion that if these were fairly laid before the public, our opinions, and
consequently our measures would be altered; and that it is not even yet too
late to retrieve, in some degree, the losses which the state has sustained
while her interests have been neglected and sacrificed, was the motive which
produced this publication: a motive which, if it does not give success to the
design, will, it is hoped, carry with it an excuse for the attempt. For
although personal altercations and private feuds have degraded the tribunal of
the public, the attention of which they have so long engrossed; yet the
questions which are peculiarly proper for its cognizance, are those which
concern the honor, the wealth, or the safety of the community; and especially
those plans of foreign and domestic policy, which are pursued by those to whom
the interests of the state are entrusted: no introduction therefore or apology
is necessary to a tract, which proposes to enquire into the merit of those
measures which have lately been adopted by the late ministry, with regard to
points of the greatest importance to the empire, commerce and security of
Great Britain.

It were ever to be wished that enquiries of this sort could be made without
descending to personal accusations; for the subjects are much lessened when the
reputations of particular men, the praise or censure of some minister, becomes
a considerable part of them. But on this occasion, it is feared that this
reserve is impossible; when we judge of the merits of measures, we necessarily
judge of those by whom they were planned and executed. If, however, in the
course of the enquiry blame shall be thrown on particular persons, the writer
can truly say, that this was not in his first intention, and that it is only
the necessary result of the subject he treats; a subject of so much importance,
that he has not suffered the dislike which he feels in common with almost all
mankind to personal censure, to stifle that information which the public has a
right to receive upon a point which goes up to the very first principles of our
constitution, and involves in it questions upon which the existence of all
government depends. The reader easily sees that the subject I mean is the stamp
act. This is the measure of the greatest importance, both in itself and in its
consequences: referring therefore the other plans of the year to some future
hour, it is proposed at present to examine the conduct of the ministry, with
regard to this act, from the time at which they came into office, to that at
which it was repealed.

If this is done without partiality, the persons whose conduct is examined will
have no reason to complain; they especially will have no reason to complain of
being called to a public trial, who are perpetually assuring us that their
delight, their merit, and their support is, that they possess entirely the
favor of the public. To disprove the truth of this assertion, nec enim (to use
the words of Cicero) populum romanum esse illum puto, qui constat ex iis qui
mercede conducuntur, qui impelluntur ut vim afferant magistratibus, ut
obsideant senatum; and to show by what arts they gained, for a short time, the
appearance of popularity, would be easy; but it is of little consequence in
itself, and foreign to the present subject; the discussion of which will
however determine (which is a question of more importance) whether they have
deserved it.

To decide on the merits of their conduct, it is necessary that the state of
affairs should be known; that the intelligence received from America, the mode
and the degree of the resistance there made, the wishes of our friends, the
efforts of the opposers, the conduct of our officers, should be stated;
especially that the instructions sent by the ministry in consequence of the
informations they had received should be examined. Upon these grounds this
enquiry is conducted; whenever a fact is asserted, the authorities for it are
quoted or referred to; authorities so convincing as to leave no room for doubt;
they consist of letters, minutes of councils, instructions, advices, orders,
transmitted to and from America. Transcripts of these are now in the possession
of so many persons, and the power of consulting them is in the reach of so many
more, that the reader will not suspect any false quotation is attempted in
circumstances which render the detection of it so very easy. Some of these are
inserted in the appendix; from others extracts only are made, with references
in the notes to the letters themselves, and credit is taken from the exactness
of them upon the same ground; as well as for those in which the names of the
writers are omitted; the only reason of this omission is to avoid the
possibility of informing the Americans (who, it is feared, do not want this
information) by what channels the intelligence of their proceedings was
conveyed to us; for, to the disgrace of Great Britain, her friends and
advocates in one of her provinces, are not (it seems) to be protected or
avowed. And surely it is time that the public should receive the evidence which
has hitherto been industriously concealed from them, whilst false, though
positive assertions, and unmeaning declamation have been substituted in its
place: it is time, that having heard with eagerness and even with partiality
the claims of America, they should hear with patience, at least whilst I plead,
the cause of Great Britain; that they should read with impartiality, whilst I
state very shortly, (not the merits, for they are beside the present question,
but) the principles and progress of the stamp act: an act to which to private
interests, no party views, nothing but public motives could give rise; and the
intentions of which, however they might be treated in America, deserve the
approbation of every inhabitant of Great Britain.

The first and great principle of all government, and of all society, is, that
support is due in return for protection; that every subject should contribute
to the common defense, in which his own is included. Nam neque quies gentium
sine armis, neque arma sine stipendiis, neque stipendia sine tributis haberi
queunt. Tacit. Hist. lib. 4. It was necessary, and it was just, to recur to
this principle at the close of the last war. It was found necessary to maintain
upwards of 10000 men for the defense of our colonies; an expense of between 3
and 400,000 l. per ann. great part of which was entirely new, was, on that
account, to be incurred; it was just that the colonies which had profited so
much by the war, whose interests, commerce and security had been the first
objects of the peace; and of whose ability to bear at least some proportion of
that new expense there neither was nor is any reason to doubt, should
contribute (not to support or to defend Great Britain but) about a third part
of the expense necessary for their own defense and protection.

Upon this general and acknowledged principle, and upon this application of it,
which was just in itself, and which the situation of this country made
necessary, and which it might have been expected, would appear neither
unreasonable or unpleasing to an English ear, the stamp act was planned. In the
beginning of the year 1764 the proposition of imposing, by a duty on stamps, a
tax on America, in conformity to uninterrupted precedents for near 100 years,
was made, and thrown into the form of resolution. At that time the merits of
this question were opened at large; those who have lately so loudly asserted
the privileges and exemptions of America were then publicly called upon to
deny, if they thought it fitting, the right of the legislature to impose any
tax either internal or external upon that country: and not a single person
ventured to controvert that right. A year's delay however was given, that any
information might be received from America, with regard to the expediency of
the particular tax proposed, not to permit the right of imposing it to be
controverted. This distinction was fully opened at that time, and afterward
explained to the agents of the provinces.

This delay was however abused by some of the Americans; and when, in the
beginning of the year 1765, the plan was carried into execution by a bill
several petitions from America which denied their right of imposing taxes (...)
the Col^^^^^, were presented to the parliament, and were therefore rejected
without a division; no one person having been then found, in either house, who
would declare it to be his opinion that America was not, in this instance,
subject to Great Britain And yet it has been asserted that this opposition
would have been made, if some intelligence relating to this matter had not been
suppressed at that time; as this was publicly said, the public is to be
informed of the fact, which was this.

On the 11th of December, 1764, the board of trade reported to the king, that
the assemblies of Massachuset's bay and New York had, in their resolutions and
proceedings (copies of which they transmitted with the report) treated the acts
and resolutions of the legislature of Great Britain with the most indecent
disrespect. The privy council advised the king, to give directions that the
same be laid before parliament, at such time and in such manner as his Majesty
shall be pleased to direct and appoint.

This postponed the laying it before parliament, as it was meant to do; but it
deprived the parliament of no information, for the assemblies had instructed
their agents here to prepare petitions in the same words; and particularly Mr.
Mauduit, the agent for Massachuset's bay, was directed to draw his principles
and arguments from Mr. Otis's book of The Rights of the Colonies (which had
been reprinted here). The colonies were obeyed. Petitions were presented,
asserting the right of freedom from taxes imposed by Great Britain, on the very
grounds of the resolutions and proceedings which the board of trade had
transmitted to the king; these were rejected by parliament, not from ignorance
of their contents, but because their contents were known; because they denied
the power of Great Britain. No information was withheld therefore by this
delay, the cause of which was tenderness to the colonies. For had the king
called the attention of parliament to proceedings in which their acts were
treated with the most indecent disrespect; their own d^gnity must have drawn
from them vo^^; of censure and severity toward the offenders: and therefore
the ministry, who were taking the proper methods to form and enforce the act,
which would have sufficiently repressed the claims of the Americans, and
effectually asserted the dignity and authority of Great Britain, withheld a
paper which would have given no information but what was given in a manner less
calculated to irritate men's min^^.


In 1766 the act was repealed, but even then the administration, determined as
they were on the repeal, and though they were to carry their point chiefly by
the assistance of tha^ gentleman's speeches who denied the right of England to
tax the colonies, were however obliged, before they ventured to propose this
measure to parliament, to prepare the way by a bill asserting the right in the
fullest and strongest terms.

So that however the public may have been misled by the authority of names
quoted on the other side of the question, it can be doubted of no longer; the
supreme legislature has asserted, in the most explicit and solemn manner, its
right to the obedience of its American subjects; and therefore the assertions
of particular persons, opposed to this, not only deserve that disregard which
they will meet, who propagate opinions contrary to the common declared sense,
and detrimental to the interests of their country, but become also highly
criminal: for it is now as criminal to assert the exemption of America from
taxes imposed by parliament, as it is to assert, that parliament had no right
to repeal the stamp act.

The right of Great Britain being established and universally acknowledged
(except by about six or seven voices) it is certain, that whatever the private
opinions of particular men might be, it was the duty of every subject to have
submitted to this law while it subsisted; and the duty of those to whom the
execution of it was committed, to have enforced it.

The next step therefore is to enquire whether the administration took the
measures proper and necessary to procure due obedience to a law in which the
interests and dignity of Great Britain were so deeply concerned; or whether
they are guilty of having, by neglect and connivance, encouraged a resistance
to her authority, and shaked the very foundations of her empire.

To judge of this, it is necessary to examine the instructions and orders
issued by the s -- y of st -- e for the southern department, to whom this
important branch of our dominions is officially entrusted.

The letters of Mr. s -- y C -- y are of three dates; they are reprinted here,
having been already printed in America. The first of them is a single letter to
governor Fauquier, dated Sept. 14, 1765 See Appendix, No. 1.
. On the 24th of October, 1765, the s -- y wrote to major general Gage See
Appendix, No. 2.
, to governor Bernard See Appendix, No. 3.
, and a circular letter to the governors of the colonies See Appendix, No. 4.
; and on the 15th of December, 1765, he sent letters to major general Gage See
Appendix, No. 5.
, and to lieutenant governor Colden See Appendix, No. 6.
. Of this last an extract only is given, the rest is omitted, as it contains a
censure on a particular person.

The reader will justly be surprised, that on a subject so important, at a time
so critical, no more directions were issued; he will be more so, to find that
the letter to governor Bernard, of the first date, and that of the last, to
general Gage, refer to those of the 24th of October, 1765 for instructions,
(the letter to governor Colden is on a particular subject only) that the letter
of the 24th of October, 1765, though addressed to so many different governors,
presiding over people so different in their form of government, character and
conduct, is the same to each; and indeed a mere facsimile of that sent to the
commander in chief of the English forces; that in fact only one instruction was
issued during that period, and that from all his essays on obedience, it would
be difficult to extract any thing which could give real directions or
assistance to the governors, whose conduct was to determine, whether the empire
of North America should be retained in obedience, or thrown into an
independence fatal to themselves and dangerous to Great Britain.

For the sake of perspicuity and of justice, the method observed is this,
before each letter is considered, the information which the writer of it had
then received is stated; for it is only by thus placing ourselves in his
situation, that we can form an impartial judgment on the propriety of his
conduct. After considering each of these dispatches, there is thrown together
the intelligence received subsequent to any orders given by him, but previous
to the repeal of the stamp act.

It is necessary to begin by a description of the state of this matter, when
the s -- ls of the southern department were put into the hands of Mr. C -- y.

As soon as the stamp act had received the royal assent, which was on the 22d.
of March, 1765, the administration which had planned it began to take such
measures as might most effectually carry it into execution: and though such
complaints of the future burden had been received from America, as are ever
made by those who have been long indulgently exempted from bearing any; and
though some of that country had proceeded even to deny the right of
Great Britain to impose them; yet the act was not yet passed; and to impose and
to secure the collection of the tax would be so effectual a vindication of that
right, that in lenity to the colonies any severer animadversion on their
conduct was spared.

This act had given a jurisdiction for the recovery of the penalties, incurred
by the breach of it, to the same courts of admiralty which for near a century
had possessed that jurisdiction with regard to the laws of revenue and trade.
This clause it had in common with those laws which had formerly passed
respecting subjects of the like nature; but (and that was peculiar to this act)
it provided a remedy for the inconveniences and abuses, to which those courts
might be liable.

While our colonies were few in number, and small in extent, the court of
admiralty could never be far distant from, nor its officers unknown to the
clients in that court: but upon the increase of them to their present greatness
of territory and people, it had been a grievance complained of by the persons
the most loyally disposed to the government of England, that the distance of
many of the provinces from the seat of this court, with the difficulty of
obtaining the assistance of lawyers, must often operate so as to bar the
justest claim; and deprive the subjects of their property, by disabling them
from prosecuting their right to it. Another material objection arose from the
constitution of this court; in which the judge was paid by a poundage of the
money arising from such seizures as were condemned: this, as it made it his
interest rather to condemn than to acquit, if it did not influence the
decisions of the judge, took from them however that air of impartiality which
can alone secure to them respect.

To obviate the possibility of that fraud and oppression to which these
circumstances might give rise, a clause had been inserted in the stamp act,
giving a power of forming such a number of courts of vice-admiralty, as might
place the decision of his property more within the reach of every subject in
America; and in execution of this design, those who were then commissioners of
the treasury, formed and submitted to the privy council a plan for appointing
three courts of vice admiralty, with proper districts, and with ample and
honorable fixed salaries to the judges, in lieu of all fees; that so situated,
and so supported, applications to them might be less expensive and
inconvenient, and their decisions less suspected Even this provision, which
redressed a real grievance, which had been severely felt and justly complained
of, was rendered ineffectual in spite of all representations, because it had
the ill fortune to stand a part of the stamp act. And the Americans, therefore,
will owe the grievances which they suffer from the present situation and
constitution of the court of admiralty, to the administration which repealed
the stamp act.
.

The treasury, after consulting the board of trade and the agents of several of
the colonies, next applied themselves to the dividing the country, in which the
act was to operate, into such districts as might be most convenient for the
receipt of the revenue, and least troublesome to those from whom it was to be
collected.

After receiving and considering the plans of the stamp office, who were
necessarily to be employed in it, for carrying the law into execution, they
formed such instructions as might be adequate to the occasions of the officers
to whom the execution of it was to be entrusted.

The choice of these officers was of great importance; they did not therefore
proceed to this hastily, or in the common track of official recommendation:
they waited till they received from the most respected men in each colony,
applications in favor of persons of the best credit in it; and they complied
with these, both as it gave the best security for the discharge of the trust to
be committed to the officers, and as it might much facilitate the collection of
the duty.

Whoever reads the list of distributors appointed on this occasion, will see
that the general intention was to bestow that office on colonists: this would
prevent the dissatisfaction which must always and in every country arise, at
seeing offices of profit in the collection of a duty imposed on them, thrown
into any other hands than their own; and would engage the principal men in each
colony to support the person whom they had themselves recommended, to assist
the execution of the law, and to conciliate to it the minds of their
countrymen. The influence of this measure would be the more extensive, as the
appointment of the inferior distributors was necessarily rested in the
principal distributor for every province; the persons appointed by him would,
it is probable, be his friends, neighbors or dependants, colonists also; and
the same motives would engage therefore throughout the country a number of
colonists in the same cause.

In fact it appears, that this design was generally executed, except in the new
colonies, in which description Nova Scotia and Georgia are included; in these
it was scarcely possible that any natives should be found capable of executing
the office: but even in these the principal was so strictly adhered to, that in
Nova Scotia a gentleman was said to be therefore appointed because he was one
of the first settlers in that colony.

The board of treasury was not less attentive to the other qualification of
their officer, that he should be not only a colonist, but recommended by
persons best acquainted with, and most concerned and respected in the several
provinces: few were appointed who were not either of the council or the
assembly. The reader, perhaps, does not expect to be informed that colonel
Mercer was recommended by Mr. Montague, the agent for Virginia, in the name of
the governor, council, and assembly of that province; which Mr. Mercer himself
insisted on, as his apology to the people of Virginia. Dr. Franklyn, agent for
Pensylvania, applied for, and succeeded in behalf of Mr. Hughes. Mr. Cox,
distributor for New Jersey, owed the office to the solicitation of the same
gentleman, whose son was then governor of the province; and besides the
application of Mr. Anthony Bacon, in favor of Mr. Mac Evers, for distributor
of New York, I have seen the copy of a letter from Mr. Mac Evers to Mr.
alderman Barlow Trecothic, in which, to use his own expression, he repeats his
great obligations to that alderman, for having him nominated a distributor of
the stamps.

In the pursuit of these plans, and before the officers could be sent with
those instructions which were preparing for them, the administration was
stopped by that change of government, of which, as the author of it is dead, I
shall only say, that by placing Mr. C -- y in the office of s -- y of st -- e,
for the southern department, it entrusted the execution of a law, of the
greatest importance in its consequences, to one of the very few persons who had
opposed the passing it. The consequence has been such as might have been
expected, was foreseen by thinking me^, and, as will appear from the course of
the evidence, designed by the new ministers.

Previous to the change of ministry, not only the government had received no
intelligence which might give them reason to suspect resistance in America; but
even the persons who were afterward the most forward in magnifying this
resistance, and applying the arguments drawn from it to their own purposes, had
then no expectation of it. It is not possible to suppose that Mr. Trecothick,
Mr. Bacon, Dr. Franklyn, who solicited colonel Mercer, and Mr. Meserve, who
accepted this office, would either have solicited or accepted it, if they had
thought they should have been exposed to that violence, which the neglect of
some, and the evil intentions of others, afterward produced. Another and still
stronger proof arises from the testimonies of those who were the best informed
of the progress, and most interested in the success, of this act in America. It
is the opinion of almost every officer there, that it would be obeyed; an
opinion given at a period of time subsequent to this, and even after an avowed
resistance to it had been raised, neglected and encouraged. It would be endless
to quote all these opinions, some of them may be necessary, a few will be
sufficient

In a letter from New York See letter to the commissioners of stamps, dated
September 30, 1765.
it is said, The people now begin to cool a little, and some of the most
considerable of them to think how they shall do their business after the first
of November, and cannot conceive of any method of doing it without making use
of stamped paper; never was an act better made to execute itself than this is.

Another writer from New England See letter to the lords of trade, dated
September 7, 1765.
(after a very exact description of the pains taken to prevent the execution of
the law) says, I cannot help thinking that when a clear representation of the
miseries which await the province, if the stamp act is not executed at its day,
shall be made to them, they cannot but be alarmed; and must sacrifice their
prejudices and their popularity too, if necessary, to save their country from
immediate ruin.

In the colony in which the insults on government had been most violent, a
person well acquainted with these outrages sollicits the appointment of
distributor of stamps for the province, of which the mob had forced a
resignation from another hand; That See letter to the commissioners of stamps,
dated New York, October 26, 1765.
(these are his words) I may likewise enjoy the advantage of that office when
it is quietly submitted to, as no doubt it will be in a few months.

A letter from Virginia has this passage See a letter to the lords of trade,
dated Nov. 8, 1765.
, I am not altogether without hopes that the distress they will feel, on a
total stagnation of business, will open their eyes, and pave the way for the
act executing itself; for I am credibly informed, that some of the most busy
men, in opposing the reception of the stamps, are already alarmed at the
consequences of the imprudent steps they have taken.

Even so late as December 1765, another See a letter from New York to the lords
of the treasury, dated December, 1765.
letter from New York has these words; Since that time nothing has been done,
and we have waited to see the law execute itself, which I am persuaded it must
do shortly; for the suspension of it has occasioned so many inconveniences
here, in every branch of business, that they do already begin to be severely
felt.

These circumstances, says the same person See letter to Mr. Conway, dated
December 21, 1765
, induce me to think that the face of affairs will change very soon, and I hope
in my next letter to give a more favorable account of our proceedings.

And, to close this point with an evidence of the strongest kind, the council
and house of representatives of Massachuset's bay speak thus of the act See
address, dated November 3, 176^.
of the former sessions, granting certain duties in the British colonies and
plantations in America: To which act we humbly apprehend we may propose our
objections, at the same time we acknowledge our duty to yield obedience to it
while it continues unrepealed.

This was the state of affairs when that ministry was removed; the intention of
removing them was declared in the middle of May, 1765. The next administration
came into office in the beginning of July; Mr. C -- y's letter, which gives
notice of his appointment to the southern department, is dated the 12th of that
month.

They had reason to know, from the intelligence of, and several letters
received at the secretary of state's office, that the objections to the stamp
act were of three kinds; the first arose from the opinion See petition of
council and house of representatives of Massachuset's bay.
that the powers given by that act, to the court of vice-admiralty constituted
over all America, would be grievous to the subject from the great distance of
that court, and would distinguish the subjects in the colonies from those in
Great Britain by depriving them of a trial by jury; the second from the fear
that it would exhaust the provinces of their specie; and the third from their
claim to the privilege of judging of their own ability, and of having the sole
right of imposing taxes on themselves. To obviate the two first of these
objections, nothing was required of them but to execute the provisoes of the
act, and those other measures which the former ministry had already begun. With
regard to the first, they had only to remind them that a jurisdiction had been
assigned to the judges of the court of admiralty, upon the laws of revenue and
of trade, without juries, for near a century past. The reason for putting these
causes in a course of trial without any jury, undoubtedly arose from an
apprehension that juries, in these cases, were not to be trusted: the force of
this reason may be abated, but I cannot think that it is wholly destroyed: no
candid man will, I believe, take upon him to declare, that at this time an
American jury is impartial and indifferent enough to determine upon frauds in
trade. These are the words of a very well informed and candid judge. They might
have informed them, that it is so far from being true, that the subjects in
North America, by being deprived in these cases of trials by jury, are in that
respect distinguished from their fellow See letter to secretary of state, dated
Nov. 10, 1764.
subjects in Great Britain; that in this very instance of the stamp duties, the
penalties are, by the laws now in force for collecting them in Great Britain,
recoverable also without trial by jury, as well as on all the laws of excise,
and many others respecting the public revenue in Great Britain.

With regard to the seat and the support of the court, the former lords of the
treasury had made a representation to his Majesty in council (founded on a
clause inserted in the stamp act for this very purpose) stating See memorial
from the commissioners of the treasury to the privy council, dated July 4, 1765.
the expediency of giving the judges in America sufficient and honorable
salaries in lieu of all poundage and fees, and of establishing three different
courts of vice-admiralty, with proper districts annexed to each. Had the
succeeding ministers condescended to execute, on this plan, the laws of their
country, a plan which had been fully opened and approved in parliament at the
time when the stamp act was proposed, all the dissatisfaction and clamor which
arose from misrepresentation on these points had been remedied.

It would have calmed the fears which were expressed, that the colonies would
be drained of their specie, if the ministry had issued to the several officers
the directions which the late commissioners of the treasury had given on this
subject, viz. See treasury minute, dated July 9, 1765.
That, in order to obviate the inconvenience of bringing into this kingdom the
money to be raised by the stamp duties, all the produce of the American duties,
arising or to arise by virtue of any British act of parliament, should from
time to time be paid to the deputy play master in America, to defray the
subsistence of the troops, and any military expenses incurred in the colonies.

The last objection which arose from the claim of the colonies to an exemption
from taxes imposed by parliament, was to be treated in a different manner; as
the two former were to be obviated by explanations, this, now the act imposing
a tax was passed, was to be repressed by authority. They saw that a part of the
Americans was impatient of those restrictions, which it is the interest of the
whole empire to impose with regard to their commerce; the late regulations of
their trade had been petitioned against as grievous and oppressive, because
they contradicted their illicit views; and from the general temper of that
country it appeared, that it was necessary to hold the rein with a temperate
but firm hand. But besides this, the fullest accounts were soon received of the
turbulent and seditious behavior of a part of America. So early as the 27th of
July, 1765, a copy of the resolutions of the colony of Virginia was transmitted
to the ministry, in which the right of the parliament of Great Britain to tax
that colony is absolutely denied: these resolutions are printed in the appendix
See Appendix, No. 7.
. The Governor had thought it necessary to dissolve an assembly capable of such
an insult on the legislature of Great Britain: at the time this packet arrived
no board of trade existed, and the papers were therefore carried immediately to
the secretary of state. As soon as a new board of trade was formed they
represented to the King in council that, See the Representation of the board of
trade, dated August 2^, 1765.
These resolutions, as they contain an absolute disavowal of the right of the
parliament of Great Britain to impose taxes upon her colonies, and a daring
attack upon the constitution of this country, appear to us to require an
immediate and serious attention; and whatever further measures your Majesty
may, with the advice of your council, judge proper to be taken either for
expressing your royal disapprobation of these proceedings, or for preventing
the fatal consequences which they naturally tend to produce, we think it our
duty to submit to your Majesty's consideration, whether, in the mean time, it
may not be expedient to dispatch immediate instructions to your Majesty's
servants in your Majesty's colony of Virginia, who may be concerned in
enforcing the execution of the law for levying the ^uty upon stamps, that they
do each in their several department, in support of the authority of parliament,
vigorously exert themselves, and, with becoming resolution upon every occasion,
exact a due obedience to all the laws of the land.

But even this was not the only incitement to vigor which was given to
administration; a much stronger was to be drawn from the intelligence they
received of the state of that provinc^; they saw from it that these resolutions
which assert an independence upon England, were meant to be not merely verbal
assertions, but principles of action; they were accompanied by a most alarming
description which was given of the situation of the colony, by one of the
persons best acquainted with it See letter to the s -- y of s -- e, dated June
14, 1765, received August 8, 1765.
: The most solemn treaties (he writes) with our Indian neighbors have been
most publicly violated. The violators of the treaty and public peace have been
as publicly rescued out of the hands of justice. Government it set at open
defiance, not having strength in her hands to enforce obedience to the laws of
the community* But even this description, alarming as it was, joined to the
certain evil consequence and great danger of delay, could not awaken the
administration to the discharge of their duty. The letter which was written on
this occasion See Appendix, No. 1.
, instead of endeavoring to repress by authority this open defection in a
provincial assembly; instead of encouraging the officers to the performance of
their duty, instead of representing the punishments due to disobedience, takes
that languid tone which must appear the effect of inability to maintain the
empire of Great Britain, or of a formed resolution to sacrifice it.

The s -- y, in direct contradiction to the papers immediately before him,
calls the resolutions the offspring of the violence of some individuals, and
treats the colonists as disposed to pay a wise and virtuous obedience; in that
very important and critical hour, when the eyes of all America must be turned
on the reception which such resolutions as those of Virginia should meet with
in England, and on the conduct which a new ministry would hold toward the
colonies, to take from thence instructions for their future behavior; when
they were to be restrained within the bounds of a dutiful submission, or
excited to resolutions of equal violence by the fate of these, he takes no step
to check their license, or encourage their obedience.

Intelligence had been received, that new and unconstitutional principles were
avowed by the colony of Virginia; the principles of independence on England,
and exemption from taxes imposed by the British parliament; that many outrages
had been committed in that colony; and upon the whole, that government was set
at open defiance. Upon this intelligence it was his duty to have given
immediate support to government, to have asserted the rights of England, and to
have maintained them by holding out rewards to the obedient, punishment to the
seditions; by giving activity to the civil, and, if necessary, to the military
power; especially and directly to have sent the most positive instructions to
the officers to exact a due obedience to the laws of the land.

It would scarcely be credited, were not the facts before the public that,
after waiting from the 27th of July to the 14th of September, before he
returned any reply, the reply gives the officer to whom it was written neither
instruction nor encouragement; that it does not even contain a direction to
assert the authority of government, which had been defied, or to exact a
submission to the laws and legislature, which had been renounced; a respect to
parliament, a confidential resiance of the colonies on the mother country,
these are the strongest expressions in which the s -- y of Great Britain claims
the obedience of her subjects: and, lest even these should seem to countenance
any exertion of authority, he takes care to disclaim giving any direction in
them; he will not pretend to give any advice or instructions on these subjects;
but refers the governor to an instruction to be hereafter receiving from the
privy council. The question was, whether the colonies are independent of the
acts of the legislature of Great Britain? A question which, after so many acts
of parliament immediately respecting and binding the colonies, no subject of
Great Britain could lawfully bring into debate, except in one of the houses of
parliament; and concerning which they should least of all have appeared to
doubt, to whom the execution of the laws had been entrusted by the King, and
who were responsible to the parliament and the kingdom for the support of their
authority. The making this a question, and referring to a privy council for a
future decision of that on which the legislature had decided already so
frequently and so expressly, tended therefore only to inform the officer that
he could not depend either on direction or support from England; and that it
was still a doubt if the government of this kingdom would assert her rights.
Another proof that procrastination alone was intended, arises from hence; the
Virginia resolutions were received July 27, 1765; this important matter, which
the board of trade had represented as requiring immediate and serious
attention, and the dispatch of immediate instructions; and which must have
appeared to the ministry to require them, as soon as they were acquainted with
it; instead of being immediately attended to, was referred to the privy
council; but it was not even referred to them till September 6, 1765, and no
report was made upon i^ till October 3. The report when made is, That this
matter was not within the decision of the privy council to whom it had been
referred; a report made by the very ministers who referred it to that board;
and in which, from his office, the s -- y has the lead. The words of it are
these; This is a matter of the utmost importance to the kingdom and legistature
of Great Britain; and of too high a nature for the determination of your
Majesty in your privy council; and is proper only for the consideration of
parliament. It was for the sake of this decision that the s -- y deferred so
long a matter of so much consequence; a decision which he must have known at
the time he wrote his letter to the governor of Virginia; a fuller proof cannot
be imagined that a timid and fatal delay was all that was intended; and that at
the very time when he assure^ the officer that he would receive the fullest
instructions from the wisdom of the privy council, he knew that board would
have too much wisdom to issue any upon a matter of too high a nature for their
determination. I said he must have known that decision when he wrote the
letter; and I said this, not only because he probably knew what that report
would be which he was to direct; but chiefly because it would be indeed
extraordinary if the s -- y of s -- e could be entirely ignorant of the powers
of his own office, and of the privy council. It is not necessary to be of that
counsel to know that the execution of the laws is by the constitution rested in
the King, and delegated by him to the officers in each department; that the
privy council cannot l^liberate upon the laws, though they can assist the
execution of them; and therefore that it was impossible for the privy council
to make any other report than that which they did make. But it was in the power
of tho s -- y of s -- e to enforce the execution of the laws, it was his duty;
he was called upon to perform this duty by the importance of the object, and
the express representations of the board of trade; and the referring it
therefore to the privy council could only be meant to weaken by delay a right,
which he would not support, and durst not surrender.

It is lenity to the s -- y to attribute his reference and letter to this
motive; to grant that he wrote it in direct contradiction to his own knowledge;
and that he intended the governor, to whom it is writ, should expect as little
instruction from the decision of the privy council, as himself knew it would
contain.

It was indeed impossible for him to intend or wish that the governor should
understand the words of the letter according to their plain and obvious sense,
because it was impossible for him to wish that the governor should think him
capable of avowing principles so full of treason and of danger: for if this
letter indeed meant what it expresses, if it was designed to turn the eyes of
the officers of the crown from the known and permanent authority of parliament
to an inserior board; to teach them to look for directions for their conduct
not to the laws of their country, but to the instructions of a privy counsel;
he must be told that this principle, which attributes to the king in counsel
the power of dispencing with the laws of the land, is the highest treason
against the state; that it cost king James the second his crown, and might cost
him his head.

The next advices from America were such as might have been expected to arise
from the negligence of the administration in Great Britain, A letter addressed
immediately to the secretary of state informed him, that the capital of the
province from whence it was written had shaken off all subjection to the laws
both of trade and police, See letter to the secretary of state, dated August
15, 10, received October 14, 1765.
Two or three months ago says the writer of it, I thought that this people
would have submitted to the stamp act withou actual opposition. Murmurs indeed
were continually heard, but they seemed to be such in time as would die away
BUT THE PUBLISHING THE VIRGINIA RESOLUTIONS PROVED AN ALARM BELL TO THE
DISAFFECTED. From that time an insamons weekly paper, which is printed here,
has swarmed with libels of the most atrocious kind: these have been urged with
so much vehemence, and so industriously repeated, that I have considered them
as preludes to action; but I did not think that it would have commenced so
early, or been carried to such lengths as it has been. Then follows an acoount
of the particulars of the riot, and of the insults which were offered to the
officers of the revenue, merely because they were officers: but these
particulars, as they are not immediately essential to the present subject, and
are in the highest degree disgraceful to Great Britain are here omitted; but
may be found in the letters to the s -- y of s -- e, dated August 15, 16, 1765,
received the 14th of October: it is however necessary that the reader should
see the general situation of the province, as described in the same letter.
Every one agrees that this riot has exceeded all others known here, both in the
vehemence of action and mischievousness of intention; and never had any mob so
many abettors of consequence as this is supposed to have had, It is said there
were 50 gentlemen actors in this scene, disguised with trowsers and jackets on,
besides a much larger number behind the curtain. -- The common talk is that the
stamp act shall not be executed here; -- that the man who offers a ^^ampt paper
to sell will immediately be killed; -- that all the power of Great Britan shall
not oblige them to submit to the stamp act; -- that they will die upon the
place. -- IN TRUTH IT WILL BE IMPOSSIBLE TO ATTEMPT TO CARRY THE ACT INTO
EXECUTION UNTIL FRESH ORDERS AND POWERS ARE COME FROM ENGLAND. The same person,
in a subsequent b letter adds, I mention all these particulars, that your
lordship may judge yourself from real circumstances; but it is my opinion, that
the worst that can happen should be expected, and provided against. -- I
presume that after this, the authority of an American government will never be
lefto the mercy of the people.

This violence of proceeding, and the resolutions of the representatives of the
province of Massachuset's bay, which were similar to those of Virginia, were
referred to the privy council, by the Board of Trade, on the 1st and 11th of
October, 1765. That board, at the same time, represented them to be of
dangerous tendency, especially as connected with the spirit which had appeared
throughout thewholeconduct of this assembly; -- and is, in truth, a daring
attack upon the constitution of this country; -- and in whatever light these
dissturbances are viewed, whether in respect of the avowed object, which the
perpetrators and abettors of them declare to be a general resolution to oppose
and prevent the execution of an act of the parliament of Great Britain; or in
respect of the state of government and magistracy there, which -- represents to
be utterly incapable of resisting or suppressing these tumults and disorders;
they were of such high importance, that no time was to be lost in directing
such measures as might be most prudent and effectual.

These representations contain so just a state of this important matter at that
time, and of the impression which the intelligence from America must make on
all those whom the most obstinate prejudice had not hardened, that they are
printed in the Appendix See Appendix, No. 8, 9.
.

By this time the flame had begun to spread, and to threaten all those who were
concerned in the collection of any part of the revenue: one of the officers in
America gave information See letter to board of trade, dated Aug. 31, received
about the 8th of October.
, not only that THE PRINCIPAL PEOPLE OF THE TOWN OF BOSTON publicly avowed and
justified the act of demolishing Mr. Oliver's (the distributor of stamps)
house, but that all kinds of ill humors were set on float; every thing that
for years past had been the cause of any popular discontent was revived. -- It
seems the mob had set down no less than 15 houses, in or near the town, to be
attacked the next night; AMONG WHICH WAS THE CUSTOM HOUSE AND THE HOUSES OF
SOME OF THE RESPECTABLE PERSONS IN THE GOVERNMENT.

A person immediately concerned in the collection of the customs writes thus
See letter to secretary of state, dated August 28, received October 21, 1765.
; I consider their fury against me to proceed from my capacity as an Officer of
the customs, and the check I am of course to their smuggl^ng views; and from my
having lately received an unpopular commission relating to their ri^tous
behavior toward a ship which had been seized. Thus our situation exposes us
to the lawless fury, not of a trifling mob, but of a whole country inflamed to
an intolerable degree; subject to no rule or order, but abandoned and
licentious in principle; -- and without protection or support, either to enable
us to do our duty, or preserve our peace in society. The same Officer acquaints
the commissioners of the customs See letter to commissioners of customs, dated
September 5, received October 21, 1765.
that, The mob had the audacity to send messages, importing that, if we would
agree to receive our fees (for customs) agreeable to their will and pleasure,
and would also deliver the ships now under prosecution, I might come on shore
in safety, and rely on their protection. -- The custom-house, in consequence of
this, continued shut up. -- I complained to the Governor and a pirncipal
magistrate of the person who sent the above terms, with a view of having him
punished; and the magistrate's warrant was returned by the sheriff as
impossible to be executed under peril of his life; so that I consider this as
an end of the prosecution for want of government, there being here an absolute
suspension.

These tumults were not more dangerous to the government in themselves, than to
the dependence of the colonies upon Great Britain in their consequences, and
from the principles which gave rise to them. Care was taken to inform the
administration of these, by transmitting to them those anonymous papers, in
which they are more openly avowed than it was possible for them to be in the
resolutions of any assembly; though the same turbulent and interested lawers,
who governed the councils of those meetings, were all known to be the authors
of these inflammatory papers.

In one of them, the Providence gazette extraordinary, August 14, 1765. we met
with these, among many similar sentiments and expressions; You, my countrymen,
already feel some of the effects of this horrid policy, men of war, cutters,
marines with their bayone^s fixed, judges of admiralty, collectors,
comptrollers, searchers, tide waiters, land-waiter^, with a whole catalogue of
pimps, sent over, not to protect our trade, but to destroy it. It is advised to
form in a general assembly, votes or resolves to the following effect; That his
Majesty and his substitutes, together with the general assembly of this colony,
have, in their representative capacity, the only exclusive right to lay taxes
and imposts upon the inhabitants of this colony; and that every attempt to v^st
such power in any person or persons whatsoever, other than the general assembly
aforesaid, is unconstitutional. -- That his Majesty's liege people the
inhabitants of thi^ colony, are not bound to yield obedience to any law or
ordinance designed to impose any internal taxation whatsoever upon them, other
than the laws and ordinances of the general assembly aforesaid. And to put it
out of doubt on whose principles and examples these sentiments were formed, the
same paper proceeds, We think that an address of thanks ought to be voted by
the general assembly, to those gentlemen who distinguished themselves in the
last session of parliament, in defense of liberty and the colonies; in
particular to general Conway, etc.

But the officers in America not only represented their distress, but the means
too by which they might be relieved; they called for instructions from the
government at home, that they might execute every part of this act; for
assistance that they might enforce it. There is scarcely an officer who does
not complain, that he has received no instructions for the execution; many,
that they have not even an authentic copy of the act. There is scarcely a
governor who does not express his weakness, and implore the support of that
government for the interests of which he acts; without, therefore, accumilating
any more intelligence received from other hands and other quarters, and which
is all of the same kind, it is now time to examine what measures were taken by
administration, to check, repress and correct tumults, which struck at the very
foundations of government.

It was plain, that although the stamp act was the pretext, the restrictions
upon their trade, which are so necessary, and their desire to be independent of
England, were among the real causes of many of the American tumul^s; that
impatience of all government which some of the colonists expressed, that
opposition both to the former and latter custom-house and commercial laws,
which some even of their assemblies avowed, required to be immediately and
effectually controuled. The necessity of this measure was not unknow to the
administration; the representations of the board of trade had forced it upon
their attention, and they themselves confessed it to be of the utmost
importance to the kingdom and legislature of Great Britain. It was indeed of
importance, for it imported no less than the maintaining the dependence of the
colonies more extensive than any nation before ever possessed; and the
retaining in obedience to commercial laws, and directing the industry of an
empire, upon whose consumption of our manufactures the trade and credit of this
kingdom so immediately depend. To secure these interesting objects the reader
expects to hear, that the most vigorous measures were planned and executed;
that the strength of government in that country was accurately examined, and
judiciously disposed; and that such additions to this, both of a military and
naval kind, were prepared, as the occasion called for; and which being directed
(if necessary) against those who were most forward in rebellion, might, by
repressing these, prevent the crime and the punishment of the rest. This might
have been the conduct of ordinary statesmen, our ministers despised such
obvious remedies; and after much deliberation determined, that in order to
check the mutinous, and correct the rebellious colonists, to vindicate the
authority of parliament, maintain the empire of Great Britain, and restore the
peace of America, Mr. s -- yC -- y should write them a letter. This step which
was necessary, and might have been effectual if taken in the beginning of these
disturbances, and supported by authority, became rediculous when alone, and in
a state of such extreme tumult; and reminds one of a similar expedient, related
in the memoirs of Madame de Nemours. Mr. de Beaufort de son cote, qui n'en
saisoit pas moins que le coadjuteur (pour s'opposer a cette paix) et qui
cherchoit tous les moyens imaginables de de l'empecher, crut en avior trouve^
un infalllible, qu'il proposa a Mr. ke Bellievre en lui demandant par maniere
k'avis, si en donnant un souflet a Mr. d' Elbeuf,: il ne changeroit point la
face des affairs: a quois Mr. de Bellievre repondit de'un sang froid plus
digne de sa gravite que de la question, qu'il ne croyoit pas que cela put
changer autre chose que la face de Mr. d'Elbeuf.

But as this was the only step which they proposed to take, why was it so long
delayed? The most alarming informations had been received by them so long ago
as the 27th of July; they could scarcely beignorant that, in populor tumults,
an immediate execution of authority is required, and that delay gives to them
confidence and strength: in this exigence therefore no degree of delay can be
vindicated, even the s -- y does not attempt to vindicate, he disowns it: he
asserted in public, what he has written in his letter See Appendix, No. 5,
of the 15th of December, 1765. that his instructions (dated the 24th of
October, 1765) were sent on the first notice of these disturbances; and yet it
is proved by his own evidence, that on the 27th of July, 1765, that is at three
months distance from that time, he had received the Virginia resolutions, that
daring attack upon the constitution of this country, and intelligence that
government was set at open defiance, not having strength in her hands to
enforce obedience to the laws of the community.

But I have done with the delay, and the denial of it; this delay had at least
given him time to form a plan of action, which should be extensive and
effectual when he should begin to operate; he had had leisure to consider the
particular state of every province, and to compare the disorders which were
complained of, with the resourses which were to be found, and might be applied
in each. In fact, there was great reason for an attention of this kind, for the
provinces were known to be in very different situations; in some the mob
appeared alone in the riots, while those who had any thing to risque in the
contest, contented themselves with giving to them concealed encouragement; in
others, the principal people of the town avowed the utmost violences; in one
they had not yet declared their resolution of freeing themselves from all
custom-house laws, though they had marked the custom house for destruction; in
another they already refused to pay any customs but such as they themselves
should regulate the payment of: the riots at Boston were very different in
their nature and purposes from those which had shaken Rhode Island; the
Virginia resolutions had been, and were the alarm bell to the disaffected,
calling them to tumult and outrage; while the plan of a general assembly of
committees, which had proceeding from Massachusett's bay, discovered more of a
regular system of resisttance. The resources too were as different as the
difficulties; they were to be drawn from the parciular constitution and
strength of each government, the temper of the people, the neighborhood of the
military force, and a thousand other circumstances, of which the s -- y was
informed.

The public will judge of the ability shown by him in adapting the instructions
and assistances to the particular situation of each province, when they find
that See Appendix, No. 4.
the letter to every governor on the continent and in the islands, excepting
one, is exactly the same; and that this same letter, like Jacks Parchment in
the tail of a tub, serves too, by the alteration of a very few sentence, for
See Appendix, No. 2.
military orders to the commander in chief of the British forces in America. It
was not possible that disorders so various and so violent could be remedied by
one application; and the prescribing for distempers so very different the same
insipid potion of warm water, is a practice of which our state Sangrado's alone
were capable. In the leetter See Appendix, No. 3.
to the governor of Massachuset's-bay there is indeed some difference; the
reader, who is informed that the project of a general combination of America
took its rise in that province, immediately supposes that in this separate
dispatch some special instructions are given to prevent, dissipate or elude the
operations of this meeting; it is necessary to read this letter, to be
convinced that in it no notice whatever is taken of the unprecedented
unconstitutional and dangerous design.

They had at the time when this letter was written, received the fullest and
most authentic intelligence, that some of the subjects of England had refused
obedience to an act of the legislature; and forced the officers to whom the
execution of it in America was entrusted, to resign their posts. To be
perfectly acquainted with the means used for the attainment of this end; to
judge of the temper of the colonies, and of the state of government in them,
see Appendix, No. 12. The state of the matter is so exactly described, in a
letter addressed to Mr. C -- y, that it is here referred to, though it was not
received till four Days after the date of his dispatch; because it might, and
ought to have been seen by administration, in the same light in which it was by
the writer of this letter. It appears from thence See Appendix No. 10.
that the general scheme concerted throughout America was, first by menace, or
force, to oblige the stamp-officers to resign their employments in which they
had generally succeeded; and next to destroy the stamp papers upon their
arrival; that, having no stamps, necessity might be an excuse for the dispatch
of business without them; and that before they could be replaced, the clamor
and outcry of the people, with addresses and remonstrances from the assemblies,
might procure a repeal of the act.

It was no part of the question, whether the ministry for the time being
approved of the principles and purposes of that act or ^ot. The power of
judging whether or no an act of Parliament shall be carried into execution, is
not by the constitution entrusted to any ministry. THE BILL OF RIGHTS, as it
was drawn on account of this power usurped by the crown, so it is most express
against the exertion of it. The patriots of that age had felt the extensive
effects of this dispensing power; and had seen it bring their religion and
liberties into the most imminent danger; to prevent therefore the possibilty of
any future ministers being so much warped from their duty as to suspend he
execution of the law, THE BILL OF RIGHTS declares that this pretended power of
suspending of laws, or the execution of laws by regal authority, without the
consent of parliament, is illegal.

But be it that they had a right to suspend the execution of this law, because
they did not approve it; they were apprized, that there had arisen in America a
spirit of opposition to the whole system of custom-house laws, ^n impatience of
those ties, which even the most partial to the claims of the colonies must
confess to be necessary for the common good; that the merehants See letter to
Mr. C -- y, dated Nov. 7. 1765
there think they hove a right to every freedom of trade, which the subjects of
Great Britain now enjoy: a freedom which would render the colonies not only of
no benefit, but in the highest degree prejudicial to the commerce and welfare
of their mother country. This opinion and they did not content themselves with
the bare opinion, made it necessary to secure the collection, not of a new and
internal but ^f o^ external duties, which had ever been submitted to, and
constantly though imperfectly collected; and to establish the great act of
navigation; which was the effect of wise and extensive policy, gave the
deepestwound to the trade and power of Holland, and acquired to England the
maritime empire of Europe.

But be it, that the laws of the customs too were to be dispensed with;
granting that they were all repealed by that voice, and at that moment when it
was declared, that the salvation of Great Britain depended on a total repeal of
all custom-house laws, and the universal extention of the laws of excise, and
therefore that it was no part of the duty of administration to enforce the
execution of them; still there remained the strongest reasons for a speedy and
vigorous interposition: the English government in America was weak precarious,
unable to secure the execution of the common laws of peace and good order,
insulted, defied. These disorders, so disgraceful in themselves, so dangerous
in their consequences, required to be immediately and effectually controlled;
and would have been controlled by any ministers but those quibus patrioe salus
and dignitas posterior sua dominatione and domesticis commodus fuit.

The stamp act was avowedly rejected, the custom-house laws openly violated,
the officers menaced, insulted and spoiled, the offenders unpunished, and
government dissolved. Read now the dispatch of the 24th of October See
Appendix. No. 4.
, which was to contain the s -- y's fullest instructions; you will not find in
it any instructions whatever; at this distance he does not think it possible to
give possitive instructions to the officers, not even instructions to obey and
to enforce the laws of their country. This duty, which should have been the
first object of his care and directions is entirely omitted; the utmost vigor
which he recommends rises no higher than to repel acts of outrage, not to
punish them, or to maintain and execute the laws of England. But even this
degree of exertion is not to be resorted to till the last extremity; lenient
and persuasive methods, the utmost lenity, these are the arms which he directs
the governors and the commander in chief to oppose to the revolt which he saw
so universal.

He had been repeatedly imformed that the schemes of independence were formed
and guided by the lawers, and supported by the principals of the provinces To
the other proofs of this add the following extract of a letter to Mr. C -- y,
dated December, 21, 1765, and therefore subsequent to his letter.

The lawyers are the source from whence the clamours have slowed in every
province. In this province nothing public is transacted without them, and it
is to be wished that even the bench was free from blame. The whole body of
merchants in general, assembly-men, magistrates, etc. have been united in this
plan of riots, and without the influence and instigation of these, the inferior
people would have been quiet: very great pains were taken to rouse them before
they stirred.

See too a curious paper in Appendix, No. 11.


; but as this increased the danger of the insurrections, and the necessity of
an interposition, he contradicts without hesitation the intelligence in his
hands, and hopes and expects (which words if they can mean any thing as applied
to a thing past must mean bleieves) that this resistance to the authority of
the mother country, can only have found place among the lower and more ignorant
of the people. Instead of that tone of authority which alone can enforce
obedience of those orders and directions which the dangerous situation of
America, and the requests of the officers there called for, the whole tenor of
his letters is languor and debility; it is true that such vague and general
expressions are used, as leave the writer at liberty to own or to disavow the
measures which shall be persued after the receipt of the letter; to divide with
or take from the officers to whom it was addressed, the reputation of their
success; or to turn on them alone the odium of a miscarrige; and such
qualifying words intermixed, as by a cautious hand are eveused to prevent if
possible any parliamentary danger but it is impossible to read it without
seeking that the intent is rather to check, than to exice the ardour of the
officers of the crown; not to quell the riots of which he saw the tendency, but
to elude any operations which might discourage those disturbances by which he
meant to profit. If this purpose was less evident than it is in his dispatches,
it is put out of doubt by the declaration which the same officer is said This
is expressed doubtfully, because the authority is doubtful.
to have made, that he would sooner cut off his right hand than order troops to
march to suppress this claim of freedom. His letter is perfectly consistent
with his declaration; and though we lament that his conduct has lost to
Great Britain the hands of all the inhabitants of America, yet we must
acknowledge that the right hand of that right honorable Gentleman is perfectly
safe.

To be convinced of the evil effects which these his dissertations upon
prudence and levity must have had in the midst of so much tumult, let us
suppose for a moment that the procrastinating s -- y had still procrastinated;
even his delay or his neglect would have been less pernicious to his country
than dispatches of so much Caution. The officers in America might still have
hoped, that their obedience to the laws of England, amidst the general contempt
of them, would be esteemed a service, and receive encouragement and support;
they might have continued to encourage the loyal, and to check the violence of
the rebellious, by turning the eyes of both toward Great Britain, who would
reward her friends, chastise her foes, and vindicate her just authority. The
arrival of the packet deprived them even of this resource: They saw the
ministers in England either too timed to enforce the law, or determined to
suspend and repeal it; and they saw therefore the folly of exposing themselves
to the fury of an enraged people, in support of an act which the administration
did not intend to execute. If these obvious reflections did not immediately
occur to the officers themselves, they were however soon suggested to them by
the opposers of the act; for the Americans saw this conduct in its true light;
in that in which the s -- y must have wished them to see it: They had formed
hopes of it as soon as they were informed of his promotion; they express them
thus See Constitutional Courant, No. 1
it may be worth the serious consideration of those who would officiously
endeavor to enslave their countrymen to enforce (the stamp act) whether they
will not be more likely to receive frowns, than the smiles of their superiors,
for their activity in so odious an office.

When therefore the disobedient saw these expectations answered by the s -- y's
dispatch, they, who had no restrainst upon them but the fear of English
displeasure, were convinced too by these letters that they might offend with
impunity; when they ^aw a total annihilation of government submitted to, and an
avowed and violent resistance to the English parliament calling forth the
utmost lenity they perceived that the ministry, though they did not yet venture
to avow, did however approve their proceeding; that they had nothing to fear
from their displeasure, or from their orders, without which no American officer
would take any decisive step; and they received from hence that degree of
encouragement which nothing else could have given to them

The intentions of the ministry are proved, not only by the steps which they
did take, but also from their neglect of those which they ought to have taken.
It is not always just to argue a criminality of this kind from an omission, but
it is impossible not to deduce it in this case; because the omission was that
of a step which the importance of the object, the requisitions of the American
officers, and the representations of the Board of Trade had shown them to be
necessary, and which they had confessed to be so in their own report.

To be convinced of this, let us suppose that every thing hitherto had been
well conducted; let us grant, that on the 14th of September the s -- y could
not even guess what he should determine on the 3d of October, concerning a
matter, on which he had had the time passed since the 27th of July to meditate;
and therefore that he acted with all possible vigor as well as caution, when,
after an interval of more than six weeks, he referred the officers in America
to a future decision of the privy council for their instructions; let us
imagine too, that till the 3d of October he though it so lightly of the privy
council, as to expect that they would decide on a matter too high for their
deliberation; and that he did not know that it was neither his nor their
province to debate upon the propriety of laws, but that it was his duty to
address himself to the execution of them. At least, by the report of the privy
council made on that day, his uncertainties must have been removed; they were
removed; he himself joins at least in that report which declares that, this
matter is proper only for the consideration of parliament. There never had
arisen a point which from its importance both in itself and in its
consequences, called more loudly for the intervention of that assembly: the
support which might be clai^ed from near two millions of people was to be
determined by it; and the question whether Great Britain has a right to the
obedience of her colonies, was involved in the decision.

This report had been made on the 3d of October; by the 8th of that month the
administration had authentic and particular intelligence, that the principles
of resistance and independence, which had been unchecked, had produced their
natural consequences, tumult and rebellion. What now does the reader expect
from a ministry, which doubtful in itself, and looking round for direction, had
not hitherto been able to receive any, but that they should immediately have
had recourse to that council for which no matter is too high; from which the
repeal of every law found inexpedient is to take its rise, the authority of
which would secure obedience to it till the propriety of the repeal had been
considered, and to which the representation of the Board of Trade and their own
report referred them? The great council of the kingdom? He expects to see a
proclamation, dated on the 9th of October, which would have assembled the
parliament by the latter end of November. An immediate call of the senate was
the more necessary, because it was reasonable to expect that the discussion of
so important a subject would employ some time; the administration could not be
assured that the parliament, which had been almost unanimous in approving the
principles, and enacting the clauses of the stamp act, would immediately and
without hesitation consent to the repeal of it. The fact is, that sixteen days
after the receipt of this intelligence, the ministry, in spite of the call from
the distress of a whole continent, from their own neglect, from their own
acknowledgments, advised the k -- g to prorogue the parliament; it was
prorogued on the 24th of October, and on the very same day on which they
betrayed the empire of Great Britain, by the timid duplicity of the
instructions sent abroad, they deprived her too of the assistance which might
have been received from more vigorous counsels at home

A conduct which can be accounted for only by one motive; they had resolved
from spleen, faction, jealousy, or resentment to repeal an act, the success and
good effects of which would still have increased the reputation of the minister
who planned it; they feared that the authority and the wisdom of parliament
would be able even yet to check the rebellion of the provinces, and enforce the
law; they wished this rebellion should gain strength, that they might apply to
the fears of those, whose reason they could not hope to convince; they
sacrificed to these views the permanent interests and honor of the state, and
encouraged by their connivance, and by the p^^^ogation of the parliament, that
resistance and those tumults, which they meant to apply to their own factious
purposes.

Unhappily for the public, these designs were but too successful; the riots in
America became more general, and more dangerous: it will appear by the
intelligence subsequent to this period, of which I shall now state some part,
as nearly as may be, in the order of time in which it is dated, that even their
wishes could not form a scene of greater anarchy than their conduct had
produced in America; that they were informed very minutely of a total
dissolution of every part of government, and that although the stamp act was
the pretext, yet the causes and the objects of their resentment were also the
restraints on their trade, and their subjection to Great Britain: these were
really felt, while the stamp act which was formed to execute itself, which
affected scarcely any but those of whose ability the very payment was a proof,
which was confessed by the Americans to be the most eligible of all the taxes
which could be imposed, and which, as it had not been executed, could not yet
have been oppressive, was only the occasion of these insurrections.

This opportunity was taken (says the Sea letter to commissioners of customs,
dated September 7, 1765.
writer of a letter from America) to show their resentment to every officer
under the crown; and particularly to the officers of the customs in this port;
with whom they had been and still continue to be much displeased, for their
vigilance in putting the acts of trade in force, and endeavoring to prevent
abuses of the same. A letter to the s -- y has this passage See letter to Mr.
Conway, dated September 28, 1765. received November 4.
; The country has grown more and more inflamed; every where have been heard
loud declarations that they would not submit to the stamp act upon any account,
or in any instance. -- I observed that the violences of the mob had intimidated
some of the best people in the province, and left the cause of the king and
parliament almost without an advocate.

It is apparent, from their proceedings See letter to Mr. Pownall, dated
October 1, 1765.
, that there is among them an intention and an expectation of improving the
present ill humor of the people into an actual breach with Great Britain; or
at least of gaining such a triumph over Great Britain, by obliging her to
repeal this law under an actual resistance of it, as to make her authority
contemptible hereafter.

The steps they took for this purpose, in one of the provinces, were these; See
letter to the commissioners of stamps dated October 12, 1765.
One and all cried out, let us see who will dare put the act in execution, upon
the governor's appointment; we will take care of that.

In another government this paper was pasted up at the door of every public
office, and at the corners of the streets;

Pro Patri^
The first man that either distributes, or makes use of stamped paper, let him
take care of his house, person and effects.

We dare.

Vox Populi.

I shall conclude (says an intelligent writer See letter to commissioners of
stamps, dated October 12, 1765.
) with the following observation, that if Great Britain can or will suffer such
conduct in her colonies to pass unpunished, a man need not be a prophet, or the
son of a prophet, to see clearly, that her empire in North America is at an end.

But whether his Majesty See letter to commissioners of stamps, dated November
2, 1765.
and his ministers can or will wink at and overlook these insults and outrages,
and permit their colonists to refuse obedience to an act of parliament, and
also to declare it illegal and unconstitutional, the writer does not determine.

Britain (says the same correspondent, in the same letter) must first
determine, whether she is to govern or not; and whether she will permit us to
put ourselves under the protection of France or Spain; as many upon the
continent declare they will ward off the stamp act until they can get France or
Spain to protect them. -- The issue of this act will absolutely determine
Britain's sovereignty in America; for if by these rebellious methods we can get
this act repealed, I doubt not but some of my children will live to see a duty
laid by the Americans on some things imported from Great Britain.

A person very well informed, and very capable of judging, writes thus; See a
letter to the lords of trade, dated Nov. 30, 1765.
You may imagine that the popular party is greatly elated with this accession
of strength, founded upon the ruins of the power of government. Some of them
talk of it with an indiscretion that is amazing, as if this town was to remain
for ever independent of the king's government. One says, there has not been
enough done; there wants more correction: another says, let us see now who will
seize merchants goods; what judge will condemn them; what court will dare to
grant writs of assistance now. Others talk as familiarly of turning out the
governor, for adhering to the king and parliament, as they could do at
Rhode Island or Connecticut.

The Sea letter to commissioners of customs, dated September 7, 1765.
leaders or conductors of the mob had offered to take any kind of goods, liable
to seizure, under their protection; and bid defiance to the officers of the
customs.

They See advertisement, dated September 2, 1765.
had surrounded the custom-house, and demanded the persons of the collector and
comptroller.

The riot raised on the 1st of November, in New York, was so unprovoked, and,
in its consequences, so dangerous a defiance and attack on government, that the
account which was published of it by themselves is printed in the Appendix. See
Appendix, No. 13.

In this riot the lieutenant governor had been abused, insulted and plundered;
and major James after suffering the same violences, had been obliged to
withdraw himself from their fury, by taking refuge on board a ship, and to
leave a country in which See letter to Mr. C -- y, dated December 13, 1765
no objection could be made to him, but his daring to put the king's fort into
a state of defense against the sovereign lords the people, as they styled
themselves; and for which offense they resolved to make him an example of their
displeasure.

But (says a correspondent, See letter to Mr. C -- y, dated December 18, 1765.
speaking of a recent riot) it was designed as an insult upon the king's
authority, as a terror to the king's officers, and to show that they were
nothing in the eyes or the hands of the people.

See letter to commissioners of stamps, dated December 3, 1765.
The state and anarchy and confusion we are now in (says a writer well
qualified to judge) is beyond description; every thing being under the power of
the people, who undertake to govern in all cases, and regulate all public
affairs. -- I BELIEVE THEY THINK THE MOST EFFECTUAL WAY TO GET THE ACT
REPEALED, IS TO INSULT THE AUTHORITY THAT MADE IT.

Alarming and rebellious as this conduct appears, the danger of it, and the
importance of checking it, was still increased by the principles which produced
and accompanied it: these may be found in the popular publications in America,
with regard to Great Britain, which is described in one of them Providence
Gazette, August 24, 1765.
as a mother country, who, in their stupidity, have judged it criminal for us
to become our own manufacturers.

These are some of the political principles which they contained and dispersed
Constitutional Courant, No. 1.
. The public faith of the nation, in which till now we thought we might
securely confide, is violated, and we robbed of our dearest rights, by the late
law erecting a stamp office among us. -- Let us boldly deny all such usurped
jurisdiction (it is the jurisdiction of the British parliament of which he
speaks) we owe them no more subjection, in this respect, than the Divan of
Constantinople. -- The true lovers of liberty, who detest and abhor the
stamp act from principle, and a certain knowledge of their rights violated by
that act. -- An act illegally obtruded upon us to deprive us of our most sacred
rights, and change our freedom to slavery, by a legislature who has no lawful
authority over us. -- But how came the English parliament by such a right over
us? -- Their power (with regard to liberty and property) is purely local. --
Heaven defend us from such representatives. -- They have taken upon them to
deprive us of our rights, which are not under their jurisdiction.

These and the like principles, which were constantly published See letter to
Mr. C -- y, dated September 23, 1765. received October 28.
to serve the purpose of exciting the people to disobedience of the laws, and
to sedition, were not the productions of the lower and more ignorant of the
people, but, as a person, who knew the characters of the men, informed Mr. C --
y, See the same letter.
some of the most popular lawyers are the authors of these seditious papers;
and have been countenanced by some of the judges, and others of the highest
trust in the government.

Indeed the influence and support of the writers was so extensive, that the
council of the province agreed See the same letter.
That it was not a proper time to prosecute the printers and publishers of
these seditious papers; the Attorney General likewise not thinking himself safe
to commence any such prosecution.

But these principles were not confined to particular persons, the general
assembly of Massachuset's-bay had actually prepared a bill enacting, See letter
to Mr. Pownall, dated October 26, 1765.
That it shall and may be lawful to do business without stamps, the act of
parliament to the contrary notwithstanding.

The people of Connecticut, (says a correspondent See letter to Mr. C -- y,
dated December 19, 1765.
of Mr. C -- y's) who are embodied in form, have declared publicly, that all
power is from the people; that it is granted with certain bounds, that if those
bounds are exceeded, power devolves to the people; that where there is no other
redress, as in the stamp act, the people should resume their power; therefore
they recommend, with threats against disobedience that the public officers
should proceed in their business without stamps: this is a formal resumption of
government by the people.

The assembly of New Jersey resolved, nem. con. See extract from Votes of
Assembly of New Jersey, November 30, 1765.
That all supplies being free gifts; for the people of Great Britain to grant
to his Majesty the property of the people of this colony, without their own
consent, and being represented, would be unreasonable; and render useless
legislation in this colony in the most essential point.

Among the votes of the assembly of New York stands the following; See extract
from Votes of Assembly of New York.
Resolved, nem. con. That it involves the greatest inconsistency with the known
principles of the English constitution, to suppose that the honorable House of
Commons of Great Britain, can, without divesting the inhabitants of this colony
of their most essential rights, grant to the crown, their, or any part of their
estates, for any purpose whatsoever.

Each of these resolutions were accompanied by others of the same nature and
tendency, which were designed to establish the claim of an absolute
independence on the British parliament. That the reader may be enabled to judge
of the spirit and purpose of them, those of Philadelphia are printed more at
length in the Appendix. See Appendix, No. 14.

It was to enable them to maintain this independence, that an unprecedented,
illegal and dangerous meeting of committees from all the provinces was
assembled at New York, to enable them, in their own expression, to become a
bundle of sticks, which can neither be bent nor broken. Other pretenses were
given to this assembly, but its tendency, and the spirit of those who composed
it, are thus described by a very judicious hand; See letter to Mr. C -- y,
dated November 12, 1765.
They are of various characters and opinions, but it is to be feared, in
general, that the spirit of Democracy is strong among them. The question is not
of the inexpediency of the stamp act; or of the inability of the colonies to
pay the tax; but that it is unconstitutional, and contrary to their rights;
supporting the independency of the provinces; and not to be subject to the
legistative power of Great Britain.

There was no step which required more the interposition of government than
this: if the other instances of their seditious temper might be called sudden
tumults, which built on no premeditated design, and directed only to temporary
purposes, might cease with the present frenzy, and leave their traces only in
the devastation they had committed; this was more hostile in its appearance,
implied more of a deep and dangerous spirit of determined revolt, and by the
very precedent left the most alarming consequences: and yet although the
nature, design, and consequences of this meeting, were repeatedly and by
various hands pointed out to them, the administration observed, during this
whole proceeding, a total silence; and left the Americans unrestrained to form
a general congress, which, bearing the appearance of a national, as the several
assemblies bore of a provincial representative, might turn the eyes, affections
and respects of the colonists from the legislature of Great Britain to this
American parliament.

Even the last step of formed and avowed rebellion ^^^s ventured on by them;
that of raising a regular body of forces to be opposed to those which England
might employ.

In this town (says a See letter to the lords of trade, dated November 30, 1765.
person on the spot) all power is in the hands of the people; out of which,
under pretense of uniting two parties in the town, are formed two companies,
under two professed captains; who are said to be able to muster 400 men on a
short warning. Two or three gentlemen of fortune profess to have the command of
these bands, and it is hoped they have; as the governor (whose authority could
not command ten men) and every other officer of the crown lie at their mercy.

Ten days, or more, (says the writer See letter to the lords of trade, dated
November 26, 1765.
of a very circumstantial account of this dangerous confederacy) before the
last 5th of November, two gentlemen, called the richest merchants in this town,
entertained the principal men of these parties, and reconciled them to one
another, for other purposes I fear than burning a pope. -- Thus was celebrated
the union between these two bands, who (at a time when the militia have refused
to obey the captain general, and it has been said publicly, at a town-meeting,
that they were not obliged to obey him) are said to be well trained, and ready
to obey orders upon proper occasions

Such was the state of government in the American provinces; If shape it might
be called, which shape had none
Distinguishable in member, joint or limb;
Or substance might be called that shadow seemed;
An exigence in which the fullest and most particular instructions, and the
warmest encouragements, were necessary to direct and assist the officers in the
performance of their duty: an assistance and encouragement toward which they
were ever turning their eyes and hopes, and ever in vain. For with regard to
the execution of the particular act in question, the ministry so little
intended it, that they did not even send the common directions for that
purpose; or even copies of the act.

The complaints of this neglect are very numerous, and from different quarters.
I enclose herewith (says an officer See letter to Mr. Po^^^^ dated October 20,
176^.
) a certificate of my having taken the oath required by the stamp act; which I
framed from a copy of the act printed here; there being not one authentic act
here; there never were but two; and those sent under private covers. It is
strange -- s should not have those acts sent them by which they are liable to
penalties.

I beg leave to represent to your lordship (says another See letter to lords of
trade, dated November 3, 1765.
) that I was left to myself, without any instructions or directions from your
right honorable board, to guide me through this wilderness. Your lordships
will, I hope, forgive me for saying, that I even had not the common notice of
there being such an act, as it has never been sent to me.

I am, my lords, (these are the words of a third See letter to the lords of
trade, dated Nov. 9, 1765.
) under great difficulties, with respect to the stamp act; not having to this
day received the act of parliament, or one scrape of a pen about it; nor is any
stamp-paper or officer yet arrived here. (This was eight days after the day
fixed for the commencement of the act) I fear, my lords, there has been an
omission somewhere relative to this matter, which embarrasses me greatly.

And, to omit several others of the same kind, even so late as the 13th of
November a correspondent See letter to the lords of trade, dated Nov. 13, 1765.
writes thus to the Board of Trade: We are indeed particularly circumstanced in
this province with regard to the stamp act; for even if there was no opposition
given to it, it could not be put in force, as no commission or instructions for
the purpose are yet come to hand, if sent from England; and without them the
person nominated distributor of stamps could not be qualified to execute the
office, were he so inclined.

But bare official instructions were not the only ones which the occasions and
the applications of the officers demanded; they had hoped, they still hoped to
receive the support and authority, which England alone could give them; and
which was thought as necessary to preserve the peace of the provinces, as the
dominion of Great Britain. Some of the principal ringleaders in the late riots
(says a correspondent See letter to board of trade, dated December 17, 1765.
) walk the streets with impunity; no officer dares attack them, no
attorneygeneral prosecute them, no witness appear against them, and no judge
sit upon them; so it must remain until other orders than this government can
give shall be taken.

By this you may guess (writes a person See letter to Mr. Pownall, dated
October 19, 1765.
of unshaken loyalty to England) what a state this government is in; and it is
not likely to mend, 'till the power and authority of Great Britain comes to our
relief. For this I can quote a great politician of this town, who is now at New
York, attending the congress there. This gentleman (it is Mr. Otis of whom he
speaks) has, I believe, contributed more than any one man whatever to bring us
into the state of outlawry and confusion we are now in, and now begins to be
frightened at it: before he left this town, for New York, he said to a
gentleman, if the government at home don't very soon send forces to keep the
province, they will be cutting one another throats from one end to the other
of it.

Nothing can be done here to enforce obedience to this act, (says a
correspondent See letter to lords of trade dated October 5, 1765.
on this subject) and nothing less than the wisdom of parliament can provide a
remedy for this act of disobedience. The militia is all the force the
respective governors on the continent depend on, upon all emergencies; and
experience has shown, how vain and fruitless it is to beat to arms, when
neither officers or men will or dare appear.

It is not surprising that the administration did not pay more regard to these
and the like complaints, of which the letters to them are full, than they had
done to the other requisitions on the same subject. They, who would not assist
their distressed and meritorious officers even with instructions, could not be
expected to send the more material support of forces. It is true, that an order
of the privy council was made See Order of council, dated St. James's, Oct. 23,
1765.
, directing, That orders should be given to the commander of the land and sea
forces in America, for their concurrence and assistance in suppressing riots,
when called upon by the governors for that purpose: and it is equally true,
that the lords of the treasury ordered a circular letter to be written to the
governors, directing them to assist in the collection of the stamp-duty, and to
see that the revenue received no damage: an instruction exactly equal in
efficacy with that exhortation, which the inquisitors give with so much charity
to the civil magistrate, to take care of the unhappy victim, whom they have
themselves devoted and doomed to destruction. It is impossible to read the s --
y's letter of the 24th of October, (see Appendix, No. 4.) and not be sensible,
that the governors must have seen it was the intention of the ministry that
force should not be employed; and that they must expect therefore to answer in
their own persons for every fatal, though accidental consequence, which might
attend the employing it: under these circumstances there was danger that the
governors should call upon the commanders for an assistance to their efforts,
the success of which gave them nothing to hope, while the miscarriage left them
every thing to fear.

The administration had, however, a still stronger security that the
occurrences in America should not be interrupted by force. They thought that,
on that continent a number of men, equal to the exigence, could not be
assembled; and they determined that no more should be sent thither. Of the
former of these points the s -- y had been informed authentically, as he chose
to think, by the commander in chief of his Majesty's forces in America; this
appears by the answer which he returns to that officer; See Appendix, No. 5.
especially considering what you say of the difficulty, or rather impossibility
of drawing any considerable number of men together; and of the impracticability
of attempting any thing by force, in the present disposition of the people,
without a respectable body of troops.

It will perhaps appear, by a perusal of those letters from the commander in
chief, which are to be found in the collection of papers made on this occasion,
that of the impossibility of drawing a considerable number of men together he
says nothing: he says the forces are greatly scattered and divided over that
vast continent, that a junction might be prevented by the frost, etc. but a
minister who had wished to act with vigor, might have given orders to act if
the junction could be made; and if these orders had been given, they had been
executed; for a subsequent letter See letter to Mr. C -- y, dated December 21,
1765.
informed the s -- y, that 300 men, which in that country is a respectable body
of troops, could be brought to act whenever the governors should require them.

But if the s -- y really understood general Gage as stating an impossibility
of drawing together a number of men sufficient to attempt any thing by force,
it ought to have been to him the strongest motive for sending thither such an
assistance as might be equal to the occasion. So far were the ministry from
attending to this, so far from sending to the continent an augmentation, that
they prevented that increase of force which the common military rotation would
have carried thither. For the time was now coming when the regiments, which
were on duty in that part of the world, were to be relieved by those from
Ireland. About 2500 men are carried to America for this purpose; and as the
regiments which have passed the stated time of their service there, are at the
same time drawn down to the coast for embarkation, the junction of these, which
might have been made in any place most proper for the service, would have
formed a body of near 5000 men, ready and able to have reduced the revolting
provinces to obedience: this resource was stopped under those pretenses, which
in so extensive a dominion are never wanting; under the pretense of fear of
some tumults in Ireland, a reason which operated equally for two or three years
together, these regiments were detained from America, where their presence
would have restored security to the officers, authority to the laws, and
sovereignty to Great Britain.

These were all the steps which the ministry had taken to execute the laws of
their country, and to preserve the allegiance of America, before the meeting of
parliament. It is true, that Mr. C -- y dispatched to America two more letters
on the 15th of December: but whoever reads them (they are in the Appendix, No.
5 and 6) will not be surprised that no credit is given to the writer of them
for any attempt to quell by their means the rebellion in America; though it
appeared to have increased both in extent and danger from the 24th of October
to the time at which they were written; for they are addressed only to one
province, they contain even less than his former dispatches, and, in fact,
refer to them as containing fully his Majesty's sentiments and commands.

All the intelligence has now been laid together, which was received after the
24th of October, 1765, and prior to the meeting of the parliament; and none has
been produced, which was received after the House of Commons had taken this
matter into their consideration. For by these means the reader is enabled to
compare the intelligence with the conduct of the administration; and to
determine in what degree they merit his approbation or censure, as ministers
entrusted with the execution of the laws of their country: a point very
different from that, which is afterward to be considered, the great question
of the repeal of the stamp act; and to be determined upon very different
grounds, If the act was repealed upon just reasons, it will not follow that the
conduct of the ministry, before the repeal, was either wise or honest: it is
even part of their crime that their conduct had been such as to make the repeal
appear necessary to those who repealed it. For, from the intelligence which has
been produced, it appears, that they had not only omitted to execute those
clauses for the relief of the Americans which must have facilitated the
reception of the stamp act; but even to send those official instructions
without which it was impossible that act should be executed at all: they had
seen the laws of Great Britain, not only the law in question, but those of
customs and police violated and rejected; her officers insulted; her authority
contemned: and her government dissolved; while the independence of the colonies
was asserted by popular publications, provincial assemblies, and the still more
dangerous step of open resistance: they had looked on, while comaintain this
independe^ce, an American senate was formed, which might receive the reverence
due to the parliament of England; and while a regular force was embodied to
support their pretensions; and instead of checking so dangerous and increasing
a revolt in its first and feeble beginnings, they had continued and increased
these evils by their neglect and connivance; and that they might, by repealing
the act, detract from the merits of the preceding ministry, effect an union
with Mr. Pit, and secure their own continuance in office, they had sacrificed
the reputation, empire, and interests of Great Britain.

It is impossible not to see that this was their design, because their conduct
was such as could be produced by no other motives; and was the reverse of that,
which was dictated by common prudence and a regard for their own reputation and
safety; because it was foretold to them, both by the American officers and by
the board of trade, that those dreadful effects which did follow in America,
would be the consequences of that conduct; and because too, at the period we
now speak of, the meeting of the parliament, they actually did apply them to
that purpose,

In fact, all the motives which had hitherto influenced them to this conduct
were increased in strength: the tenure by which they held their offices was
grown still more precarious; the hand which had planted could no longer protect
them; and destitute as they were of reputation, experience or ability, and
looking round with anxious dismay in search of some support, they saw none but
in the destruction of the measures of their predecessor, and in an union with
the great commoner. That gentleman had retained some degree of popularity, for
he was not yet a peer; this would give them an appearance at least of strength;
and he was sufficiently conversant in business, to free them from the
ridiculous distress of being obliged to ask assistance from every one whom
chance threw in their way. But an approximation to this person was not easy;
some of them had forsaken him, and given him reason for that mixture of
contempt and dislike which he expressed pretty freely of them all: but he had
declared his disapprobation of the stamp act; they approached him with that
total submission to his sentiments, which seldom fails of pleasing, they
entreated his protection, his interest required that all the capital measures
of the former ministry should be thought wrong: he gave them therefore his
assistance on this question, which was so interesting to them as ministers; and
their subsequent behavior has gained in a still greater degree; he has
consented to an union with them: and England, if she has lost America by this
ministerial intrigue, is so happy as to have purchased, by that small
sacrifice, an administration composed of lord C -- m and his adopted children.

Quod si non aliam venturo fata Neroni
Invenire viam --
-- Coelumque suo servire tonantie
Non nisi soevorum potuit post bella gigantum,
Jam nihil O superi querimur, scelera ipsa nesasque
Hac mercede placent.
But, notwithstanding their confidence in this powerful auxiliary, the ministry
were well aware, that if the question was to be debated on the principles of
justice, policy, or public advantage, they could have no hopes of success.
Nothing therefore remained but to pursue those measures which they had
practiced so long, and in which their American friends had given them such
effectual assistance; and to apply to the fears of those, whose judgments they
could not hope to convince.

The American merchants had written See letter to Mr. C -- y, dated November 8,
1765
that no dry goods may be sent out to them, unless the stamp act is repealed;
and some go so far as to say, that they will not pay their debts but upon that
condition.

This scheme (says a very intelligent See paper enclosed in a letter to Mr. C
-- y, dated December 13, 1765.
correspondent) is calculated solely to influence the people in England; and
should it be executed, the people in America will pay an extravagant price for
old moth eaten goods, and such as the merchants could not otherwise sell. The
merchants may likewise have views of getting goods in that case from Holland
and other foreign parts, while the moh can d^ter the custom house officers from
attempting to do their duty.

They have wrote many See letter to Mr, C -- y, dated December 21, 1765
letters to their correspondents in England, in which they throw the blame upon
the unruly populace; magnifying the force and determined resolution of the
people to oppose the execution of the law by every means; with a view to
terri^y and frighten the people of England into a repeal of the act. And the
merchants having countermanded the goods they had wrote for, unless it was
repealed, they make no doubt that many trading towns and principal merchants in
London will assist them to accomplish their ends.

Their expectations were well grounded; many trading towns and principal
merchants in London did assist them to accomplish their ends; but the ministry
took the lead, and emyloyed for this purpose every engine in their Power: every
body remembers the industry with which all their writers and orators of every
shape and size endeavored to depreciate the rights of Great Britain; and to
exalt the privileges of the freeborn, virtuous and independent Americans;
their union and their strength were represented as irresistible, and their
employing these in residance to the English parliament praised as heroic.

When, it was hoped, the minds of the people were prepared by these
declamations, petitions were solicited by their agents from such of the
manu^acturing towns as they could hope to influence; a regular society of
American merchants in London was formed for this among other purposes; this
society supported and assisted by government, became so successful, as to claim
at length the superiority; they obtained it; and the counsels of the Kingdom
were guided, not by the enlarged maxims of general policy, not by
considerations even of permanent and extensive comercial interests, but by the
temporary and partial views of a junto of interested traders held at a tavern.
Now that the f^rment raised on this occasion has subsided, one can scarcely
believe this fact though so recent and authentic; or that such means and
instruments should produce, as they did produce, the repeal of the stamp act.
For it was in vain that, to the popular panic, every argument was opposed,
which the principles of justice, of the constitution, of policy, even of
interest could furnish. It was in vain that those, who were so unpopular as to
defend the cause of Great Britain, urged that the stamp act had passed upon the
most general and acknowledged grounds of Whig policy, is due in return for the
protection on the part of government; that taxation should be extended over all
the parts of a state, in proportion to the relative ability found in each, If,
said they, we examine the arguments by which the Americans would prove their
right of exemption, we shall see that the admission of them dissolves at once
the constitution of our country: if the legislature has no power but over those
who vote for the election of the members which form one part of it, not only
all our possessions in Asia, Africa and America are exempted from any obedience
to the laws of trade, revenue and police, passed in England; but even
nineteen-twentieths of the inhabitants of Great Britain are released from their
subjection; and entitled to return to that savage freedom on which every
restrictive law is an usurpation. But it is not from its absurd and pernicious
consequences alone that we prove the falsehood of this maxim; it proceeds from
an ignorance of the nature and powers of our constitution. The Commons of
Great Britain, assembled in parliament, are not only the representatives of the
counties and buroughs who depute them, but of all the commons of the realm:
they are entrusted with the interests, appointed to guard the liberties,
relieve the burdens, and redress the grievances of the whole kingdom; there is
no part of it but is entitled to their protection, there is none therefore
which is exempted from their authority; the contrary doctrine diminishes their
utility, degrades their character, and reduces them from the honorable and
extensive office of being the guardians and counselors of a whole kingdom, to
that of burgomasters for a petty, sometimes an uninhabited borough. It is one
of the first duties to whom this important trust is committed to execute it,
and especially that unpleasing but necessary part of it the power of taxation,
in the most impartial manner; it is this alone which can induce the subject to
bear with patience the burden of imposts; will you not then betray the trust
of your constituents, if you suffer any part of the people to force an
exemption from those taxes which the public exigencies require to be imposed
on the whole; and will you not destroy that confidence on which all government
is founded?

The distinctions which have been made on this subject are not well grounded;
The parliament has the right of imposing external, not internal duties: and it
will be proper to lay on the Americans every burden which the hand of power
can impose, if they should attempt to become manufacturers. These sentiments
have been delivered and received as maxims; but the difference between the
right of imposing internal and external duties is merely imaginary, grounded on
no principle of justice or policy, contradictory to the claims of the
Americans, whose resolutions See Appendix, No. 7 and 14,
assert their exemption from all duties not imposed by themselves; and is
treated as an idle distinction by Mr. Otis, the chosen champion of American
privileges. The other maxim, that of forbidding manufactures, seems a much
greater and less justifiable infringement of the rights claimed by the
Americans, than the imposing on them a tax for their own defense, is with
difficulty to be resolved into any principle but that of power; and must be
very uncertain in its extent and operation; whereas that of the stamp act is
founded in justice, and of certain and acknowledged extent and application,

The ability of America, to raise this proportion of the sum necessary for
their own defense, admits of no doubt; the pressure of debt upon them, of which
as of a popular topic, they have made some use, was at the end of the war not
quite 2,600,000 l: it is already reduced to about 767.000 l, and the greater
part of this will be paid of in two or three years by funds provided for that
Purpose. The whole sum expected to be raised by the stamp-duty was 100, 000 l a
year; the repartition of this upon 1,500, 000 people, at which the lowest
computation estimates the present inhabitants of that country, would not draw
from each person more than half the value of a day's labor in America. England
has even furnished them with resources to raise the revenue she has required;
the bounties given to them on two or three articles alone would enable them to
support the new impositions; and the increase of the establishment there
furnishes them with another fund, which alone would more than balance the
account; it is sufficient to mention this, for it is not on this ground that
the Americans wish to stand; they do not plead poverty, but privilege; and
have rested their inability to support, but their cause, not upon their right
of exemption from an English tax.

The manner in which the resistance has been exerted, proves still more
strongly the necessity of opposing it with firmness. Riots in the capitals of
the provinces, personal attacks on our officers, insults on our government,
these are the actions by which they have accompained and supported those
resolutions of their assemblies which disclaimed our authority. The ministry,
partial as they are to the Americans, have themselves acknowledged that in
these circumstances it would be disgraceful, and it is impossible to repeal the
act. Read, in the dispatches of Mr. C -- y, who will not be suspected of
asserting the rights of Great Britain in too high a tone, this point
determined. He directs the officers to represent to them the dreadful
consequences that must inevitably attend the forcible and violent resistance to
acts of the British parliament.

He assures them that his Majesty cannot permit his own dignity and the
authority of the British legislator to be trampled on by force and violence.

Neither will his Majesty undoubtedly submit, or his servants advise, under any
circumstances, that the respect which is due to parliament, and which is
necessary for the general good of the whole British empire, should any where be
made a sacrifice to local and dangerous prejudices.

From the time of writing these letters, the disrespect to parliament, the
violent resistance to acts of the British legislature, and those outrages, by
which they were supported, have been continually increasing; the disgrace
therefore and the danger are proportionally increased, and those sentiments
which then animated him are strengthened too; it is impossible therefore that
the ministry can, without acting in direct contradiction to themselves as well
as to their duty, propose that the respect due to parliament should be made a
sacrifice to local and dangerous prejudices. To make this sacrifice will deter
both future ministers from forming any schemes for the public utility, which
may expose them to be sacrificed to combinations of private interest, the
clamor of multitudes, or the malice of faction; and future officers from
executing acts of parliament, for and in that country; and will contribute to
the success of the design which the most desperate of the colonists have formed
to make G. Britain contemptible, by extorting a repeal of an act of parliament
during an actual resistance to its execution: a repeal which will either
abrogate in effect all other laws and statutes relating to our colonies; or at
least greatly increase the difficulty of enforcing them, as well as postpone it
to a season, when the strength of the colonies as well as their claims of
independence being augmented, the situations and dispositions too of the other
powers of Europe may be such as to render the contest far more dangerous.

These, and the other arguments, which were drawn from all the great and
interesting topics with which the subject abounds, were scarcely heard, for it
was reason only which spoke: the tumult of popular fear expressed itself in
louder terms, and was more attended to. The Americans had withdrawn their
commissions; they threatened to withhold the payment of their debts; the first
of these was an illegal and hostile combinanation to distress our
manufacturers, a step rather allowable in an equal when in a state of war, than
in subjects who pretend to be in peace: the ^^st was such a breach of private
faith as is not practiced even in time of war between jealous commercial
rivals; and both of them means which would always be in the power of the
Americans to use, and would hereafter be recurred to with an assurance of
success: and yet these reasons, which would have made it disgraceful and unwise
to have given way in an indifferent matter, operated so strongly on the
multitude that they persuaded them we ought to recede in the justest cause, and
from the strongest ground. Petitions were obtained, the manufacturers excited,
the merchants clamorous, the ministry, interested and factious, directed to
their own purposes the resistance and the clamours which they had raised; and
the legislature, with a condescension to popular alarm, and a lenity to the
colonies which demands the amplest returns of gratitude and obedience, passed a
bill for the repeal of the stamp act.

The conduct of the late administration has now been stated from authentic
vouchers; it is time to examine the merits of it with regard to the crown, to
America, and to Great Britain. In speaking of that administration, I would be
understood to speak generally; I do not pretend to be informed by what part of
it the counsels were planned; it is therefore left to them to divide in the
proper proportions that praise to which the public shall think them entitled.
If the f -- y for the f -- n department was only the hand; I desire to charge
him only with being the hand; though to the state he is accountable for the
plan of those counsels by which his department is conducted: a weight which he
has with great prudence and caution contrived, if it be possible, to shift on
other shoulders, by a stratagem exactly equal with that of a much fatter
commander, who prudently withdrew when he had led his raggam^^ffins where they
might be peppered.

The first whom their conduct regards is a name which should never be mixed
amid the tumult of party contests; and which I mention with reluctance though
it is to recall to it that reverence which is its due, and which the behavior
of the late administration has tended so much to diminish. It is the great
advantage which limited and mixed monarchies have over those of a more despotic
cast, that in them there are so many intermediate subordinate powers between
the king and his people, that the love and reverence, which for the public good
it is expedi^nt be should possess, may always be retained to him. To this end
it is necessary that the private sentiments of the monarch should not be quoted
at all; and that those of his character should be expressed with a moderation
and dignity equally removed from the vehemence of any party, that he may
continue to all the object of veneration. The late administration offended
against both these parts of their duty as ministers.

It would perhaps be unjust to reproach them with the effeminate, uncertain,
and even ungrammatical expressions in which they cloth the sentiments which
they attribute to their sovereign; so different from that plain and natural
style which ought to convey the commands of an English king; because it is
probable that they used on this occasion the best expressions in their power.

But they are to be told, that to describe their master as surprised, and as
highly provoked (see Appendix, No. 3 and 5) is not a proof of their knowledge
of the duties of administration. The president Montesquieu, when he condemns
this mixing of passion with the royal authority, which he says (Live. xii, chap.
25.) est un grand resort, qui doit se mauvoir aisement. and sans bruit, could
not more exactly have described their dispatches if he had read them. Un
ministre malhabile -- ne scait vous dire ou vous ecrire si ce n'est que le
prince est fache qu'il est surpris, qu'il meltra ordne. The reason of the
impropriety of this kind of style he had given before, Dans nos monarchies
toute la felicite consiste dans l'opinion que le peuple a de la douceur du
gouvernement. The king is the father of his people, and he views their errors
and their crimes with that compassion with which parents regard the misconduct
of their children; it is with reluctance that he lifts his hand to punish, and
it is not the being provoked, it is the necessity of preventing greater evils,
it is justice, it is his paternal care for his obedient subjects, which draws
from him any mark of correction and chastisement. It is by this character that
he preserves the reverence of his people, and therefore to attribute to him
those little passions, which may perhaps at some times agitate the minds of his
ministers, is to diminish his dignity, the confidence which his subjects place
in him, and the happiness of his people. This is so self-evident that I doubt
not the s -- y himself will be the first to acknowledge it; and to confess that
he could not, without betraying equally the truth and his duty, represent his
master as highly provoked.

But this was not the only instance in which they misrepresented the sentiments
of their sovereign: when they were to influence by authority those whom popular
tumult could not terrify to consent to the repeal of the stamp act, they had
recourse to the name of the -- assuring those who would hear them, that the --
wished it might be repealed. The part of honest and affectionate servants was
the very reverse of this; supposing the measure itself to have been just, all
mention of that name should have been suppressed, till, the success of the
repeal being ascertained, the wishes which he expressed for the relief might be
held out as the object of the gratitude of his people; but to quote this
authority, and to risque thereby this reputation for the promotion of their own
party-purposes, was a conduct neither suggested by duty to their fovereign, nor
by regard for the constitution: this reserve would have been necessary, had the
opinion of the -- been that which they attribute to him; but it is certain that
they falsified as well as prostituted the sentiments of the --: it is certain,
although when contradicted on this subject by those who could do it with
authority, they endeavored to avoid the disgrace of this contradiction by an
expedient borrowed from their own school of business, those clubs of gaming in
which gentlemen do not trust the unwritten words of gentlemen, and demanded in
writing the words of their sovereign.

His words were the genuine dictates of his wisdom and love ^or his people;
careful of the safety of all his subjects, he wished to unite them all by the
bands of mutual support, and by a community of duties as well as of rights.
They can claim no merit toward the crown, who by their artifices prevented the
execution of that royal wish; but must with terror look forward to that hour,
for it will come, when Augustus, grieved with the remembrance of the only loss
which can obscure the glories of his successful reign, shall demand from them a
restitution, not of a province, but of an empire more extensive than that of
Rome; not of three legions, but of whole nations of subjects.

They appear however to deserve at least the thanks of the Americans, whose
present interests they have promoted, and of whose privileges they are the
avowed patrons; and yet there are many reasons which may induce those who are
best acquainted with the true interests of that country, to think that they
have not been served by the late project of emancipation. If it is true, as it
has hitherto been pretty generally thought, that the good of each part is
inscparable from that of the whole, their interests are involved in those of
the whole empire, and they must themselves be hurt by their partial exemptions.

If it is the interest of colonies, formed of such various and discordant
materials, to be attempered, guided, encouraged, or restrained by their common
parent; the being set loose from that tie, and encouraged to reject the
authority of that parent, will have material and immediate ill consequences. It
is true, that the Americans, under the shade and protection of Great Britain,
have made rapid advances in population, commerce and wealth; but are they
sufficiently strong to flourish without her care; or to support, I will not say
her resentment, but her neglect: The provinces on the American continent have
been so divided in principles, sentiments and manners; so jea^ous of the
progress of each other in strength, commerce and riches, that they have ever
been unable to form an union equal to their own defense. Their frontiers on
both sides are extensive, and therefore easily attacked; they have no
fortresses, no ships of force, no marine of their own; but must depend upon the
English navy to keep at a distance from them those dangers which they are
unable to repel: the Indian nations, reduced as they are, are still formidable
to them; it was by the English arms that their inroads since the peace have
been checked and prevented; those arms of the expense of which the colo^ists
have refused to pay any proportion: and yet they may again want the protection
of that government which they have ^^jected; and they may call too late for the
efforts of that warmth of affection, which such a partial exemption tends to
alienate from them.

It tends too to alienate from them this affection, from which they have
received such advantages, that they have been represented to have some peculiar
claims to a freedom which they purchased by peculiar fortitude; a
representation which is most untrue. We have been told, that having fled to
that country from our oppression, their migration to America, as it argued in
them a love, so it gave them a title to freedom superior to that of their
fellow subjects who remained in England. But to esteem the Americans our
brethren, and to wish that they may deserve and possess all the sweets of civil
and religious liberty, which Great Britain enjoys, does not make us forget that
they received these blessings from England, and depend on her for the
continuance of them. The truth of the latter of these propositions is obvious;
the proof of the former would be easy but invidious; for the history of these
colonies is not involved in that cloud of fable which hangs over and
aggrandizes the origin of more ancient nations: It would not be difficult to
give a detail of the establishment of each; and it would appear from that
detail that there are few of them who could claim any hereditary discriminating
privileges. Of the patriot colonists of New York it is so far from being true
that they fled from our oppression, or grew by our neglect, that they were
Dutch subjects acquired by our arms, and received, by a formal cession from
Holland in 1667, into our protection. Of the Virginians, whose resolutions were
the alarum-bell to rebellion, and who have been esteemed the great patrons of
American privileges, it may be said with truth, that all the inhabitants of
that colony did not retire thither from motives of religion and virtue; and
that some of them at least were removed to that place, not by the oppression
but the mercy of the government of England. Nor is this peculiar to the colony
of Virginia, for I find in one of the American newspapers, dated Boston.
September 2. 1765, that one of those patriots who had been the most active in
foreing from Mr. Johnson a resignation of his stamp-office was a foreigner (by
which name I suppose they do not yet describe an Englishman) who had been
transported from England to America. Such a detail would be but a mild return
for all those marks of neglect, contempt, and insult on Great Britain, with
which the writings of that country have abounded; it will however be more
temperate only to say, that admitting that to be true of all the colonies,
which is perhaps true only of the New England governments, that the settlers of
them retired thither to enjoy that liberty of which a monarch of arbitrary
principles was endeavoring to deprive them at home; yet less praise is due to
those who fled from the danger, than to those who had the courage to abide it.
If their flight argued in them a love of freedom, their countrymen who remained
in England showed by their actions an equal love of it, supported with more
resolution and success; they took arms to oppose the tyranny from which the
others fled, averted it by the civil war, and abolished it by the revolution.
In these two hazardous enterprises, undertaken for the cause of liberty, the
colonies took no part; they followed in both the fortunes of the
mother country; the patriots of which disused the advantages of their success
to the infant colonies after their settlement; and the colonists therefore have
neither shown any peculiar attachment, nor can be entitled to any of those
superior claims to freedom which have been so invidiously and falsely made in
their behalf; but owe every branch of the liberties of Englishmen to the
community of rights, which they are entitled to as long as they remain in that
subjection to England, to which they are bound by the ties of gratitude,
justice and interest. In fact, the rights to which they have a just claim, are
rendered precarious by placing them on the ground, on which some of their
imprudent advocates in England have concurred with some of their assemblies to
place them.

The franchises of Great Britain are protected and preserved for all the
subjects of the realm by the same power which defined and obtained them; for it
was not by the flight of a few Plymouth adventurers, but by the courage and
constancy o^ the people of England that the freedom of our constitution was
defended: the bill of rights, the act of settlement, on which all our liberties
depend, are not the resolutions of an assembly of colonists, but the acts of an
English Parliament. As our liberties were established, so they are still
protected by the legislature of Great Britain; it is as claimants under this
title, and subjects to this power, that the Americans have ever enjoyed and
still enjoy them; a claim and title which cannot exist in those who reject its
authority: the cause therefore of the colonists and their rights, are betrayed
by those who withdraw their dependence from the supreme ligislature, and teach
them to rest upon the precarious and feeble support of a provincial assembly.

The Americans indeed owe it to the connivance and encouragement of the last
ministry, that their people have been blooded with the prey of sedition; that
they have been taught to obtain support by other means than industry, and
privileges by other means than obedience; but whether the exciting and
rewarding this temper will conduce to the happiness of that continent, either
in the several provinces, or considered as a common empire, is to be referred
to the judgment of the wise and loyal of the colonists: a judgment which they
have already expressed; for all the Americans are not to be involved in those
accusations of disobedience, which have been proved on some. There have ever
been among them men of wisdom and moderation well acquainted with and attached
to the constitution of their country; and though some of these, driven as
exiles to Great Britain, are neglected in that kingdom for the cause of which
they suffer; there are yet many others, who wait only 'till the first gust of
popular tempest is past, to avow their principles and return to their duty.

In truth the Americans in general are less guilty than they may at first sight
be thought: the desire of present ease is the common feeling of man, and the
bulk of the people are so entirely guided by their feelings that there is
scarcely an instance of their submitting to imposts however essential to their
interests or even to their safety, from any motives but those of necessity. The
Americans exerted only on a similar occasion the same spirit, which animated
the cider counties to tumult and almost to rebellion: these counties are not
invidiously mentioned; for there is not, it is probable any part of our
dominions, scarcely any county in England, which, if government in it had been
so neglected and relaxed, riots so encouraged, and rebellion so unchecked would
not have expressed an equal aversion to the obnoxious burden of taxes In
viewing commotions of this kind it is natural to pity, while we condemn the
unthinking and misguided people: but on those who could behold the first rising
of the American storm without even attempting to suppress it, could give it
strength by such a conduct as implied approbation; and, that they might blast
their predecessors in office, contribute to raise a tempest which was to lay
the colonies waste, and tear America from England; on these our indignation
must be poured unmixed; and they may well expect that the dangers and the
mischiefs of the disunion, will bring on them the resentment and reproaches of
those of the colonists who understand their duty and their interests.

If however the late administration have the justest title to those honors and
statues, which some of the Americans have loyally admitted their sovereign to
share with the E. of C -- m; from England they have no claim to approbation: in
that opposition of interests which they so unwisely raised between the members
and the head, every merit toward America, is a crime to their country.

When it became a question, whether the colonies should be called upon for a
just and moderate contribution toward their own defense; or that this should
be thrown, in addition to their other burdens, on the inhabitants of
Great Britain; to surrender our just rights, and to endeavor to force a
decision of this question in favor of America, by all the arts of intrigue and
faction, cannot merit the thanks of the people whose interests they
surrendered. The other measures proposed by that ministry do not immediately
belong to this subject, and I observe in this place, that they consisted of
exemptions from commercial restraints, relaxations of the act of navigation,
remissions of duties, all favorable to the colonies, and disadvantageous to
Great Britain, only as a proof that the having introduced a rivality between
them, and preferred America, cannot entitle them to popularity in England.

It would indeed have been unreasonable to have expected from the late ministry
any measure which required extensive views, or a concerted plan; it would have
been absurd to have hoped that they would hazard a breath of that popular air,
which they were gathering with so much industry to fill their sail, for the
sake of a distant and public benefit: but nothing of this was necessary; they
had succeeded a minister such as they could wish, one who had been we^^ enough
to subject himself to much real opposition, and more abuse, for the sake of the
state; who seems to have retained the useless and exploded idea of a common
weal, a public interest. To this man even experience had not given prudence;
and, though sensible that from pursuing a plan of English policy abroad, and of
economy and improvement at home, he had reaped only the satisfaction of having
discharged his duty, while Mr. Pit had acquired popularity by adopting the
most expensive German measures, and imposing the most severe taxes to support
them; yet his obstinacy had made him hardily oppose himself to the whole
torrent which private interest and faction would not fail to pour on his head.
He had done this merely that he might form and cement a lasting plan of policy,
might unite the colonies by the firmest bands of dependence on Great Britain,
attemper their several interests, and lay the foundation of indissoluble union,
and of increasing strength and riches for distant ages.

It was natural that the ministers who succeeded him should despise this
antiquated policy, so different from their own, and deride those sentiments
which could give birth to it; but they would have done well to have profited by
it; and after having thrown all the abuse they were able on the minister who
planned it, at least to have retained those advantages which he had given to
Great Britain. Unhappliy they embraced the opposite system, and to blast, if it
were possible, the reputation of one minister, whom they envied and feared; to
secure an union with another, by whom they were despised; and to attain that
degree of popularity, which the interested followers of some interested traders
could bestow, they proposed the repeal of that act, the execution of which they
had endeavored to render impossible.

The success of one of these designs the public has already seen in the
permission, which those of the late ministry, who had most actively promoted
that measure, have received from lord C -- m to continue in office: that of the
other two purposes seems less within their reach; for, though while the
passions of the public were heated by those whose interest it was to prevent
their judging with impartiality, Mr. Grenville was the object of much abuse, it
is nor possible that the infatuation should last; the clamours of mob, and the
misrepresentations of faction will subside; the taxes which have been removed
from American and must be laid on English property will be fel^^; and the
partiality of the imposition will add weight to the load; a time is coming when
it shall be remembered to his honor (and it shall scarcely be believed that in
Great Britain it could be a reproach to him) that he was the first who proposed
to secure by just and moderate ties the allegiance of those colonies, which
with so much expense we had planted, protected, and enlarged; who when every
branch of our trade every necessary of life was taxed in England even to its
utmost bearing, acquired from America some return for that support which we had
so liberally given, some tribute for that wealth, which we had poured into her
bosom, some and toward maintaining her in that security which we had so dearly
purchased; and who, when the artifices of faction had divided the several parts
of our empire, and when the administration sacrificed their trust to their
hopes of popularity and power, and became Americans; remained an Englishman.

The temporary and bought praise of that administration must subside also, and
they will receive from their countrymen that censure which they have so well
merited. But I leave them to the good or evil fame which awaits them, for the
object of this pamphlet was not the applause or censure of any set of men, or
the mere contention of parties: it was undertaken with a better and honester
view, with the hope, that if a plain state of the facts relating to the stamp
act, supported by authentic vouchers, was laid before the public, it might
prove to those who have been guided by names instead of reasons, have been
misled by false assertions, or have acted from sear rather than judgment, the
necessity of untreading the false steps which have been taken, of promoting
better measures, and securing, while yet it is possible to secure, the only
r^maining hope of Britain. It is better to assert than to prove that it is from
the union and dependence of the colonies that we are to seek for our safety; it
is time therefore to return to measures undertaken upon public grounds and
permanent principles; what those are, the perusal of this tract may in some
degree have suggested; and if any senator should condescend to turn it over, he
may perhaps, by the evidence it contains, be prepared to hear himself addressed
by his constituents in some such manner as this.

When I entrusted to you the care of my interests, and the power of granting
some part of my property for the services of the state. I entrusted it in
confidence that this power would never be used but on the calls of necessity,
and would ever be exercised with justice. The character of a legislator demands
the s^rictest attention to that general good which arises from subjecting the
several interests of the landed and commercial parts of the state to one common
end; and a mind too steady to be diverted from the pursuit of this end either
by hopes or fears, by authority or by ^umult. If it was wise or prudent to
relax for a time the springs of government; to give opportunity to an enflamed
and misguided people to return to their allegiance; that time has been given:
The stamp act was repealed on the motives of condescension to mercantile
interests and fears, and to popular violences; that hour of tumult is passed:
If lenity to the colonists was then necessary, justice to England now claims
its turn: Sacrifice no longer the unalienable rights of supreme jurisdiction to
the new and illegal claims of provincial assemblies; but if the Americans enjoy
the privileges, let them participate in some degree of the burdens of their
sellow subjects. If their ability could have been doubted before, the
administration in 1764, and 1765 increased it by encouraging their cultivation
and commerce; they have received more immediate advantages, at the expense of
England, from the ministry which followed: If there could be any doubt whether
these favored children would be reclaimed to obedience by concessions, that
doubt is removed. They would not express that encroaching gratitude, which is
contained in their address^s, if the object were only the repeal of a
particular and light duty; it is plain that they understand the conduct of
England to be an acknowledgment of the right which they claim, of taxing
themselves.

Their temper is still more plainly proved by the indignation they express at
the claim of England to sovereignty, and at the bare mention of requiring them
to repair the damages, for the insults are irreparable, which the officers of
England have suffered at their hands.

The last and strongest proof arises from their conduct; for it is certain that
in the town of Boston, the execution of the custom-house laws is now actually
suspended, and seizures of smuggled goods prevented by open force in despite of
the government of Great Britain. Now then at length call on them for an aid in
some proportion to their ability; and oblige them to confess, not in words, but
by obedience, the authority of England. Relieve me from that appearance of
partiality which doubles the weight of every burden which you impose; and
while every necessary of life is taxed to its u^most bearing, do not deprive me
of the melancholy consolation which I draw from believing that the taxations
are equally laid on all my fellow subjects.

I submit to taxes as they are the purchase of p^ace and security; do not while
you receive the price, withold the reward; nor encourage every species of
outrage tending to the dissolution of society by granting those exemptions to
rebellion, which you refuse to obedience. If tumult can extort the repeal of a
duty to be levied chiefly on the rich, while acquiescence is repaid by an
additional and perpetual land tax on the poor, will you not exicte the
insurrections which you reward; and discourage that submission which is thus
made to bear more than its own burden? at least do not treat with more
tenderness your emancipated and rebllious colonists than those of your
countrymen, who have perhaps been encouraged in tumult by American success. If
the poor English peasant, driven into a temporary insurruction by the whip of
that severest master Want, is taught to expect condign punishment and speedy
justice, and calls forth the vigor and vigilance of government, let the wanton
Americans forming a concerted plan of obstinate rebelion on occasion of a tax
uncollected, and which would almost have been unfelt, awaken other sentiments
than those of the utmost lenity.

To impose with success on the Americans that proportion of the public burden
which they ought to bear, seize the opportunity, while a general peace leaves
you at liberty to employ in this service, whatever force may be necessary for
it; and while the infirm and disjointed state of the provinces renders a small
force equal to the work; an opportunity which may soon pass, and the neglect of
which must be fatal to the very safety of Great Britain. Other misfortunes may
be repaired or borne, the loss of battles or of cities may be redeemed or
compensated in more prosperous hours; but if you suffer this important hour to
pass unimproved, it is lost forever: The Americans will add to confidence in
their claims, strength to support them; they will turn our favors to them into
reasons of resistance, and refuse to receive any longer our manufactures, which
are become expensive by being loaded with taxes imposed for their protection;
they will cease to be the Colonies of England, and we shall have more than
doubled the burden of our national debt in a war undertaken for their defense,
and the successes of which were all directed to their advantage, to enable them
to pour the benefits of their trade into the bosom of our commercial rivals.
The declaratory law asserting the power of Great Britain to tax the Americans,
will hold forth only a delusive and nugatory affirmance of the right of the
legislature of this kingdom, if not followed by some bill which shall exert it.
The surrender of so unalienable a jurisdiction, when this surrender might, and
certainly in America would be attributed to such motives, demands a subsequent
vigor and firmness; if now, when time for recollection has been given, you
neglect to pursue those measures, which justice and necessity demand from you;
and to which duty, gratitude and interest ought to secure obedience from them,
the whole new world ceases for ever to be subject to your authority.

Ministers for the purposes of interest and party may wish to continue this
partial exemption; but you can act from no motives but those of justice; your
interest is united to your duty; and you cannot without departing from both
give any support to a minister capable of such a conduct. If the public see
with regret the power of government in the hands of lord C -- m, it is from the
dread not so much even of his continental, as of his colonial system: It was
from the commerce of the American part of our dominions that those resources
were to be drawn, which his extravagance have rendered so necessary. But to
continue every species of profusion, and, by throwing wantonly his pensions
into every open hand, to load the present revenue; while by emancipating the
colonies he prevents even future improvements; is at once to divide the river
of our wealth 'till it is lost in a thousand private channels, and to cut off
its communication from that spring, by which it should be supplied. We had less
to fear from the inability of the last, than from the desperate rashness of the
present statesman; if the former connived at the colonists withdrawing
themselves from our dominion, this professes on principles to throw them from
us. If we have almost lost America by the timidity and neglect of those who did
not venture to deny our right to the dominion of that country, can we hope to
recover it under his guidance, who is almost the only man in England who
ventures to assert it owes us no subjection. If then in this hour of danger,
when vigor and firmness are necessary to reclaim the colonies to our
obedience, you see a junto formed of the minister who has taught them to
despise our authority, joined to the peer who declares they are exempted from
our dominion, you will not be satisfied with an unactive pity for your country;
but will exert your best abilities to vindicate her rights, and provide for her
security; and to oppose by every constitutional method, ministers who are
convicted of having sacrificed to their jealousy, resentment, ambition, and
interest, the safety of our officers, the dignity of our state, the stability
of our commerce, and the rights of our Legislature.

APPENDIX.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Reader will find, in this APPENDIX, some Chasms left, and some slight
Alterations made, to prevent the Writers being discovered: These will be
readily excused, when this Reason is known, which I choose to give in the Words
of an American Correspondent, in his Letter dated Nov. 2, 1765. I shall
communicate Things as they happen, although it is at the Risque of my Life; for
the Party, by their Tools, frequently give out, that if they knew the Man that
would so far assist Great Britain, as to inform against any Man, in this or any
other Province, he should not live many Hours.

APPENDIX.
NUMBER I. Copy of a LETTER from Mr. S -- Y C -- Y, to Lieut. Gov. FAUQUIER.
Sept. 14, 1765. SIR,
IT is with the greatest pleasure I received his Majesty's Commands to declare
to you his most gracious approbation of your conduct. His Majesty and his
servants are satisfied, that the precipitate resolutions you sent home did not
take their rise from any remissness or inattention in you; nor is his Majesty
at all inclined to suppose, that any instance of diffidence or dissatisfaction
could be founded in the general inclination of his ancient and loyal Colony of
Virginia; the nature of the thing and your representations induce a persuasion,
that those ill-advised resolutions owed their birth to the violence of some
individuals, who taking the advantage of a thin assembly, so far prevailed, as
to publish their own uninformed opinions to the world as the sentiments of the
Colony. But his Majesty, Sir, will not, by the prevalence of a few men, at a
certain moment, be persuaded to change the opinion, or lessen the confidence,
he has always entertained of the Colony of Virginia; which has always
experienced the protection of the Crown. His Majesty's servants, therefore,
with entire reliance on your prudence, and on the virtue and wisdom of the
Colony entrusted to your care, persuade themselves, that when a full assembly
shall calmly and maturely deliberate upon those resolutions, they will see, and
be themselves alarmed at, the dangerous tendency and mischievous consequences
which they might be productive of, both to the Mother Country and the Colonies,
which are the equal objects of his Majesty's parential care; and whose mutual
happiness and prosperity certainly require a confidential reliance of the
Colonies upon the Mother Country.

Upon these principles, Sir, and upon your prudent management, and a proper
representation to the wise and sober part of the people, how earnest his
Majesty is to extend the happy influence of his fatherly care over every part
of his dominions, it is expected that a full assembly will form very different
resolutions, such as may cement that union, which alone can establish the
safety and prosperity of the Colonies and the Mother Country.

As there is no intention in the Crown to attempt, nor in the King's servants
to advise, any encroachments on the real rights and liberties of any part of
his Majesty's subjects; so neither will his Majesty undoubtedly submit, or his
servants advise, under any circumstances, that the respect which is due to
parliament, and which is necessary for the general good of the whole British
empire, should any where be made a sacrifice to local and dangerous prejudices.

As this important matter is, however, now before his Majesty's privy council,
as well as the other consideration of the dangerous riot and mutinous behavior
of the people on the frontiers, I shall not pretend to give any advice or
instructions on these subjects; not doubting, but you will soon have the
fullest from the wisdom of that Board, in all those things, in which, by your
last accounts, the most essential interest of the Colony are so deeply
concerned.

You will therefore, in the mean time, be very attentive, by every prudent
measure in your power, at once to maintain the just rights of the British
government, and to preserve the peace and tranquillity of the Provinces
committed to your care.

But as these appear to me matters of government fit for his Majesty's more
immediate notice and information, I must beg you will not fail to transmit to
me such occurrences, from time to time, on these heads, as you may deem of
importance in the light I mention. I am, etc.

H. S. C -- Y.

NUMBER II. Extract of a Letter from Mr. S -- Y C -- Y, to Major General GAGE.
SIR, October 24, 1765.
IT is with the greatest concern, that his Majesty learns the disturbances
which have arisen in some of the North American Colonies: these events will
probably create application to you, in which the utmost exertion of your
prudence may be necessary; so as justly to temper your conduct between that
caution and coolness, which the delicacy of such a situation may demand on one
hand, and the vigor necessary to suppress outrage and violence on the other.
It is impossible, at this distance, to assist you by any particular or positive
instruction, because you will find yourself necessarily obliged to take your
resolution as particular circumstances and emergencies may require.

It is hoped, and expected, that this want of confidence in the justice and
tenderness of the Mother Country, and this open residance to its authority, can
only have found place among the lower and more ignorant of the people. The
better and wiser part of the Colonies will know, that decency and submission
may prevail, not only to redress grievances, but to obtain grace and favor,
while the outrage of a public violence can expect nothing but severity and
chastisement. You, and all his Majesty's servants, from a sense of your duty
to, and love of, your Country, will endeavor to excite and encourage these
sentiments.

If, by lenient and persuasive methods, you can contribute to restore that
peace and tranquillity to the Provinces, on which their welfare and happiness
depend, you will do a most acceptable and essential service to your Country:
but having taken every step which the utmost prudence and lenity can dictate,
in compassion to the folly and ignorance of some misguided people, you will
not, on the other hand, where your assistance may be wanted to strengthen the
hands of government, fail to concur in every proper measure for its support, by
such a timely exertion of force, as may be necessary to repel acts of outrage
and violence, and to provide for the maintenance of peace and good order in the
provinces.

NUMBER III. Copy of a LETTER from Mr. S -- Y C -- Y, to Governor BERNARD.
SIR, October 24, 1765.
YOUR letters of the 15th, 16th, 22d, and 31st of August, have been received;
the three former not till yesterday.

It is with the greatest concern his Majesty learns the disturbances which have
lately arisen in your Province, the general confusion that seems to reign
there, and the total languor and want of energy, in your government, to exert
itself with any dignity or efficacy, for the suppression of tumults, which seem
to strike at the very being of all authority and subordination among you. His
Majesty cannot but, with the greatest surprise, hear of the refusal of your
Council to call for the aid of any regular force to the support of the civil
magistracy, at a time when, it seems, you had reason to think, there was no
other power capable of providing for the peace and quiet of the Province.

Nothing can, certainly, exceed the ill advised and intemperate conduct held by
a party in your Province, which can in no way contribute to the removal of any
real grievance they might labor under, but may tend to obstruct and impede the
exertion of his Majesty's benevolent attention to the ease and comfort, as well
as the welfare, of all his people.

It is hoped, and expected, that this want of confidence in the justice and
tenderness of the Mother Country, and this open resistance to its authority,
can only have found place among the lower and more ignorant of the people; the
better and more wise part of the Colonies will know, that decency and
submission may prevail, not only to redress grievances, but to obtain grace and
favor, while the outrage of a public violence can expect nothing but severity
and chastisement. These sentiments, you, and all his Majesty's servants, from a
sense of your duty to, and love of, your Country, will endeavor to excite and
encourage: you will all, in a particular manner, call upon them not to render
their case desperate; you will in the strongest colors, represent to them the
dreadful consequences that must inevitably attend the sorcible and violent
resistance to acts of the British parliament, and the scene of misery and
distraction to both Countries, inseparable from such a conduct.

If, by lenient and persuasive methods, you can contribute to restore that
peace and tranquillity to the Provinces, on which their welfare and happiness
depend, you will do a most acceptable and essential service to your Country;
but having taken every step which the utmost prudence and lenity can dictate,
in compassion to the folly and ignorance of some misguided people, you will
not, on the other hand, fail to use your utmost power for repelling all acts of
outrage and violence, and to provide for the maintenance of peace and good
order in the Province, by such a timely exertion of force, as the occasion may
require; for which purpose, you will make the proper applications to general
Gage, or lord Colvil, commanders of his Majesty's land and naval forces in
America: for however unwillingly his Majesty may consent to the exertion of
such powers as may endanger the safety of a single subject, yet can he not
permit his own dignity, and the authority of the British Legislature, to be
trampled on by force and violence, and in avowed contempt of all order, duty
and decorum.

If the subject is aggrieved, he knows in what manner legally and
constitutionally to apply for relief: but it is not suitable, either to the
safety or dignity of the British empire, that any individuals, under the
pretense of redressing grievances, should presume to violate the public peace.

I am, etc. H. S. C -- Y.
P. S. The sloop which carries this will carry orders to lord Colvil, and to
the governor of Nova Scotia, to send to your assistance any force which may be
thought necessary from thence, and which that Province can supply.



NUMBER IV. Copy of Mr. S -- Y C -- Y 's Circular LETTER to the GOVERNORS in
North America.
SIR, October 24, 1765.
IT is with the greatest concern, that his Majesty learns the disturbances
which have arisen in some of the North American Colonies: if this evil should
spread to the government of --, where you preside, the utmost exertion of your
prudence will be necessary, so as justly to temper your conduct between that
caution and coolness which the deli^acy of such a situation may demand, on the
one hand, and ^he vigor necessary to suppress outrage and violence, on ^he
other. It is impossible, at this distance, to assist you, ^^y any particular or
positive instruction; because you will and yourself necessarily obliged to take
your resolution, as particular circumstances and emergencies may require.

His Majesty, and the servants he honors with his considence, cannot but
lament the ill-advised intemperance shown already in some of the Provinces, by
taking up a conduct, which can in no way contribute to the removal of any real
grievance they might labor under, but may tend to obstruct and impede the
exertion of his Majesty's benevolence and attention to the ease and comfort, as
well as the welfare, of all his people.

It is hoped and expected, that this want of considence in the justice and
tenderness of the Mother Country, and this open resistance to its authority,
can only have found place among the lower and more ignorant of the people. The
better and wiser part of the Colonies will know, that decency and submission
may prevail, not only to redress grievances, but to obtain grace and favor,
while the outrage of a public violence can expect nothing but severity and
chastisement. These sentiments you, and all his Majesty's servants, from a
sense of your duty to, and love of, your Country, will endeavor to excite and
encourage.

You will all, in a particular manner, call upon them not to render their case
desperate. You will, in the strongest colors, represent to them the dreadful
consequences that must inevitably attend the forcible and violent resistance to
acts of the British Parliament, and the scene of misery and calamity to
themselves, and of mutual weakness and distraction to both Countries,
inseparable from such a conduct.

If, by lenient and persuasive methods, you can contribute to restore that
peace and tranquillity to the Provinces, on which their welfare and happiness
depend, you will do a most acceptable and essential service to your Country:
but having taken every step which the utmost prudence and lenity can dictate,
in compassion to the folly and ignorance of some misguided people, you will
not, on the other hand, fail to use your utmost power, for ^pelling all acts of
outrage and violence, and to provide for the maintenance of peace and good
order in the Province, by such a timely exertion of force as the occasion may
require; for which purpose, you will make the proper applications to general
Gage, or lord Colville, commanders of his Majesty's land and naval forces in
America. For however unwillingly his Majesty may consent to the exertion of
such powers as may endanger the safety of a single subject; yet can he not
permit his own dignity, and the authority of the British Legislature, to be
trampled on by force and violence, and in avowed contempt of all order, duty
and decorum.

If the subject is aggrieved, he knows in what manner legally and
constitutionally to apply for relief; but it is not suitable, either to the
safety or dignity of the British empire, that any individuals, under the
pretense of redressing grievances, should presume to violate the public peace.

I am, etc. H. S. C -- Y.
P. S. To Governor WILMOT.
You will probably receive application from governor Bernard, to send him part
of the force which may be within your government. Lord Colville has command to
transport them; and you will be very attentive, that the public service should
suffer no impediment from any delay in you, when such application is made.



NUMBER V. Extract of a LETTER from Mr. S -- Y C -- Y, to Major General GAGE.
SIR, December 15, 1765.
I Had the favor of your letters of the 4th, 8th, and 9th of November last, by
which I learn, with the utmost concern, the disordered state of the Province
where you reside, and the very riotous and outrageous behavior of too many of
the inhabitants.

I did not fail to lay your dispatches, together with those of
lieutenant governor Colden, before his Majesty, who, though highly provoked by
such an insult offered to his governor there, is however pleased to hear, that
matters were not pushed to such extremity, as might have cost the lives of many
of his subjects, and perhaps have tended, as you seem apprehensive, to the
great detriment, if not ruin, of the town of New York; particularly if the fort
had fired on that insolent and infatuated mob, which so provokingly approached.
The temper shown, as well by lieutenant governor Colden, as by the officers
there, is highly to be commended. His Majesty is willing to suppose, that both
yourself and governor Colden have acted on principles of duty to his service,
in the advice and resolution formed to put the stamped paper into the hands of
the magistrates of New York; which, however, unless the necessity for it
appeared very pressing, must certainly be looked upon as a step greatly
humiliating and derogating to his Majesty's government.

If the post was not tenable, or the papers insecure there, it should seem much
preferable to have put them on board the man of war, as was proposed: nor does
there appear any good reason, why captain Kennedy refused to take them. It is
difficult, at this distance, to judge with the same propriety of the conduct,
to be held on occasions of such difficulty and importance, as on the spot. Had
the personal safety of those in the fort alone been considered, I am persuaded,
there would not have been a moment's hesitation about the defense of it,
against any attack that might rashly have been attempted: nor can his Majesty
suppose any want of resolution for his service, in those who have, in their
different stations, given so many proofs of their regard to it. It should
otherwise seem, that the reality of the mobs being armed and prepared for an
actual attack, should have been well ascertained before the papers were given
up.

The step you have thought fit to take, in drawing together such forces as
their situation allowed, was certainly prudent, and could not be too soon
determined, on any positive grounds, to suspect an insurrection; and especially
in regard to the securing his Majesty's stores, a circumstance which will still
demand your greatest attention; and particularly those arms, which may be
seized by the mob for their own mutinous purposes.

Your situation is certainly delicate and difficult, it requires both prudence
and firmness in the conduct of all employed in his Majesty's service there;
especially, considering what you say of the difficulty, or rather
impossibility, of drawing any considerable number of men together, and of the
impracticability of attempting any thing by force, in the present disposition
of the people, without a respectable body of troops.

You seem to think there are still hopes, that as the spirits of those unhappy
people have time to cool, there will be more submission shown; you will not
fail, I am persuaded, in your station, to avail yourself of every favorable
symptorn for the improvement of such favorable dispositions, any more than to
exert yourself, where the necessity of the case may require, in support of the
honor of government, and for surpressing any riotous or rebellious resistance
offered to the laws, or those magistrates who have the execution of them.

I hope my former letters are come safe, as they will have conveyed to you his
Majesty's sentiments and commands for your conduct, on the first notice of
these disturbances.

NUMBER VI. Copy of a LETTER from Mr. S -- Y C -- Y, to Licutenant-Governor
COLDEN.
SIR, December 15, 1765.
I Have received your letter of the 5th of November by major James, and that of
the 9th of the same month by the packet, with the minutes of the council of
New York, from the 31st of October to the 6th of November, etc. -- From your
last letter, I have hope (...) time will produce a recollection, which may lead
(...) unhappy people back to a sense of their duty; and that, in the mean time,
every proper and practicable measure will be taken to awe that licentious
spirit, which has hurried them to those acts of outrage and violence, equally
dangerous to the sober and well-disposed part of the people, the ease and quiet
of the city, and subversive of all order and authority among them.

Sir Henry Moore will certainly be arrived before this reaches you; it is
expected, therefore, Sir, from your knowledge of the country and people, that
you should inform the new governor of every thing necessary for his knowledge,
as well respecting the state of things, as the characters and dispositions of
men in that country. He will see that, by his instructions, he is empowered to
suspend members of the council, and officers of the law, who shall appear to
deserve it; being, in that case, only obliged to send home immediately the
reasons and causes of such suspension. It is not improbable, that such times as
these may require the exercise of that power: as it is not doubted the governor
will use it with discretion, so it is expected he should not want firmness to
use it boldly, whenever it may seem useful to the King's service and the public
peace.

NUMBER VII. Copy of the RESOLUTIONS of the House of Burgesses in Virginia, in
consequence of a Motion made (May 29, 1765.) to take into Consideration the
late Act for levying a Duty upon Stamps.
Resolved, THAT the first adventurers and settlers of this his Majesty's Colony
and Dominion of Virginia brought with them, and transmitted to their posterity,
and all other his Majesty's subjects since inhabiting in this his Majesty's
said Colony, all the liberties, privileges, franchises and immunities, that
have at any time been held and enjoyed, and possessed by the people of
Great Britain.

Resolved, That, by two royal charters granted by king James I. the Colonies
aforesaid are declared entitled to all liberties, privileges and immunities of
denizens and natural subjects, to all intents and purposes, as if they had been
abiding and born within the realm of England.

Resolved, That the taxation of the people, by themselves, or by persons chosen
by themselves to represent them, who can only know what taxes the people are
able to bear, or the easiest method of raising them, and must themselves be
affected by every tax laid on the people, is the only security against a
burdensome taxation, and the distinguishing characteristic of British freedom,
without which the ancient constitution cannot exist.

Resolved, That his Majesty's liege people of this his most ancient and loyal
Colony have, without interruption, enjoyed the inestimable right of being
governed by such laws, respecting their internal polity and taxation, as are
derived from their own consent, with the approbation of their sovereign, or his
substitutes, and that the same has been constantly recognized by the King and
People of Great Britain.

NUMBER VIII. October 1, 1765. Copy of a Representation of the Lords
Commissioners for Trade and Plantations, touching the Proceedings and
Resolutions of the House of Representatives of Massachuset's Bay, with respect
to the Act for levying a duty upon Stamps in America, and to other Acts of the
Parliament of Great Britain.
To the KING 's Most Excellent Majesty.
May it please your Majesty.
THE House of Representatives of your Majesty's Province of Massachuset's Bay
having, last year, printed and published, in the journals of their proceedings,
a letter from a Committee of that House to their Agent here; in which letter
the acts and resolutions of the Parliament of Great Britain were treated with
the most indecent disrespect, and principles tending to a denial of the right
of Parliament to levy taxes upon your Majesty's subjects in the Colonies, were
openly avowed; our predecessors in office thought it their duty to transmit
this transaction to your Majesty's consideration, to the end that such
directions might be given, as the nature and importance of the matter should
appear to require.

Since this, and since the passing the act of Parliament for levying a stamp
duty in America, the grounds of which act gave rise to the reflections
contained in the abovementioned letter, the same spirit that dictated the
sentiments it expresses, has appeared throughout the whole proceedings of the
said House of Representatives.

Upon the election of counselors, who, by the constitution of this Colony, are
annually chosen by the House of Representatives, the strongest endeavors were
used to preclude your Majesty's secretary of state, who has always been a
member of the council from his seat at that Board; and this, as your Majesty's
governor represents, merely on account of his having received an appointment
(unsolicited) to be a distributor of the stamps: and the motion made in that
House, to discontinue the annual salary allowed for the support of your
Majesty's governor, upon which proceeding we have this day made a separate
representation to your Majesty, seems to have arisen from the same motives.

These, however, being only attempts of individuals in the community, would not
either have required or deserved your Majesty's attention, in the light in
which we view them; but it further appears, from the journals of the House of
Representatives in their last session, that this Assembly, having thought fit
to make the propriety and expediency of the stamp act, and of other acts of
parliament, a subject of open question and discussion, came to several
resolutions and proceedings thereupon, which they kept secret till the last day
of their session, when they published them in their printed journals -- Then
follow the resolutions -- Then the Board of Trade proceeds thus: The object of
the resolutions and proceedings of the House of Representatives of
Massachuset's Bay, is to recommend to, and induce, the rest of your Majesty's
Colonies in America, to join in a general congress of committees from the
several assemblies, independent of the other branches of the legislature, and
without any previous application to your Majesty, to consider and deliberate
upon the acts of the parliament of this kingdom. As this appears to us to be
the first instance of a general congress, appointed by the Assemblies of the
Colonies without the authority of the Crown; a measure which we conceive of
dangerous tendency in itself, and more especially so, when taken for the
purposes expressed in the abovementioned resolution, and connected with the
spirit that has appeared throughout the whole conduct of this particular
Assembly; we therefore think it our indispensible duty to submit this matter to
your Majesty's consideration, for such directions as your Majesty, with the
advice of your Council, may think proper and expedient to give thereupon.

All which is most humbly submitted, etc.

Whitehall, Oct. 1, 1765.
NUMBER IX. Copy of a Representation from the Board of Trade, with several
Papers transmitted, relative to the outrageous Bohaviour of the People at the
Town of Boston, in Opposition to the Stamp-Duty Act. Dated October 10, 1765.
To the KING 's Most Excellent Majesty.
May it please your Majesty,
SINCE our humble representation to your Majesty of the 1st inst. in
consequence of some alarming proceedings of the House of Representatives, in
the Province of Massachuset's Bay, we have received letters from --, giving an^
^count of a riot of a most dangerous tendency, which had arisen in the town of
Boston, and which directing its fury against the houses and persons of the
lieutenant governor, and other principal officers of government, continued with
repeated acts of extraordinary violence, from the 15th of August to the 26th of
the same month; at which period the tumult seemed suspended, rather than
allayed.

In whatever light these disturbances may be viewed, whether in respect of the
avowed object, which the perpetrators and abettors of them declare to be a
general resolution, to oppose and prevent the execution of an act of the
Parliament of Great Britain, or in respect of the state of government and
magistracy there, which -- represents to be utterly incapable of resisting or
surpressing these tumults and disorders, they seem to us of such high
importance, that we lose no time in laying the letters and papers relating
thereunto before your Majesty, that your Majesty may direct such measures to be
pursued, as your Majesty, with the advice of your Council, shall think most
prudent and effectual.

Which is most humbly submitted, etc.

NUMBER X. Extract of a Letter from --, to Mr. S -- Y C -- Y.
New York, Sept. 23, 1765.
THE resolves of the Assembly of Virginia, which you will have seen, gave the
signal for a general outcry over the Continent; and though I do not find, that
the Assembly of any other Province has yet come to resolutions of the same
tendency, they have been applauded as the protectors and assertors of American
liberty; and all persons excited and encouraged by writings in the public
papers, and speeches, without any reserve, to oppose the execution of the act:
the general scheme concerted, throughout seems to have been, first, by menace
or force, to oblige the stamp officers to resign their employments, in which
they have generally succeeded; and next, to destroy the stamped papers upon
their arrival; that, having no stamps, necessity might be an excuse for the
dispatch of business without them; and that, before they could be replaced, the
clamor and outcry of the people, with addresses and remonstrances from the
Assemblies, might procure a repeal of the act. The populace of Boston took the
lead in the riots, and by an assault upon the house of the stamp officer,
forced him to a resignation. The little turbulent Colony of Rhode Island raised
their mob likewise; who were not content only to force a promise from the
person appointed to distribute the stamps, that he would not act in that
employment, but also assaulted and destroyed the houses and furniture of Mess.
Howard and Mossatt, and obliged them to fly for safety on board a ship of wan:
the first, a lawyer of reputation, had wrote in defense of the rights of the
Parliament of Great Britain to lay taxes upon the colonies; the other a
physician, who had supported the same in his conversations. The neighboring
Provinces seemed inclined to follow these examples, but were prevented by the
almost general resignation of the stamp officers. The Boston mob, raised first
by the instigation or many of the principal inhabitants, allured by plunder,
rose shortly after of their own accord; attacked, robbed, and destroyed several
houses, and amongst others, that of the Lieutenant Governor, and only spared
the Governor's because his effects had been removed. People then began to be
terrified at the spirit they had raised; to perceive that popular fury was not
to be guided, and each individual feared he might be the next victim to their
rapacity. The same fears spread through the other Provinces, and there has been
as much pains taken since, to prevent insurrections of the people, as before to
excite them.

NUMBER XI. Extract of a State of the Province, contained in a Letter to Mr. C
-- Y, dated Dec. 13. 1765.
THE gentlemen of the law make the second class, in which are properly included
both the bench and the bar; both of them act on the same principles, and are of
the most distinguished families in the policy of the Province.

The merchants make the third class; many of them have suddenly rose from the
lowest rank of the people to considerable fortunes, and chiefly in the last
war, by illicit trade; they abhor every limitation of trade and duties, and
therefore gladly go into every measure, whereby they hope to have trade free.

The gentlemen of the law, both the judges, and the principal practitioners at
the bar, are either owners, or strongly connected in family interest with the
proprietors in general. -- The gentlemen of the law, some years since, entered
into an association, with intention, among other things, to assume the
direction of government upon them, by the influence they had in the assembly;
gained by their family connections, and by the profession of the law, whereby
they are unavoidably in the secrets of many families. Many court their
friendship, and all dread their hatred; by these means, though few of them are
members, they rule the House of the Assembly, in all matters of importance; the
greatest number of the assembly being common farmers, who know little of men
and things, and are easily deluded and seduced.

By this association, united in interest and family connections with the
proprietors of the great tracts, a domination of lawyers was formed in this
province, which, for some years past, has been too strong for the executive
powers of government. -- Besides what is before related, it is necessary to
observe, that, for several years past, the Assembly grants the support of power
only from year to year; they increase and lessen the salaries of all the
officers at their pleasure; and the bill passed in the House of Assembly (the
author means the House of Commons) in the last sessions of parliament, laying
internal taxes on the Colony, and paying all the officers of government, as it
is suggested they may intend to do, will destroy the great and undue influence,
which the Assembly has gained over the administration, to the great prejudice
of his Majesty's prerogative in the Colonies; and it is chiefly for this reason
that the popular leaders so violently oppose the act for laying a Stamp Duty.

NUMBER XII.
Extract of a Letter to the LORDS of TRADE, dated Aug. 15, 1765.
YESTERDAY morning, at break of day, was discovered hanging upon a tree, in a
street in the town, an effigy, with inscriptions, showing, that it was intended
to represent Mr. Oliver the secretary, who had lately accepted the office of
Stamp Distributor. Some of the neighbors offered to take it down, but they
were given to know, that would not be permitted. Many gentlemen, especially
some of the council, treated it as a boyish sport, that did not deserve the
notice of the Governor and Council. However, the Lieutenant Governor, as chief
justice, directed the Sheriff to order his officers to take down the effigy;
and a Council was appointed to meet in the afternoon, to consider what should
be done, if the Sheriff's officers were obstructed in removing the effigy.

Before the Council met, the Sheriff reported, that his officers had
endeavored to take down the effigy, but could not do it without imminent
danger of their lives. The Council met, represented this transaction as the
beginning of much greater commotions, and desired their advice what should be
done upon this occasion. A majority of the Council spoke in form against doing
any thing; but upon very different principles: some said it was a trifling
business, which, if let alone, would subside of itself; but if taken notice of,
would become a serious affair. Others said, that it was a serious affair
already: that it was a preconcerted business, in which the greatest part of the
town was engaged: that there was no force to oppose it, and making an
opposition to it, without a power to support the opposition, would only inflame
the people, and be a means of extending the mischief to persons not at present
the objects of it. -- The Sheriff was ordered to assemble the peace officers,
and preserve the peace; a matter of form, rather than real significance.

It now grew dark; when the mob, which had been gathering all the afternoon,
came down to the Townhouse, bringing the effigy with them; and, knowing that
they were sitting in the Council Chamger, they gave three huzzas, by way of
defiance, and passed on. From thence they went to a new building, lately
erected by Mr. Oliver to let out for shops, and not quite finished; this they
called the Stamp-office, and pulled it down to the ground in five minutes. From
thence they went to Mr. Oliver's house, before which they beheaded the effigy,
and broke all the windows next the street. Then they carried the effigy to Fort
Hill, near Mr. Oliver's house, where they burnt the effigy in a bonfire, made
of the timber they had pulled down from the building. Mr. Oliver had removed
his family from his house, and remained himself with a few friends, when the
mob returned to attack the house.

Mr. Oliver was prevailed upon to retire, and his friends kept possession of
the house: the mob finding the door barricaded, broke down the whole fence of
the garden toward Fort Hill; and coming on, beat all the doors and windows of
the garden front, and entered the house, the gentlemen there retiring. As soon
as they had got possession, they ^earched about for Mr. Oliver, declaring they
would kill him. Finding that he had left the house, a party set out to search
two neighboring houses, in one of which Mr. Oliver was; but, happily, they
were diverted from this pursuit by a gentleman telling them, that Mr. Oliver
was gone with the Governor to the Castle; otherwise he would certainly have
been murdered. After eleven o'clock, the mob seeming to grow quiet, the
Lieutenant Governor, Chief Justice, and the Sheriff, ventured to go to Mr.
Oliver's house, to endeavor to persuade them to disperse: as soon as they
began to speak, a ringleader cried out, "The Governor and the Sheriff, to your
arms, my boys;" presently after, a volley of stones followed, and the two
gentlemen narrowly eseaped, through favor of the night, not without some
bruises. I should have mentioned before, that a written order was sent to the
Colonel of the regiment of militia, to beat an alarm: he answered, that it
would signify nothing, for, as soon as the drum was heard, the drummer would be
knocked down, and the drum broke: he added, that probably all the drummers of
the regiment were in the mob. Nothing more being to be done, the mob were left
to disperse at their own time, which they did about twelve o'clock. -- Whilst I
am writing, I saw a bonfire burning on Fort-Hill, by which I understand the mob
is up, and probably doing mischief; I shall therefore discontinue this letter
till I can receive information of what is done this night.

August 16.
IN the afternoon of yesterday, several gentlemen applied to Mr. Oliver, to
advise him to make a public declaration, that he would resign the office, and
never act in it; without which they said his house would be immediately
destroyed, and his life in continual danger: upon which he was obliged to
authorize some gentlemen to declare in public, that he would immediately apply
for leave to resign, and would not act in the office (as indeed it was
impossible for him to do) until he received further orders.

August 22.
I Come now to pursue the subject of my letter, dated the 15th and 16th
instant. -- It is difficult to conceive the fury, which at present possesses
the people of Boston, of all orders and degrees of men: if a gentleman, in
common conversation, signifies his disapprobation of this insurrection, his
person is immediately in danger. A gentleman having said, that, notwithstanding
what was passed, he would accept of the stamp-office, a day was fixed for
pulling down his house; it was prevented not without difficulty. Another
gentleman having mentioned his expectation, that some regular forces would be
sent into the town, was obliged to make intercession to prevent his being
mobbed. A Minister of the church of England, having, in his sermon, obliquely
condemned these proceedings, has been threatened with the resentment of the
people. On the other hand, a Minister of one of the principal meetings told Mr.
Oliver, that though he was sorry this mischief had fell upon him, yet it was a
very proper and necessary proceeding, and he quite approved of it. Another
congregational Minister, well known by his late polemical writings, has, as I
have been told by several persons, justified this proceeding in his sermon, and
prayed for its success: but there are congregational Ministers, I doubt not,
(and I know some) who condemn it, but they dare not speak out, which is the
case of every one who does not approve of it. -- I would not willingly
aggravate matters, but I really fear much worse is to come than is passed: the
Sheriff of this county, a prudent and resolute man, has told me, that he was
applied to by some friends, who would have persuaded him to resign his office,
for it would soon become dangerous for a civil officer to appear; and that both
his deputies at Boston had applied to resign. The first of November is
appointed for a grand jubilee; when, I suppose, there will be much mischief
done, and vengeance wrecked upon those who remain friends to government.

August 31, 1765.
IT is with the utmost concern, that I am obliged to continue the subject of my
last, letters of the 15th and 16th, and of the 22d inst. the disorders of the
town having been carried to much greater lengths than what I have informed your
Lordships of.

After the demolition of Mr. Oliver's house was found so practicable and easy,
that the government was obliged to look on, without being able to take any one
step to prevent it, and the principal people of the town publicly avowed and
justified the act, the mob, both great and small, became highly elated, and all
kinds of ill-humours were set on foot: every thing that, for years past, had
been the cause of any popular discontent, was revived; and private resentments
against persons in office worked themselves in, and endeavored to exert
themselves under the mask of the public cause.

On Monday, August 26, there was some small rumor, that mischief would be done
that night; but it was in general disregarded. Toward evening, some boys began
to light a bonfire before the Townhouse, which is an usual signal for a mob.
Before it was quite dark, a great company of people gathered together, crying,
Liberty and Property, which is their usual notice of their intention to plunder
and pull down an house. They went first to Mr. Paxton's house, who is marshall
of the Court of Admiralty, and surveyor of the port; and finding before it the
owner of the house (Mr. Paxton being only a tenant) he assured them, that Mr.
Paxton had quitted the house with his best effects, and that the house was his;
that he had never injured them, and finally, invited them to go to the tavern
and drink a barrel of punch: the offer was accepted, and so that house was
saved. As soon as they had drank the punch, they went to the house of Mr.
Storey, register-deputy of the Admiralty, broke into it, and broke it all
to-pieces, and took out all the books and papers, among which were all the
records of the Court of Admiralty, and carried them to the bonfire, and there
burnt them: they also looked about for him with an intention to kill him. From
thence they went to Mr. Hallowell's comptroller of the Customs, broke into his
house, and destroyed and carried off every thing of value, with about 30 l.
sterling, in cash. This house was lately built by himself, and fitted and
furnished with great elegance. But the grand mischief of all was to come.

The Lieutenant Governor had been apprized, that there was an evil spirit gone
forth against him; but, being conscious that he had not in the least deserved
to be made a party, in regard to the Stamp Act or the Custom-house, he rested
in full security that the mob would not attack him; and he was at supper with
his family when he received advice that the mob was coming to him. He
immediately sent away his children, and determined to stay in the house
himself: but, happily, his eldest daughter returned, and declared she would not
stir from the house, unless he went with her; by which means she got him away,
which was undoubtedly the occasion of saving his life. For, as soon as the mob
had got into the house, with a most irrefutable sury, they immediately looked
about for him, to murder him, and even made diligent enquiry whither he was
gone. They went to work with a rage scarce to be exemplified by the most savage
people. Every thing moveable was destroyed in the most minute manner, except
such things of value as were worth carrying off; among which were near 1000 l.
sterling, in specie, besides a great quantity of family plate, etc. But the
loss to be most lamented is, that there was in one room, kept for that purpose,
a large and valuable collection of manuscripts and original papers, which he
had been gathering all his lifetime, and to which all persons, who had been in
possession of valuable papers of a public kind, had been contributing, as to a
public Museum. As these related to the history and policy of the country, from
the time of its settlement to the present, and was the only collection of its
kind, the loss to the public is great and irretrievable, as it is to himself,
the loss of the papers of a family, which had made a figure in this Province
for a hundred and thirty years. As for the house, which from its structure and
inside finishing, seemed to be from a design of Inigo Jones, or his successor,
it appears that they were a long while resolved to level it to the ground: they
worked 3 hours at the cupola before they could get it down, and they uncovered
part of the roof; but I suppose, that the thickness of the walls, which were of
very fine brick-work, adorned with Ionic pilasters worked into the wall,
prevented their completing their purpose, though they worked at it till
daylight. The next day, the streets were found scattered with money, plate,
gold rings, etc. which had been dropped in carrying off. The whole loss in this
house is reckoned at 3000 l. sterling. -- It was now becoming a war of plunder,
of general levelling, and taking away the distinction of rich and poor: so that
those gentlemen, who had promoted and approved the cruel treatment of Mr.
Oliver, became now as fearful for themselves as the most loyal person in the
town could be. -- When first the town took this new turn, I was in hopes that
they would have disavowed all the riotous proceedings; that of the first night,
as well as the last. But it is no such thing, great pains are taken to separate
the two riots; what was done against Mr. Oliver is still approved of, as a
necessary declaration of their resolution not to submit to the Stamp Act: and
even the cruel treatment of him and his family is justified by its
consequences, the frightening him into a resignation: and it has been publicly
hinted, that if a line is not drawn between the first riot and the last, the
Civil Power will not be supported by the principal people of the town, as it is
assured it shall be now. -- So that the present authority of the Government is
only exercised upon condition, and with prescribed limitations.

NUMBER XIII. EXTRACT from NEWSPAPERS.
New York, Nov. 4.
THE late extraordinary and unprecedented preparations in Fort George, and the
securing the stamped paper in that garrison, having greatly alarmed and
displeased the inhabitants of this city, a vast number of them assembled last
Friday evening in the Commons, from whence they marched down the Fly, (preceded
by a number of lights) and having stopped a few minutes at the coffee-house,
proceeded to the fort walls; when they broke open the stable of the
Lieutenant Governor, took out his coach, and, after carrying the same through
the principal streets of the city in triumph, marched to the Commons, where a
gallows was erected, at one end of, which was suspended the effigy of the
person whose property the coach was: in his right hand he held a stamped bill
of lading, and on his breast was affixed a paper with the following
inscription, The Rebel Drummer in the Year 1715; at his back was fixed a drum,
the badge of his profession; at the other end of the gallows hung the figure of
the Devil, a proper companion for the other, as it is supposed it was entirely
at his instigation he acted: after they had hung there a considerable time,
they carried the effigies with the gallows entire, being preceded by the coach,
in a grand procession, to the gate of the fort, where it remained for some
time; from whence it was removed to the Bowling-green, under the muzzles of the
fort guns, where a bonfire was immediately made, and the Drummer, Devil, Coach,
etc. were consumed, amidst the acclamations of some thousands of spectators;
and, we make no doubt, but the Lieutenant Governor and his friends had the
mortification of viewing the whole proceeding from the ramparts of the fort.
But the business of the night not being yet concluded, the whole body proceeded
with the greatest decency and good order to Vauxhall, the house of major James,
who, it was reported, was a friend to the Stamp Act, and had been over
officious in his duty, from whence they took every individual article, to a
very considerable amount, and having made another bonfire, the whole was
consumed in the flames, to the great satisfaction of every person present;
after which they dispersed, and every man went to his respective habitation.
The whole affair was conducted with such decorum, that not the least accident
happened.

NUMBER XIV. Philadelphia. In Assembly, Sept. 21, 1765. A. M.
THE House taking into consideration, that an act of parliament has lately
passed in England, for imposing certain stamp-duties, and other duties, on his
Majesty's subjects in America, whereby they conceive some of their most
essential and valuable rights as British subjects to be deeply affected, think
it a duty they owe to themselves and their posterity to come to the following
resolutions, viz.

Resolved, nem. con. That the Assemblies of this Province have, from time to
time, whenever requisitions have been made by his Majesty for carrying on
military operations for the defense of America, most cheerfully and liberally
contributed their full proportion of men and money for those services.

Resolved, nem. con. That whenever his Majesty's service shall, for the future,
require the aids of the inhabitants of this Province, and they shall be called
upon for that purpose in a constitutional way, it will be their indispensible
duty, most cheerfully and liberally to grant to his Majesty their proportion of
men and money, for the defense, security and other public services of the
British American Colonies.

Resolved, nem. con. That the inhabitants of this Province are entitled to all
the liberties, rights, and privileges of his Majesty's subjects in
Great Britain or elsewhere; and that the constitution of government in this
Province is founded on the natural rights of mankind, and the noble principles
of English liberty, and therefore is, or ought to be, perfectly free.

Resolved, nem. con. That it is the interest, birthright, and indubitable
privilege of every British subject, to be taxed only by his own consent, or
that of his legal representatives, in conjunction with his Majesty, or his
substitutes.

Resolved, nem. con. That the only legal representatives of the inhabitants of
this Province are the persons they annually elect, to serve as members of
Assembly.

Resolved therefore, nem. con. That the taxation of the people of this
Province, by any other persons whatsoever than such their representatives in
Assembly, is unconstitutional, and subversive of their most valuable rights.

Resolved, nem. con. That the laying taxes upon the inhabitants of this
Province in any other manner, being manifestly subversive of public liberty,
must, of necessary consequence, be utterly destructive of public happiness.

Resolved, nem. con. That the resting an authority, in the Courts of Admiralty,
to decide, in suits relating to the Stamp Duties, and other matters, foreign to
their proper jurisdiction, is highly dangerous to the liberties of his
Majesty's American subjects, contrary to Magna Charta; the great charter and
fountain of English liberty, and destructive of one of their most darling and
acknowledged rights, that of trials by juries.

Resolved, nem. con. That it is the opinion of this House, that the restraints,
imposed by several late acts of parliament, on the trade of this Province, at a
time when the people labor under an enormous debt, must, of necessity, be
attended with the most fatal consequences; not only to this Province, but to
the trade of our Mother Country.

Resolved, nem. con. That this House think it their duty thus firmly to assert,
with modesty and decency, their inherent rights, that their posterity may learn
and know that it was not with their consent and acquiescence, that any taxes
should be levied on them by any person, but their own representatives; and are
desirous, that these their resolves should remain on their Minutes, as a
testimony of the zeal and ardent desire of the present House of Assembly, to
preserve their inestimable rights, which, as Englishmen, they have possessed
ever since this Province was settled, and to transmit them to their latest
posterity.

FINIS.

