EXTRACT FROM THE WRITINGS OF William Penn; (From his first Volume, beginning
at Page 187, and ending at Page 223.) Containing many interesting Matters.

PROVIDENCE: N. E. Printed by SARAH GODDARD and COMPANY. MDCCLXVII.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
THE valuable writings of that pious christian, William Penn, of which I am a
great admirer, as they appear to be written from the heart, with a view to
promote the happiness of mankind in general; I therefore sincerely wish they
were more generally read and attended to than I believe they are. -- But being
sensible that many are deprived of the advantage of his writings, from their
inability to purchase them (being comprised in two large and expensive volumes)
-- I have thought it my duty to get this short Extract printed, (containing a
very interesting Summons, etc. to the World) in a small pamphlet, for the
benefit of such who are not able to purchase his works, as well as the Public
in general; to whom I beg leave to recommend it as what is of infinite concern
to them. -- I subscribe myself a well-wisher to the happiness of mankind in
general.

ELISHA BROWN.

A SUMMONS, or CALL to CHRISTENDOM: In an earnest Expostulation with Her, to
prepare for the Great and Notable Day of the Lord that is at the Door.
AWAKE, O Christendom! awake, and come to judgment, for the great and notable
day of the Lord is drawing apace upon thee; prepare to meet him, thou and thy
children, for the hour of his judgment hasteneth upon you, as travail on a
woman with child, in which all your works shall be tried, and that by fire, for
the day of the Lord, shall burn as an oven, end all the proud, and all that do
wickedly shall be as stubble. Yea, by fire and by sword will the Lord God
Almighty plead with all flesh; with all fleshly worshippers and workers, who
live after the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof: And with the spirit of
judgment, and the spirit of burning, that is, with spiritual judgment and
burning, will he visit all ranks and regions upon the earth: Yea, his holy
terrors shall take hold of the rebellious, and anguish and distress shall fill
the souls of the guilty. The faces of nations shall gather paleness, and their
knees smite together, because of the anger of God, that is kindling against
them, and his fierce wrath, that is revealing from heaven against all the
ungodly, but more especially against the children of the mystery of iniquity:
It Is in this day that the kindreds of the earth shall mourn with a great
lamentation.

O Christendom! thou have long sat as a Queen, that should never know sorrow;
great have been thy pretenses, and large thy profession of God, Christ, spirit
and scriptures; come, let me expostulate with thee, and thy children, in the
fear and presence of him, that shall bring every word and work to judgment, God
is pure, and the pure in heart only see him: Now, are ye pure? Do you see him?
God is a spirit, and none can worship him aright, but such as come to his
spirit, and obey it: Do you so? Christ is the gift of God, have you received
him into your hearts? Does he rule there? Then have you eternal life abiding in
you: If not, you are not true Christians. The spirit of truth leads into all
truth; and the children of God are born of it, and led by it. But are you led
into all the holy ways of truth, born of this eternal spirit? Then you follow
not the spirit of this world; nor do your own wills, but the will of God. You
profess the holy scriptures; but what do you witness and experience? What
interest have you in them? Can you set to your seal they are true, by the work
of the same spirit in you, that gave them forth in the holy ancients? What Is
David's roarings and praises to thee, that live in the lusts of this world?
What Is Paul's and Peter's experiences to thee, that walk after the flesh?

O you, that are called Christians, give ear a little unto me, for I am pressed
in spirit to write to you: Read with patience, and consider my words; for
behold, what I have to say to you concerns your eternal good.

GOD has so loved the world, that he has sent his only begotten Son into the
world, that those that believe on him, should have eternal life. And this son
is Christ Jesus, the true light, that lights every one coming into the world;
and they that abide not in him the light, dwell in darkness, in sin, and are
under the region and shadow of death: Yea dead in sin, and see not their own
states, neither perceive the sad conditions of their own souls. They are blind
to the things of God's kingdom, and unsensible of true and spiritual life, and
motion, what it is to live to God: And in that state, are alienated from God,
without true judgment and living knowledge; and under the curse. For in Jesus
Christ, the light of the world, are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, redemption and glory; they are hid from the worldly christian, from
all that are captivated by the spirit and lusts of the world: And whoever would
see them, (for therein consist the things, that belong to their eternal peace)
must come to Christ Jesus the true light in their consciences, bring their
deeds to him, love him and obey him; whom God has ordained a light to lighten
the Gentiles, and for his Salvation to the ends of the earth. Light and
salvation are joined together, and none can come to salvation, but as they come
first to the light, and submit to the manifestation of it, which leads to
salvation. For the nations of them that are saved, shall walk in the light of
the lamb, Christ Jesus. Light and justification are also joined together: If we
walk in the light, as God is in the light, the blood of Jesus Christ his son
cleanses us from all sin. And light and life eternal are joined together: For
in the word (that was with God in the beginning, and was God, by whom all
things were made, that were made) was life, and the life was the light of men.
And this is the testimony of Jesus, I am the light of the world; he that
follows me, shall not abide in darkness, but have the light of life; yea, it
is eternal life, to believe in him, in Christ the light, to receive, embrace,
and to follow him. And that was the true light (says the same beloved
disciple) which lights every man, that comes into the world. Now this light
shines in darkness, in the children of darkness, in their dark hearts, in
their black souls, and defiled consciences, but in this darkness they
comprehend it not. Neither can man know the nature and benefit of it, while he
rebelleth against it; for the virtue and excellency of it is shut up and hid
from the children of disobedience. To as many as received him of old, gave he
power to become the children of God; and they that did his will, knew his
doctrine to be of God, and of power and efficacy to their salvation.

But this is the great condemnation of the world at this day, that though God
has sent his son a light into the hearts of all men and women, to manifest and
reprove their evil deeds, and to save them; yet they love darkness, they love
the lusts and imaginations of their vain hearts, better than this holy light,
that is given unto them for salvation: They choose Barabbas rather than Jesus.
Yea they have set up other lights, than Christ Jesus, God's great light; and
other prophets than Christ, God's great prophet; and other priests than Jesus,
the High Priest of the new covenant: But they are dark lights, false prophets,
and blind priests. All that came before me, says Christ, are thieves and
robbers: And all that pray, preach, sing, worship, etc. and not by the light
and spirit of Jesus, they go before Christ, before Christ comes, before he
prepares their hearts, and touches their lips with a coal, from his heavenly
altar; and perform worship in their own will, time and power, and stay not for
his leadings. And therefore all such rob Christ of his office, who is the
leader of the true christians, their heavenly High Priest, to anoint them, and
offer up their sacrifice to God for them; and prophet, to let them see and know
by his light, in their hearts, what they ought to do according to the new and
everlasting covenant; I will write my law in their hearts, and put my spirit in
their inward parts, and they shall be all taught of me, says the Lord.

Now this is the question to the whole world called Christians: Do you see with
this divine light? Have you searched your hearts with it? And are you anointed
by this High Priest with his holy unction, that leads into all truth? Does
this heavenly prophet give you vision, and reveal the father to you? Is he your
eye, your head, your wisdom? Do you live, move, and have your life and being in
him, in praying, preaching, and singing, yea, in your whole conversation? Are
you renewed into his life and image? And have you heard his voice, and seen his
shape? Are you witnesses of his holy rebukes, his pure judgments, the shame and
death of his cross? Is he the fountain of your knowledge? The author of your
faith? O consider! Are you of those, that have spoke with Jesus? That have been
taught in the school of his holy cross? Students in his heavenly academy? O
have you drank of his cup, and been baptized with his baptism? Tell me in the
fear of the Lord God, you that call yourselves Christians, does he go before
you, and lead you as a master teaches his disciples, and a Captain leads his
soldiers? And do you follow him in all the weighty things of this life? And
does he order your minds, and rule your affections? If not, you are thieves and
robbers; for you rob Christ of his office. For God has appointed him to be the
leader and ruler of all people; yea, it is God's decree; and those that he
leads not in their thoughts, words, and works, shall never come to God: For
all must come to God by him, that is, by his light, and spirit ruling in their
hearts, which sanctifies, regenerateth, and converteth the soul to God.

And the cause of the confusion and contention, that is about religion, in
Europe; at this day, is, that men have deserted this true light and holy
spirit, and so are degenerated from the life and power of pure and unspotted
religion, and have attempted to comprehend Christ's doctrines without Christ's
light, and to know the things of God, without the spirit of God. And being thus
miserably erred by wicked works from the one spirit of truth, they have
wandered into the fallible conceits and opinions of men. And in this state one
party has contended against another: From words they have fallen to blows, and
the strongest has oppressed the weakest. And not knowing what spirit they were
of, have called light, darkness, and darkness, light; putting the sheep's-skin
upon the wolf, and the wolf's-skin upon the poor sheep of Christ, endeavoring
by carnal weapons to enforce their opinions, and to extort conformity, by
wordly laws and punishments, to their persuasions. All this is out of the
light, life and doctrine of Christ Jesus, and in the spirit of darkness,
confusion, strife and bloodshed, which are of the devil. All which Babel must
and shall come down by the light, power, and spirit of Jesus now rising in the
world; (...) hell, death and the grave, shall not be able to hinder it: For the
set time, the appointed time of the father is come, and the judgment is begun.

O ye, that are called Roman Catholics, tell me, are you truly catholic, that
is, of an universal spirit? Then you will not persecute, but love all, and be
tender to all. Are you truly Roman, and successors of that ancient apostolical
church? Then you walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, yea, the
spirit of Christ dwells in you, and you are led by the spirit of God, and can
call him father in truth and righteousness, and the word of God in the heart is
your teacher, and not the traditions of men; for so the Romans of old time were
instructed. O consider, if you are true successors, you must follow them in the
same nature, spirit and life; for in that only stands the christian
succession, to wit, in Christ: And every branch, person or church, that abides
not in this great vine, is rejected for the fire. Therefore deceive not
yourselves, as the Jews of old did, with crying, the temple of the Lord, the
temple of the Lord; and saying, we have Abraham to our father, and to us belong
the fathers, covenants, law, priesthood, and chair of Moses: For as the apostle
said of old, so say I to you; his servants you are, to whom you obey, and he
that commits sin is of the devil. So that Christ's successors are they that
take up his cross, follow him, and that abide in his holy doctrine, that keep
his commandments, and themselves unspotted from the world. And those that
follow the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and pride of life, are not
of Christ, nor of the father, but of the world; subjects to the prince of the
power of the air, and successors of Sodom, Gomorrah, Egypt, Tire, Sidon, and
persecuting Jerusalem; and not of the harmles., self-denying, holy, suffering
spouse of Christ Jesus, that is ruled in all things by her husband, her head
her Lord. O search and try with the light of Jesus, if you are not degenerated
from primitive simplicity, and purity? For great are the abominations of all
sects, that flow like a deluge throughout your countries! Repent, and turn to
the ancient apostolical spirit and life, that you may enter into the rest of
God.

O you that call yourselves evangelicks, or gospellers, are you evangelical?
Are you saved from the lusts and pleasures, and dead worships of the world by
the mighty power of God, which is the gospel, and led by an evangelical spirit?
If not, you are not yet redeemed, you are not yet under grace, which is the
gospel-state. For you are not taught by it, but rebel against it; how then are
you true gospellers, men of gospel-liberty, men of deliverance and redemption;
to whom immortality is brought to light, (as it is to all, that truly know and
receive the blessed gospel) that are yet subjects and servants to sin? How can
you sing the song of the lamb, that are not delivered by the lamb; but by your
vain conversations crucify the lamb, and do despite to the spirit of grace, and
that every day? The true gospellers are those, that receive the angel's
message, who is the great preacher of the everlasting gospel, viz. Fear God,
give glory to his name, for the hour of his judgment is come; and no more
worship the beast. Do you fear God in truth, and in sincerity? Then are you
fearful of offending the Lord, and tender of God's glory; then are your hearts
kept clean, then are you wise to salvation; and so you can glorify God indeed:
otherwise your prayers and praises are not evangelical in God's sight.

But tell me, O ye gospellers, is the hour of his judgment come to you? Is it
begun at your houses yet? How do you feel it? Has it broke your hearts? Has
it contrited your spirits? Have ye known the Godly sorrow? The chastisements of
the Lord, and rebuke of the Almighty? Has his pure eternal word divided yet
betwixt your soul and spirit, the joints and marrow? Have you ever been weary
and heavy laden with sin? Has it been a burden to you? Did you ever cry out,
in the agony of your spirits yet, men and brethren what shall we do to be
saved? O! who shall deliver us from the body of sin here, and the wrath to
come! (the travel of the holy ancients) if not, you are yet strangers to Christ
and his kingdom: And if you die in that state, where he is gone, you shall
never come. For Sion, God's city, must be redeemed through judgments, and her
converts through righteousness: Yea the house of God cannot escape it;
wherefore said one of old, if judgment begin at the house of God, where shall
the sinner and ungodly appear? O woe to them, that live without the judgments
of the Lord! Woe to them, that cast his reproofs behind their backs, and live
in earthly pleasures, fatting up themselves in their lusts and pleasures, as
for the day of slaughter, and treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath. O
the ancient Saints lived not thus; they wrought out their salvation with fear
and trembling; yea, they gave all diligence, to make their calling and election
sure: Which way do you work out yours? Habbakuk, that holy prophet, his lips
quivered, and his belly trembled, that his soul might rest in the day of
trouble: Is this your state? Or, are you not rather worshippers of the beast at
this day, lovers of the worldly, sensual, voluptuous life, walking in the lusts
of the eye, the lusts of the flesh, and pride of life; like rebellious Israel
of old, forgetting God, days without number? But this know, that all that
forget God, shall be turned into hell.

Oh! what is become of the fatherly visitation made to your progenitors, those
good beginnings sown in persecutions and martyrdoms? Have you answered the
loving kindness of God therein? Have you advanced in the way of righteousness?
Are you become an holy nation, and a peculiar people to God, zealous of good
works? But have you not betaken yourselves to the wisdom and learning of this
world, to make ministers, and deserted the spirit of the Lord, and fled to the
power and policy of this world, to defend and protect you, and not to the name
of the Lord, which has always been the strong tower of the righteous? Nay, are
you not divided one against another, and turned persecutors for religion,
yourselves denying that liberty to others, you took for yourselves? Ah! where
is the Royal law of doing as you would be done unto.

Thus have you decayed and degenerated into a worldly clergy and a carnal
people, holding and maintaining reformed words, in an unreformed spirit, yea,
are not the same evils, pride, passion, malice, wars, bloodshed, persecution,
deceit, fleshly lusts, wantonness, vain pleasure, and sports, yea, all manner
of worldly-mindedness to be found in you, that were in the persecutors of your
forefathers, and against which your most serious and best ancestors faithfully
testified? So that the difference now is about words and sentences; and not
about the life, nature and spirit of pure and undefiled religion: And men are
to be known now by their denominations and subscriptions to certain human
creeds, man-made faiths and forms, and not by the spirit and image of Christ
Jesus, by the nature of the true sheep, and by that holy unction, that was the
bond of the heavenly fellowship of the saints of old.

And you that are called reformed, with the rest of the subdivided sects, what
better are you for your names? Are ye regenerated yet? Are you reformed from
the lusts of the eye, the lusts of the flesh, and the pride of life; from the
devil and all his works? Are you born of the incorruptible seed, that lives
and abides for ever? And are you come out of the corruptible things, and does
Christ lead you? Is the government of your souls upon his shoulders? Tell me,
is it the new birth, that which is born of God through many tribulations, the
new man created in Christ Jesus, that calls God father in your prayers, and
that makes mention of him in your preachings? Or is it the first birth of the
earth, earthly, the old man, the corrupt and unregenerated nature, that which
is born of the flesh, that is to say, of the seed of the evil one, the father
of all the fleshly lusts, inventions, imaginations and traditions of men, that
takes pleasure in the vain and wicked sports and pleasures of this apostate
world, that forget God, and turn his grace into wantonness; reproaching,
nick-naming, and persecuting the children of regeneration, with scornful names
and cruel punishments, calling God father as the Jews did; and crucifying
Christ afresh by a vain conversation at the same time.

O you degenerated Christians of all sorts, yea, all the several sects in
Christendom, that have deserted your first love, and degenerated from the light
and power of primitive godliness, with the light of Christ Jesus in your hearts
examine yourselves. God has lighted your candle, search and try yourselves;
see how it stands with you as to your eternal condition, before you go hence,
and be no more in this world. Consider, are you in the true faith of Christ or
no? For without true faith none can please God; and without pleasing him no man
can be saved. The devils believe, yea, and tremble too; that is more than
thousands, called Christians, do, and so far they are short of the very devils.
Have you faith? Lets try it in the name of God. What is it for faith? Does it
overcome the world? Does it live and depend upon God? Can it forsake country
and kindred? Turn out Ishmael? Offer up Isaac? Live a pilgrim, a stranger in
the world? Does it work by that love, which can forsake all for Christ's
namesake? Does it fight against the devil? Resist his fiery darts? Overcome
his assaults and temptations? And finally, purify the soul to God's use? Is
this your faith, O you carnal, outside Christians? No such matter; for you live
in the flesh, fulfilling the lusts thereof; and your care is, what you shall
eat, drink, and put on, and how you shall get the mammon, friendship and glory
of this world. Examine yourselves, and prepare, for the day of the Lord
hasteneth upon you. And have a care, lest you partake of the plagues that God
has prepared for Babylon; she that calls herself the lamb's bride, and is an
harlot, committing fornication throughout all nations and sects, that is, those
that by a lying spirit, have had their hearts seduced from God and his holy
fear, yet in words professed to be his people; who call themselves Jews, but
are not; Christians, and are not, but of the synagogue of Satan; being
strangers to the circumcision in spirit, and the baptism that is with fire, and
with the Holy Ghost: With fire, to consume the fleshly nature; and with the
Holy Ghost, to beget the heavenly nature in man. O the downfall of this great
city, and the desolation of this false church through all the sects in
Christendom, is come and coming! Yea, in one day shall it be accomplished, even
in the day of the appearance of Christ, who is the second Adam, the Lord from
Heaven, who by the brightness of his coming, and by the breath of his mouth in
the hearts of nations, shall reveal, and destroy this great Antichrist, this
man of sin, in man, that fitteth in the place of God, yea, exalted above all
that is called God, requiring conformity to all his inventions and injunctions
upon pain of life, liberty and estate: Nor are any suffered to buy or sell in
this great city, but such as will receive his mark.

Woe to you all in the name of the Lord, that call God your father, and are not
born of him; that name his name, and hate to be reformed: That call Jesus Lord,
and not by the Holy Ghost; who take his pure name into your mouths, and depart
not from iniquity. I say to you on God's behalf, as God said to the Jews os
old; your prayers, your sacrifices, and your solemn assemblies, etc. in an
unconverted state, are abomination to the Lord. No matter for your names, your
pretenses, your creeds, if you live without God in the world; that is, without
his holy awe in your hearts, without a divine sense of his presence in your
souls, and know not that Godly sorrow, that works unfeigned repentance, the
only way to eternal life. Your worship God loatheth: A dog's neck, swines
blood, yea to bless an idol, or kill a man, is altogether as acceptable with
the Lord. O! God is wrath with the feigned worships, as well as common
ungodliness of the world: Come to Christ's spirit, be led of it, and do not
your own wills, but the will of Christ Jesus; and then you shall know the true
worship. For the true ministry and worship of God stand not in the will,
wisdom, or appointment of men, nor can they be performed by unregenerated men;
but in the leadings of his eternal spirit, by whom all the faithful offer up
themselves, an acceptable sacrifice to God, not to live unto themselves, but to
him that has purchased them. It Is true, Christ Jesus died for the ungodly, but
not that they should continue ungodly, but take up his daily cross and follow
him. Christ (says Peter) suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should
follow his steps: As he was in this world, so we should be, not conformable to
the rudiments, fashions, and customs of this world, that pass away; but
transformed and renewed in our minds by the grace that he has given us: Which
grace brings salvation to all that obey it, teaching such to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and Godly in
this present evil world: Because without holiness, none shall ever see the
Lord: That is God's decree.

Wherefore be you not deceived, O you formal and titular Christians; God will
not be mocked: Such as you sow, such shall you reap at the hand of the Lord;
yea, for every idle word shall you give account in the day of judgment. Think
not with yourselves, you have Christ to your Savior, and your are reconciled
to God, through Christ, and that God looks not upon you, as you are in
yourselves, but as in Christ; whilst you walk not after the spirit, but after
the flesh: For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom? Not to them that despise his light in
their hearts, that grieve his spirit, and by a worldly conversation go on to
crucify him; and who follow not Jesus in the way of tribulation and
regeneration. God is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity; and he looks upon
men and women to be, what they really are, and not what they imagine themselves
to be: Behold he comes, (...) his reward is with him, and he will reward all
according to their works. Sinners, while such, can no more come into Christ,
than into God; for God is in Christ, and Christ is in God: Christ is holy,
harmless, pure, and undefiled, and separate from sinners. And if ever you would
have God look upon you to be in Christ, you must come into Christ: And you can
never come into Christ, the new and heavenly man, that is undefiled and
separated from sinners, till you come out of sin, and the author of it, the
Devil, the old man of sin, and leave your wicked deeds of darkness.

Therefore be ye separate from every evil way: Christ, the immaculate lamb of
God, came not only to save men from wrath, but from sin, which is the cause of
wrath. Behold the lamb of God, says John, which takes away the sin of the
world: Not their sin that will not believe in him, but the sins of those that
are weary and heavy laden, that wait, hunger, thirst, and cry for his
salvation; whom God has given for a light to lighten the Gentiles, and for his
salvation to the ends of the earth. O you that are called by his sacred name,
repent, repent! prepare, prepare to meet the Lord, who is coming in the way of
his judgments to visit the inhabitants of the earth; and put away the evil of
your doings, and turn to him that he may receive you.

But woe in the name of the Lord, to all that rebel against the Light of Christ
Jesus, who serve another master, and follow another Captain, and obey the
Prince of the power of the air, who reigns in the hearts of the children of
disobedience. Yea, woe unto all that are covered with a covering, and not of my
spirit; that take counsel and not of me, says the Lord: Who gather sticks, and
kindle a fire of their own, and compass themselves about in the sparks, which
they have kindled; for this shall they have at my hand, they shall lie down in
sorrow.

Woe from God to all the will-worshippers, who worship, but not in the spirit
and in the truth; th^^^ worship is not available. He that worships God aright
is turned to the spirit, and is taught and led by the spirit. And such as have
received the spirit of Christ are not led by their own spirits, nor by the
spirits of this world, nor according to the inventions and traditions of men:
Neither do they conform themselves to the customs and fashions of this world,
nor will they bow to the glory of this world, or the God of it. But having seen
him, whom they have pierced with their vain conversation in times past, they
mourn, and are in great bitterness, because they have done despite to his holy
spirit of grace, that strove so long with them for their redemption. And being
called by his spiritual call in their hearts, to come out of Babylon, the great
city of will worship, confusion, and darkness, that is in the earth, do
cheerfully resign up all to follow him in the narrow way of self-denial, as his
holy disciples did of old. And such have learned by good experience, that
without Christ they can do nothing: Though in these days scarcely any thing is
done with him, or by him. For he is resisted in his spiritual appearance in the
consciences of those, that make a profession of him with their mouths, and
therefore he does not many mighty works in them: Yea he is smitten, spit upon,
crowned with thorns, pierced and crucified of all false Christians, through
their rebellion and wickedness.

O woe from the great and just God, that made heaven and earth, upon all
people, that work iniquity, and forget God! Woe to you Kings and Princes, that
have crucified the Lord of life and glory; yea, you have crucified him in
yourselves, and helped to crucify him in others: He lies slain at this day in
your streets. For you have not ruled for God as you ought to have done, but for
yourselves, to please your own lusts; and have not sought the glory of (...)
Lord, nor the prosperity of his work in the earth, (...) much as the greatness
of your own names, and to (...) large your worldly dominions, often oppressing
the poor, and persecuting conscientious Dissenters; but suffering almost all
manner of vice and vanity to go unpunished. How does the lust of the eye, the
lust of the flesh, and the pride of life reign in your territories? Are not
your courts the very schools of vanity, and nurseries of worldly lusts and
pleasures, which war against the soul, and lead to eternal destruction? O! you
have much to answer for before the great God, at the day of his terrible
tribunal, who have power in your hands to chase away wickedness, and to reform
the world. It is written, a King upon his throne of judgment, scatters all
evil with his eye: O! that the Kings and Princes of the world knew this throne
of true judgment! That they had this Godlike Majesty, that they would purge
their lands of evil-doors, that they and their people might escape the wrath
and vengeance of God, that is ready to be poured forth upon them!

And woe to you Nobles of the earth, that spend your estates in pleasures, and
your days in vanity, that like those of old, drink wine in bowls, and stretch
yourselves upon couches of ivory: That invent musical instruments for your
mirth, but remember not the afflictions of Joseph, neither consider of your
latter end. What pride lust and excess lie at your doors! What spoil and waste
do you make in the world! You live as if you should never die, careing only
what you should eat, what you should drink, and what you should put on; how you
should trim, perfume, and beautify your poor mortal selves, and at which plays
and sports you should divert and spend away that troublesome and melancholy
thing, called time, (as you esteem it) instead of redeeming the time, because
the days are evil, and preparing for the eternal judgment. Is this the way to
glory? Did Jesus give you this example? O! he is crucified by these things!
(...) is far from the true Nobility and Christian Honor (...) comes from
above.

Woe to you Judges of the earth, who pervert judgment for a reward, that
oppress the poor and despise the cause of the needy, who regard the mighty and
the rich in judgment, and delay justice for the fear or favor of man. That
subject the laws to your will, and righteous rules to your passions and
interest. Repent, and be just, for God the just God, the great Judge of heaven
and earth, shall judge you all according to your works: And dreadful shall that
day of his reckoning and tribunal be, to all the workers of iniquity: But
especially to unjust and corrupt Judges.

And woe to you lawyers, that refuse no cause for money, but will plead even
against law, truth and justice for advantage, teaching your tongues to advocate
for a lie, and your mouths for gain, to plead the cause of unrighteousness;
raising unreasonable wealth unto yourselves, by the folly, ignorance and
contention of the people. O the equivocation, deceit, falsehood, and iniquity
that is in your profession, in which you let your consciences cut to hire at
every summons, for all sorts of causes: Insomuch, that it is the money, and not
the cause that prevails. And the worst cause most commonly is most desired,
because the Client, doubtful of his success, is usually the most liberal to
you. This also is for judgment.

And woe to you merchants and traders, that have not the Lord's fear before
your eyes, whose God is gold and gain, that neither buy nor sell with regard to
his just principle in your consciences, that use vain and deceitful words, and
that are not come to the just measure, and the righteous balance, but use
^^auds for advantage: That neither eye the Lord's Providence by sea, nor his
care by land; but day and night cast about, how to raise to yourselves a great
name and estate, to exalt your nests, and rank your families among the rich,
and the noble of the earth! the Lord will also plead with you: Repent, and fear
before God.

Woe to you farmers and countrymen, that reward the Lord evil for good, who
gives you increase of all things in their proper seasons, yet you discern not
his hand, you regard not his care; you live without God in the world: Yet no
life is fuller of the Lord's providence, who preserves and prospers your
flocks, who increases your wine, your corn, and your grass; instead of
remembering his goodness with reverence, and in your harvests praising him with
fear, you sacrifice to your lusts, and rejoice only in your fullness; making
merry at your harvests, without the fear of God, or looking to him that gives
you to increase. Repent and fear before the God of the whole earth.

But above all others. Woe to you Scribes, Pharisees and hypocrites, you
priests and pastors, who have taken a charge that God never gave you; who run,
and he never sent you; who say, thus says the Lord, and he never spoke to you,
or by you. That steal the words of the prophets and apostles, and with them,
make merchandise to the people, not knowing the pure word of God in your
hearts, to be as an hammer, a fire, a sword, to destroy sin, and to purge,
redeem, and reconcile you to God; but boast in other men's lines, and speak
things made ready to your hands: That teach for hire, and divine for money; who
seek honor of men, and love the uppermost places at feasts. Who speak peace to
the wicked, and sow pillows under their elbows for reward: Pleasers of men,
more than pleasers of God, Woe to you in the name of the Lord, that counterfeit
his commission, and deceive the people, requiring th^^^ money for that which is
not bread, and their labo^^ for that which does not profit: At your doors lye^^
the blood of souls, in which you have traded. O you physicians of no value,
whom have you cured? Where is the seal of your ministry? Is it not an
abominable cheat, that you take money to cure, yet cannot cure; that have no
medicine to cure; and, at last maintain, that the disease is incurable? You are
they, that will neither enter into the kingdom yourselves, nor suffer others.
For whenever we have seen your delusions, and deserted your assemblies,
presently a packet of letters must be sent to Damascus: The magistrate must be
called upon to be jailer and hangman for the priest. What wars, changes and
persecutions ever befell the world, since you had a being, in which you have not
been at head or tail? O your practices shall more and more come to light: And
the day hasteneth, that your very name and calling (as now held) shall be had
in abhorrence by the nations. O you numerous offspring of the great false
prophet, that has been a liar from the beginning; hereby is it known that God
has never sent you, that you have not profitted the people; they are God's
words by the prophet Jeremy. Weep and howl, for the day of your great calamity
hasteneth upon you! Your father and mother are come into remembrance before the
Lord, the hour of their judgment is at the door. God will fill you the cup of
his fury, you shall drink it at his hand.

O! I cannot but cry aloud to you all, of all ranks and qualities, from the
highest to the lowest, that walk not after the spirit, but after the flesh,
daily fulfilling the lusts thereof; that you would repent, and be saved. O how
has Christ's religion been profaned, and his holy name blasphemed by the lewd
life of professed Christians! The very Heathens are scandalized, and the nations
round about have you in scorn and derision. Arise, O God, for thy name's sake!
(...) what tremendous oaths and lies! What revenge and murders, with
drunkenness and gluttony! What pride and luxury! What chamberings and
wantonness! What fornications, rapes and adulteries! What masks and revels!
What lustful ornaments, and enchanting attires! What proud customs, and vain
compliments! What sports and pleasures! What plays and romances! What intrigues
and pastimes! Again, What falseness and treachery! What avarice and oppression!
What flattery and hypocrisy! What malice and slander! What contention and
lawsuits? What wars and bloodshed! What plunders, fires, and desolations! And
it is not only committed by Christians in general one against another, but by
Christians of the same faith, sect and church one against another; praying to
the same God to destroy one another; and singing psalms to God, when they have
wickedly destroyed one another. O the rapes, fires, murders, and rivers of
blood, that lie at the doors of professed Christians! If this be Godly, what is
Devilish? If this be Christian, what is Paganish? What Is Antichristian, but to
make God a party in their wickedness? O profanation! O blasphemy! What need is
there of any other demonstration, that Christendom is foully apostatized from
the doctrine and example of Christ Jesus, and his true followers, who says, if
ye love me, keep my commandments. By this shall all men know that ye are my
disciples, if ye have love one to another. And John says, whosoever does not
love his brother, is not of God, and whosoever hates his brother, is a
murderer; and ye know, that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him. And
it is not to be supposed, that they kill one another in love: For murder is not
the effect of love and brotherly kindness, but of malice, envy and revenge. O
Christendom! how art thou and thy children degenerated from God, and fallen
from the doctrine of Christ, whose holy name thou professest Thou art become a
city full of uncleanness, committing whoredom under every green tree; following
other lovers than JESUS, whose spouse thou professest to be. O thou rebellious
city, thou cage of unclean birds, thou and thy children have filled the earth
with the stink of your abominations!

O how expert have you been in these impieties! How ingenious to work
wickedness, and how fruitful in your inventions to gratify the lust of the eye,
the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life! O how has the Heathen nature, as
an evil leaven prevailed, and leavened the great body of Christians at this
day, as if the end of Christ's coming into the world, had been to furnish us
with a new profession, but not to give us a new nature; to learn men to talk,
and not to live; to cry Hosannah, but in works to crucify him: What did the
Heathens, that Christians have not done? Yea, the same lusts, vanities, and
impieties, that reigned among them, are to be found improved among Christians.
So that it is Paganism made free of the Christian profession, or Heathanism
christianed: And not to conform to the Heathen in the Christian, is not to be a
Christian but an Heathen. O the ignorance as well as wickedness of the present
Christian world! Verily, the Christian life is oppressed under this mass of
darkness and impiety, found in the conversations of Apostate-Christians, even
as Christ was grieved and burdened with the darkness and obstinacy of the
Apostate-Jews. And as the hard-heartedness of the false Jews crucified him
outwardly, so has the hard-heartedness of the false Christians crucified him
inwardly: Which has fulfilled what is recorded in the Apocalypse, viz. that
the Lord was crucified in Sodom and Egypt, spiritually so called: For the false
Christians are the spiritual Sodom and Egypt, who ^^ve and live in Sodom's
sins, and Egypt's lusts and pleasures. Yea, they are of the race of them that
stoned the Prophets, and crucified the Lord of glory: Of the same nature and
spirit. O the blood of Jesus lies at their doors, shed, spilt, and trod under
foot of them, and will one day cry for eternal vengeance against them, if they
repent not with unfeigned sorrow, and turn to the Lord with their whole hearts:
Certainly woe, anguish and tribulation shall be their portion for ever! That
which they have grieved, shall grieve them; and that which they have bruised
and resisted, shall reject and torment them; yea, it shall be a never-dying
worm, and an endless pain to them. O woe to the worker of iniquity in that day!
Woe to the slothful servant! Woe to the mocker and scoffer! Woe to the drunkard
and unclean person! Woe to them that spend their days in vanity, and their life
in earthly pleasures! Woe to the proud Pharisee, and disdainful Scribe! Woe to
the fearful and unbelieving! Woe to the idolaters and liars! Yea, and woe from
God to all the cruel persecutors of the innocent lambs and sheep of JESUS, for
their pure conscience to him! For they shall have their part in the lake, that
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

O that you might escape this great damnation! And I testify to you in the
word of the Lord, that God gives unto you all a day of visitation, in which
you may escape the wrath to come. For this end, God has sent his Son a light
into your hearts; it is he, which manifests all your thoughts, words and deeds
unto you; it is he, which checks and reproves you; yea, it is he, which
expostulateth and striveth with you; it is he, that knocks at your doors, and
awakeneth you to judgment: Who condemns every unfruit^^^ thought, word and
work in you. Repent, I (...) you, turn to him, hear his voice, and harden not
your hearts; but while it is to day, and the light shines and the spirit
striveth, O humble yourselves, (...) his judgments, love his reproofs. And
though his word be as fire in your hearts, and though you are even scorched
within you, because of the heat thereof yet bear the indignation of the Lord,
in that you have sinned against him. Wait, watch, and walk in the light of the
Lord Jesus, that in his blood you may feel remission of sins, and
sanctification unto life eternal: That you may no more walk after the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts thereof, but in the spirit of holiness; that you may be sealed
unto the day of redemption. O (...) peace, the joy, the pleasure, and the
undeclarable comfort, that is daily met with in the holy and righteous way of
the Lord.

O this rises powerfully in my soul, that his form has no comeliness in it,
that will please flesh; his way and worship is most remote from it. Flesh and
blood have no share in his worship; the will and runnings of man have no part
in his way. It Is neither at the mountain, where one sort runs; nor at
Jerusalem, whither another sort goes; but in spirit, within the vail, hid from
flesh and blood: Yea, there it is, that his worship is known and performed. Any
form is more pleasant than this: His visage is more marred, than any man's. All
will worship, all human invention, finds acceptance, where he cannot find a
place to lay his head on. O this is a bitter cup to the creature; few will
drink it! They are hard to be persuaded to sit still, and patiently to wait for
the salvation of God, to let him work all their works in them and for them.
They know not what it is to have the mouth in the dust, to have all flesh
silent before the Lord, (...) the voice of God may be heard; that he may (...)
them, and that the will of God may be brought (...) in them. O this mystery of
iniquity, how has wrought, and how does it yet work! It claims a (...) to
the living child; but she has no right to it: (...) is the womb of death, and
can bring forth no living (...) to God All nations have drunk her cup: but the
hour of her judgment is come. She is seen disvailed, and condemned by the
living spirit of God, that is felt and received, and obeyed by a remnant, who
are gathered from the mouths of idol shepherds, and all the errings and
strayings of false prophets, that have no vision; and are come to the Lord, to
know his law in their hearts, and fear and spirit to be in their inward parts,
and are taught and led by him. And these follow the Lamb, and are his host this
day, that fight under his banner with his holy testimony, against the whore,
false prophet and beast. And behold they shall prevail: For greater is he that
is in them, than he that is in the world.

O this is a great mystery, but a greater truth: Moses, the servant, is
externally more comely than he* Yea, the prophets were as pleasant singers, and
as delightful instruments of music; their visions, sights, and glorious
prophecies of the last days, and new covenant times, were (says one of them of
old) as a pleasant song: But the SON, the substance, when he came, no beauty,
no excellency, no comeliness. What Is the matter? The way is narrow for flesh
and blood; there is a cross must be taken up, a bitter cup drunk, and a
baptism, yea, of blood gone through. Man must die to his own will, affections,
imaginations, and carnal conceptions; he must wait and watch; yea, continually:
His own religion and righteousness is as odious as his sin and iniquity, yea,
in a sense more dangerous. It Is no outside will do; not that which pleases the
busy active will and mind of the creature; that gratifie^ the external senses,
that have prevailed against (...) soul: O no, it is an hidden life, an hidden
temple, (...) hidden worship, and that in God's time; yea, an hidden manna, an
hidden supper, not discernable by (...) vain sects of this world. Of this
tabernacle is JESUS builder; of this covenant and worship is he author; of this
altar is he priest: To this did he gather his of old, and to this is he
gathering the nations. And the bride says, come; and the spirit says come;
and he says, come: And blessed are they that come, and see how good he is.

But such, who like Sodom of old, go on to grieve the spirit of the Lord, to
rebel against his light, and vex God's just Lot, that lives in the midst of
them, persisting in their lusts and abominations, God's angel shall smite them
with blindness: The day of their visitation shall pass away, and the
forbearance of God shall be at an end, and fire from heaven shall devour them.
Which with my soul I fervently and tenderly desire you may all escape, whom God
has taught to hate your sin, deny your glory, and separate from all your false
worships by his own light, spirit and truth, and to follow his dear Son in the
way of regeneration, whose love to me has taught me to love all mankind, and
to seek their salvation.

WILLIAM PENN.


