Mr. FISH's Thanksgiving DISCOURSE, ON THE REPEAL OF THE STAMP ACT

JOY and GLADNESS: A Thanksgiving DISCOURSE, Preached in UPTON, WEDNESDAY, MAY
28, 1766; OCCASIONED BY THE REPEAL OF THE STAMP ACT BY ELISHA FISH, A. M.
Pastor of the CHURCH there.

PROVIDENCE, in NEW ENGLAND: Printed and sold by Sarah Goddard, and Company, at
the Post Office. M,DCC,LXVII.

JOY and GLADNESS: A THANKSGIVING DISCOURSE, etc.
ESTHER viii. 15. -- And the city of Shushan rejoiced and was glad.
THAT we may rightly understand the occasion of the joy and gladness expressed
in our text, it must be noticed, that a certain favorite minister with the King
of Persia, called Haman the Agagite, the Jews enemy, who, it seems, by his
being thus called the Agagite and Jews enemy, was a reputed branch of the royal
feed of Amalek. This favorite, by art and base insinuation, imposed upon his
master, King Ahasuerus, to such a degree, that he obtained a most cruel decree,
to take away the lives and properties of the Jews in one day. A warning to
Princes, not to trust their favorites too far.
The request and decree are as follows: If it please the King, let it be
written that they may be destroyed. -- And the letters were sent by posts into
all the King's provinces, to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish all Jews,
both young and old, little children and women, in one day -- and to take the
spoil of them for a prey. Now when this bloody edict was published, there was
(as well there might be) great distress among the Jews. In every province
whithersoever the King's commandment, and his decree came, there was great,
mourning among them, and fasting, and weeping, and wailing; and many lay in
sackcloth and ashes. In this critical hour, Queen Esther, informed by her uncle
Mordecai, of her own and nation's danger, (although uncalled) to the hazard of
her life, she approaches the presence of the King Ahasuerus, and finds favor in
his sight. Thus the finger of GOD began to appear, in answer to the cries of
the distressed Jews, which shone still more by the signal bringing of
Mordecai's long neglected service to the mind and notice of Ahasuerus, in the
most seasonable hour, to pave the way for the disgrace and destruction of proud
Haman, and sure advancement of worthy Mordecai, to dignity and honor. These
things being done, at Queen Esther's second approach and request, for herself
and her people, before the King, the Jews obtain liberty to defend their lives
and properties. This was the singular occasion that gave rise to the joy and
gladness of the city of Shushan, the royal palace of the Kings of Persia, as
expressed in our text.

LIKE to this, is the deliverance of America at this time, by the REPEAL of the
Stamp Act, in several regards.

1. THE lives, liberties and properties of the Jews were exposed to destruction
-- And so were the lives, liberties, and properties of the Americans, if this
dreadful act, or decree, had not been repealed.

2. THAT bloody decree given at Shushan the palace, was obtained by a favorite
-- So it is thought that this odious act was procured by a favorite.

3. THERE was mourning and fasting with the Jews, in their distress -- So there
has also been with many sober persons in America.

4. IT was most evident, that GOD gave the Jews deliverance -- In like manner
it is evident, that GOD has given us our great deliverance, who turns all
hearts, even as the King's, whither soever HE will.

THUS by accommodating our text to our present times, we shall, I. MENTION some
things, that should excite us in America to joy and gladness, at this season;
not confining our discourse merely to our late deliverances. II. POINT out how
we should rejoice and be glad on this occasion. III. NOTICE some fruits that
should attend our joy and gladness.


First. Mention some things, that should excite us in America to joy and
gladness, at this season: not confining our discourse merely to our late
deliverances.

HERE we have presented in one view, heathen Shushan half buried in slavery;
flowing with joy and gladness, to find the doomed Jews, by the unhappy Persian
constitution, only indulged and encouraged to arm themselves for the defense of
their lives and properties. And shall not we christians and Englishmen, feel
an ardent flame of joy and gladness inspire our hearts, when we see the fetters
removed from our feet, and swords from our throats; and every thing dear to us,
secured on its former basis, by the repeal of the odious Stamp Act? Thus to
behold America, emerging from this dark cloud, that threatened to pour forth
upon her an irresistible torrent of miseries, to the latest ages, is a view
that most naturally does, and should fill every true-born American, with joy
and gladness, whilst he discerns the snare broken, and his soul escaped. As no
language can paint out what true sons of America felt, and what they expected,
in this night of tribulation, when their Sun of Liberty underwent such an
amazing eclipse; so is it impossible, by words, to describe the joy and
gladness that does, on this occasion, dilate the souls of this people; reaching
the most remote corners, and with a strange rapidity seize every rank of
reasonable beings, that either desire or taste freedom.

AGAIN; -- when we of this congregation remember the gloomy horror which
covered our faces, and the anguish that filled our hearts, in the year past,
under our then approaching dangers; and call to mind, that those surrounding
walls bear witness for us, that there we sought the LORD in our distress, and
lifted up our hands, with our hearts to GOD in the heavens for deliverance, as
knowing that GOD rules among the inhabitants of the earth, as well as armies
in heaven; this reflection cannot fail of swelling the tide of joy and gladness
in our hearts, when now we behold ourselves here assembled to praise GOD, and
rejoice before him with thanksgiving, for the very deliverance we sought at his
hand. And this naturally leads us to say with the Psalmist, I will praise thee,
for thou have heard me, and art become my salvation. And with Solomon, He shall
not much remember the days of his life; because GOD answers him in the joy of
his heart. This spring of joy should not be easily forgotten.

A FARTHER consideration to excite and increase our joy and thankfulness to
GOD, at this season, arises from his kind care, as the great Governor in
Providence, and bountiful Author of every blessing, who foresaw all the
miseries and embarrassments of poor and distressed America; under the decay and
stop of her commerce, shutting up of the courts of justice, with a train of
other evils, which strangely stagnated all business.

IN this period, GOD has showed his pity and mercy, in giving so general
health, and such a plenty of the necessary fruits of the earth, by which, in
the year past, our misery and distresses have been much abated, and without
which, in our other circumstances, we had nigh been overwhelmed with misery.
These are the tender mercies of our GOD, that call for joy and gratitude from
every heart among us.

STILL to aid our joy and gladness, at this season, we recollect, that this is
the happy day, in which the liberty, allowed by royal charter, of electing the
members of his Majesty's council for this province, is to be exercised. This
demonstrates, that we yet are a free people, and have occasion to rejoice in
that privilege mentioned by the prophet -- Their nobles shall be of themselves.

BUT to crown all our joy and gladness on this occasion, and excite it to the
highest pitch, we must ever remember, that in the name of the divine Savior,
there is published to the world, a REPEAL of the most amazing doom pronounced
against sinners. This is indeed worthy to be called glorious news, and the most
sweet and heart-refreshing, that ever entertained mortal ears. Lo! such
messages echo from the Book of GOD, Thou shall call his name JESUS; for he
shall save his people from their sins. And behold the Lamb of GOD, which takes
away the sins of the world. Still the soft sound attracts our ears, GOD sent
forth his son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that are
under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. And CHRIST has
redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us. And the Angel
said unto them, Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy,
which shall be to all people: for unto you is born this day, in the city of
David, a Savior, which is CHRIST the LORD. These are messages worthy of a
seraph sent from GOD! For what will it avail us, my brethren, to rejoice in the
birthrights of Englishmen, and account ourselves happy in a deliverance from a
late grievous burden, laid on our necks; whilst in the next or present moment,
we reflect and view ourselves, servants to sin, bond slaves to Satan, lying
under the infinite burden of GOD'S wrath and curse, and heavy yoke of a
condemning law, hasting into the prison of hell, and dark abodes of the damned,
there to be reserved in chains of everlasting darkness, to the judgment of the
great day. Hence, the news of an eternal redemption by JESUS CHRIST, sounding
in the ears of fallen men, appears to be, indeed, the most noble and highest
matter of joy and gladness, not only to America, but to the world; and
infinitely exceeds all temporal deliverances or civil freedoms. It Is the saying
of the Redeemer of men, If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be
free indeed. Let us then, inspired with the hopes and lively expectations of
living and reigning with CHRIST, and enjoying the glorious liberties of the
sons of GOD, indulge an holy freedom of soul, pouring forth our joy and
gladness, in a sort joining the heavenly high, saying, Glory to GOD in the
highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men -- Longing for our arrival
to those peaceful abodes, where no bounds will confine, nor sorrows diminish
our joy and gladness, in perfect freedom, for ever and ever. But to proceed:

Secondly. We were to point out, how we should rejoice and be glad, on this
occasion.

IT is GOD, ( who created all things, and upholds all things, by the word of
his power, who alone is the supreme Governor of the world, and fountain of
being and perfection) in whom all intelligent creatures should rejoice and be
glad, and not in themselves. It is indisputable, that the joy and gladness of
holy angels, is peculiarly in GOD, as the force of all perfection and glory;
and is excited by every discovery of these divine perfections and glories, in
his works of creation, grace or providence, toward the universe of beings. It
is therefore in GOD, through JESUS CHRIST, the divine mediator, that we, fallen
men, should rejoice and be glad, seeing it is only in him we are able to behold
the divine glory, agreeable to that of the apostle, For GOD who commanded the
light to shine out of darkness, has shined into our hearts, to give the light
of the knowledge of the glory of GOD, in the face of JESUS CHRIST. Hence we
learn from inspiration, to rejoice in GOD, through our Lord JESUS CHRIST
supremely. And thus speaks the prophet, I will greatly rejoice in the LORD,
my soul shall be joyful in my GOD, for he has clothed me with the garments of
salvation. Again, another prophet, in a dark season, says, Yet I will rejoice
in the LORD, and joy in the GOD of my salvation. In like part Paul speaks,
But we also joy in GOD, through our Lord JESUS CHRIST. It behooves us, on this
occasion, therefore, to rejoice in GOD, through our Lord JESUS CHRIST, by whom
every deliverance or mercy flows down to us; for salvation is of the LORD.
Whenever mercy, goodness or kindness appears, there we should notice the finger
of GOD, which justly leads us this day to rejoice in GOD supremely, as the
alone giver of every good and perfect gift.

AGAIN: -- If we would know how to rejoice with gladness acceptable before GOD,
at this season, it must spring from a divine faith, wrought in our hearts by
the grace of GOD, which is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of
things not seen, and agrees to that divine sentence, Believing, ye rejoice with
joy unspeakable, and full of glory. Without the divine faith in the being,
perfections and faithfulness of GOD, in the record he has given of his Son, all
our joy and gladness is heathenish and abominable, as an empty noise
displeasing before GOD; for without faith, it is impossible to please HIM. Let
us then take heed, brethren, left there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living GOD, in this the day of our joy and
gladness.

BUT still to point out, how we should rejoice this day before GOD, we ought to
keep in mind, how variable human scenes are, not imagining that our mountain
stands so strong as never to be moved. Surely we have not so soon forgot the
dark day, when the Sun of our Liberty set in a gloomy cloud, which, for a
season, boded perpetual night. Then our faces gathered paleness, whilst we saw
fair Liberty so suddenly fled from her former delightful abodes.

THIS unexpected eclipse of our darling Sun of Liberty, should for ever impress
our hearts with a feeling sense, that all human things are uncertain. Here we
may learn, to salute and embrace fair Liberty in her return, with a trembling
hand, and jealous heart, left we provoke her to withdraw from these happy
climes; for she is so delicate and modest, as not to fit long in the proud lap
of presumption and security. Therefore we should at this season, accept that
word of inspiration, Serve the LORD with fear, and rejoice with trembling. And
in the midst of our joy and gladness, imitate Jacob, in his return from exile;
I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which
thou have showed unto thy servant. In this humble, zealous and trembling
manner, interwoven with joy and gladness, may we now welcome Liberty in her
auspicious return to these her pleasant seats; and in such arms may we retain
her to the latest ages, as the offspring of GOD, sent to bless this new world.

To add farther, how we should rojoice before GOD acceptably, on this occasion;
it naturally occurs, that we remember the poor, and make them glad and rejoice
with us, by kind portions, after the ancient custom of GOD's people on
occasions of singular joy. This will be an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice
acceptable, well pleasing to GOD.

Now that we may close this head of directions, how we should rejoice and be
glad before GOD, on this extraordinary occasion, which, on many accounts, far
exceeds all that have gone before in British America; as the distress and awful
apprehensions of danger and misery had risen, in general, much higher than ever
was known in this land before, under her sharpest trials, and most singular
distresses, which have been many and great from the very beginning; so never
did the hearts of all swell with grief, or expand with joy and gladness, as on
this occasion, -- Therefore in the fullness of our hearts, we should pour forth
devout raptures of praise and thanksgiving to GOD on high, that governs over
the kingdoms of men, who proclaims himself King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.
He only is worthy to be praised, who does great things, unsearchable and past
finding out. It Is the LORD our GOD who has given us this great deliverance, in
which we rejoice and are glad. -- Therefore, with holy David, let our hearts
and lips join, when he says, I will praise the name of GOD with a song, and
will magnify HIM with thanksgiving. In this sort may our affections ascend to
GOD, in the chaunt of praise this day, which shall please the LORD better than
an ox or bullock, that has horns and hoofs; yea, better than all the
fireworks in America.

III. We were to notice some fruits that should attend our joy and gladness, on
this special occasion.

The supreme love of GOD, stands in the front of these fruits, which should
wait on, and flow from our joy at this season. May we not justly imagine, that
GOD is saying of America, on this occasion, as he did of his Israel by the
prophets: Surely they are my people, children that will not lie: so he was
their Savior. In all their affliction, he was afflicted, and the angel of his
presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them. And shall
not such thoughts, raise in our hearts, the most ardent wish for the heavenly
dove, to descend with balmy wings, and shed abroad in our hearts a seraphick
flame of love to GOD; that we may give GOD our whole hearts in this the day of
our gladness. And so shall we prove that we are children that will not lie, and
manifest, that our hearts are right with GOD. When our souls breathe forth this
language of David, I will love thee, O LORD, my strength. -- The LORD is my
rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer. The LORD, in very deed, has been our
strength, rock, fortress, and deliverer in our late distresses, and in all our
distresses. Hitherto we may say the LORD has helped us. -- And can we think of
making any less return to him, than the highest affections of our souls? GOD
forbid such a thought.

AGAIN: -- The giving glory and honor to GOD, as the author of all, and
particularly our late salvation, is a fruit necessarily connected with our joy
this day. We have a divine injunction, Call upon me in the day of trouble; I
will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. We of this congregation have the
comfort to recollect, that here we called upon GOD in our day of trouble, and
he has delivered us: Let us not then be wanting in glorifying HIM. But my
brethren, whilst I am urging you to give glory and honor to GOD, the supreme
benefactor, from whom every blessing descends, I abhor the most distant
thought, of diminishing our esteem and veneration for our gracious King, and
noble Patriots, whom GOD long preserve as extensive blessings, not only to our
nation and land, but to the world, and late receive them to eternal glory. Yet
I think too much has formerly been said, in our national successes and
deliverances, about ministerial wisdom, accomplished generals, and intrepid
soldiers; even to the neglect of that honor and glory, which is due to GOD
only, who furnishes those brave instruments with their shining talents, and
raises them to power, and succeeds them in their noble enterprises for the good
of men -- As we seem to have fallen into this error formerly, we may easily
discern like danger at this time, of robbing GOD of his glory, by ascribing too
much to men, who are but instruments, how excellent soever they may be. An
inspired King exhorts the grandees of the world in this language, Give unto the
LORD, O ye mighty, give unto the LORD glory and strength. -- Give unto the LORD
the glory due unto his name! To this exhortation may I not ardently wish, the
mighty in our nation, land, and world, would do themselves the honor carefully
to attend. Then will they esteem themselves most honored by those, who honor
GOD for them, and account it their highest glory to be instruments of
glorifying HIM by whom kings reign, and princes decree justice. Thus we shall
be safe in paying all just honor to the instruments of our deliverance, whilst
we glorify GOD on their behalf. This fruit of honoring GOD, I hope will attend
our joy and gladness on this season.

THE next fruit that presents itself in view, as what should naturally attend
our joy and gladness, for the present deliverance from slavery, is a serving
GOD with freedom and delight of soul, running the way of his commands with
enlarged hearts, who has delivered us from bondage and distress. Does not GOD
speak to us of America in his providence, as once to Israel by his prophet? I
drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love, and I was to them as they
that take off the yoke on their jaws. Has not GOD done this latterly for us?
And shall not we esteem his service our greatest freedom; accounting his yoke
easy, and his burden light? Being delivered out of the hands of our enemies,
let us serve GOD without fear, in holiness and righteousness, before him all
the days of our life. For us now to live in the service of our own lusts, and
slavery to Satan, or in any disobedience to the just and lawful authority over
us under GOD, when we are rejoicing in our English freedom and late
deliverance. -- This is absurd to the last degree, and well does merit, and
justly might provoke an holy GOD, for such baseness and ingratitude, to doom us
to eternal chains in hell, as delighting in slavery.

THE last fruit we shall notice, that should attend our joy and gladness on
this occasion, is a fitting and retaining on our spirits, a deep and grateful
sense of GOD'S, unmerited, mercy and goodness toward us in our deliverance, so
that we may not lose the influence of it on our hearts and lives all our days;
-- left the weight of that charge fall upon us, as on Israel of old -- They
remembered not his hand, nor the day when he delivered them from the enemy --
Or that rebuke, they sang his praise, they soon forgot his works. GOD forbid
such baseness and trifling, ever to be found with us. But may a grateful sense
of our salvation abide in our hearts, and influence our lives whilst we
remember that we are reasonable beings.

Now we close all with a few reflections. Here it is natural to view the opening
scenes of joy, with a kind of divine pleasure expanding our hearts into an
ecstasy, like that of the psalmist, When the LORD turned again the captivity of
Zion, we were like them that dream. Then was our mouth filled with laughter,
and our tongue with singing: then said they, the LORD has done great things
for us, whereof we are glad. Thus the most surprising and marvelous prospect,
breaks in upon our eyes at this time; when but a few months past, a prospect of
blood and slavery both to ourselves and posterity, presented itself in all its
horrid deformity. The face of things are now changed, and the happy vision of
safety and Liberty entertains our eyes, and employs our thoughts, with
inexpressible delight in the thoughts of living and dying free men, and leaving
this freedom, as our best patrimony, to the ages yet unborn. What must be the
satisfaction of such reflections, when they receive the additional sweetness
which springs from the redemption of JESUS CHRIST, into the glorious liberty of
the sons of GOD! This far exceeds all language, and swallows up all our
thoughts as in a boundless ocean of goodness.

ANOTHER reflection at this season, may very well turn our case in a special
manner, to give GOD the glory of our freedom, and not man: Not unto us, O LORD,
not unto us, but unto thy name give glory. This is becoming language, even for
the most exalted monarchs on earth. Yet we find a strange aptness in men, when
admiring the noble instruments of their preservation, to rob GOD of the glory
due unto his name, and wickedly say, ' it is the voice of a GOD, and not of a
man. Although Herod's worms demonstrate the falsehood of such a shout, and leave
a warning for the most exalted princes, or shining orators, to give GOD the
glory. From this sin of robbing GOD of his glory, in this transport of joy that
fills our land, may divine grace preserve both us and our happy deliverers
under GOD.

TO add farther, GOD'S delivering us at this time, should inspire us with holy
courage and confidence, in HIM, in all our dangers, and teach the ages yet to
come, to fix their hope in GOD. Shall we not say, on this occasion, GOD is our
refuge and strength, a very potent help in trouble: therefore will not we fear,
though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the midst
of the sea? Let America never despair; but trust in and cry to GOD, as her
refuge and present help in trouble.

BUT still our reflections should lead us to remember, we are this day before
the LORD our GOD, in our joy and gladness. Therefore our joy should be such as
becomes men and christians; not the joy of beasts and heathens -- left if we
close this day with vain mirth, we should provoke the eyes of GOD'S holiness to
send more wrath upon us, by which we may be utterly consumed. Here, surely,
while we are solacing our hearts with the pleasure of deliverance, from
perpetual slavery to men, it becomes us to feel a kind of holy indignation
swell in our breasts, at the thought of living in a most abject slavery to our
own lusts, and being the willing captives of Satan. And does it not become
Americans in general, and each of us in particular, to petition, with a greater
union and importunity, the Majesty of Heaven, for deliverance from such a
spiritual slavery, than ever it did to petition his Majesty on earth, from the
deliverance from the most detestable Stamp Act? Or can any thing less than a
resolution, never to be forgotten, burn in our hearts on this occasion,
determining our souls, that by the grace of GOD, we will not jest or give over
the suit, until we know the happiness of being CHRIST's freemen? This will
afford a pleasure infinitely more exalted and ravishing, than what now fills
America with joy and gladness.

Now let our reflections close with an ardent wish, that America may be as a
field which the LORD has blessed, on which he will cause his heavenly dew
perpetually to descend, where heaven-born Liberty shall for ever smile -- All
whose inhabitants, like their kindred spirit on high, may be inspired with
supreme love to GOD, and his Son JESUS CHRIST. Animated with this offspring of
GOD, love divine, may unceasingly give him the honor due unto his name --
Aiming at the most universal obedience, shall honor all men, love the
brotherhood, fear GOD, honor the King -- And continually retaining the most
grateful sense of GOD'S mercy and loving kindness toward them, by which they
are indulged to dwell in tents of freedom on earth; and live in sure hopes (by
JESUS CHRIST) of shining in glorious mansions of perfect freedom with GOD in
heaven for ever. Amen.

THE END.

