Youth liable to sudden Death; Excited seriously to consider thereof, and
speedily to prepare therefore. THE SUBSTANCE OF A DISCOURSE. Delivered on the
Day of the Funeral of three Young Men, Who were killed by LIGHTNING, at
Suffield, MAY 20, 1766. Published at the Request of Many.

By ISRAEL HOLLY, Preacher of the Gospel in Suffield.

For we must needs die.

2 SAMUEL, xiv. 14. My Days are swifter than a Post.

JOB ix. 25. Well, if our Days must fly,
We'll keep (...) End in Sight,
We'll spend them all in Wisdom's Ways,
And let them speed their Flight.
PSALM 90. THE SECOND EDITION. HARTFORD; Printed by THOMAS GREEN, MDCCLXVII.

To the Reader.
BY way of preface I would offer a word or two to my readers in general; but
especially to such as were the hearers of the following discourse. I would
inform you, that you must not expect that it will appear word for word as it
was when preached; it being then neither committed to writing or memory; yet
the general lead, scope and substance of it is the same. -- As it is not my
method to read my sermons, as many do, so neither do I commit to memory what I
deliver, when I come to preach, as I understand that some do; for I think there
is a medium between these two extremes, to be preferred before either of them;
and that is for a preacher not to depend upon his notes, nor his memory
neither, for what he is to deliver in public; and yet be as safe, and much more
in the way of a blessing, than such preachers are, who confine themselves to
either of the for ementioned methods. Let a preacher that GOD has prepared for
that work, have but the general plan, idea, or platform of his sermon in his
mind, when he is going to preach, with a heart that feels the weight of his
subject, and the worth of souls, and he will not at all be likely to be
blundered in his performances, although he has not his sermon in his notes nor in
his memory. However studious and faithful the godly preacher is in private, in
order to furnish himself with a proper message to deliver to the people in
public: yet this is certain, that he has not got all the materials in private
that contribute much toward the rendering his compositions complete and entire.
For the godly preacher finds by experience that he has great help in preaching
by some present concurring circumstances, while in the pulpit. The sight of his
audience, and their different apparent aspect at present, whether stupid or
affected, with that degree of divine Assistance that he has a right to expect
from the LORD, to carry him through present duty, while the holy fervors of his
own soul are en^^amed and excited by the means of his address to the souls of
others. These things. I say, cannot fail of suggesting many new ideas to the
preacher, as he goes along in his work, and of furnishing of him with abundance
of proper matter to speak that he had not though it of before. So he ought to allow
himself the liberty to improve the same as he passes along in his work, which
he cannot do, if he confines himself to written notes in his d^livery, or to
what he has committed to his memory.

But some will be ready to say, that this method might do provided the preacher
was sure always of having special assistance in preaching, but seeing he is
liable to be left to straitness of spirit, it is but a point of prudence for
him to preach by notes, to prevent boggles and blunders.

Ans. I think that the remedy is worse than the disease: for, on supposition
that the preacher should be sometimes left to such strait^ess of spirit that he
could not proceed with that freedom as would always be desirable in the
preacher; yet the effect hereof might do him much good; teach humility, and his
d^^^ndance on GOD; and learn him the necessity of living in the power of
religion always, which he finds he needs when he comes to preach. But the bad
effect of the remedy plead for is that it is like to keep the preache^
straightened in spirit always: For if he can, by the help of his notes, get along
one time without special assistance in preaching, so he can another, and
another, and so always; which I would represent by a similitude, thus: Suppose
a man was about to travel a journey, but was so distrustful of providence, in
preserving his legs through it, that he durst not set out upon them in his
journey as other folks do, but think it a point of prudence to get him a pair
of wooden legs, for fear his own would fail; but when he has got them, he
travels so much upon them, and neglects his own, that, in fine, it proves the
very means which causes his own legs finally to perish, so that ever
afterward, the man is obliged to use his wooden legs, or not go a st^p
further. And it seems to me, that this is much the case with some preachers,
who, by the gifts of nature and grace, have been considerably prepared to be
real preachers, had they ventured out upon GOD, in the improvement of their
preaching talents; but through timerousness, and distrust of GOD, or in
compliance with the custom of reading notes, have habituated themselves so to
that practice, that their preaching gifts have dried up and perished; or, as in
the words of the similitude, they used wooden legs so much when they have
better, that finally they had nothing better than wooden legs to use. Hence it
comes to pass, that sometimes, when an unexpected providence gives a fair
opportunity for a sermon, it must be omitted, to the grief of hundreds, for no
other reason but this, viz. that the preacher did not happen to have his notes
with him.

But to return: From the hint above given of my method of preaching, the reader
may understand, that I have took the same in writing the following discourse,
viz. that having the general plan and lead of it in my mind, filled it up, as I
went along, with what did naturally occur. The occasion was solemn; the subject
is solemn; and may GOD make the reader solemn, think of death, and prepare for
it; and then the end of these poor labors will be answered.

I. H.

Youth liable to sudden Death.
JOB I. 19. -- And it fell upon the Young Men, and they are dead. --


THESE words are the close of the melancholy tidings, which Job's messengers
brought him of his heavy losses. A^ Job had a deep cup of affl^ction given him
to drink, and by every messenger was made to drink deeper and deeper therein;
this last messenger b^ings him, as it were the very dregs of the cup. The
former messengers told him of the los^ of his cattle, and outward substance;
this last informs him of the loss of his children. Although in some circumstan^es
the loss of worldly substance may seem heavy, yet in comparison with the loss
of children, it is nothing; especially with the loss of children in a s^^de^,
awful and unusual manner, as was the case here with J^b; yet the good man takes
it well, he takes it patiently. J^b looks beyond the the instruments of his
affl^ctions, and eyes the hand of God, the first caus^; and rises up and
reverences the hand that smites him, and falls down in humility in the dust
before a sovereign God, and adores him. See v. 20, 21, 22, Then Job arose, and
rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground and
worshipped, and said, naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I
return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the
name of the Lord. In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly.

Here, my afflicted friends and neighbors, here is a pattern and an example
worthy your imitation. Has the Lord given you Job's cup to drink? see then,
that with Job's submission you receive it. Has the Lord sent his lightning down
from heaven? has it fallen on the young men? and are they dead? O, now arise!
arise! and reverence the Majesty, the sovereign Majesty of heaven that has done
it. Bow! bow, in humility, submission, and resignation to the holy will of God,
that is guided by unerring wisdom, and see that by no means you charge God
foolishly.

Man that is born of a woman, is of few days and full of trouble; and to the
saints especially, this world is a vale of tears. And what wonder is it that a
world so full of sin and rebellion as this world is, should be so full of
affliction and sorrow as we see it is? yet we have no right to conclude that
those who are under the greatest afflictions, are certainly the greatest
sinners: the contrary is evident many times: and the reason is obvious, viz.
this, that this world is not to be the place of rewards and punishments, but a
state of trial; and therefore God's dispensations are calculated according
thereunto: that is, they are trying, and sometimes exceedingly so. And although
God may send trials and afflictions, either in judgment or mercy, upon the
wicked, as in his holy sovereignty he sees fit; yet to his own children, he has
bound himself by his gracious promise, that he will correct in measure and in
mercy, if need be, and for their profit. But yet we find, by the scriptu^e
account, that God sometimes has a twofold aim in correcting, afflicting and
trying his own children; as sometimes for correction, and sometimes more
especially for trial. For correction, when they fall into any particular ways
of rebellion; according to Psalm 89.30, 31, 32. "If his children forsake my
law, and walk not in my judgments, if they break my statutes, and keep not my
commandments; then will I visit their transgressions with a rod, and their
iniquities with stripes." But sometimes the Lord brings his children under
afflictions, more especially ^or their trial, when it is not to correct any
special transgression. ^^nd this seems to be the case with Abraham, when God
called him to go and offer up his son Isaac; it was a heavy affliction, and it
was sent for his trial; to try his faith and obedience. Hence, says God to him,
in the close of that trial, "Now I know thou fear God seeing thou have not
withh^ld thy son, thine only son from me." Genesis 22.12. God knew that Abraham
truly feared him before, but here was now an eminent proof and demonstration of
it. And God loves to put the graces of his children to the trial; and here
Abraham's says was so tried and proved, that he is canonized in scripture for
the eminency of his faith, Heb. 11.19. "Accounting that God was able to raise
him up even from the dead." And this seems to be the case with Job; he was
afflicted grievously, but not so much for correction (he being consc^entiously
upright) as for his trial. As, says James, Ye have heard of the patience of
Job, and have seen the end of the Lord, Jam. v. 11. The end of the Lord, in
afflicting Job, we see was to prove the eminency of his patience, baffle and
confound the devil in his own schemes and proposals, and in the end to honor
and exalt Job (or rather the strength of his own grace in Job) as one of the
most eminent saints left upon divine record. Hence he is ranked among the
worthies, as we read of Noah, Daniel and Job, as some of the first men to stand
in the gap to keep off God's judgments. And God intending thus to exalt him,
saw meet first to prove him. An^ that Job's afflictions was not sent so much to
correct him as to prove him, is plain from God's own words to satan, after that
Job had rec^ived the first shock of his trials with such composure and
patience, that in all of it he sinned not, nor charged God foolishly; so that
God seems to boast of his eminency to satan, chap. 2, v. 3. "And the Lord said
unto satan, have thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in
the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God, and escheweth
evil? and still he holds fast his in^egrity, although thou movedst me against
him to destroy him without cause." And we all should, my friends, if possible,
learn the meaning and design of God, when he sends afflictions, whether he
sends them for correction or for trial, that we may be in a better circumstance
to answer the design of providence. If our afflictions are sent for correction,
then we ought to repent, reform, and do no more so wickedly; but if for trial,
then we should see to it that those graces hold out in their exercise, to the
glory of God, as faith, love, patience, resignation, submission, etc. that we
may, with Job, come forth, as gold brightened by the fire of affliction.

But to return to the words I first read: And it fell upon the young men, and
they are dead. In these words we may note several things; as, 1. And event is
held forth, viz. death: it is said, they are dead. 2. Who they were, that are
said to be dead; which we find they were not aged people, or men of gray hairs;
but the young, the young men are dead, viz. Job's children. 3. We have here the
means of their death held forth, viz* the fall of the house. The wind came from
the wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house, and it fell upon the
young men, and they are dead. 4. We may note the employment that death found
them in, viz. feasting. They were eating bread and drinking wine in their
eldest brother's house, and perhaps not the least apprehensive of death till it
come. O! what dying mortals are we! how liable to the stroke of death at any
time, at any place, and in any employment! O! what need is there of being
always ready! for we never know when we are safe from the stroke of death; but
sometimes, when most cautious, most exposed; Man's caution often into danger
turns,
And his guard falling, crushies him to death.
Night Thoughts.
and that which we mean to be our protection, may prove the means of our
destruction, as was the case here with Job's children: their house they made
for their protection, ^ut it was made the means of their destruction. Solomon
says There are many devices in the heart of man; but the counsel of the Lord,
that shall stand. We may devise means and measures in which we may think we are
safe; but in God's counsel, those very means and measures are sometimes to
prove our death. And was not this the case with two of the young men now dead?
who had been at work in a neighboring field, and seeing the storm arising,
aimed to come here to this house for shelter; but no sooner were they seated in
their chairs but death chained them down to rife no more.


And, by the way, what think you, my hearers, concerning death? those of you,
in particular, who saw the young men (as many of you did) before they were
removed from their seats, in which they sat, when the fatal flash burnt in two
the tow thread of life. I say, what do you think of death? Did not you then see
death in a more striking light, and piercing view than perhaps ever before?
death sitting upright in chairs, st^^nly looking all spectators in the sace, as
they came into the room! And can you any more forget that you are mortal? can
you any more forget death until your own dying day? can you, when, for ought
you know, it may come as soon as the morning light of the next day; yea, sooner
too, for we see that we know not what a day may bring forth.

But what I aim to speak further upon this subject, and to improve the present
opportunity (God willing) to the best advantage I can, is, not to give the
character of the dead; but to improve the gloomy, melancholy theme, DEATH!
which my text leads us to, and the late awful providence fixes our eyes upon,
to the benefit of the living; and this is all the advantage we may hope for,
from the solemn scene now before us. The living cannot benefit the dead, but
the dead may benefit the living: For that God who can bring light out of
darkness, and meet out of the eater, can also bring life out of death: And that
this may be the event, in the present case, saints of God, let you cries ascend
to heaven. -- I don't feel over critical about a curious method, at present;
yet seeing that some one must be attempted, let it be the following, viz.

I. Let us meditate upon death a little, since we have so much occasion
therefore, and seriously consider some of the important consequences of it. II.
Consider, that even young men, in the bloom of youth, are liable to the stroke
of death. III. That young men are not only liable to the stroke of death, but
to a sudden stroke, without a minute's warning, as to the time when. And, IV.
Some brief improvement.
I. Let us meditate upon death a little, since we have so much occasion
therefore; and seriously consider some of the important cons^quences of it.

I shall not at this time, consider death all the ways I find the word used and
applied in scripture; but only in this threefold manner. Briefly,

1st. The loss of God's moral image in which man was at first made; or that
state of alienation from God into which mankind are sunk, by the original
apostasy, and all unregenerate men are yet in, is called death, and men are
naturally in a death-state, and dead while they live, as ^aith the scripture, 1 Timothy v. 6. that is spiritually dead, while naturally alive; dead in trespasses
and sins, Ephesians. 2.1.

The true life and happiness of the rational soul does not consist merely in
being endowed with such powers and faculties as the great Author of human
nature has given thereunto, as the understanding, will and affections, which
are essential to the very being and existance of a reasonable creature; not yet
in the soul's union to the body. But the true life and happiness of the
rational soul consists in aspiritual union to God; or a corresponding frame of
mind and temper of heart to the various representations of the perfections and
attributes of God. As a filial fear and reverence of the greatness, majesty and
power of God; a firm belief and trust in the faithfulness and promises of God;
an humble dependence on the all-sufficient fullness of God; a cheerful and
hearty compliance with the will of God, and an holy delight in the purity and
moral beauty of the divine nature, etc. In these things consists the true life
of the soul; and as it was said of Adam in his first creation, he become a
living soul, it was true in this sense, his soul was alive, spiritually, having
these corresponding dispositions of soul toward God, co-natural with his
existance. But alas! by the fall, how is the gold become dim! yea, become
brass; for the most fine gold is changed; the image and life of God removed,
and the image of satan and death introduced. For who don't see, that se^ any
thing spiritually, that there are none of these right dispositions of mind
toward God, naturally to be found in mankind? Since ^he fall, men are naturally
so far from the true reverential fear of God, in heart, that they are rather
inclined to say in their hearts, that there is no God, Psalm. 14.1. And instead
of being inclined to trust in the faithfulness of God, mankind are more
inclined to trust in lies and falsehood, Jer. 13, 25. And instead of depending
upon the all-sufficient fullness of God, natural men had rather depend on
cisterns, yea, broken cisterns that can hold no water. Jer. 2, 13. and instead
of loving God for his purity and holiness, that is, the very thing upon the
account of which they hate him so mort^lly as they do, that their minds are
very enmity in the abstract, Romans 8.7. And instead of loving God's laws, and
cheerfully complying with his will they say in plain terms, that they will not
have this man to rule over them, Luke 19, 14. O! what a sad and awful
death-state are natural men in! this spiritual death is a thousand fold greater
calamity and heavier judgment than merely natural death. And all of you, my
heaters, that are yet in your natural state, are thus dead; and by reason of
this spiritual death, you are more deformed, loathsome and naucious in the eyes
of the holy God, than these corpse are in your eyes, by means of natural death.
And shall the sight of three dead corpses this day, fetch tears from many of
your eyes, and shall not the consideration of so many dead souls as we have
amongst us, fetch groans from none of your hearts? if not, it seems it must be
because the dead are burying the dead.

2. That state and condition that the wicked shall be placed and fixed in after
this life, and especially after the judgment day, is called death. And death,
in this sense considered is of a very comprehensive signification, including
all evil in it, even complete destruction. Hence it is called the second death,
yea, eternal death.

3. The dissolving the union between soul and body, is called death; and here
the word is to be understood in its most natural and obvious meaning, that
every one knows what is meant by death, in this sense of the word, though few
consider, as they ought, the consequences of it. And death, in this latter
sense of it, with some of its important consequences, is what now lies before
us, which my text, and the present providence calls unto the consideration of.
When the messengers bro't us the late awful news, that the young men were dead,
that three were killed with one clap of thunder, or awful flash of lightning,
the melancholy ideas were soon catched by every on^; none ask for information
what is meant by death, for all expect, all know, that death turns the
sprightly, active youth into a ghastly, breathless corpse, which evidently shows
that the heavy, leaden hand of death has closed the eyes for time, and chained
in silence the nimble tongue as long, ^^d has so marred the beauty of the whole
structure, that the most tender relative cannot endure the awful spectacle, but
is ready to cry with Abraham, concerning his once beautiful Sarah, Let me bury
my dead out of my sight, Genesis 23, 4. A few of the important consequences of
death, I would here mention. As,

1. Immediately upon the dissolving of the union between soul and body, there
is an everlasting parting with a worldly enjoyments. It is a sad effect of the
apostasy that mankind pursue the world so greedily, and seize upon its
enjoyments so eagerly, as if true happiness consisted herein, or as if they
would last forever, and were durable and permanent good. Certainly worldly
enjoyments are sleeting in the nature and design of them, yea, they are always
on the wing, ready for their flight; but if they halt a few moments by the
command of heaven, bl^nd mortals think that they will always stay, and look for
no higher nor better good; yea, neglect the higher, better, and only good, for
the fake of these things. And the worldly heart of fallen man will be
contriving how to make bed of rest among the smiling charms of creature
delights; but, alas! to his surprise, before he has got composed upon his a bed
of ease, he is all on a sudden summoned immediately to appear in the eternal
world! But this will not sufficiently instruct the rest of the worldly tribe to
seek a better good, but cheated with some delusion, worldly hearts will presume
upon lasting happiness from worldly things; even against ten thousand
informations and warnings to the contrary. But I say, death will put an end to
all these enjoyments. O! how short lived are they! O! how soon is the bubble
broke! what a panick might this strike through the heart of all worldlings, who
have their portion in this life, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be
required of thee, then whose shall all these things be? Luke 12, 20. At death
there will not only be a parting, but an everlasting parting with worldly
enjoyments; for the saints in heaven will have a better, a full, and an eternal
supply, without these things; and although the damned in hell will be in eternal
want, yet worldly enjoyments would not relieve them, suppose ^^ey might have
them; but have they must not, shall not, no, not so much as a drop of water to
cool their tormented tongues. It seems that this consideration should moderate
our pursuit of this world's goods, and excite us to secure a more lasting
happiness. O, labor not so much for the meat which perishes, but more for
that which endures to everlasting life.

2. Another important consequence of death is, a final end to all means of
grace: an end to all means, helps, and opportunities of preparing for our
future and eternal state, God has wonderfully distinguished the fallen race of
man, from the sinning angels; them he reserved in chains, under darkness, to
the judgment of the great day. But the sovereign mercy and grace of God has
interposed in the behalf of poor fallen man,

1. By providing a Mediator. For, without this, there would have been no more
hope for fallen man, than for devils,

2. In granting a repreive to mankind, longer or shorter, according to the
sovereign pleasure, and in this space of reprieve, to afford means of grace; as
the written word, a preached gospel, the Liberty of the throne of grace, etc.

3. And because mankind are so averse to the way of life and so entirely under
the power of sin, that merely external means are insufficient to prevail upon
any of the fallen race truly to return to God, in the ways of the gospel;
therefore, over and above these external means, God is sending down the
influences of his holy spirit, to strive with sinners, and accompany the
outward means, and make them effectual to sound conversion, and consequently to
eternal salvation. And O! what wonders of mercy are here, which the fallen
angels never had!

And thus mankind come into the world, under the guilt of their original
apostasy, and the curse of the broken law; reprieved by the mercy of God only
for a few uncertain moments, as sovereign wisdom sees fit, with the means of
grace in their hands, which, if not rightly improved, and truly complied with,
will assu^^dly aggravate their eternal misery. And O! what an awful and
critical situation are mankind then in! and how reasonable is it to expect that
rational creatures in our circumstances, should be engaged to the utmost
degree, in improving the day and means of grace! Methinks this should be the
language of one and all, of one to another. "O! the infinite mercy of God, in
providing a Mediator for us, and through him, has opened a door of hope, and is
now affording means of grace, and giving us an opportunity to make our peace
with God! Come, come, O! come, let us enter while there is room, and before the
Master of the house rises up, and shuts too the door of mercy. Behold! now is
the accepted time, and day of salvation, and let us improve it. Let us seek the
Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near. Let us seek
first the kingdom of God, and mind the one thing needful; and agree with our
Adversary quickly, while we are in the way with him, and have means, and an
opportunity so to do. O! let us cry mightily to the Lord, and who can tell but
that he will turn away his wrath, that we perish not." -- I say, one might
reasonably expect that such would be the language, and such the conduct of
rational creatures, in our circumstances: but, alas! how reverse of all this do
we find the practice of men! instead of a thankful eng^gedness in improving the
day and means of grace, O! how dreadfully are they slighted and abused! how
many prayerless persons! how many sabbath breakers! how many despise the word,
and grieve the spirit of God! and because grace has thus far abounded, O! how
do men abound in sin! and because sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily, as in strict justice it might have been, therefore the hearts of the
sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.

But how much soever the means of grace are slighted, neglected or abused, they
will not last always; death will put an eternal end to them, and to all
opportunities of improving them. The man that would not improve his time for
God, his soul, and eternity, shall then have no more time to improve, if he
would. The man that would not bow the knee in prayer a^ the throne of grace,
while God waited to be gracious, will then find that it is too late to pray; or
if he should pray, plead, cry, and weep tears of blood, it would avail him
nothing. And he that in the time of life, thought that sabbaths and sermons
came too thick and often, and were too long and tedious, and wore ready to
complain, what a weariness are these things? when will the sabbaths and the new
moons be gone? O then he would give worlds, had he them at command: Ah! for one
of those tedious sabbaths back again! O? for a little of that time, more
precious now than gold! But all in vain; for it is too late, too late,
eternally too late! O! immortal souls! bound for eternity, and will quickly be
there! if you would b^ wise, improve time while you have it. moment's seize;
Heaven's on their wing: a moment we may wish,
When ^orlds want wealth to buy.
Night Thoughts.
Work while the day lasts, for the night comes, wherein no man can work. John
ix. 4.

3. Another important consequence of death is, that it puts an end to all
opportunity of performing, and discharging relative duties. It is of great
importance that relative duties are faithfully discharged; such as parents owe
to children, and children to parents, rulers to subjects, and subjects to
rulers, ministers to their people, and people to their ministers, etc. The
honor of God, the interest of religion, and the good and welfare of the rising
generation depend much hereupon. But, O! what sad neglects here! and why? Why
time enough yet, all are too apt to plead. The parent don't intend to die so,
nor that his child shall neither, in such awful neglects of religion, and soul
concern; and the minister in ends by and by to be more thoro' with his people;
and all hope to discharge relative duties, in a future period, in a better
manner than at present they do. But alas! sudden death comes and puts a stop to
all -- think of this, you that are ^^ck in the discharge of you relative
duties, when death comes you cannot then discharge them better, you cannot then
discharge them at all, if you would.

4. Another important consequence of death is, that it unalterably fixes the
soul for eternity, either in weal or woe, happiness or misery to change no more.
It Is true there may and will be some circumstantial alteration, that the soul
will meet with after death: as union to the body at the resurrection, and the
saints happiness will be progressive, and the misery of the damned (perhaps)
through eternity. But there will be no changing from happiness to misery, or from
misery to happiness, but in this respect, as the tree falls so it lies, and
will eternally. But this world in which we now live is a changing world, and
blessed be God that it is (woe to all the wicked if it were not) for among other
changes, a saving change may possibly be met with in this world, but not in the
next; he that is there found filthy, must remain so still, and still, and still
eternally; and he that is holy shall remain so as long. O, Beloveds! look
before you leap, for the leap is for eternity.

II. I proceed to speak a word briefly to the second general head proposed,
viz. That even young men in the bloom of youth, are liable to be cut down by
the stroke of death. This is confirmed abundantly if we consult either
scripture or common observation, and is so evident, that in words none will
deny it, although in practice, it seems as if there were but few that did really
believe it.

1. The scriptures are full to this point; the text we are upon tells us, the
young men are dead; and Luke tells us of a certain young man that was carried
out dead, the only son of his mother, Luke 7. And says Job, one dies in his
full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet, his breasts are full of milk,
and his bones moistened with marrow, Job 21, 23, 24. But I shall not stand to
multiply instances of this nature, given in scripture.

2. It is evident to, and by common observation abundantly. How many youth have
we known in our day, that have been cut down by the stroke of death? some at
home, some abroad, some by sudden death, some by a lingering sickness, some
fall in battle, some are wasted by the wartery waves on a sudden to the shore
of eternity, and others, quick as the lightning's flash, fly from this world to
the next, as on blazing wings of fire. Oh! there is but a step across from the
road where the young walk, in the days of youth, to their eternal home, in the
other world; and how many are there in youth that take this step! how many
youth are cut across and soon get home, and never travel round by the way of
gray hairs, and old age for it? and it is too evident, that youth are liable to
the stroke of death, to stand longer upon this point. But this is not all.
Therefore I proceed to consider,

III. That youth are not only liable to be cut down by the stroke of death, but
by a sudden stroke, without one minute's warning, as to the time when.

What a strange thing is here, and yet how common too! for all to have
warnings, a thousand warnings of death's approach, and yet so many die without
the least warning; death not mistrusted to be near, until he is done his work,
struck the fatal blow and fled. The old world had an hundred and twenty years
warning of the flood, and yet were swept away suddenly by it at last. For, says
Matthew, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage and
knew not until the flood came and took them all away, Mat. 24.38, 39. And so it
was with Sodom, and so it will be at the end of the world, and so it is with
respect to particular deaths; notwithstanding all the warnings of its approach;
how often do people cry peace and safety, until sudden destruction in this
sense, comes upon them. But if you want a further proof of this awful point,
viz. That youth are liable to be cut down by a sudden stroke of death, without
one minutes warning, as to the time when, the late awful providence that has
called us together at this time, is a full demonstration. For if by the mouth
of two or three witnesses every word shall be stablished, then we have a
competent number of witnesses this day to bear testimony to the present truth;
and such they are too, whose veracity in their testimony, will not so much as
admit of dispute; for although they are dead, yet they speak, and speak ^^^dly
too, and more effectually to the present point than the living can. And what
say you my hearers? if you will not believe the testimony of the living, which God
sends you, dare you reject the testimony of the dead? Dives though it in hell, if
one might be sent from the dead, his testimony would be believed. But, dear
youth, God is sending you, not only a singe, but a triple testimony from the
dead, that greatly concerns you all, and will you not believe it? don't their
witnesses all agree? don't they speak the same thing? don't they speak truth?
don't they speak important truth? don't they speak loud, loud as the voice of
thunder? did you ever hear the voice of thunder louder? And yet, if you are
deaf, and cannot hear, this day, God bids you look and see; that if you will not
believe your ears, believe your eyes, and know that you are mortal. All men
think all men mortal but themselves.

N. Th.


Use first of information. Hence learn, how absolutely necessary it is, even
for young people to be truly religious. There is a prevalent disposition
naturally in young people, to put off religion for the present, thinking there
is time enough yet, and that it is not a business suitable to their age. Young
people think it best for old folks, who have as it were one foot in the grave,
of very age, to be religious, think of death, and prepare for it; but are very
apt, in their tho'ts to exempt themselves from any present necessity of setting
about the work and business of religion in good earnest. But O youth! youth!
learn here how presumptuous is your practice! true it is, that old people must
die; but then it is as true that young people may die, and often do, when the
old are spared: And a remarkable instance of this nature, has been seen now, in
this late surprising providence. When death came amongst us sudden, and in this
awful manner slung his darts, cut down three, at one instantaneous stroke, was
it because there was no aged people in the town, that the young were taken? or
was it because there was no aged people in the neighborhood? nay further, was
it because there was no elderly people in the house then at the same time, when
the young sell victims to the rage of death? no, surely; for although several
elderly people then were present, yet they were passed by, yea, protected in
the very jaws of death! one in special, aged almost to an hundred years,
sitting side by side as it were free among the dead, in about, the space of
three seet of the slain, yet escaped unhurt, untouched. So that here, dear
youth, you may see your age is no defense against the stroke of death; nor have
you any certainty that the aged must die first. O then, if you may die before
the aged; if you may die in youth, and if you may die by a sudden stroke,
without a minute's warning as to the time when; how necessary it is for you
always to be prepared? or, in other words, to be truly religious? and all of
you, that are old enough to reflect upon these things, ought without farther
delay, to lay the sam^ to heart, free to Christ for refuge, and make your peace
with God, get into, and live in, an actual readiness for death; then let it
come, it cannot hurt you; yea, let it come ever so suddenly, it can then do you
no hurt, for to die will be gain.

2. We may hereby further learn, what is a sufficient apology, for a young man
or maiden to make, in their own defense, against the scoffing age, for becoming
serious, godly, and ^^^ly religious in their youth, viz. this, only tell your
mates, tell the world, that you must die, and for aught you know, you may die
suddenly, as others have, without a minute's warning, of the time when; and
therefore you count it prudent, wise and safe, to be always ready, always
religious: and if earth will not approve this for an answer, heaven will: this
will be approved of as wise in the hour of death, and at the day of judgment.
But what am I about! does religion need any apology? does it, when it is the
glory and ornament of human nature to be religious, whether old or young? yea,
it is the highest honor and glory (...) the angels in heaven, to be truly
religious, that is, to love ^^a^, and serve God And yet the cursed pride and
folly (...) fallen man is such, that the world think it so mean and ^^^^polite
to make a rea^ business of religion, that they know ^ot how to forgive the man
that is guilty of the da^ing cr^^^^; or if they do, then it is because they
think the (...) has (...) good apology to make. And what apology is it (...)
^he ^^^^d will allow to be sufficient in the case? why d^^^ ^^^gs! all will
allow the dying man to be in earnest (...) ^^^d, and for his soul. And if this
is a sufficient apo^^^^ (...) dying man, to be in earnest in religion, I think
(...) ^^^^ent for you all, for such you all be. But does religion ^^d apology,
embraced in health, in youth? no, no; but the (...) a ^en-fold damnation, that
looks upon religion s^ mean and contemptible a business, as really to think it
does; for it is not ten thousand apologies that can excuse the man that
neglects religion, be he old or young.

3. If the young may die, and die suddenly, as we have heard; then we may hence
learn what great obligations are aged laid under to God, for his preserving
mercy to them such a length of time. O, my aged fathers and mothers! look into
this glass, and here see your indebtedness to God. Why were you not sent from
the womb to the tomb? why were you not cut down in childhood or in youth, as
thousands have been? why have not the arrows of death been permitted to strike
you, when they have been flying so thick all around you, for such a number of
years? when others have been constantly falling by your side; yea, on every
side; and you spared, spared now yet once more, when the young have been taken,
I say, whence comes this to pass? what can you attribute it to? is it not mere
mercy, and sovereign goodness in God, ^^^at has thus dis^^gu^shed you from so
many others of your fellow creatures? O, how thankful should you be! how should
the goodness of God herein lead you to repentance! ^ow should you improve that
life that is lengthened out, by me (...), wholly and entirely to God's glory!
but in case you (...) improve your life thus long spared, to the purposes for
which it is given you, you had better died in the womb, and never seen the
light: and the longer death stays, the heavier will his vengeance be when he
comes; like arrows that are shot up into the air, the longer it is before the
fall, the greater force they gather, and do but pierce the deeper into the pate
of him on whom they light. Therefore, my aged friends and neighbors, although I
would reverence your gray hairs, yet upon this occasion I cannot but remind you
of your great obligations to God, whose kind visitations have hitherto
preserved you in life; and also faithfully, and in a solemn manner, I would
warn you of the dreadful aggravations of that misery, which a long life, spent
in sin, will inevitably pull down upon such guilty souls, who will venture to
be so daringly presumptuous; for the scriture says, but the sinner being an
hundred years old, shall be accursed, Isa. 65, 20. O! how much more tolerable
will it be with such who were sent, with the curse of God upon them, into the
eternal world in their youth or infancy, to what it will be with old sinners
dying accursed; who have spent a long life, in treasuring up wrath all the
time, against the day of wrath, as all do, who live long, and yet as long abuse
the patience and long sufferings of God, which should lead to repentance.
Therefore, think of this, you that have been long, and still are, the subjects
of the sparing mercy of God: lest it all prove bitterness in the end, and one
day you wish, in the anguish of your soul, that you had died, and never seen
the sun.

Use second of exhortation. I would further improve this subject, and the
present providence, by way of exhortation to all, but to youth especially, to
seek a true and speedy preparation for death, without any further delay. You
all intend, I suppose, to repent before you die; but O! how apt you are to
delay, and put off for the present! but I would warn you against the danger of
delays; it is the beaten road to hell! could you enquire of the damn'^, they
would tell you so too. Many now in hell, doubtless, once intended to repent
before they died, as much as you do now, but procrastination Procrastination is
the thief of time:
Year after year it steals, till all are ^^^d,
And to the mercies of a moment leaves
The vast concerns of an eternal scence.
If not so frequent, would not this be strange?
That it is so frequent this is stranger still.
Night Thoughts.
and delays, deceived them down to flames! and this will be your fate too, my
hearers, if you venture but a little longer to tread their steps. But that, by
the blessing of God, I may excite you, one and all of you, immediately to set
about, in good earnest, the business that relates to the everlasting welfare of
your souls, I would, for your consideration, lay a few things before you, by
way of motive, to excite you hereunto.

1. Consider that it is all owing to the mere mercy, free and sovereign grace
of God, that you have any space, means and opportunity to make your peace with
God, prepare for death, and the eternal world. Devils never had it, and were it
not for sovereign mercy, man had never had it neither.

2. Consider, that the space and opportunity that you have to prepare for
death, at longest wont be long; and for aught you know, it may end with you
before the setting sun.

3. Consider, if you should, any of you, neglect the only season which God will
allow you to prepare for death in, as it is awfully to be feared you will,
then, when it is too late, you will curse yourself, and your folly for it,
eternally in hell. And the Devil, who tempts you now, all he can, ^o delay your
soul concerns, flattering you that there is time enough yet, will then insult
you for a fool, for hearkening to his lies.

4. Consider how dear it cost the Lord Jesus Christ to purchase that salvation
that is offered to you in the gospel; yea, the day and means of grace he
purchased at a dear rate for sinners. Hence Christ is said to be the Savior of
all men; that is, so far as they are saved, he is their Savior. If sinners
have a temporary salvation, a short space of reprieve from the execution of the
threatened sentence against sin; and if they have life, and the comforts of
life a while; all this is owing to Christ, and it is mere mercy, which the
sinner don't deserve: but especially if we consider sinners as favored with
the means of grace, and offers of eternal life, it is owing to Christ, for he
purchased that life, and salvation which is offered.

And can you, my hearers, take the common blessings of life, purchased at so
dear a rate, and consume them upon your lusts? can you waste away the day of
grace, in pursuing this world, and the vain pleasures of this life? And can
you, dare you trample under foot the great salvation offered to you in the
gospel? These favors were purchased with a price infinitely more worth than
the whole world; not with such corruptible things as silver and gold, but with
the precious blood of the Son of God. If all the mere men on earth, and all the
angels in heaven, had laid down their lives, to have purchased these favors
for sinners, the price had been too low, and rejected as insufficient,
Therefore hearken, O sinner, and hear! I will speak a dreadful word unto you,
yet a truth, an awful truth, which you will find so one day; that if you
continue to live as you list, and consume those dearbought favors upon your
lusts, and waste away the golden season of grace, and flight and reject the
offers of Christ and salvation: that you will have a most dreadful, aggravated
condemnation, in the end, when God shall come to make inquisition for blood,
and no common and ordinary blood neither; but this precious blood of Christ,
the guilt of which will be found under your skirts; for you will then be
counted a^ the betrayers and murderers of Christ, who were not content with his
once being crucified by the Jew? and Romans; but by your sins you have been all
your life long crucifying of him afresh, and putting him to open shame. And
where will your doom or portion be in the coming world? among the Sodomites?
no, verily, but leagues below them, in the regions of darkness and woe, if not
below devils themselves, for surely they never were guilty of such crimes.

Consider further, O sinner! that once, when David's three worthies put their
lives in their hands, and broke through the hosts of the Philistines, to fetch
him some water he longed for; yet when they brought it, and David come to
consider how they exposed their lives to get it for him, it wrought so upon his
compassions, he could not bear to drink it, but poured it out before the Lord.
But the Lord Jesus Christ not only put his life in his hand, that is, exposed
his life; but he actually laid down his life O sinner! to purchase all these
favors you enjoy, and can you seize upon them greedily, not regarding the
price? can you be lavish of that which is the price of blood, and yet never
think of him that bled? O! where is your ingenuity! O! vile ingratitude!

Think again, how contrary is your conduct in mere worldly affairs, and how
much more wise and prudent? how choice and saving are you of that which is very
dear and costly, of a worldly nature? if you have any thing that is uncommonly
dear and costly, you are not wont to use and dispose of it as you be of cheap,
common and ordinary things. And if you were as wise in spirituals, O! how
careful would you be to husband your time well, and make the best use of the
means of grace possible; and improve all earthly enjoyments with reselence to
death and the eternal world.

Once more, under this head, consider that you must be accountable to God for
all these dear articles, if you abuse them, or don't improve them as God
requires. God don't give these favors absolutely out and out, to sinners, and
there is to be an end; no, no; but only conditionally. If a sinner does improve
well the favors he enjoys in this world, and as God requires him to do, he is
welcome to them all, and eternal life to boot; ^ut if he don't, he must answer
for them all. Rebellious sinners must give an account of their stewardship by
and by; and, O! what a dreadful an account it will be that they will have to
give, when it will be made to appear, that they have wasted their Lord's goods,
dear and costly goods, the invoice, the book of God, tells us the price was
infinite. And, O dreadful! what do you think sinner, of having ten thousand
talents, in fair articles bro't in against you at the reckoning day, and at the
same time you have nothing to pay? and for want thereof, the body must be
taken, and the soul too, and cast into the prison of hell, until you pay the
debt; Verily thou shall by no means come out thence, until thou have paid the
utmost farthing, Mat. 5.26. Therefore, O sinner, as free and as lavish as you
are, with the favors and bounties of heaven, as though they were cheap and
common things: I tell you, that the time will come, that you will think their
price is really dear, whatever you think of it now. And as soft and indulgent
as these mercies are at present, while their silent language is, enjoy and
welcome, if you will love and serve the giver; yet if abused, by and by they will
harden into steel, and sharpen into swords, and visit you again in another
form, and in a stern, unrelenting manner, demand satisfaction, for their abuse,
in all the severity of strict justice. There is not a mercy come from heaven,
to the sons of men, but what will return thither again, with a true account,
how they were received, how entertained, how improved, and by whom. Time,
precious time will complain, Lord, I was abused and murdered by such and such
persons, and improved wholly to wrong purposes: sabbaths complain, Lord, we
were profaned by such and such who were weary of us, and longed to have us
gone, we being tedious and but thensome company to them: the bible will
complain of being neglected; sermons of being slighted; invitations of being
refused; conscience of being stifled, and brow beat, and counteracted; the
motions of the spirit rejected, and the holy Spirit often grieved, etc. Now
these will be bitter complaints alleged against gospel despising, and Christ
rejecting sinners; and they will awake the divine resentment, to the highest
pitch; and God will say, go visit them again with full commission to seek
satisfaction and revenge for such gross abuse, and heaven daring ingratitude. O
sinner, think of this! the time is coming, that the sight of the many mercies
that you have received and ^b^sed, will appear more formidable and ^^r^isying
to you, than all the devils in h^ll; (...), you might d^fy all the devils in
the regions of darkne^^, ^e^e it ^ot for this. This is that that will make you
so dread to (...) the face of the judge, at the last day, that you would (...)
had to have the ^ocks and the mountains to fall upon you, if that (...) be a
^^^ans to hide you from the sight or ^^s free, whose ^^ow^s you will then know
to be worse then death. O ye abusers of the mercies, the manifold mercies of
God! think how you will seel when they shall visit you the second time, in this
ter^^^ying form, come in their rebound from heaven, armed with vengeance, and
with fell power to seek just reve^gel they will then come like mountains of
lead, sent from heaven, by the force of the omnipotent arm of Jehovah, in that
day when he will show his wrath, and make his power known, wrath excited and
enkindled to a stame that never can not will be quenched, through eternity.

5. Consider how many and great are the helps and advantages that God is
affording you now, in order that you might get prepared for death. And among
the rest of the many precious means and helps that you have, this awful
providence, God has now come forth to us in, might be a very great help to you
in this weighty affair, would you improve it as you ought. For now you are
solemnized. Now the levity and vanity of your minds is checked. It Is very
evident by your countenances, that you have no disposition for a present
frolic; and it may be some of you think you never shall have again. But O,
your deceitful hearts! if you don't get them truly changed by renewing grace,
will turn to their old course, and run as swift in the channel of former vanity
as ever. Therefore now it seems, is your time, if you have any spiritual
prudence at all, and intend ever to make your peace with God, now set about the
work in earnest, while the impression of this providence is not worn off. It
seems that your hardness, blindness and stupidity has been so great, that you
have obliged the Almighty, as I may say, to speak in an unusual manner to you.
Had you been all obedient to the gentle voice of mercy, in the loving
invitations of the gospel, and the sweet whispers of the Spirit; doubtless this
awful voice of thunder might have been spared. For will the lion roar in vain,
and when there is no cause? And upon whose account, my hearers, do you think it
is, that God has come thus surprizingly amongst us? decked himself with
thunder, and clothed himself in flames, and as with a puff of his fiery
breath, has on a sudden blew out the candle of life in three instances among
us; while others scorched and stunned, did, as it were miraculously escape. I
say, for whose sake do you think that all this is done? do you think it was
merely for the sake of the dead? if you do, I think your thoughts are criminal
before God. No, no, my friends, for our sakes, for the sake of the living,
doubtless are these awful deaths sent. And as we had a high hand in bringing
down this dispensation, God has an errand to us herein, we may conclude,
without hesitation. And what is it? Why the language is, turn, turn to God,
turn to God or die. And what say you my hearers, will you hear? will you hear
turn and live, or will you go on and die? Although there may seem great severity
in this dispensation, especially to those on whom severity fell; yet it may be
sent in mercy, in great mercy to us who are spared, and so solemnly warned; and
it will be so in the event, if we improve it right. And shall we, my hearers,
by our hardiness, stupidity and rebellion, as it were necessitate God, if he
would do us good, to strike smitten friends,
Are Angels sent on errands full of love;
For us they languish, and for us they die:
And shall they languish, shall they die in vain?
Night Thoughts.
our friends and fellow creatures with death, in a sudden and unusual manner;
and then refuse, or neglect the benefit designed? O! what double ingratitude,
rebellion and unkindness is this! and shall this be the event in the present
case? O may the good Lord forbid! yet I am afraid it will, with respect to many
of you. I am afraid you will not improve this providence so as to get any lasting
good by it. But if you would be wise for yourselves, wise for your souls, and
wise for eternity: now is your time, dear youth, when God is calling you so
loudly. If you wont hear a loud call, this loud call, what will you hear?
Common and ordinary calls, it seems will not do the turn, will not prevail with you,
many of you, to turn to God; and if this extraordinary and uncommon call wont
prevail upon you neither, what will? And this may not only be the loudest, but
it may also be the last call that ever God will give you. And it looks as
probable as not, that now is come the turning point for eternity with respect
to some of you; and if you don't hear and turn now, it is to be feared that God
will give you up, and say to you as of ^^d, Ephraim is joined to idols, let him
alone. So that nothing shall disturb or terify you out of your carnal peace.
The spirit of God may let you alone; sermons let you alone; awakening
providence may let you alone; and you sleep on in security and ease; and the
next alarming voice that you may hear from God, to your surprise may be, take
them, devils, bind them hand and foot, and in burning wrath, confine them down
in chains, in the abyss of eternal flames!

6. Consider, that now many eyes will be upon you, to see how you behave, under
this dispensation of providence, and how you improve it. God's eye will be upon
you, as it always has been, and he will, it the book of his remembrance, record
every circumstance of ^^l your conduct, in order to the day of account and
reckoning. Man's eye will be upon you; the good in hopes to see some good
effect; and the bad in order to imitate your had example, with a bolder face,
while they see that others do the like; and the devil will now have his eyes
upon you, to see whether he is like to lose his prey; he don't love to see you
affected, serious and prayerful; he hates you should be concerned about your
souls, and tho'tful of their eternal welfare; he had rather see you eagerly
pursuing earth, than to see you in earnest for heaven; he had rather see you
inclined to read romances and play books, than the bible; and had rather see
you at a merry frolic, siddling and dancing, drinking and carousing than to
see you in your closet, upon your knees praying, or at a religious meeting,
with the people of God, worshipping. And therefore the devil will watch, and
keep his eye upon you now, in order to improve the first and fittest season to
tempt you to break through these restraints that God has now, by this
providence, laid upon you; and he will not only watch the fittest seasons, but
the fittest persons too, to tempt forward, to lead the way. The devil knows
that there is a check put to fiolicking in this town now, which young people
are so prone to, and in this neighborhood especially; but he is in hopes that
some of his faithful servants will venture for his cause soon, and revive the
old custom again, and go on as merrily in his service as ever. And now I would
ask the youth of this assembly, and the frolickers among the youth, which of
you intend to share these honors, of being the first that shall venture for the
devil, in reviving that practice that is so agreeable to his will, and
strengthening to his kingdom? whoever you be that do it, you will have the
applause of all hell, for being a bold soldier for the prince of darkness; and
the devil will give you many high encomiums for your valor, as being one of the
heroes of his kingdom.

But as I said, many eyes will be upon you now; but not as mere idle
spectators, but in the judgment day, they will be improved as witnesses, either
for, or against you, as your con^^^ shall be, good or bad. Therefore, before I
leave you, I ^^^ld warn you not to venture on in sin, after such solemn ^^^s,
lest one day, heaven, earth and hell too, will rise up against you, and bring
in their witnesses, to your eternal overthrow, and utter confusion.

But I must close this discourse, lest I interfere with the other appointments
Another Sermon before the funeral.
of the day: and in doing of which I would more particularly address myself,

1. To this neighborhood. This providence is a loud call to the whole town,
yea, to neighboring towns, but it is louder to this neighborhood: and let
others improve it as they will, do you, my friends, improve it aright: and
don't let the voice of God, so loudly and awfully uttered, in this
neighborhood, be uttered in vain. And don't let it be bro't in as a charge
against you at last, that when God came into the neighborhood; in this awful
manner, and smote three of your friends and fellow creatures dead by your
sides, that the rest repented not; for this will be a heavy charge, if true.

2. I would speak a word to the friends of the deceased. As God has come nearer
to this neighborhood, in this dispensation, than to those who live more
remote; so he has come nearer to you still; and if you don't answer the call of
God herein, you will be inexcuseable with a witness! but if you improve this
providence aright, you will find mercy in all this severity, and in the close,
be able to say that it is good for you that you have been thus afflicted, and
that in faithfulness the Lord has done it.

3. I would speak one word to such whose lives were emi^ently exposed, and yet,
through the mercy of God, you are spared. If all others soon forget this
dispensation, yet can it be possible that you should? can you, when you have
not only heard God's awful voice, but felt a touch of the hand of his dreadful
power; and being scorched, and singed by his light'ning's awful blaze, it seems
you cannot but know, that our God is a consuming fire. And yet seeing your lives
are spared, O how great are your obligations to hear the voice of Christ,
speaking to you in this providence! the language of which seems to be this, go
for the present, and sin no more, lest a worse thing befall you.

And now, one word to you all, both old and young: If after all that has been
said and done to prevail with you to turn to the Lord, by sound repentance, and
unfeigned faith, yet if any of you shall venture to go on in sin still, and let
the impressions of truth, and divine Providence wear off, without any good and
lasting effect upon you; I would just remind of another storm that is a coming,
insinitely more dreadful than this late awful storm has been; the dimensions of
which will not be consined within the limits of a few miles in breadth, or
hours in length, as was the case with this late storm; but it will overspread
the while world of the wicked, and extend to the ^^most bounds of hell, as to
the breadth of it; and as to the length of it will continue in its terror,
without abatement, worlds without end. And the clouds of this storm have
already been long gathering, and so far risen in the horizon of the written
word, that is appears plain to faith's view now: and it will quickly overspread
our horizorn with a most melancholy gloom; for it will be a day of darkness,
and gloominess, of clouds and thick darkness. And before the terrors of this
day, which will be so great, the sun and the moon will quit their station,
flee, and hide as in some dark abiss, and will never venture to show their
faces in the firmament any more. And the thunder and lightning of that day,
will not be such as has now been; merely ^o beat down tops of chimneys, tare
through roofs of houses, and strike a few individuals; but so terrible and
powerful will the thunder of that day be, that as with one clap, the earth will
split to the very center, and the whole globe crumble as in a moment, to dus^
and powder, and the lightnings awful blare will turn the very elements into a
mere I quid flame. And millions and millions, even all the wicked shall fall
victims to the thunder of God's wrath in that day. As wicked men and devils
were the Jonahs that caused this tempest to arise, so in that day when it comes
none of them all will be able to stand before it, or flee or make their escape
from it, but naked and defenseless they must lie open to it, in all the terrors
of it, while G^d's wrath will beat upon them as in one eternal storm, without
the least mitigation.

As suitable to the foregoing Occasion, and Subject I would here add one of
Doct. Watts's Hymns, which he composed in the time of a Thunder-Storm.

1.
SING to the Lord, ye heavenly Hosts,
And thou O Earth adore:
Let Death and Hell through all their Coasts,
Stand trembling at his Power.
2.
His sounding Chariot shakes the Sky,
He makes the Clouds his Throne:
There all his Stores of Lightning ly,
'Til Vengeance darts them down.
3.
His Nostrils breathe out fiery Streams,
And from his awful Tong^e,
A sovereign Voice divides the Flames,
And Thunder ro^^s along.
4.
Think, O my Soul, the dreadful Day,
When this incensed God
Shall rend the Sky, and burn the Sea,
And fling his Wrath abroad!
5.
What shall the Wretch, the Sinner' do?
He once defied the Lord:
But he shall dread the Thund'rer now,
And sink beneath his Word.
6.
Tempests of angry fire shall roll,
To blast the rebel Worm,
And beat upon his naked Soul,
In one eternal Storm.

