CHRIST, THE FOUNDATION OF THE SALVATION OF SINNERS, AND OF CIVIL AND
ECCLESIASTICAL GOVERNMENT;

ILLUSTRATED IN A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE COLONY OF
CONNECTICUT, ON THE DAY OF THE Anniversary ELECTION, MAY 14th, 1767.

By EDWARD EELLS, M. A Pastor of the Second Church in MIDDLETOWN.

ISAIAH xxviii. 16. -- Behold, I lay in Zion for a Foundation, a Stone, a tried
Stone, a precious Cornerstone, a sure Foundation. ISAIAH ix. 6. For unto Us a
Child is born, unto Us a Son is given, and the Government shall be upon his
Shoulder. MATTHEW xxviii. 18. And Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying, all
Power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth. HARTFORD: Printed by THOMAS
GREEN, at the Heart and Crown, opposite the Courthouse.

At a General Assembly of the Governor and Company of the Colony of
Connecticut, holden at Hartford, on the second Thursday of May, A. D. 1767.
ORDERED, That Jabez Hamlin, Esquire; and Mr. Richard Alsop, return the Thanks of
this Assembly, to the Reverend Mr. Edward Eells, for (...) Sermon, delivered
before the Assembly, on the 14th Instant, and desire a Copy thereof, that it
may be printed.

A true Copy, Examined by GEORGE WYLLYS, Secr'y.

An Election Sermon.
1 CORINTHIANS, III. 11. For other Foundation can no Man lay, than that is
laid, which is Jesus Christ.
THE great and wise Creator of all Things, out of his own mere good Pleasure,
and for the Display of his own glorious Perfections, has created all Things,
both visible and invisible, in Heaven above, and on the Earth beneath: He made
the noble Creature, Man, after his own Image, and ordained him Lord of this
lower World; then viewing his own Works, in their Beauty and Perfection, he
pronounced them all very good. But it seems not long, before this happy Scene
was changed. Through the Subtilty of the old Serpent, Man was prevailed upon to
rebel against his Maker, and break that sacred Covenant which included his
Posterity, and bro't himself, with his numerous Race, descending from him by
ordinary Generation, under the terrible Sentence of Death: upon which, Man was
immediately driven out of the earthly Paradise, and his Return was guarded with
the flaming Sword, which turns every Way, to keep the Tree of Life. This sad
Revolt must have procured God's amazing Wrath and Curse, both in this Life, and
that which is to come, had not a merciful GOD, out of his infinite Wisdom and
Grace, laid a sure Foundation in his Son, for the Pardon of the Guilty, and
restoring them to his Favor, and making them happy in the Enjoyment of himself
forever. This Way of Salvation God was pleased to make known unto Adam in that
early Promise, that the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpent's Head. And
he was pleased to unfold this Mystery of divine Grace, more and more, until the
Fullness of the Time was come, that this glorious Savior should make his
Appearance in this World, and reveal his marvelous Grace fully under the gospel
Dispensation. This glorious Savior was prophesied of, under the Similitude of a
Foundation, Isa. xxviii. 16. Behold I lay in Zion for a Foundation, a Stone, a
tried Stone, a precious corner Stone, a sure Foundation. The Apostle
particularly applies this to CHRIST, Ephesians. ii. 10. And are built upon the
Foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets Jesus Christ himself being the chief
Corner Stone. In our Context the Apostle says, by the Grace of GOD, he had,
with all Care and Application, preached the important Doctrines of the Gospel,
leading his Hearers unto CHRIST, as the great and sure Foundation on which his
Church is built, and the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against it; and all
those who believe this Truth, and cordially receive CHRIST for their Savior, he
calls GOD'S Building. A happy Superstructure upon CHRIST as the Foundation, who
is able to support all their Hopes of eternal Life! And other Foundation can no
Man lay, than that is laid, which is JESUS CHRIST. Whatever Pretenses Man may
make to other Foundation to build their Hopes upon, whatever other Doctrines
seducing Teachers may preach; yet the Lord JESUS CHRIST, the eternal Son of
GOD, who was chosen of the Father, elect and precious, is the only Foundation
of the Salvation of Sinners; all the Blessings of Providence and Grace, of a
civil and religious Nature, come to us in and through him. Here many important
Truths might be brought under our Consideration; but I shall confine my
Discourse to a few Particulars under these general Heads: I. That JESUS CHRIST
is the Foundation of the Pardon and Salvation of Sinners. II. That JESUS CHRIST
is the Foundation of civil Government. III. That JESUS CHRIST is the Foundation
of the wise and good Government established in his Church.


I. That JESUS CHRIST is the Foundation of the Pardon and Salvation of Sinners.
When we view the human Race fallen in Adam, their public and federal Head lying
under the amazing Threatening of Death, which included in it all the Miseries of
a temporal and spiritual Death, and the Pains of Hell forever. Horror and
Despair must have seized the Guilty; had not GOD, out of his own free and
Sovereign Grace, provided a Way for the Pardon and Redemption of Sinners, in
and through his Son the Lord JESUS CHRIST. When we consider this wonderful
Mystery of divine Grace, opened unto us in the sacred Oracles of GOD, it seems
like Life from the Dead. Here the sacred and adorable Trinity are represented
doing their Part, in this marvelous Method of divine Grace, in bringing about
the Salvation of Sinners; and here JESUS CHRIST lays as the Foundation; --
which may be illustrated in a few Particulars.

1. JESUS CHRIST is the Foundation, as he becomes our Surety in the Covenant of
Redemption made between the Father and the Son. The Covenant of Redemption was
that eternal Compact made between the Father and the Son, concerning the
Salvation of Sinners, in which the Father makes great and precious Promises to
his Son, that he would furnish him for, assist him in, and give him Success in
this important Undertaking, Isai. xlii. at the Beginning. And the Son engages
to secure the divine Honor, and procure Salvation for all those included in the
Covenant. The great Immanuel says, Lo I (...) do thy Will, O God. Heb. x. 7. In
this Covenant we may conceive the Father addressing his Son in some such
Language as this -- "My Son, behold here the Posterity of fallen Adam, who have
utterly undone themselves by Sin, and my Justice requires Satisfaction, and if
it takes Place on them, they will be miserable to all Eternity. What can be
done for their Salvation? I am willing to admit a Surety." The Son replies, "O
my Father, such is my Compassion for these miserable Sinners, I will undertake
for them, I will be their Surety, I will do and suffer for them all your
Justice demands." The Father says, "If you undertake for them, my Son* you must
expect no Favor on Account of your being my only and beloved Son; it will cost
you dear." The Son answers, "I am content to bear any Thing. Though I must leave
thy Throne, thy Bosom, and vail my Glory in the Flesh -- though I must suffer thy
Wrath, which will fill me with the utmost Distress in Soul and Body; yet such
is my Love, I am willing to tread the Wine Press of thy Wrath alone, that these
poor, sinful, helpless Creatures might be pardoned, and restored to thy Favor,
and be happy in the Enjoyment of Thee forever." Thus we may conceive the Father
and the Son stipulating with each other, and coming into mutual Engagements, to
do what was requisite to lay a sure Foundation for the Salvation of Sinners.
This Compact which was made in the Days of Eternity, is opened unto us in the
Covenant of Grace. Which brings me to say,

2. JESUS CHRIST is the Foundation, as he is the Mediator of the Covenant of
Grace made between GOD and Man. The Covenant of Redemption made between the
Father and the Son, opened the Way for the Covenant of Grace to be propounded
to the sinful Children of Men. This Covenant contains in it all that Sinners
need to restore them again to the Favor of God, that they might be happy in the
Enjoyment of him. In this Covenant, the glorious Mediator is exhibited,
displaying the most surprising Condescension, in the misterious Union of the
divine and human Nature, in the Person of the Mediator: For God sent forth his
Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the
Law, Gal. iv. 4, 5. And being made under the Law, he did, as Mediator fulfill
the Righteousness of the Law, and yield that Obedience which the Law required
of Sinners, which they were not able to perform, and so is become the End of
the Law for Righteousness to them that believe, Romans x. 4. He has also suffered
the full Curse of the Law due unto Sinners, and made complete Satisfaction to
divine Justice; that GOD can, consistent with his glorious Perfections, pardon
and save Sinners. Romans iii. 26. And now Repentance and Remission of Sins are
preached in His Name. The Terms of our Acceptance with GOD, are plainly
propounded in the Gospel; we must have Repentance toward GOD, and Faith in the
Lord JESUS CHRIST -- that Faith which unites us to him, and makes us Partakers
of him; and being in CHRIST, no more any Condemnation belongs to us. Romans viii.
1. We are made new Creatures, reconciled unto GOD, adopted into his Family, and
have Assurance of his Grace, to qualify us for, and bring us finally unto
Glory; so that we may well say, There is no other Name given under Heaven,
whereby we can be saved, but Jesus Christ. Thus the Mediator has prepared the
Way for the solemn transacting of the Covenant of Grace, which we may conceive
of in some such Way as this,

1. CHRIST the Mediator, says to GOD the Father, "Lo, O Father! I have done thy
Will. -- The Obedience the Law required of these Sinners, which they were not
able to perform, I have fulfiled; the Sentence of Death that was out against
these Sinners, I have suffered for their Sakes; this, Father, was what you
required of me, in Order to their Salvation: Now, Father, glorify thy Grace on
these perishing Sinners, for my Sake be reconciled unto them, and receive them
into thy peculiar Favor." -- The glorious Mediator says to poor Sinners, "Now
freely accept me for your Savior, upon my own Terms -- receive me by Faith, for
the Lord your Righteousness; rely on the Merit of my Blood, to purge you from
all Sin, and restore you to the Favor of GOD; then how aggravated soever your
Sins have been, and how desperate soever your Case may appear in your own Eyes,
yet I am able to save you to the uttermost, all you who will come to GOD, in
and through me."

2. In the Covenant of Grace, the Father says to Sinners, "The Price my Son has
paid by his Righteous Life, his cruel Sufferings and Death, is to my full
Satisfaction: I am willing to acquit you from Condemnation, and receive you
into my Favor, and make you my Sons, and bestow upon you all those precious
Gifts and Graces, which will fit and qualify you for Heaven and Happiness. I
delight, says GOD, to glorify my Grace in this Way of your Conversion and
Salvation. O, Sinners! Why will you remain obstinate and impenitent? Why will
you die, when I stand with open Arms, full of Grace and Mercy, to receive you
into my Embraces, and bestow upon you all the Blessings of the Covenant of
Grace?"

3. The Sinner viewing the Covenant of Grace, with divine Light let into his
Soul, with Admiration replies, "O, what Manner of Love is this! Not that I
loved GOD, but he first loved me, and gave his Son to die for me. Here is a
Savior exactly suited to my sad Case; and the Terms of GOD'S accepting me, in
CHRIST, are reasonable and good: I will therefore, by the Assistance of the
Holy Spirit, take GOD the Father, for my GOD and Father, in JESUS CHRIST, and
take the Lord JESUS CHRIST for my Savior and Redeemer, upon his own Terms. I
will take the HOLY SPIRIT for my Instructor and Sanctifier, that the whole Work
of Grace may be carried on in me, to the Glory of GOD the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit." Thus, the Covenant of Grace is propounded by GOD to Sinners, through the
Mediator, and complied with by poor Sinners; and the Terms of Peace and
Reconciliation are settled again between GOD and Man, through CHRIST, as the
Foundation of their Salvation.

3. JESUS CHRIST is the Foundation, as he does by the Holy Spirit, apply the
Redemption he had purchased, unto the Soul of Sinners, and brings them up to
the Terms, and makes them Partakers of all the Blessings of the Covenant of
Grace. -- The blessed Spirit, the third Person in the adorable Trinity, applies
the Redemption purchased by CHRIST unto poor Sinners, and so makes them
Partakers of the precious Benefits of the Covenant of Grace, of which CHRIST is
the Foundation. This important Work is sometimes, in Scripture, ascribed to the
Father, John vi. 14. No Man comes unto me, except the Father which has sent
me draw him. Sometimes it is ascribed to the Son* John xii. 32. And I (says the
Redeemer) if I be lifted up from the Earth, will draw all Men unto me. But it
is emphatically applied to the Holy Ghost as a Work proper for him in the
Salvation of Sinners: And therefore CHRIST assures his Disciples, that when he
should leave them, and go unto the Father, he would send the Comforter, the
Holy Spirit unto them, John xvi. 7. If I go not away, the Comforter (which
means the Holy Ghost) will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him
unto you; not only to endue you with Power from on High, to furnish you for
extraordinary Services in his Church; but effectually call and sanctify all
them who shall be saved. He shall glorify me (says CHRIST) for he shall receive
of mine, and shall show it unto you. John xvi. 14. He shall open the Doctrines
of Grace in a powerful and saving Light; and apply the Merits of Christ with
such a divine Energy, that Sinners are said to be regenerated and born again,
of the Spirit. Joh iii. 6. The Holy Spirit, in bringing Sinners to Salvation by
JESUS CHRIST, always applies the Redemption purchased by CHRIST, by working
Faith in them, and thereby uniting them to CHRIST, in their effectual Calling.
Here I shall a little enlarge, in showing how the Spirit works upon the Hearts
of Sinners, in bringing them up to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, in
applying the Redemption purchased by CHRIST.

1. In convincing them of their Sin and Misery, and so making them in Earnest
for Salvation. The first Work of the Spirit upon the Hearts of Sinners, is to
enlighten the Mind, and awaken the Conscience to an affecting Concern for their
own Salvation: And from a Discovery of their sinful and miserable State, they
cry, What shall we do to be saved? This is the Work of the Spirit; for when he
comes, says CHRIST, he shall reprove the World of Sin, John xvi. 8. When he
leads the Sinner into the Knowledge of his own Heart and Ways, and he sees
himself altogether defiled and polluted with Sin, for which he deserves to be
made miserable in this Life, and that which is to come: And alas! he sees he
cannot help himself, he cannot redeem his own Soul, or give to GOD a Ransom for
it: He is stripped of all Confidence in his Duties, and good Dispositions, and
sees, that all his Refuges he has betaken himself to, will not save him from
the Storm of GOD'S dreadful Wrath. A deep Sense of his Sin and Misery, brings
him as a guilty Criminal unto the Foot of GOD, with earnest Cries for Mercy,
Mercy: He sees that Nothing but free Grace can save him from the Pit of
everlasting Destruction. Thus the poor, guilty Sinner stands trembling before
an angry GOD, and sees all his awful Threatenings pointed right at his Heart,
and ready to fall upon him.

2. The Holy Spirit enlightens the guilty Sinner, into the Knowledge of CHRIST,
and the Way of Salvation in and through him. The Holy Spirit unfolds the Mystery
of the Covenant of Grace revealed in the Gospel, and shows the poor Sinner the
Savior GOD has provided; and, as it were pointing to CHRIST, says, "Behold, O
Sinner! that GOD, whose Wrath you fear, has found a Ransom for you -- he has
given his beloved Son to be your Savior, and he is an almighty Savior, exactly
suited to your Case; what you find you cannot do, he has done for you; what you
fear suffering, as the just Desert of your Sins, he has suffered for you: He
has endured the amazing Wrath of God, in his Body and Soul, for your Sake and
Salvation: He has paid a full Price for your Redemption, and he has Power
sufficient to save you from what you feel and fear. And there is infinite
Safety in appearing before GOD, in the Righteousness of CHRIST; and his Blood
cleanses from all Sin." Thus the Holy Spirit enlightens the Understanding of
the Sinner, into the Knowledge of CHRIST, and the Terms of the Covenant of
Grace, and the Way of the Salvation of Sinners propounded in the Gospel, and
the Sinner's Assent to all. Then,

3. The Holy Spirit renews the Sinner's Will, and brings him to accept of, and
rely upon CHRIST for Pardon, and complete Salvation. While the Spirit
enlightens the Understanding, to behold the Glory and Excellency of CHRIST, as
the Savior of poor perishing Sinners, the Will is renewed, persuaded and
enabled to say, "This is the Savior I chose for mine: Though I have sought
Happiness in other Things, yet could never find Ease to my Conscience. The
Refuges I have betaken myself to, have proved Refuges of Lies: But in this
Savior GOD has provided, there is Nothing wanting: He is every Way complete, he
is altogether lovely; and with all my Heart I take him for mine upon his own
Terms. I resolve I will be his forever. I see GOD can, consistent with his own
glorious Perfections, justify me through CHRIST, and receive me again into his
Favor, and this is the only Way I can hope, and do desire to be saved." Now the
whole Soul relies upon CHRIST, and can safely trust in him for Pardon and
Salvation. Thus the Union between CHRIST and the Believer is brought about, and
Salvation is secured to all such, upon the Terms of the Covenant of Grace. O!
remember, if you choose CHRIST upon his Terms, you will find them directly cross
to Flesh and Blood; for you must be divested of all Confidence in yourselves,
and desire to be found of GOD in CHRIST: And you must be willing to deny all
Ungodliness and every worldly Lust, and live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present evil World. You must take CHRIST with his Cross, as well as his
Crown, and have the whole christian Temper formed in you, and influencing you
to the Practice of all christian Duties; and so adorn the Doctrine of GOD your
Savior in all Things; that you may have the Evidence in yourselves, and
manifest to others, that the Holy Spirit has applied the Redemption purchased
by CHRIST unto you for your Salvation; and so the Heart is prepared to ascribe
his whole Salvation unto CHRIST from the Foundation, to the bringing in of the
Top-Stone of his Salvation with Shouts, crying Grace, Grace.

II. That JESUS CHRIST is the Foundation of civil Government. That glorious
Person who is the Basis of all the Hopes and Happiness of GOD'S People, he is
the great Creator of all Things, John i. 3. All Things were made by him; and
without him was not any Thing made that was made; and it is his Right and
Prerogative to rule in the Kingdom of Providence, and govern all the Affairs of
the upper and lower World: The Prophet Isaiah speaks of him as having the
Government of the Universe devolved upon him, ixth Chap. 6th Ver. The
Government shall be upon his Shoulder. When our Savior was about to give his
last Commission to his Apostles, just before his Ascension into Glory, he says,
Matt. xxviii. 18. All Power is given unto me, in Heaven and in Earth. By his
Wisdom and Power he conducts all the Affairs of his providential Government,
and accomplishes his own Purposes; although he makes Use of Means and Instruments
yet he himself always stands as the Wheel within the Wheel, in Ezekiel's
Vision, to direct all the Motions of second Causes, that nothing shall ever
happen without his special Direction. This glorious Person has on his Vesture
and on his Thigh, a Name written, (which bespeaks his sovereign Dominion in the
Kingdom of Men) King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Rev. xix. 16. He sets up and
pulls down, when he will, at his Pleasure. Though the Forms of civil Government
are various, in Kingdoms and Nations, yet it is calculated in each of them, for
the general Good of the Body Politic. And all those who are promoted to Places
of Rule and Government, receive their Power from him, who is the blessed and
only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy vi. 15. I shall
illustrate the Truth before us, in the following Particulars. As,

1. Civil Rulers receive their Power and Authority from CHRIST. The Apostle,
speaking of civil Magistrates, says, The Powers that be, are ordained of God.
Romans xiii. 1. CHRIST, the Wisdom of GOD, proclaims, Prove. viii. 15, 16. By me
Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice: By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even
all the Judges of the Earth. This important Subject has been so often well
illustrated on the like Occasion, that I shall proceed to say,

2. CHRIST directs and regulates Rulers in their Duty. This great and wise
Governor has given Rulers wise and general Maxims in his sacred Word, by which
they may form a good Plan of Government, and has furnished them with complete
Power to make good Laws, and enforce Obedience on all, by proper Sanctions. By
his own Authority he has laid the most powerful Restraint upon Rulers, to keep
them from all unjust and oppressive Measures, by assuring them they shall die
like other Men, and stand at his Bar, and give a strict Account of their
Conduct as Rulers. The Lord of all expects and requires that they have a
principal View at his Glory, in all they do, in their different Offices. And in
Subordination to the Glory of GOD, they are to exercise their Authority for the
Good of the Ruled. You must be a Minister of GOD to his People for Good: You
are not to be a Terror to the Good, but to the Evil; and make them know, you do
not bear the Sword in vain. The sweet Laws of our most holy Religion, ^uling in
your Hearts, and attended to in your public Administrations, will most happily
direct you in your Duties, and make you reach the good End of Government.

3. CHRIST requires all due Subjection and Obedience to Rulers, as his
Ministers. By the Authority of the King of Kings, you are not only required to
fear GOD, but honor the King, 1 Pet. ii. 17. paying due Reverence to his
Vicegerents, Submitting to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's Sake;
whether it be to the King, as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are
sent by him, for the Punishment of Evildoers, and for the Praise of them that
do well. 13, 14 Ver. You must be subject to civil Government out of Conscience,
and Obedience unto GOD, by obeying the Laws, and willingly contributing to
their honorable Support, paying Tribute to whom Tribute is due; giving full
Proof of your Loyalty, by your earnest Prayer for them; according to that
divine. Exhortation, 1 Timothy ii. 1, 2, 3. I exhort, therefore, that first of
all, Supplications, Prayers, and Intercessions, and giving of Thanks, be made
for all Men; for Kings, and all that are in Authority, that they may lead a
quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty; for this is good and
acceptable in the Sight of God our Savior. Thus he who has the Government on
his Shoulders, has invested you with Power to act for him, and directed you in
the wise Exertion of it, for the Good of his People; and requires that
Subjection, which will make your Government easy and beneficial and prove the
lengthening out of our Tranquillity, under the happy Privileges which this
Government has been long favored with.

III. That JESUS CHRIST is the Foundation of the wise and good Government
established in his Church. The great Governor among the Nations, spreads his
divine Influences through the whole Universe, with a peculiar Design for the good
of his Church, to support it on the Foundation already laid; and he is Head
over all Things to the Church, Ephesians. i. 13. He has reserved to himself the whole
Authority to give Laws to his own Kingdom, and none may teach for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men, to bind their Consciences. CHRIST, the glorious Head, has
given to his Church, all necessary Doctrines and Laws, in his sacred Oracles:
And if any shall presume to add unto these Things, God shall add unto him all
the Plagues that are written in this Book: And if any Man shall take away from
the Words of the Book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his Part out of the
Book of Life. Rev. xxii. 18, 19. CHRIST governs in his Church, by accompanying
the Doctrines of Grace with such powerful Influences, as to make his People
willing and obedient unto him. Those important Doctrines which are plainly
revealed in GOD'S Word, are made powerful on the Heart of GOD'S People, so as
to awaken secure Sinners; to humble proud Sinners; and bring them to renounce
all Confidence in any Thing they have, or can do, to recommend them to the
divine Favor. They desire, with the Apostle, to be found in Christ, not having
on their own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the
Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is by Faith, Phil. iii. 9. And having
received CHRIST by Faith, and become united unto him, they receive such
spiritual Influences from CHRIST their Head, that they bring forth Fruit, in
their different Stations among Men, to the Praise and Glory of GOD. He has
furnished them with such a Variety of important Truths in his sacred Word, that
they may grow in Knowledge and Grace, and be directed in all virtuous Living,
and become Ornaments to the Church, of which CHRIST is Head, and useful Members
of civil Community. CHRIST will take Care that the important Doctrines of
Religion be maintained, and that Religion, in the Power and Practice of it,
more or less prevails. He will rule in the Hearts of his own Children, and
train them up, in his Church Militant, to become Members of the Church
Triumphant. But while the Church is in this imperfect State, their will be
Corruption in Doctrines and Practice; and therefore the wise Governor has
established good Laws, to direct his Church, in a faithful Dealing with all
such Offenders, to bring them to a Sight and Sense of their Sins and Errors,
that they might repent, and obtain Mercy and Forgiveness. But if they remain
obstinate, after proper Means have been used, and Patience exercised; they must
be cut off as fruitless and corrupt Members. Now, that these Laws of Discipline
might be more easily understood, and practiced upon, it has been the Practice
of all christian Churches, in all Ages, to collect the Laws of CHRIST,
instituted for the Government of his Church, into short Systems. And although
none of these, as far as they are Human, may be esteemed perfect, but in some
Things may need Amendation; yet, perhaps, none more agreeable to the Pattern
given us in GOD'S Word, than what our Forefathers have drawn up to our Hand,
in our ecclesiastical Constitution, which has received the Approbation of the
legislative Authority of this Government. Here the Rights and Liberties of
particular Churches are maintained; and the Power of particular Churches, in
the Management of Discipline, in Relation to any Scandals that fall out within
the same, is clearly asserted and maintained. And that Churches might afford to
each other, such mutual Assistance as may be requisite, upon all Occasions
ecclesiastical; neighboring Churches are to form into a Consociation; and all
Cases of Scandal and Heresy, falling out within their Limits, are to be there
tried and issued, unless the Matter is so great in its Nature, so doubtful in
the Issue, or of such general Concern, that it be thought best to call a
neighboring Consociation, to issue and determine such a Case. This
Constitution has made Provision for the fair Trial of Criminals, and for the
Relief of the aggrieved. And if you look carefully into the Form of Proceeding,
you will find it well calculated to answer the good End of Government in the
Church. We should esteem it a special Favor of the Great Head of the Church,
that we have so wise and good Constitution established in our Churches: And may
it be a Means of guiding, purging, and defending the Church, which is built
upon CHRIST as the Foundation, that the Gates of Hell may never prevail against
it; but Religion may flourish, and the Church appear clear as the Moon, bright
as the Sun, and terrible as an Army with Banners, Cant. vi. 4.

IMPROVEMENT.
1. From what we have heard we may learn, that we should take special Care how
we build upon this Foundation. Those who own CHRIST for the Foundation of all
their Hopes of Happiness, had need be careful that their Building answer the
Excellency of the Foundation. There are precious Doctrines for you to adhere
to, compared in our Context to Gold, Silver, and precious Stones: These will
make us rich, honorable, and comfortable. Others who hold corrupt Doctrines,
which lead to unwarrantable Practices, are compared to Wood, Hay, and Stubble.
Whatever your Building is, remember, O Christian! your Work shall be made
manifest, for the Day shall declare it; because it shall be revealed by Fire;
and the Fire shall try every Man's Work, of what Sort it is, whether it be good
or no. We are assured this shall be the Case; let us take Heed how we build
upon CHRIST, that we might reap the Benefit and Comfort of Religion, and be
daily preparing for a glorious Manifestation of our firm Adherence to CHRIST,
and his sacred Truths.

2. We learn, that the Foundation Men may lay, besides what is already laid,
will certainly fail them. It is supposed in our Text, that Men will have some
Foundation to build their eternal Hopes upon; and while some are building upon
CHRIST, Others who profess Christianity, will deny the peculiar Doctrines of
the Gospel, and bring in damnable Heresies, denying the Lord who has bought
them, and so strike at the Foundation GOD has laid. We cannot but be sensible of
a very sad Corruption of the christian Faith, spread abroad in many Books,
denying the Divinity of our blessed Savior, and the Price he has paid by his
righteous Life, and cruel Sufferings and Death, for our Redemption; and the
special Agency of the Holy Spirit, in applying the Redemption purchased by
CHRIST, thereby beginning, and carrying on the Work of Sanctification in the
whole Man, and thus preparing for Glory and Happiness. Perhaps there never was
a Time when more dangerous Errors prevailed in our Land than at this Day: But
we may be sure that the Stone which these foolish Builders reject, is become
the Head Stone of the Corner, in the Salvation of Sinners, Psalm cxviii. 22.
However you may now treat the great Savior, and his precious Doctrines; ever
long your Faith and Hope will entirely fail you. If you now deny him before
Men, he will deny you before his Father which is in Heaven, Matt. x. 33. You
are now warned that all other Foundations will sail: Therefore, look well to
yourselves, that you build upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
JESUS CHRIST himself being the chief Corner Stone, Ephesians. ii. 20.

3. We learn, that we should attend to the Doctrines and Duties required in
GOD'S Word, in building upon CHRIST as the Foundation. In the sacred Oracles,
we have a complete System of what we are to believe and do. And we must feel
such a powerful Sense of these sacred Truths upon our Hearts, as to bring us to
rest and rely upon CHRIST, and him only, for Life. And the Hope we have founded
upon CHRIST, should purify our Hearts more and more, and make us fruitful in
every good Work, to the Praise and Glory of GOD. We must be studious to know
the Mind and Will of GOD, and search the Scriptures daily, that we may build
our Faith upon the Testimony of GOD, and keep his Institutions and Ordinances
pure and unmixed, and attend them with Care and Diligence; and never give Way
to our own Devices, or be led away by the crafty Designs of those who lie in
Wait to deceive.

4. The Redemption CHRIST has purchased, must be applied unto us by the Holy
Spirit, in fixing us, savingly, upon the Foundation GOD has laid. It is the
Office and Work of the Holy Spirit, in bringing Sinners to Salvation, to apply
the Redemption purchased by CHRIST; thereby working Faith in us, and uniting us
unto CHRIST, as our Head, and making us Partakers of these divine Influences,
by which we are renewed, and sanctified, and strengthened in the inner Man;
that CHRIST may dwell in our Hearts by Faith; that we being rooted and grounded
in Love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the Length, and
Breadth, and Height; and to know the Love of CHRIST, which passes Knowledge,
that we may be filled with all the Fullness of GOD, Ephesians iii. 10. and on. If you have not the Power, nor don't taste the Fruit of the Spirit, in this great Work of
applying the Redemption purchased by CHRIST, you cannot have any solid Hopes,
that you are built on CHRIST, as the sure Foundation, O then, what will become
of those who deny the Influences and Agency of the holy and blessed Spirit, in
uniting them to CHRIST! they can have no Part in him.

5. That Glory should be given unto CHRIST, for all the happy Privileges both
civil and sacred, which we have long enjoyed. It is by the wise and gracious
Disposal of CHRIST, the great Governor of the World, that we are distinguished
above the most of our fellow Men, in those sacred Privileges of Worship and
Discipline, which, by the Blessing of Heaven, may make us perfect in every good
Work, and build us up on CHRIST, as the Foundation, in Faith and Holiness, unto
eternal Life. Our civil Privileges are distinguishingly great; and the great
Good we have enjoyed in them, should raise our Gratitude and Thankfulness to
the great Author and Upholder of them. This joyful Day is a Token of divine
Kindness; and with Thankfulness should we wait upon the wise Disposer of all
Events, to give us our Rulers as at the first, and our Judges as at the
Beginning, wise and good Men, well qualified for their Offices.

Here may I be indulged with Freedom to address your Honors, and the whole
legislative Authority of this Government.

Honored, and much esteemed,

The important Subject before us, equally concerns those who are styled Gods,
by their Office: Every One of you must build upon this glorious Foundation, or
miss of Glory and Happiness at last. Let me then beseech you, my political
Fathers, to see to it that CHRIST be the Foundation of the Hopes of Salvation.
You know the Terms, what you must experience in yourselves, and what you must
believe in your Hearts, and what you must profess with your Mouths, if you
would be saved. Now, if your Faith and Hope be rightly fixed on CHRIST, the
Foundation GOD has laid; then you may know for your Comfort, that the
Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, the Lord knows them that are
his. 2 Timothy ii. 19. This you will find the best Support, under the great
Burdens of Government at this Day, which is greatly increased by some peculiar
Circumstances; which calls most loudly upon you to exert all your Wisdom and
Prudence, in conducting our public Affairs, to the securing our most valuable
Rights and Privileges, and transmit them down to our Posterity as a sacred
Treasure.

While you are employed in these arduous and important Services, may you find
some sweet Nearness to CHRIST, and receive that Wisdom and Instruction from
Him, which shall make you Ministers of GOD for Good to his People; that you may
all close your useful Lives in Peace, and be crowned with eternal Glory.

Let me urge you to improve your Power and Wisdom, in enacting all good Laws
which may be needful to suppress Sin, and encourage Virtue and Religion.

Pray see that your Laws be well executed, effectually to suppress those crying
Sins, which have bro't down GOD'S Judgments upon the Land. The Want of the due
Execution of the Laws, is one great Occasion of GOD'S Sabbaths being openly
profaned, his Worship neglected, and many other Evils prevailing before our
Eyes. And these Things forebode our Ruin, except we be reclaimed by the civil
Power.

While you are Guardians to the common Wealth, let me ask your tender Regard
for the ecclesiastical Constitution, which has received your Approbation, and
is of vast Importance, to the building up of the Kingdom of CHRIST amongst us,
in the Unity of the Faith, and the Bond of Peace; until we all come unto the
Fullness of the Stature of a perfect Man in him.

As you love the Church of the Lord JESUS, let the College always share in your
paternal Care and Kindness, under its present Regulation; and then we may well
hope, the Doctrines of the Gospel will be preserved pure, and many will be
trained up for eminent Service in Church and State; and may your Frowns cause
all its Enemies to hide their Heads.

I can most heartily recommend to your wise and most serious Consideration, the
important Affair of christianising the poor Heathen in our Land. This is what
your Savior justly expects from you, at such a favorable Opportunity as now
presents. Your Wisdom and Help are needed; and the more you do, to build them
up upon the Foundation God has laid, the more you may hope and expect the
divine Blessing will attend your pious and wise Administration, for the Good of
all under your Care and Government.

I would earnestly beseech you, my political Fathers, to make some more
effectual Provision for the Instruction of our Children, in our common Schools,
both in Virtue and good Learning. For that End Schools should be steadily
maintained; and the Teachers should be qualified Persons, of good Characters;
who will instill the best Principles into them, by Instruction, and a good
Example, of Virtue and Religion; and instruct them, by Rule, in those Parts of
Learning, which are needful, to furnish them for Usefulness in their Day. For
that End, perhaps it might be well, if none be suffered to teach in our
Schools, but those who have been examined and licensed by proper Judges, of
their good Qualifications, to be wise and profitable Instructors. The Want of
special Provision in this Case, has proved such a destructive Evil already,
that Multitudes grow up in Ignorance and Vice, which will naturally occasion a
sad Decay in Religion and Virtue, and make them unprofitable Members of the
common Wealth. The Importance of our common Schools, to remedy the Evils we see
in the rising Generation, must plead in a Language which no Tongue can express,
to excite your Pity, and employ your Wisdom and Power, to do something more
than has been done, for the instructing our Children.

I shall add but one Thing more, which I would humbly submit to your superior
Wisdom -- Whether some Provision cannot be made, to prevent such vast Expenses
in Lawsuits, and such oppressive Measures in collecting in just Debts, which
often makes the Charge much more than the original Debt? O! may the distressed
State of the People you govern, make you exert your Wisdom and Skill, in doing
Something within your Power, to relieve the Burdens we are groaning under, and
to encourage those Measures, which may contribute to the lengthening out of our
Tranquillity! O! may GOD give you Wisdom in all Things, to conduct the Affairs
of Government, and show great Tenderness, to the Church, and Interest of the
great Redeemer's Kingdom; and that you may lead GOD'S People, as the Flock of
GOD ought to be lead.

I would address myself to my Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry.

Brethren,

We are under the most solemn Charge, to preach the important Doctrines of the
Gospel, and to show to GOD'S People, that CHRIST is the only Foundation of the
Sinner's Pardon and Acceptance with Him: And if we fail of this, to the Ruin of
Souls, their Blood will be required at our Hands. We must then be exceeding
careful to distinguish between Truth and Error; and make a faithful Stand
against the prevailing Errors of the Times, which subverts the Foundation GOD
has laid; and plainly and faithfully teach the Doctrines of Grace, and press
them with the powerful Arguments and Motives of the Gospel; and show the
Necessity of having them in wrought in their Hearts, by the all-powerful
Influences of the Holy Spirit, to bring them up to the Terms of Salvation by
JESUS CHRIST. And we must maintain good Government in the Church, according to
the Laws of CHRIST's Kingdom, to purge out corrupt and incorrigible Members,
with all Gentleness and Meekness; and we must strengthen those whom CHRIST
would have supported. For this Purpose, we must maintain our ecclesiastical
Constitution, in the Sense in which it has always been understood, and
practiced upon, and improve it for the Good of the Church. And while we are
vigorously endeavoring the Salvation of Others, we should take Heed to
ourselves, that we be not Cast-aways at last. We must experience the Power of
those Truths upon our Hearts, which we press upon Others; and be savingly
acquainted with JESUS CHRIST, and the Way of Pardon and Salvation through Him.
Our Hearts must cordially comply with the Terms upon which CHRIST will become
our Savior. We must build upon CHRIST as the Foundation, and make him the chief
Cornerstone of our Salvation. A powerful Sense of Religion upon our Hearts,
should make us take Heed to our Doctrine, that we build nothing but Gold,
Silver, and precious Stones, such as will bear the Trial, at the last Day, when
every Thing shall be made manifest. We must take Heed to our Conversation, that
we adorn the Doctrine of GOD our Savior, and become Examples to the Flock, in
every Thing which is virtuous and praiseworthy, that we might save ourselves,
and them that hear us. How loudly does GOD, in his Providence, call upon us to
be always ready, to give up an Account of Ourselves to our glorious Judge, by
the many Breaches he has made by Death, upon our sacred Order, in the Year
past; four of our Brethren, Theophilus Hell, William Gaylord, Moses Bartlet,
and Ebenezer ^o^ge.
in a few Months, have ceased from their Labors. And the late Rev'd President,
THOMAS CLAP, who vastly excelled in universal Learning, and in his great Skill
of instructing, which has been very conspicuous in his important Labors in the
College for more than twenty-seven Years, etc. was truly a pious, as well as a
great Man. He sincerely loved the Doctrines of Grace, and exerted himself, in
his high Station, to the Admiration of all, in supporting those peculiar
Doctrines of the Gospel, which stand inseparably connected with building upon
CHRIST as the Foundation GOD has laid. And although he did not escape the
Reproach of Men, he has doubtless received the Approbation of his Judge, and a
glorious Reward of his great and faithful Labors. How should these Admonitions
from GOD, animate us, as Brethren, to live in Love, and study the Things which
make for Peace, and carefully fulfill our Ministry; that we may at last, receive
the sweet Approbation of our Judge, and hear him say to each One of us, Well
done, good and faithful Servants: -- Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you, from the Foundation of the World.

I would address myself to the whole Assembly, We all profess, there is no
other Name under Heaven, given among Men, whereby we can be saved, but by JESUS
CHRIST: He is the Foundation GOD has laid. It is then of the greatest
Importance, that each One of you personally partake of Him as your Savior, and
experience the powerful Influences of the Holy Spirit, applying the Redemption
he has purchased, unto you, bringing you severally up to the Terms of the
Covenant of Grace; forming the new Creature in your Hearts; implanting those
divine Principles in your Souls, which will make you pay a due Respect to
Religion, in all the Branches of christian Duty, both toward GOD, the supreme
Governor of the World, and all those he has set in Authority over you. You
cannot but know the Burden of Government lays heavy upon them, and they are
under many Discouragements: The Power of Religion in you, should excite you to
do all you can, to encourage their Hearts, and strengthen their Hands. O! do
all you can to maintain their Honor and Influence among the People; and honor
Religion, in your Loyalty to them who rule over you. My Brethren, fear thou the
Lord, and the King, and meddle not with those who are given to Change, Prove.
xxiv. 21. Bear your full Testimony against all evil speaking of Dignities; for
GOD has solemnly charged, saying, Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the
Rulers of thy People, Exodus xxii. 28. Always maintain good and honorable
Thoughts of your Rulers, and carry them to GOD, in your fervent Prayers; for it
is the Will of GOD, that Supplications, Prayers, and Intercessions -- be made
for all Men: For Kings, and for all that are in Authority: That we may lead a
quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty, 1 Timothy ii. 2. This is
the Way for us to obtain divine Wisdom and Direction for our Rulers, that they
might be made very rich Blessings unto us, in protecting our Rights and
Privileges, and directing our public Affairs, to the great Advantage of the
whole Community; and happily instrumental to suppress Vice, and cherish Virtue;
to support the Church, and strengthen the Hands of GOD'S Ministers; that we may
see Religion revive in our Day, and enjoy the Benefit and Comfort of it to our
own Souls, and be forever happy, in the full Enjoyment of GOD, in eternal
Glory. AMEN.


