THE HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF MASSACHUSETS-BAY, FROM THE Charter of King
WILLIAM and Queen MARY, IN 1691, Until the Year 1750.

By Mr. HUTCHINSON, Lieutenant Governor of the Province.

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed By THOMAS and JOHN FLEET, in Cornhill, and Sold
in Union-Street, opposite to the Cornfield. MDCCLXVII.

CONTENTS.
THE PREFACE. Page i. CHAP. I. From the Charter in 1691, until the arrival of
Governor Dudley in 1702. Page 1. CHAP. II. From the arrival of Governor Dudley,
in 1702, to the arrival of Governor Shute, in 1716. P. 134. CHAP. III. From the
arrival of Governor Shute, in 1716, to the arrival of Governor Belcher, in
1730. P. 217. CHAP. IV. From the arrival of Governor Belcher, in 1730, to the
reimbursement of the Charge of the Expedition against Cape Breton, and the
abolition of Paper Money, in 1749. P. 369.
APPENDIX.
NUMB. I. A Summary of the Affairs of the Colony of New Plymouth, from the
first Settlement until the Incorporation with Massachusetts Bay, etc. in one
Province. P. 449. NUMB. II. The Examination of Mrs. Ann Hutchinson at the Court
at Newtown, November 1637. P. 482.
ERRATA.
Page 105, line 42, for or their read of envy,

P. 147, l. 36, for children r. grand children,

l. 37, for father's r. grand father's,

P. 216, l. 21, for 87 r. 77,

P. 400, l. 6, for line r. time.

The PREFACE.
THE constitution and historical occurrences of the colonies in America become,
every day, more and more, subjects of speculation in Great Britain. To this I
attribute the favorable reception given, there to my history of the colony of
Massachusets-bay, which I intended merely for the benefit of my own countrymen,
and to preserve, among them, the remembrance of facts but little interesting to
the rest of the world.

THE perusal of the materials from which I composed my work, especially the
letters and papers of our first planters, afforded me a very sensible pleasure.
We are fond of prolonging our lives to the utmost length. Going back to so
familiar an acquaintance with those who have lived before us, approaches the
nearest to it of any thing we are capable of, and is, in some sort, living with
them. I was so pleased with their company, that the further enjoyment of the
same kind of pleasure was inducement enough to collect and peruse materials for
the history of the Province of Massachusetts from the year 1692, when we
concluded the history of the Colony. I found that a little more time, than the
bare perusal required, would be sufficient to arrange the materials and reduce
them to order, and I set about it with a view to render them of use to
posterity. I had proceeded as far as the year 1730, when a misfortune besel me
which had like to have rendered my past labor of no effect and to have
prevented me from proceeding any farther. The stamp act had disturbed the minds
of the people of America. In such a state of affairs, the vicious, the
abandoned have a peculiar opportunity of gratifying their corrupt affections of
envy, malice and revenge. I had in public and private, in every way and manner
which appeared to me the most prudent, endeavored to show the inexpediency of
an act of parliament of this nature, but an unaccountable jealousy of the
contrary had been infused into the minds of the populace, and, being thus
misguided, they expressed their resentment and rage by breaking into my house,
destroying and scattering all my furniture, books, papers, etc. The sober
virtuous part of the province expressed the greatest detestation of this act of
violence, and few or none ventured to justify or approve of it. The loss which
I sustained, as far as it was reparable, by his Majesty's most gracious
recommendation to the province and their generous grant in consequence of it,
both which, in this public manner, I most gratefully acknowledge, has been
repaired or compensated, but the loss of many papers and books, in print as
well as manuscript, besides my family memorials, never can be repaired.

For several days, I had no hopes of recovering any considerable part of my
history, but, by the great care and pains of my good friend and neighbor the
reverend Mr. Eliot, who received into his house all my books and papers which
were saved, the whole manuscript, except 8 or 10 sheets, were collected
together and, although it had lain in the street scattered abroad several hours
in the rain, yet so much of it was legible as that I was able to supply the
rest and transcribe it. The most valuable materials were lost, some of which I
designed to have published in the appendix. I pray God to forgive the actors in
and advisers to this most savage and inhuman injury, and I hope their posterity
will read with pleasure and profit what has so narrowly escaped the outrage of
their ancestors.

THE hazard which attends such papers, together with the request of many of my
friends, induced me to publish my manuscript sooner than I intended.

I have carried down the story to the year 1750, but that part which relates to
the last 20 years in a more general way, being deprived of some papers which
would have enabled me to render it more particular and circumstantial.

SOME of my friends of the colony of New Plymouth took it unkindly, that I said
no more of their affairs in the first part of the history. My principal object
was the Massachusetts colony; besides, I never could meet with many papers
relative to Plymouth. From such papers as I have been able to obtain I have
prepared the best summary I could, to which I shall give a place in the
appendix.

I have endeavored to avoid offense to any persons or families, as far as my
obligations to truth would permit.

WE shall never be all of one mind in our political principles. I desire no
more candor from those who differ from me, than I ever have been, and ever
shall be ready to show to them.

CHAP. I.
From the Charter in 1691, until the arrival of Governor Dudley in 1702.
A BRIEF recapitulation of the rise and progress of the Massachusetts colony,
may not be an improper introduction to this second part of our history.

THE first planters of the Massachusetts colony removed to America, expecting,
there, to enjoy civil and religious liberty, in a greater degree than their
fellowsubjects, at that time, enjoyed it in England. The country, to which they
removed, was claimed by the crown of England, by right of discovery. The
property of a very large tract, in which Massachusetts bay is contained, had
been granted to a certain corporation called the council of Plymouth in Devon.
This council made a grant of Massachusetts bay to Sir Henry Roswell and others,
who intended to send out planters and servants to be under the direction of the
proprietors in England. An incorporation was thought necessary, and a charter
was obtained from King Charles, which, some manuscripts say, cost the company
two thousand pounds sterling. "I paid 50l. and Mr. Eaton 100l. and sundry other
merchants the same sums respectively for the purchase of the charter, we being
members of the corporation for N^sE." John Davenport's let. to John Cotton, N.
Haven, 24.4^ 65.
The principal undertakers were puritans: Planters and ministers, of the same
persuasion, together with servants, cattle, and all necessaries for beginning a
colony, were sent over; the expense of which was very great. Subscriptions were
slowly paid, and a cloud arose, very early, upon the affairs of the colony; but
it was soon dispelled by a proposal from Johnson, Winthrop, and several other
puritans of good families and estates, to remove to America; provided they
might carry the charter with them, and manage the affairs of the colony without
any dependence upon such of the company as should remain in England. This, by
some, was thought irregular; but, after consultation, was agreed to. The
removal of so any persons of character induced a great number of others, of the
same opinions, who were not of the company, to remove with or follow after
them, and put themselves under their protection and government. They complained
of the then reigning Prince, that he depr^ved his subjects of their just
rights, and had no regard to the great charter of the kingdom. What dependence
then could, rationally, be placed upon a special charter to a small part of his
subjects in America? They were soon convinced that it was an insufficient
security. A circumstantial account of an attempt to vacate it the second year
after their removal, we have in a letter to the governor from Emanuel Downing,
father of Sir George Downing. This was a very sensible letter, and I intended
to have printed it, but it was unfortunately destroyed.


In 1638, a formal demand was made of the surrender of their charter, which was
refused, and other proceedings followed, which would have issued in a final
decisive judgment carried into execution, and probably have proved fatal to the
plantation, if the change of affairs in England had not prevented. Upon this
change, the colony became a favorite. The principal men were the intimate
friends of the leading members of parliament, Pym, Hambden, etc. who had been
engaged with them, and from time to time were expected to join them. Whilst
Cromwell ruled, he showed them all the indulgence they desired.

FROM 1640 to 1660 they approached very near to an independent commonwealth;
and, during this period; completed a system of laws and government, the plan
of which they had before laid and began to execute. In this they departed from
their charter; and instead of making the laws of England the ground work of
their code, they preferred the laws of Moses; and, notwithstanding the charter
knew no representative body, Douglass in his Summary P. 409. 1st part, speaks
of representatives of townships in the old charter. He is erroneous.
they established one; and, although it gave them no power to judge and
determine capital offenses, they gave this power to the judicatories they
erected. This last provision became necessary, from their distance from the
judicatories in England; but I know not how to excuse the persecution of all
who could not conform to their religious establishment, when their charter
granted toleration to all christians, except papists.

FOR the first 30 years, although the governor and assistants were annually
chosen by the body of the people, yet they confined themselves to the principal
gentlemen of family, estate, understanding and integrity; but, as one said, who
lived at that time when King Charles commanded them to fill up their numbers in
government, which they had neglected, the new persons empowered were Dii
minorum gentium; and one of their divines told them in public they were in
danger of being undone by creeping statesmen.

UPON the restoration, not only episcopalians, but baptists, quakers,
Gortonists, etc. Several persons who have observed in the first volume a
reference to a manuscript history of the trial of Mrs. Hutchinson, for her
religious tenets, expressed their concern that it was not printed; we shall
give it a place in the appendix to this volume.
preferred complaints against the colony; and although, by the interest of the
Earl of Manchester and Lord Say, their old friends, and of secretary Morris,
all puritans, King Charles confirmed their charter, yet he required a
toleration in religion and an alteration in civil matters, neither of which
were fully complied with. The heirs of Ferdinando Gorges and of John Mason also
complained, that, by a liberal construction, the Massachusetts had extended
their bounds to comprehend the provinces of Main and New Hampshire.
Commissioners were sent over in 1665, to settle the bounds of the colonies and
to make enquiry into their state in general. The Massachusetts denied their
authority, and pronounced the commission a violation of their charter.

NOTWITHSTANDING the acts of parliament for regulating and restraining the
plantation trade, a constant trade was carried on with foreign countries for
contraband and enumerated commodities. This gave great offense. There was no
custom-house. The governor was the naval officer, with whom or his deputy all
vessels entered and cleared. The governor, being annually elected by the
people, was the more easily disposed to comply with popular opinions. It seems
to have been a general opinion that acts of parliament had no other force, than
what they derived from acts made by the general court to establish or confirm
them. This could not consist with the charter. By this, they could make no laws
repugnant to the laws of England. This clause has been construed, by some, in
another colony ((...) Island) to intend the common law only, and not statutes,
especially not such as were made after the date of their charter.
Had the corporation continued within the realm, as was intended, the company
and every member must undoubtedly have been subject to the law of the land.
Upon complaint made by Edward Randolph, who first came over in 1676, and by
repeated orders from the crown to conform to the acts of trade, they passed an
act or law of the colony, declaring that those acts should be executed there.
For several years, they were threatened with the loss of their charter. Randolph
was unwearied in soliciting against them. Mr Randolph had the principal share
in bringing forward the quo warranto against the charter, which seems to have
rendered him odious, more than the share he had in the succeeding
administration as one of Sir Edmund's council. When he was imprisoned and
applied for bail, the house of representatives, June 25. 1689, voted "that Mr.
Edward Randolph is not bailable, he having broke a capital law of this colony
in endeavoring and accomplishing the subversion of our government, and having
been an evil councellor."
By repeated addresses and agencies, they endeavored to exculpate themselves,
but to no purpose. In 1684, by a judgment or decree in chancery, their charter
was declared forfeited, and their liberties were seized into the King's hands;
and whatever opinion some had formed, that their subjection depended upon
mutual compact between the crown and the colony, they were forced to submit to
superior power and to such form of government as King Charles the second and
his successor King James thought fit to establish. Upon the first advice of the
landing of the Prince of Orange, they reassumed their charter, and earnestly
solicited a re-establishment of it, with some necessary additional powers: but
the King could not be prevailed upon to consent to it. A new charter was
obtained; from the arrival of which, this second part of their history is to be
carried on.

BUT before we proceed, it will (...) proper to observe the difference between
the new and the old charter, with respect to the territory and to the powers of
government. The new province contained the whole of the old colony, without any
deduction or reserve; and to this were added the old colony of New Plymouth,
the province of Main, the province of Nova Scotia, and all the country between
the province of Main and Nova Scotia, as far northward as the river St.
Lawrence, also Elizabeth islands, and the islands of Nantucket and Martha's
Vineyard. A vast exposed frontier must bring heavy burdens upon a government.
In the course of sixty years, the province of Massachusets-Bay has been at
greater expense and has lost more of its inhabitants than all the other
colonies upon the continent taken together.

THE two colonies of Massachusets-Bay and New Plymouth were tolerably well
peopled; but the province of Main had never been stocked with inhabitants; and,
just before the new incorporation, had been depopulated by the wars with French
and Indians. The whole province of Nova Scotia was destitute of British
inhabitants; and although there were several thousand French, who had been
lately conquered, yet they were a burden, and there could be no dependence
placed upon their fidelity. From the time of the conquest of Nova Scotia, the
Massachusetts colony had considered the inhabitants as part of the colony, and
had given commissions and instructions to persons for the exercise of
government there. All the lands, between the province of Main and Nova Scotia,
were uninhabited, except at and near Pemaquid, where there were a few
scattering English; and upon the principal rivers, the Penobscot, Machias and
Norridgawock Indians had their wigwams. The bounds of this vast territory were
understood, to be the river Saint Lawrence on the north, the colonies of Rhode
Island and Connecticut on the south, the atlantic on the east, and the south
sea on the west; but within these limits lay the provinces of New Hampshire
Whilst the event of the Massachusetts solicitations was uncertain, New
Hampshire lay still. Samuel Allen, who claimed the soil by purchase from John
Mason's heirs, was in expectation of a commission for the government also, and
opposed the motion of the Massachusetts agent for including New Hampshire in the
same charter with the Massachusetts, etc. alleging that the inhabitants were
averse to it. As soon as the tenor of the charter was known, addresses were
sent over to Sir Henry Ashurst from the assembly of New Hampshire, and from the
inhabitants in general, praying that his Majesty would annex them to
Massachusetts government. Encouragement to hope for success was given by Lord
Nottingham, but the King, however friendly to the liberties of the nation, was
less disposed to enlarge the privileges of the colonists than some of his
ministers. This plainly appeared to the Massachusetts agents. It was finally
determined that New Hampshire should be under the same governor with the
Massachusetts but not with the same privileges.
and New York. In the controversies with several of the other governments, it
has been urged against the Massachusetts, that their western boundary could be
extended no farther than where the line met with Rhode Island or Connecticut.
The words in the charter are, from the atlantic toward the south sea or
westward as far as the colonies or Rhode Island, Connecticut and the Naraganset
country. The Massachusetts colony was the northern boundary of Rhode Island and
Connecticut; it was impossible therefore, the new province which contained the
whole of the old colony should, generally, be bounded west upon either of those
colonies; and it would be a strange construction, to suppose a corner of Rhode
Island colony, which is but a few miles from the atlantic, to be the utmost
limits the province was to extend westward; for it could then contain but a
very small part of the old colony of Massachusetts, whereas the whole is
expressly included. The only sense the words can bear, undoubtedly, is this,
viz. that the province shall extend as far toward the south sea or westward as
Rhode Island or Connecticut do extend. Naraganset country, although it lies
between Rhode Island and Connecticut, is mentioned after Connecticut, because
it was then claimed by that colony, as within the bounds of their charter; and
the Massachusetts agents favored that claim, and considered it as an appendage
to Connecticut.

THE Governor, under the old charter, although he carried great port (so does
the Doge of Venice) yet his share in the administration was little more than
that of any one of the assistants. He had the power of calling the general
court upon urgent occasions, so had the deputy governor or major part of the
assistants, if the governor did not think fit to do it; but he could not
adjourn, prorogue or dissolve the court; the vote of the major part of the
whole court was necessary. He voted with the assistants, and if there was an
equal vote, his vote was twice counted to make a casting vote. He gave
commissions to civil and military officers, but this was merely a ministerial
act, in which nothing was left to his discretion, all officers being elected by
the general court. Under the new charter, there must be an annual meeting of
the general court, on the last wednesday in May; but the governor calls an
assembly at any other times he thinks proper, and adjourns, prorogues and
dissolves at pleasure. He has no vote in the legislature, and does not, or
regularly should not, interest himself in matters in debate, in council, or in
the house; but no act of government is valid without his consent. He has the
appointment of all military officers, solely, and of all officers belonging to
the courts of justice, with the consent of the council; other civil officers
are elected by the two houses, and he has his negative; no money can issue out
of the treasury but by his warrant, with the advice and consent of the council.

THE assistants or counselors, under the old charter, were annually elected by
the votes of all the freemen in the colony; they were not only, with the
governor, one of the two branches of legislature, but the supreme executive
court in all civil and criminal causes, except in such cases where, by the
laws, an appeal was allowed to the general court. The new charter provides,
that upon the last wednesday in May annually, twenty eight counselors shall,
by the general court or assembly, be newly chosen. At the first election, it
was made a question, whether, by the general court or assembly, was intended
the house of representatives only, or the whole three branches, and it is
handed down to us, by tradition, that after some time spent in messages and
replies, the council of the former year gave up the point, and sent Major
Walley, one of their number, to acquaint the house with it; but when he came to
the door he heard the Speaker putting the question to the house, and finding
they had conceded to the council, he returned without delivering his message;
and a committee coming soon after from the house to bring up the vote, the
council, by this accident, retained a privilege which they have been in the
exercise of ever since; It seems by the records that the governor voted this
year with the council and house.
and, no doubt, it is in a great measure owing to this, that any great change
in the council has been rarely effected, even when there have been very warm
altercations between the two houses the preceding year. It is very difficult to
form a second branch of legislature, analogous to the second branch in the
British constitution. The colonies are not ripe for hereditary honors,
otherwise there seems no more room for exception to them there, than in
Ireland. In the charter governments, of Connecticut and Rhode Island, this
branch is more dependent upon the people in general, than the house of
representatives; the first being elected by the freemen in general, the last by
the freemen of their several towns; and there have been instances, in those
colonies, where the representatives have had virtue enough to withstand popular
prejudices, when the council have not. In the royal governments, as they are
called, the council can scarcely be considered as a distinct branch; frequently
they receive their appointment from the recommendation of the governor; they
are always liable to be suspended by him, and if it be without sufficient
cause, the remoteness of the colonies from the place where redress is to be
obtained, and the expense of soliciting it, are, very often, sufficient to
discourage from applying for it. In the Massachusetts, this branch is dependent
both upon the governor and people, and we have seen, at different times, the
influence of the one or the other over this branch, according to the degree of
spirit and resolution which has respectively prevailed. We have seen instances
also of counselors, who have bad fortitude enough to resist an undue influence
from either, and who from year to year have had violent opposition to their
election. We have seen so many good men members, that I may not give the
epithe^ to this branch which is sometimes used for the small boroughs in
England. But we have often seen, that the most likely way to secure a seat for
many years is to be of no importance, and therefore it must be pronounced
defective. Neither in the Massachusetts, nor in the royal governments, do we
meet with that glorious independence, which makes the house of Lords, the
bulwark of the British consti^^tion, and which has sometimes saved the
liberties of the people from threatened encroachments, and at other times put a
stop to advances making upon the royal prerogative.

THE representatives, under the old charter, were elected by freemen only;
under the new, every freeholder of forty shillings sterling. a year is a voter,
and so is every other inhabitant who has forty pounds sterling personal estate.
The speaker of the house was at first elected and took his place without any
notice to the governor; and for many years after the present charter, there was
only the formality of notice, until disputes, upon other points with the
governor, caused him to insist upon his right of negativing the speaker, which
the house was obliged, after a long struggle, to submit to.

WE find nothing, in the new charter, of an ecclesiastical constitution.
Liberty of conscience is granted to all, except Papists. The agent supposed,
that the power, given to the general court to make laws, was sufficient for
supporting and encouraging such modes of worship and such form of church
government as should be most agreeable to the inhabitants in general. Religion
is secured, for liberty is granted to all men to worship God after that manner,
which, in their consciences, they shall be persuaded is the most scriptural
way. The general court may, by laws, encourage and protect that religion which
is the general profession of the inhabitants there. Inc. Mather's account of
his (...).
At the first session of the general court, an act passed, establishing all the
local laws of the Massachusetts province, until other provision should be made.
By this law, the platform of church discipline, among the other laws, was
established, but the law was disapproved in England. At the next session, by
another law, it was enacted, that the respective churches, in the several towns
within this province, shall, at all times hereafter, use, exercise and enjoy
all their privileges and freedoms, respecting divine worship, church order and
discipline, and shall be encouraged in the peaceable and regular profession and
practice thereof. An attempt was soon made, to continue the practice of an
appeal to the general court in controversies upon ecclesiastical matters. A
great part of the church and inhabitants of Salem village, petitioned the
general court to appoint an ecclesiastical council to settle a controversy with
Mr. Paris, the minister, but the court refused. There have been instances of
the general court's interposing, so far as to recommend an ecclesiastical
council; and sometimes committees have been appointed by the court, for the
sake of preserving or restoring peace, professing, rather to advise than enjoin
measures, but exceptions have generally been taken to such votes or orders of
court, as irregular, and not consisting with the dignity of the supreme
legislative authority of the province. Synods were occasionally called, under
the old charter. Some steps were taken for calling a synod about thirty years
after the new charter arrived, but a royal instruction prevented any further
progress.

IF the first commissions from the crown, to the governor of any colony, and
the form of government prescribed by such commissions, are a precedent to be
followed in all succeeding commissions, and a system of laws once approved by
the crown cannot be repealed (all which is contended for by the inhabitants of
the royal governments) the charter to the Massachusetts was not so great a boon
as our forefathers generally imagined, the material difference in the
constitutions, being in the second branch, only, of the legislature; "The
Massachusetts agents considering that a naked restitution of their charter, in
which so many of the necessary powers of government were omitted, would not
serve their turn, put in their prayer for additional powers specially named,
which being observed by the Lords were set down in their report, and upon the
whole matter it was resolved, that their government should be in all points as
in the other plantations, saving that once in a year they should have an
election of their counselors, who should make the upper house in all general
assemblies." M. S. letter 1694.
but it is certain, that, at the time of granting the charter, it was deemed a
much greater security to the people for the enjoyment of the privileges granted
by it, than they could have had merely from a royal temporary commission to a
governor.

THE distress of the people, at the time of the arrival of the charter, is
represented to have been peculiarly great. The sea coast was infested with
privateers, so that few vessels could escape them; the inland frontiers east
and west were continually harrassed by French and Indian enemies; a late
expedition against Canada had exposed the province to the resentment of France,
the effects of which were from time to time expected; the same expedition
brought so heavy a debt upon the government, that it required all the skill of
the administration to support the public credit, and to procure farther
supplies for carrying on the war; a strong party in the government had opposed
every other measure, except the adhering to the old charter, and was now
dissatisfied with the acceptance of the new; but the greatest misfortune was an
apprehension that the devil was let loose among them, that many had entered into
a league with him, and others were afflicted, tormented and the subjects of
dia^olical rage and fury. The minds of people in general were seized with gloom
and horror. The greater part were credulous and believed all they heard, and
expected by and by their own turn; the few, who believed the whole to be an
imposture or delusion, were afraid to discover their sentiments, least some who
pretended to be bewitched should accuse them, and in such case there was no
room to hope for favor.

first published, then the governor's commission; Sir William, by his
commission, was appointed captain general over the colonies of Connecticut and
Rhode Island, and it is said went to the last named government soon after his
arrival at Boston, in order to settle the militia there. He divided the colony
into regiments, and a great number of military commissions were sent up to Col.
Sanford, who was intended to be the chief military officer of the colony; but
there being no law of the colony to enjoin submission, no regard was paid to
them by the people, and most of the officers refused to take the commissions.
This probably was the reason the government there gave themselves but little
concern. Mr. Dudley afterward attempted to exercise the same authority with as
little success.
and thereupon the venerable, old charter, governor Bradstreet resigned the
chair; I dare to say, not without a deep sigh from many of the spectators.
After publishing the lieutenant governor's commission, and administering the
oaths, the governor was conducted, with the same parade, to the place appointed
for a public dinner, and from thence to his house again. The ceremony was
opened with prayer by Mr. Allen, a minister of Boston, and concluded in like
manner by Mr. Morton, a minister of Charlestown. Some of the sprit of the old
charter remained.
By the first ships, letters from the governor and council were sent to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earl of Nottingham, and the Countess of
Sutherland, Hugh Boscawen, John Hambden, and Francis Charlton Esqrs. thankfully
acknowledging the favor Mr. Mather the agent had received from them and the
affection which they had discovered to the interest of their Majesty's subjects
in the province. At the first general council for the appointment of sheriffs
justices and other civil officers, the governor either misconceived, or was
prevailed upon to give up, the powers which belonged to him by charter, the
council nominating or choosing the officers, and the governor giving his
consent. This practice would have lessened the weight and influence of the
governor. It was not suffered long to continue. After the vacating the colony
laws under the old charter, by the publication of the new charter, there was
room to question what was the rule of law in civil and criminal matters, and
how far the common law and what statutes took place. The council, appointed by
the charter, The council appointed by the new charter were -- Simon Bradstreet,
John Richards, Nathanael Saltonstall, Wait Winthrop, John Phillips, James
Russell, Samuel Sewall, Samuel Appleton, Bartholomew Gedney, John Hawthorn,
Elisha Hutchinson, Robert Pike, Jonathan Curwin, John Ioyliffe, Adam Winthrop,
Richard Middlecot, John Foster, Peter Sergeant, Joseph Lynd, Samuel Hayman,
Stephen Mason, Thomas Hinkley, William Bradford, John Walley, Barnabas Lothrop,
Job Alcot, Samuel Daniel, and Silvanus Davis. Those in italick, had been
assistants in Massachusetts or Plymouth colonies. Bradstreet was an old senator;
having been in constant service, except in Dudley's and Andross's
administration, for 62 years. Richards, although he came into the country in
low circumstances (Randolph, in one of his letters, says he was a servant) yet
became an opulent merchant in Boston, had been employed as agent with Dudley,
but remained steady to what was called the country interest. Saltonstall was
the grandson of Sir Richard, and the father of Gurdon Saltonstall, afterward
governor of Connecticut. He lived at Haverhill. Wait Winthrop was the son of
the first governor of Connecticut and New Haven colonies united, and grandson
of the first governor of Massachusetts. He was originally of Connecticut, and
not long before removed to Boston, and was one of Andross's council. Phillips
and Russel were both of Charlestown; the latter the son of Richard Russel,
chosen assistant in 1659. Sewall was originally of Newbury, but had lived
several years at Boston. Appleton, of Ipswich. Gedney and Hawthorn, of Salem;
the latter, son of William Hawthorn, the first speaker upon record, and
afterward an assistant. Hutchinson was a merchant in Boston, son of Edward
Hutchinson who was killed by the Indians in 1675, and grandson to Mrs.
Hutchinson who was banished for her religious opinions. Pike was of Salisbury,
a principal military officer there. Curwin, of Salem, esteemed, and connected
with the principal families there. Ioyliffe, of Boston, had been many years an
active selectman and of primitive zeal. Adam Winthrop, (descended, by a younger
son, from the first governor) had been very active in the revolution: He was of
Boston, as was also middlecot who had a good estate in Warminster in England,
where some of his posterity are now living. Foster was a merchant in Boston, of
the first rank, who came not many years before from Ailsbury in England, but
had a great share in the management of affairs from 1689 to 1692. Sergeant and
Lynd were also of Boston. Hayman, of the Province of Main. Mason was a merchant
in London, a zealous man in the cause of New England, and I suppose his name
was inserted in the charter from mere respect and gratitude, for he never came
to New England. Hinkley had been many years governor of New Plymouth. Brandford
was son to Governor Bradford; and Walley and Lothrop were of good families in
that colony. Alcot and Daniel, or, Donnell, were of the province of Main.
Davis, of the country farther east or Sagadehoc; he had been commander of the
fort at Casco, where he was taken prisoner and carried to Canada. However dry
this account may appear to some readers, it may not be disagreeable to others,
and perhaps may excite a laudable ambition in some of the descendants of the
first magistrates to merit the honors of their ancestors, for although places
and titles in the colonies are not hereditary, yet caeteris paribus, the
descendants of such as have done worthily have some claim to be distinguished,
nam si quis ab ineunte aetate habet causam celebritatis et nominis, aut a patre
acceptam -- in hunc oculi omnium conjiciuntur. Cic. de Officiis.
were to continue until May 1693, and so no special provision was made for a
general assembly in May 1692, but writs issued immediately upon the governor's
arrival, and the court met the 8th of June and an act passed, declaring that
all the laws of the colony of Massachusetts bay and the colony of New Plymouth,
not being repugnant to the laws of England nor inconsistent with the charter,
should be in force, in the respective colonies, to the 10th of November 1692,
except where other provision should be made by act of assembly, and all
justices of the peace (assistants, like aldermen of London, were, ex officio,
justices under the old charter) had the same powers given to them, in the
execution of laws, which magistrates used to have. The confusion, the country
was in, from the supposed witchcrafts, seems to have occasioned an adjournment
of the general court on the 2nd of July, to the second Wednesday in October;
very little public business having been done during the session.

THE great noise which the New England witchcrafts made throughout the English
dominions, proceeded more from the general panick with which all sorts of
persons were seized, and an expectation that the contagion would spread to all
parts of the country, than from the number of persons who were executed, more
having been put to death in a single county in England, in a short space of
time, than have suffered in all New England from the first settlement until the
present time. Fifteen years had passed, before we find any mention of
witchcraft among the English colonists. The Indians were supposed to be
worshippers of the Devil, and their powows to be wizards. The first suspicion
of witchcraft, among the English, was about the year 1645; at Springfield, upon
Connecticut river, several persons were supposed to be under an evil hand, and
among the rest two of the minister's children. Johnson.
Great pains were taken to prove the facts upon several persons charged with
the crime, but either the nature of the evidence was not satisfactory, or the
fraud was suspected, and so no person was convicted until the year 1650, when a
poor wretch, Mary Oliver, probably weary of her life from the general
reputation of being a witch, after long examination was brought to confession
of her guilt, but I do not find that she was executed. Whilst this enquiry was
making, Margaret Jones was executed at Charlestown; Vol. I. P. 150.
and Mr. Hale mentions a woman at Dorchester, and another at Cambridge about
the same time, who all at their death asserted their innocence. Soon after,
Hugh Parsons was tried at Springfield and escaped death. 1d. P. 179.
In 1655, Mrs. Hibbins, the assistants widow, was hanged at Boston. 1d. P. 187.
In 1662, at Hartford in Connecticut (about 30 miles from Springfield, upon the
same river) one Ann Cole, a young woman who lived next door to a Dutch family,
and, no doubt, had learned something of the language, was supposed to be
possessed with doemons, who sometimes spoke dutch and sometimes english, and
sometimes a language which no body understood, and who held a conference with
one another. Several ministers, who were present, took down the conference in
writing, and the names of several persons, mentioned in the course of the
conference, as actors or bearing parts in it; particularly a woman, then in
prison upon suspicion of witchcraft, one Greensmith, who upon examination
confessed and appeared to be surprised at the discovery. She owned that she and
the others named had been familiar with a demon, who had carnal knowledge of
her, The Egyptians suppose a divine spirit may possibly approach a woman and
produce in her the principles of generation; but on the other side, that it is
impossible for a man to have any such intercourse with a goddess. It is however
altogether irrational, to believe that any god or demon is capable of a
sensual love for human bodily form or beauty. Plutarch's life of Numa.
and although she had not made a formal covenant, yet she had promised to be
ready at his call, and was to have had a high frolic at Christmas, when the
agreement was to have been signed. Upon this confession she was executed, and
two more of the company were condemned at the same time. Ian. 20. 1662, three
witches were condemned at Hartford. Feb. 24. After one of the witches was
hanged, the maid was well. Goffe the regicide's diary.
In 1669, Sufanna Martin, of Salisbury, was bound over to the court, upon
suspicion of witchcraft, but escaped at that time. She suffered death in 1692.


IN 1671, Elizabeth Knap, another ventriloqua, alarmed the people of Groton in
much the same manner as Ann Cole had done those of Hartford; but her demon was
not so cunning, for instead of confining himself to old women, he railed at the
good minister of the town and other persons of good character, and the people
could not then be prevailed on to believe him, but believed the girl, when she
confessed she had been deluded, and that the devil had tormented her in the
shape of good persons; and so she escaped the punishment due to her fraud and
imposture.

IN 1673, Eunice Cole of Hampton was tried, and the jury found her not,
legally, guilty, but that there were strong grounds to suspect her of
familiarity with the devil.

IN 1679, William Morse's house, at Newbury, was troubled with the throwing of
bricks, stones, etc. and a boy, of the family, was supposed to be bewitched,
who accused one of the neighbors; and in 1682, the house of George Walton, a
quaker, at Portsmouth, and another house at Salmon-falls (both in
New Hampshire) were attacked after the same manner.

IN 1683, the demons removed to Connecticut river again, where one
Desborough's house was molested by an invisible hand, and a fire kindled, no
body knew how, which burnt up great part of his estate; and in 1684, Philip
Smith, a judge of the court, a military officer and a representative of the
town of Hadley. upon the same river, (an hypocondriack person) fancied himself
under an evil hand, and suspected a woman, one of his neighbors, and
languished and pined away, and was generally supposed to be bewitched to death.
While he lay ill, a number of brisk lads tried an experiment upon the old
woman. Having dragged her out of her house, they hung her up until she was near
dead, let her down, rolled her some time in the snow, and at last buried her in
it and there left her, but it happened that she survived and the melancholy
man died.

NOTWITHSTANDING these frequent instances of supposed witchcrafts, none had
suffered for near thirty years, in the Massachusetts colony. The execution of
the assistant or councellor's widow in 1655, was disapproved of by many
principal persons, and it is not unlikely that her death saved the lives of
many other inferior persons. But in 1685, a very circumstancial account of all
or most of the cases I have mentioned, was published, and many arguments were
brought to convince the country that they were no delusions nor impostures, but
the effects of a familiarity between the devil and such as he found fit for his
instruments; and in 1687 or 1688, began a more alarming instance than any which
had preceded it. Four of the children of John Goodwin, a grave man and a good
liver at the north part of Boston were generally believed to be bewitched. I
have often heard persons, who were of the neighborhood, speak of the great
consternation it occasioned. The children were all remarkable for ingenuity of
temper, had been religiously educated and were thought to be without guile. The
eldest was a girl of thirteen or fourteen years. She had charged a laundress
with taking away some of the family linen. The mother of the laundress was one
of the wild Irish, of bad character, and gave the girl harsh language; soon
after which she fell into fits, which were said to have something diabolical in
them. One of her sisters and two brothers followed her example and, it is said,
were tormented in the same part of their bodies at the same time, although kept
in separate apartments, and ignorant of one another's complaints. One or two
things were said to be very remarkable; all their complaints were in the day
time, and they slept comfortably all night; they were struck dead at the sight
of the assembly's catechism, Cotton's milk for babes, and some other good
books, but could read in Oxford jests, popish and quaker books, and the common
prayer, without any difficulty. It is possible the mind of man should be
capable of such strong prejudices as that a suspicion of fraud should not
immediately arise? But attachments to modes and forms in religion had such
force that some of these circumstances seem rather to have confirmed the credit
of the children. Sometimes they would be deaf, then dumb, then blind; and
sometimes all these disorders together would come upon them. Their tongues
would be drawn down their throats, then pulled out upon their chins. Their
jaws, necks, shoulders, elbows and all their joints would appear to be
dislocated, and they would make most piteous outcries of burnings, of being cut
with knives, beat, etc. and the marks of wounds were afterward to be seen. The
ministers of Boston and Charlestown kept a day of fasting and prayer at the
troubled house; after which, the youngest child made no more complaints. The
others persevered, and the magistrates then interposed, and the old woman was
apprehended, but upon examination would neither confess nor deny, and appeared
to be disordered in her senses. Upon the report of physicians that she was
compos mentis, she was executed, declaring at her death the children should not
be relieved. The eldest, after this, was taken into a minister's family, where,
at first, she behaved orderly, but, after some time, suddenly fell into her
fits. The account of her affliction is in print; some things are mentioned as
extraordinary, which tumblers are every day taught to perform; others seem more
than natural, but it was a time of great credulity. The children returned to
their ordinary behavior, lived to adult age, made profession of religion, and
the affliction they had been under they publicly declared to be one motive to
it. One of them I knew many years after. She had the character of a very sober
virtuous woman, and never made any acknowledgment of fraud in this transaction.
The printed account was published with a preface by Mr. Baxter, who says, 'the
evidence is so convincing, that he must be a very obdurate sadducee who will
not believe.' In the year 1720, at Littleton in the county of Middle^ex, a
family was supposed to be bewitched. One I. B. had three daughters, of 11, 9,
and 5 years of age. The eldest was a forward girl, and having read and heard
many strange stories, would surprise the company where she happened to be, with
her manner of relating them. Pleased with the applause, she went from stories
she had heard, to some of her own framing, and so on to dreams and visions, and
attained the art of sw^oning and of being to all appearance for sometime
breathless. Upon her revival, she would tell of strange things she had met with
in this and other worlds. When she met with the words, God Christ the Holy
Ghost, in the bible, she would drop down with (...) signs of life in her.
Strange noises were often heard in and upon the house; stones came down the
chimney and did great mischief. She complained of the spectre of Mrs. D -- y, a
woman living in the town; and, once, the mother of the girl struck at the place
where the said D -- y was, and the girl said, you have struck her on the belly,
and upon enquiry it was found, that D -- y complained o^ a hurt in her belly
about that time. Another time, the mother struck at a place, where the girl
said there was a yellow bird, and she told her mother she had hit the side of
it is head; and it again appeared that D -- y's head was hurt about the same
time. It was common to find her in ponds of water, crying out she should be
drowned; sometimes upon the top of the house, and sometimes upon the tops of
trees, where she pretended she had flown; and some fancied they had seen her in
the air. There were often the marks of blows and pinches upon her, which were
supposed to come from an invisible hand. The second daughter, after her sister
had succeeded so well, imitated her in complaints of D -- y, and out did her in
feats of running upon the barn, climbing trees, etc. and, what was most
surprising, the youngest attempted the same feats, and in some instances went
belong her sisters. The neighbors agreed they were under an evil hand, and it
was pronounced a piece of witchcraft, as certain as that there ever had been
any at Salem; and no great pains were taken to detect the imposture. Physicians
had been at first employed, but to no purpose; and afterward ministers were
called to pray over them, but without success. At length D -- y, not long after
the supposed blows, took to her bed, and after sometime died, and the two
eldest girls ceased complaining; the youngest held out longer, but all
persisted in it, that there had been no fraud. The eldest, not having been
baptized, and being come to adult age, desired and obtained baptism, and the
minister then examined her upon her conduct in the affair, and she persisted in
her declarations of innocence. In 1728, having removed to Medford, she offered
to join the church there, and gave a satisfactory account of herself to the
minister of the town; but he knew nothing of the share she had in this
transaction. The Lord's day before she was to be admitted, he happened to
preach from this text, "He that speaks lies shall not escape." The woman
supposed the sermon to be intended for her, and went to the minister, who told
her no body had made any objection against her; but being determined to confess
her guilt, she disclosed the fraud of herself and her (...) and desired to make
a public acknowledgment, in the face of the church; and accordingly did so.
The two sisters, seeing her pitied had become actors also with her, without
being moved to it by her, but when she saw them follow her, they all joined in
the secret and acted in concert. They had no particular spite against D -- y;
but it was necessary to accuse somebody, and the eldest having pitched upon
her, the rest followed. The woman's complaints, about the same time the girl
pretended she was struck, proceeded from other causes, which were not then
properly enquired into. Once, at least, they were in great danger of being
detected in their tricks; but the grounds of suspicion were overlooked, through
the indulgence and credulity of their parents. M. S. of the Rev. Mr. Turell,
minister of Medford.
It obtained credit sufficient, together with other preparatives, to dispose
the whole country to be easily imposed upon by the more extensive and more
tragical scene, which was presently after acted at Salem and other parts of the
county of Essex. Not many years before, Glanvil published his witch stories in
England; Perkins and other nonconformists were earlier; but the great authority
was that of Sir Matthew Hale, revered in New England, not only for his
knowledge in the law, but for his gravity and piety. The trial of the witches
in Suffolk was published in 1684. All these books were in New England, and the
conformity between the behavior of Goodwin's children and most of the supposed
bewitched at salem, and the behavior of those in England, is so exact, as to
leave no room to doubt the stories had been read by the New England persons
themselves, or had been told to them by others who had read them. Indeed, this
conformity, instead of giving suspicion, was urged in confirmation of the truth
of both; the old England demons and the new being so much alike. The court
justified themselves from books of law, and the authorities of Keble, Dalton
and other lawyers, then of the first character, who lay down rules of
conviction, as absurd and dangerous as any which were practiced in New England.
The trial of Richard Hatheway, the impostor, before Lord Chief Justice Holt,
was ten or twelve years after. This was a great discouragement to prosecutions
in England for witchcraft, but an effectual stop was not put to them. until the
act of parliament in the reign of his late Majesty. I remember to have heard a
gentleman, who in other respects was very sensible, express his surprise upon
the first news of this act. The parliament, he said, had in effect declared
that there were no evil spirits, he was afraid they would declare by another
act that there are no good ones. From 1694 to 1701, there were 11 persons tried
for witches before Lord chief justice Holt, all of whom were acquitted. In
Scotland seven were executed for witches in 1697, upon the testimony of one
girl about 11 years old.
Even this has not wholly cured the common people, and we hear of old women
ducked and cruelly murdered within these last twenty years. Reproach, then, for
hanging witches, although it has been often cast upon the people of
New England, by those of Old, yet it must have been done with an ill grace. The
people of New England were of a grave cast, and had long been disposed to give
a serious solemn construction even to common events in providence; but in Old
England, the reign of Charles the second was as remarkable for gaiety as any
whatsoever, and for skepticism and infidelity, as any which preceded it.

SIR William Phips, the governor, upon his arrival, fell in with the opinion
prevailing. Mr. Stoughton, the lieutenant governor, upon whose judgment great
stress was laid, had taken up this notion, that although the devil might appear
in the shape of a guilty person, yet he would never be permitted to assume the
shape of an innocent person. 'A gentleman of more than ordinary understanding,
learning and experience, desired me to write to N. England about your trials
and convictions of witches, not being satisfied with the evidence upon which
some who have been executed were found guilty; he told me that in the time of
the great reformation parliament, a certain person or persons had a commission
to discover and prosecute witches. Upon these prosecutions many were executed,
in at least one county in England, until, at length, a gentleman of estate and
of great character for piety was accused, which put an end to the commission,
and the judges, upon a re-hearing, reversed many of the judgments; but many
lives had been taken away. All that I speak with, much wonder that any man,
much less a man of such abilities, learning and experience as Mr. Stoughton,
should take up a persuasion, that the devil cannot assume the likeness of an
innocent, to afflict another person. In my opinion, it is a persuasion utterly
destitute of any solid reason to render it so much as probable, and besides,
contradictory to many instances of facts in history. If you think good, you may
acquaint Mr. Stoughton and the other judges with what I write.' Letter from
London to Inc. Mather, Ian. 9. 1692-3. I suppose the long parliament must be
intended by the great reformation parliament, for in 1644, 1645 and 1646, one
Matthew Hopkins went from place to place to find out witches. Mr. Baxter says a
great number were hanged by his discovery, and that Mr. Calamy went along with
the judges to hear the confessions, and to see that there was no fraud or wrong
done. Hopkins searched for teats, set some upon stools or tables cross-legged,
and kept them 24 hours without meat or drink, within which time it was said
their imps would come and suck; others he tried by swimming them, and at length
raised the indignation of certain gentlemen, who caused him to be seized, and
his hands and feet being tied, to be thrown into the water, where fortunately
for him he was proved to be a witch or wizard himself, by his swimming or
floating upon the water. The country was cleared of him, and some lamented that
the experiment had not been made sooner.
This opinion, at first, was generally received. Some of the most religious
women who were accused, when they saw the appearance of distress and torture in
their accusers, and heard their solemn declarations, that they saw the shapes
or specter of the accused afflicting them, persuaded themselves they were
witches, and that the devil, some how or other, although they could not
remember how or when, had taken possession of their evil hearts and obtained
some sort of assent to his afflicting in their shapes; and thereupon they
thought they might be justified in confessing themselves guilty.

IT seems, at this day, with some people, perhaps but few, to be the question
whether the accused or the afflicted were under a preternatural or diabolical
possession, rather than whether the afflicted were under bodily distempers, or
altogether guilty of fraud and imposture. As many of the original examinations
have fallen into my hands, it may be of service to represent this affair in a
more full and impartial light than it has yet appeared to the world.

IN February 1691-2, a daughter and a neice of Mr. Parris, the minister of
Salem Douglass in his summary says, "In Salem and its neighborhood, enthusiasm
and other nervous disorders seem to be endemial; it was the seat of the
New England witchcraft anno 1692." I question whether he had any other
foundation for this remark than merely this scene of witchcraft, which must be
considered as the distemper of the country in general, rather than of any
particular town or county, and had Mr. Parris's family lived in any other part
of the province, perhaps the neighborhood would have been as much infected;
and no impression ought to be made to the disadvantage of a town the most
ancient, and at this day the second in rank within the province, and upon other
accounts justly respectable.
village, girls of ten or eleven years of age, and two other girls in the
neighborhood, made the same sort of complaints as Goodwin's children had made,
two or three years before. The physicians, having no other way of accounting
for the disorder, pronounced them bewitched. An Indian woman, who was brought
into the country from New Spain, and then lived with Mr. Parris, tried some
experiments which she pretended to be used to, in her own country, in order to
find out the witch. This coming to the children's knowledge, they cried out
upon the poor Indian, as appearing to them, pinching, pricking and tormenting
them; and fell into fits. Tituba, the Indian, acknowledged that she had learned
how to find out a witch, but denied that she was one herself. Several private
fasts were kept at the minister's house, and several, more public, by the whole
village, and then a general fast through the colony, to seek to God to rebuke
Satan etc. So much notice taken of the children, together with the pity and
compassion, expressed by those who visited them, not only tended to confirm
them in their design but to draw others into the like. Accordingly, the number
of the complainants soon increased, and among them there were two or three
women, and some girls old enough for witnesses. These had their fits too, and,
when in them, cried out, not only against Tituba, but against Sarah Osburn, a
melancholy distracted old woman, and Sarah Good, another old woman who was
bedrid. Tituba, at length, confessed herself a witch, and that the two old
women were her confederates, and they were all committed to prison; and Tituba,
upon search, was found to have scars upon her back which were called the
devil's mark, but might as well have been supposed those of her Spanish master.
This commitment was on the 1st of March. About three weeks after, two other
women, of good characters and church members, Corey and Nurse, were complained
of and brought upon their examination; when these children fell into fits, and
the mother of one of them, and wife of Thomas Putman, joined with the children
and complained of Nurse as tormenting her; and made most terrible shrieks, to
the amazement of all the neighborhood. The old women denied every thing; but
were sent to prison; and such was the infatuation, that a child of Sarah Good,
about four or five years old, was committed also, being charged with biting
some of the afflicted who showed the print of small teeth on their arms. On
April 3d Mr. Parris took for his text, "Have not I chosen you twelve and one of
you is a devil." Sarah Cloyse, supposing it to be occasioned by Nurse's case,
who was her sister, went out of meeting. She was, presently after, complained
of for a witch, examined and committed. Elizabeth Procter was charged about the
same time: Her husband, as every good husband would have done, accompanied her
to her examination, but it cost the poor man his life. Some of the afflicted
cried out upon him also, and they were both committed to prison.

INSTEAD of suspecting and sifting the witnesses, and suffering them to be
cross examined, the authority, to say no more, were imprudent in making use of
leading questions, and thereby putting words into their mouths or suffering
others to do it. Mr. Parris was over officious; most of the examinations,
although in the presence of one or more of the magistrates, were taken by him.
The following examinations, of several of the accused, may serve as specimens
they being generally made in the (...).

"AT a court held at Salem 11th April 1692, by the honored Thomas Danforth,
Deputy Governor. Q. John; This was Tituba's husband, who seems to have been a
cunning fellow, and to avoid being accused joined with the afflicted.
who hurt you? A. Goody Procter first, and then Goody Cloyse. Q. What did she
do to you? A. She brought the book to me. Q. John! tell the truth, who hurts
you? Have you been hurt? A. The first, was a gentlewoman I saw. Q. Who next? A.
Goody Cloyse. Q. But who hurt you next? A. Goody Procter. Q. What did she do to
you? A. She choked me, and brought the book. Q. How often did she come to
torment you? A. A good many times, she and Goody Cloyse. Q. Do they come to you
in the night as well as the day? A. They come most in the day. Q. Who? A. Goody
Cloyse and Goody Procter. Q. Where did she take hold of you? A. Upon my throat,
to stop my breath. Q. Do you know Goody Cloyse and Goody Procter? A. Yes, here
is Goody Cloyse. (Cloyse) when did I hurt thee? A. A great many times. (Cloyse)
Oh! you are a grievous liar. Q. What did this Goody Cloyse do to you? A. She
pinched and bit me till the blood came. Q. How long since this woman came and
hurt you? A. Yesterday, at meeting. Q. At any time before? A. Yes a great many
times. Q. Mary Walcot! who hurts you? A. Goody Cloyse. Q. What did she do to
you? A. She hurt me. Q. Did she bring the book? A. Yes. Q. What was you to do
with it? A. To touch it, and be well. -- Then she fell into a fit. Q. Does she
come alone? A. Sometimes alone, and sometimes in company with Goody Nurse and
Goody Corey, and a great many I do not know. -- Then she fell into a fit again.
-- Q. Abigail Williams! did you see a company at Mr. Parris's house eat and
drink? A. Yes Sir, that was their sacrament. Q. How many were there? A. About
forty, and Goody Cloyse and Goody Good were their deacons. Q. What was it? A.
They said it was our blood, and they had it twice that day. Q. Mary Walcot!
have you seen a white man? Yes Sir, a great many times. Q. What sort of man was
he? A. A fine grave man, and when he came, he made all the witches to tremble.
-- Abigail Williams confirmed the same, and that they had such a sight at
Deacon Ingersoll's. Q. Who was at Deacon Ingersoll's then? A. Goody Cloyse,
Goody Nurse, Goody Corey, and Goody Good. -- Then Sarah Cloyse asked for water,
and sat down as one seized with a dying fainting fit; and several of the
afflicted fell into fits, and some of them cried out, Oh! her spirit is gone to
prison to her sister Nurse. -- Q. Elizabeth Procter! you understand whereof you
are charged, viz. to be guilty of sundry acts of witchcraft; what say you to
it? Speak the truth, and so you that are afflicted, you must speak the truth,
as you will answer it before God another day. Mary Walcot! does this woman hurt
you? A. I never saw her so as to be hurt by her. Q. Mary Lewis! does she hurt
you? -- Her mouth was stopped. -- Q. Ann Putman! does she hurt you? -- She
could not speak. -- Q. Abigail Williams! does she hurt you? -- Her hand was
thrust in her own mouth. -- Q. John! does she hurt you? A. This is the woman
that came in her shift and choked me. Q. Did she ever bring the book? A. Yes
Sir. Q. What to do? A. To write. Q. What, this woman? A. Yes Sir. Q. Are you
sure of it? A. Yes Sir. -- Again, Abigail Williams and Ann Putman were spoke to
by the court, but neither of them could make any answer, by reason of dumbness
or other fits. Q. What do you say Goody Proctor to these things? A. I take God
in heaven to be my witness, that I know nothing of it, no more than the child
unborn. Q. Ann Putman! does this woman hurt you. A. Yes Sir, a great many
times, -- Then the accused looked upon them and they fell into fits. Q. She
does not bring the book to you, does she? A. Yes Sir, often, and says she has
made her maid set her hand to it. Q. Abigail Williams! does this woman hurt
you? A. Yes Sir, often. Q. Does she bring the book to you? A. Yes. Q. What
would she have you do with it? A. To write in it and I shall be well. -- Did
not you, said Abigail, tell me, that your maid had written? (Procter) Dear
Child, it is not so. There is another judgment, dear child. -- Then Abigail and
Ann had fits. -- By and by they cried out, look you there is Goody Procter upon
the beam. -- By and by, both of them cried out of Goodman Procter himself, and
said he was a wizard. -- Immediately, many, if not all of the bewitched, had
grievous fits. -- Q. Ann Putman! who hurt you? A. Goodman Procter and his wife
too. -- Afterward, some of the afflicted cried, there is Procter going to take
up Mrs. Pope's feet. -- And her feet were immediately taken up. -- Q. What do
you say Goodman Procter to these things? A. I know not. I am innocent. --
Abigail Williams cried out, there is Goodman Procter going to Mrs. Pope, and
immediately, said Pope fell into a fit. -- You see the Devil will deceive you;
the children could see what you was going to do before the woman was hurt. I
would advise you to repentance, for the devil is bringing you out. -- Abigail
Williams cried out again, there is Goodman Procter going to hurt Goody Bibber;
and immediately Goody Bibber fell into a fit. There was the like of Mary
Walcot, and diverse others. -- Benjamin Gould gave in his testimony, that he had
seen Goodman Corey and his wife, Procter and his wife, Goody Cloyse, Goody
Nurse, and Goody Griggs in his chamber last thursday night. -- Elizabeth
Hubbard was in a trance during the whole examination. -- During the examination
of Elizabeth Procter, Abigail Williams and Ann Putman, both, made offer to
strike at said Procter; but when Abigail's hand came near, it opened, whereas
it was made up into a fist before, and came down exceeding lightly, as it drew
near to said Procter, and at length with open and extended fingers, touched
Procter's hood very lightly. Immediately Abigail cried out, her fingers, her
fingers, her fingers burned, and Ann Putman took on most grievously, of her
head, and sunk down."

"SALEM, April 11th, 1692. Mr. Samuel Parris was desired by the honorable
Thomas Danforth, deputy governor, and the council, to take in writing the
aforesaid examinations, and accordingly took and delivered them in; and upon
hearing the same, and seeing what was then seen, together with the charge of
the afflicted persons, were by the advice of the council all committed by us,
John Hawthorne, John Corwin, Assistants."

No wonder the whole country was in a consternation, when persons, of sober
lives and unblemished characters, were committed to prison upon such sort of
evidence. No body was safe. The most effectual way to prevent an accusation,
was to become an accuser; and accordingly the number of the afflicted increased
every day, and the number of the accused in proportion, who in general
persisted in their innocence; but, being strongly urged to give glory to God by
their confession, and intimation being given that this was the only way to save
their lives, and their friends urging them to it, some were brought to own
their guilt. The first confession upon the files, is of Deliverance Hobbs, May
11th, 1692, being in prison. She owned every thing she was required to do. The
confessions multiplied the witches; new companions were always mentioned, who
were immediately sent for and examined. Thus more than an hundred women, many
of them of fair characters and of the most reputable families, in the towns of
Salem, Beverly, Andover, Billerica, etc. were apprehended, examined and,
generally, committed to prison. The confessions being much of the same tenor,
one or two may serve for specimens.

"THE examination and confession (8. Sept. 92.) of Mary Ofgood, wife of Captain
Ofgood of Andover, taken before John Hawthorne and other their Majesty's
justices.

SHE confesses, that about 11 years ago, when she was in a melancholy state
and condition, she used to walk abroad in her orchard; and upon a certain time,
she saw the appearance of a cat, at the end of the house, which yet she thought
was a real cat. However, at that time, it diverted her from praying to God, and
instead thereof she prayed to the devil; about which time she made a covenant
with the devil, who, as a black man, came to her and presented her a book, upon
which she laid her finger and that left a red spot: And that upon her signing,
the devil told her he was her God, and that she should serve and worship him,
and, she believes, she consented to it. She says further, that about two years
agone, she was carried through the air, in company with deacon Frye's wife,
Ebenezer Baker's wife and Goody Tyler, to five mile pond, where she was
baptized by the devil, who dipped her face in the water and made her renounce
her former baptism, and told her she must be his, soul and body, forever, and
that she must serve him, which she promised to do. She says, the renouncing her
first baptism was after her dipping, and that she was transported back again
through the air, in company with the forenamed persons, in the same manner as
she went, and believes they were carried upon a pole. Q. How many persons were
upon the pole^ A. As I said before, viz. four persons and no more but whom she
had named above. -- She confesses she has afflicted three persons, John Sawdy,
Martha Sprague and Rose Foster, and that she did it by pinching her bed
clothes, and giving consent the devil should do it in her shape, and that the
devil could not do it without her consent. -- She confesses the afflicting
persons in the court, by the glance of her eye. She says, as she was coming
down to Salem to be examined, she and the rest of the company with her stopped
at Mr. Phillips's to refresh themselves, and the afflicted persons, being
behind them upon the road, came up just as she was mounting again and were then
afflicted, and cried out upon her, so that she was forced to stay until they
were all past, and said she only looked that way toward them. Q. Do you know
the devil can take the shape of an innocent person and afflict? A. I believe he
cannot. Q. Who taught you this way of Witchcraft? A. Satan, and that he
promised her abundance of satisfaction and quietness in her future state, but
never performed any thing; and that she has lived more miserably and more
discontented since, than ever before. She confesses further, that she herself,
in company with Goody Parker, Goody Tyler and Goody Dean, had a meeting at
Moses Tyler's house, last monday night, to afflict, and that she and Goody Dean
carried the shape of Mr. Dean, the minister, between them, to make persons
believe that Mr. Dean afflicted. Q. What hindered you from accomplishing what
you intended? A. The Lord would not suffer it so to be, that the devil should
afflict in an innocent person's shape. Q. Have you been at any other witch
meetings? A. I Know nothing thereof, as I shall answer in the presence of God
and his people; but said, that the black man stood before her, and told her,
that what she had confessed was a lie; notwithstanding, she said that what she
had confessed was true, and thereto put her hand. Her husband being present was
asked, if he judged his wife to be any way discomposed. He answered, that
having lived with her so long, he does not judge her to be any ways
discomposed, but has cause to believe what she has said is true. -- When
Mistress Ofgood was first called, she afflicted Martha Sprague and Rose Foster,
by the glance of her eyes, and recovered them out of their fits by the touch of
her hand. Mary Lacey and Betty Johnson and Hannah Post saw Mistress Ofgood
afflicting Sprague and Foster. -- The said Hannah Post and Mary Lacey and Betty
Johnson, jua. and Rose Foster and Mary Richardson ^ere afflicted by Mistress
Ofgood, in the time of their examination, and recovered by her touching of
their hands.

I underwitten, being appointed by authority, to take this examination, do
testify upon oath, taken in court, that this is a true copy of the substance of
it, to the best of my knowledge, 5 Ian. 1692-3. The within Mary Ofgood was
examined before their Majesty's justices of the peace in Salem.

Attest. John Higginson, Just. Pac."

A miserable negro woman, charged by some of the girls with afflicting them,
confessed, but was cunning enough to bring the greatest share of the guilt upon
her mistress.

"SALEM, Monday July 4. 1692. The examination of Candy, a negro woman, before
Bartholomew Gedney and John Hawthorne Esq'rs. Mr. Nicholas Noyes (...) present.

"Q. Candy! are you a Witch? A. Candy no witch in her country. Candy's mother
no witch. Candy no witch, Barbados. This country, mistress give Candy witch. Q.
Did your mistress make you a witch in this country? A. Yes, in this country
mistress give Candy witch. Q. What did your mistress do to make you a witch? A.
Mistress bring book and pen and ink, make Candy write in it. Q. What did you
Write in it? -- She took a pen and ink and upon a book or paper made a mark. Q.
How did you afflict or hurt these folks, where are the pappets you did it with?
-- She asked to go out of the room and she would show or tell; upon which she
had liberty, one going with her, and she presently brought in two clouts, one
with two knots tied in it. the other one; which being seen by Mary Warren,
Dellvera^ice Hobbs and Abigail Hobbs, they were greatly affrighted and sell
into violent fits, and all of them said that the black man and Mrs. Hawks and
the negro stood by the puppets or rags and pinched them, and then they were
afflicted, and when the knots were untied yet they continued as aforesaid. A
bit of one of the rags being set on fire, the afflicted all said they were
burned, and cried out dreadfully. The rags being put into water, two of the
forenamed persons were in dreadful fits almost choked, and the other was
violently running down to the river, but was stopped.

Attest. John Hawthorne, Just. Peace".

MRS. Hawks, the mistress, had no other way to save her life but to confess
also.

MR. Hale, the minister of Beverly, who has the character of an impartial
relator, acknowledges that the confessors, generally, went off from their
confessions; some saying they remembered nothing of what they had said, others
that they had belied themselves, etc. but he thinks, if the times had been
calm, the condition of the confessors might have called for a melius
inquirendum; and thinks it remarkable that children and grandchildren should
confirm their parents and grand-parents confession, instancing in the case of
Goody Foster, her daughter Mary Lacey, and granddaughter Mary Lacey, jun. and
that other children should accuse their own parents, as in the case of Richard
Carrier, a lad of 18 years of age. These confessions are preserved, and a few
extracts from them will show they were forced from them, through fear of losing
their lives if they refused, and their fear, in some, was so great as to
disorder their brains, and they scarce knew what they said.

"21st July 1692. Before Major Gidney, Mr. Hawthorne, Mr. Corwin and Capt.
Higginson.

"Q. Goody Foster! you remember we have three times spokenwith you, and do you
now remember what you then confessed to us? -- You have been engaged in very
great wickendness, and some have been left to hardness of heart to deny; but it
seems that God will give you more favor than others, as much as you relent.
But your daughter here bath confessed some things that you did not tell us of.
Your daughter was with you and Goody Carrier, when you did ride upon the stick.
A. I did not know it, Q. How long have you known your daughter to be engaged?
A. I cannot tell, nor have I any knowledge of it at all. Q. Did you see your
daughter at the meeting? A. No. Q. Your daughter said she was at the witches
meeting, and that you yourself stood at a distance off and did not partake at
that meeting; and you said so also; give us a relation from the beginning until
now. A. I know none of their names that were there, but only Goody Carrier. Q.
Would you know their faces if you saw them? A. I cannot tell. Q. Were there not
two companies in the field at the same time? A. I remember no more -- Mary
Warren, one of the afflicted, said that Goody Carrier's shape told her, that
Goody Foster had made her daughter a witch. --. Do not you acknowledge that you
did so about 13 years ago? A. No, and I know no more of my daughter's being a
witch than what day I shall die upon. Q. Are you willing your daughter should
make a full and free confession? A. Yes. Q. Are you willing to do so too? A.
Yes. Q. You cannot expect peace of conscience without a free confession. A. If
I knew any thing more, I would speak it to the utmost. -- Goody Lacey, the
daughter, called in, began thus; Oh! mother! how do you do? We have left
Christ, and the devil bath gat hold of us. How shall I get rid of this evil
one? I desire God to break my rocky heart that I may get the victory this time.
Q. Goody Foster! you cannot get rid of this spare, your heart and mouth is not
open. A. I did not see the devil, I was praying to the Lord, Q. What Lord? A.
To God. Q. What God do witches pray to? A. I Cannot tell, the Lord help me. Q.
Goody Lacey! had you no discourse with your mother when riding? A. No, I think
I had not a word. Who rid foremost on that stick to the village? A. I suppose
my mother. -- Goody Foster said, that Goody Carrier was foremost -- Q. Goody
Lacey! how many years ago since they were baptized? A. Three or four years ago,
I suppose. Q. Who baptized them? A. The old serpent. Q. How did he do it? A. He
dipped their heads in the water, saying, they were his and that he had power
over them. Q. Where was this? A. At Falls river. Q. How many were baptized
that day? A. Some of the chief; I think there were fix baptized. Q. Name them.
A. I think they were of the higher powers. It was time to stop.
-- Mary Lacey, the granddaughter, was brought in, and Mary Warren fell into a
violent fit. Q. How dare you come in here, and bring the devil with you, to
afflict these poor creatures? -- Lacey laid her hand on Warren's arm, and she
recovered from her fit. -- Q. You are here accused of practicing witchcraft
upon Goody Ballard, which way do you do it? A. I cannot tell. Where is my
mother that made me a witch, and I knew it not? Q. Can you look upon that maid
Mary Warren, and not hurt her? Look upon her in a friendly way. -- She, trying
so to do, struck her down with her eyes. Q. Do you acknowledge now you are a
witch? A. Yes. Q. How long have you been a witch? A. Not above a week. Q. Did
the devil appear to you? A. Yes. Q. In what shape? A. In the shape of a horse.
Q. What did he say to you? A. He bid me not to be afraid of any thing, and he
would not bring me out, but he has proved a liar from the beginning. Q. When
was this? A. I know not; above a week. Q. Did you set your hand to the book? A.
No. Q. Did he bid you worship him? A. Yes, he bid me also afflict persons. --
You are now in the way to obtain mercy if you will confess and repent. She
said, the Lord help me. Q. Do not you desire to be saved by Christ? A. Yes. --
Then you must confess freely what you know in this matter. She then proceeded.
-- I was in bed and the devil came to me and bid me obey him and I should want
for nothing, and he would not bring me out. Q. But how long ago? A. A little
more than a year. Q. Was that the first time? A. Yes. Q. How long was you gone
from your father, when you ran away? A. Two days, Q. Where had you your food?
A. At John Stone's. Q. Did the devil appear to you then, when you was abroad?
A. No. but he put such thoughts in my mind as not to obey my parents. Q. Who
did the devil bid you afflict? A. Timothy Swan. Richard Carrier comes often a
nights and has me to afflict persons. Q. Where do ye go? A. To Goody Ballard's
sometimes. Q. How many of you were there at a time? A. Richard Carrier and his
mother, and my mother and grandmother. -- Upon reading over the confession so
far, Goody Lacey, the mother, owned this last particular. Q. How many more
witches are there in Andover? A. I know no more, but Richard Carrier".

CARRIER, at first, denied all, but was followe^ until he was brought to accuse
his mother, much in the same manner with Foster's daughter and granddaughter.

IT is urged by the writers of that day, as a principal part of the evidence
against Mr. Buroughs, the minister, that seven or eight of the confessors
witnessed against him. It will appear from the examinations, that the
confession was drawn from the examinants by the court.

"Q. Mary Lacey! was there not a man also among you at your meeting? A. None
but the devil. Q. What shape was the devil in then? A. He was a black man, and
had a high crowned hat. Q. Your mother and your grandmother say, there was a
minister there. How many men did you see there? A. I saw none but Richard
Carrier. Q. Did you see none else? A. There was a minister there, and I think
he is now in prison. Q. Were there not two Mr. Deane, one of the ministers of
Andover, then near fourscore, seems to have been in danger. He is tenderly
touched in several of the examinations, which might be owing to a fair
character, and he may be one of the persons accused, who caused a
discouragement to further prosecutions. "Deliverance Deane being asked why she
and the rest brought in Mr. Deane as afflicting persons, she answered, it was
Satan^ subtility, for he told her he would put a sham^ upon you all these
things, and make people (...) he did afflict. She said Mrs. Ofgood and she gave
their consent the devil should bring Mr. Deane's shape to afflict. Being asked
again if Mrs. Ofgood and she acted this business, ^he said yes." Mr. Deane was
much beholden to this woman.
ministers there? A. Cannot tell. Q. Was there not one Mr. Buroughs there? A.
Yes."

CARRIER'S examination is in this manner; the questions are omitted. "We met in
a green which was the minister's pasture -- 'We were in two companies at last
-- I think there was a few men with them -- I heard Sarah Good talk of a
minister or two -- One of them was he that has been at the eastward, his name
is Buroughs, and is a little man. -- I remember not the other's name."

MARGARET JACOBS had been brought to accuse herself, and then to charge
Buroughs, the minister, and her own grandfather; it, struck with horror, chose
to lose her own life, rather than persist in her confession; and begged
forgiveness of Buroughs before his execution, who is said to have freely
forgiven her; and recanted all she had said against her grandfather, but in
vain as to his life. Her own life was saved by a disorder in her head, which
prevented her trial at the first court; but before the next court, she made a
formal recantation of all she had confessed, and delivered it to the judges.

"THE humble declaration of Margaret Jacobs unto the honored court now fitting
at Salem, shows.

"THAT whereas your poor and humble declara^t being closely confined here in
Salem goal for the crime of witchcraft, which crime thanks be to the Lord I am
altogether ignorant of, as will appear at the great day of judgment: May it
please the honored court, I was cried out upon by some of the possessed
persons, as afflicting them; whereupon I was brought to my examination, which
persons at the sight of me fell down, which did very much startle and affright
me. The Lord above knows I knew nothing, in the least measure, how or who
afflicted them; they told me, without doubt I did, or else they would not fall
down at me; they told me, if I would not confess I should be put down into the
dungeon and would be hanged, but if I would confess I should have my life; the
which did so affright me, with my own viie wicked heart, to save my life; made
me make the like confession I did, which confession, may it please the honored
court, is altogether false and untrue. The very first night after I had made
confession, I was in such horror of conscience that I could not sleep for fea^
the devil should carry me away for telling such horrid lies. I was, may it
please the honored court, sworn to my confession, as I understand since, but
then, at that time, was ignorant of it, not knowing what an oath did mean. The
Lord, I hope, in whom I trust, out of the abundance of his mercy, will forgive
me my false forswearing myself. What I said, was altogether false against my
grandfather, and Mr. Buroughs, which I did to save my life and to have my
liberty; but the Lord, charging it to my conscience, made me in so much horror,
that I could not contain my self before I had denied my confession, which I did
though I saw nothing but death before me, choosing rather death with a quiet
conscience, than to live in such horror, which I could not suffer. Where, upon
my denying my confession, I was committed to close prison, where I have enjoyed
more felicity in spirit, a thousand times, than I did before in my enlargement.

"AND now, may it please your honors, your declarant, having, in part, given
your honors a description of my condition, do leave it to your honors pious
and judicious discretions, to take pity and compassion on my young and tender
years, to act and do with me, as the Lord above and your honors shall see
good, having no friend, but the Lord, to plead my cause for me; not being
guilty in the least measure of the crime of witchcraft, nor any other sin that
deserves death from man; and your poor and humble declarant shall for every
pray, as she is bound in duty, for your honors happiness in this life and
eternal felicity in the world to come, So prays your honors declarant.

Margaret Jacobs."

THE recantation of several persons in Andover will show in what manner, they
were brought to their confessions.

"WE whose names are underwritten, inhabitants of Andover; whenas that
horrible and tremendous judgment beginning at Salem village in the year 1692,
by some called whichcraft, first breaking forth at Mr. Parris's house, several
young persons, being seemingly afflicted, did accuse several persons for
afflicting them, and many there believing it so to be, we being informed that,
if a persons was sick, the afflicted person could tell what or who was the
cause of that sickness: Joseph Ballard, of Andover, his wife being sick at the
same time, he, either from h^^self or by the advice of others, fetched two of
the persons, called the afflicted persons, from Salem village to Andover, which
was the beginning of that dreadful calamity that be^el us in Andover, believing
the said accusations to be true, sent for the said persons to come together to
the meeting house in Andover, the afflicted persons being there. After Mr.
Barnard had been at prayer, we were blindfolded, and our hands were said upon
the afflicted persons, they being in their fits and falling into their fits at
our coming into their presence, as they said; and some led us and laid our
hands upon them, and then they said they were well, and that we were guilty of
afflicting them: Whereupon, we were all seized, as prisoners, by a warrant from
the justice of the peace and forthwith carried to Salem. And, by reason of that
sudden surprizal, we knowing ourselves altogether innocent of that crime, we
were all exceedingly astonished and amazed, and consternated and affrighted
even out of our reason; and our nearest and dearest relatious, seeing us in
that dreadful condition, and knowing our great danger, apprehended there was no
other way to save our lives, as the case was then circumstanced, but by our
confessing ourselves to be such and such persons as the afflicted represented
us to be, they, out of tenderness and pity, persuaded us to confess what we did
confess. And indeed that confession, that it is said we made, was no other than
what was suggested to us by some gentlemen, they telling us that we were
witches, and they knew it, and we knew it, which made us think that it was so;
and our understandings, our reason, our faculties, almost gone, we were not
capable of judging of our condition; as also the hard measures they used with
us rendered us incapable of making our defense, but said any thing and every
thing which they desired, and most of what we said was but, in effect, a
consenting to what they said. Some time after, when we were better composed,
they telling us what we had confessed, we did profess that we were innocent and
ignorant of such things; and we hearing that Samuel Wardwell had renounced his
confession, and quickly after condemned and executed, some of us were told we
were going after Wardwell.

"Mary Ofgood, Deliverance Dane, Sarah Wilson, Mary Tiler, Abigail Barker,
Hannah Tiler."

THE restimonial to these persons characters by the principal inhabitants of
Andover will outweigh the credulity of the justices who committed them, or of
the grand jury which found bills against them.

"To the honored court of Assize held at Salem. THE humble address of several
of the inhabitants of Andover.

"May it please this honored court,

"WE being very sensible of the great sufferings our neighbors have been long
under in prison, and charitably judging that many of them are clear of that
great trangression which has been laid to their charge, have thought it our
duty to endeavor their vindication so far as our testimony for them will
avail. The persons in whose behalf we are desired and concerned to speak
something at present are Mrs. Mary Ofgood, Eunice Frye, Deliverance Dane, Sarah
Wilton and Abigail Barker who are women of whom we can truly give this
character and commendation, that they have not only lived among us so
inoffensively as not to give the least occasion to any that know them to
suspect them of witchcraft, but by their sober godly and exemplary conversation
have obtained a good report in the place, where they have been well esteemed
and approved in the church of which they are members.

"WE were surprised to hear that persons of known integrity and piety were
accused of so horrid a crime, not considering, then, that the most innocent
were liable to be so misrepresented and abused. When these women were accused
by some afflicted persons of the neighborhood, their relations and others,
though they had so good grounds of charity that they should not have thought any
evil of them yet, through a misrepresentation of the truth of that evidence
that was so much credited and improved against people, took great pains to
persuade them to own what they were, by the afflicted, charged with, and,
indeed, did unreasonably urge them to confess themselves guilty, as some of us
who were then present can testify. But these good women did very much assert
their innocence, yet some of them said they were not without fear least Satan
had some way ensnared them, because there was that evidence against them which
then was by many thought to be a certain indication and discovery of
witchcraft, yet they seriously professed they knew nothing by themselves of
that nature. Nevertheless, by the unwearied solicitations of those that
privately discoursed them both at home and at Salem, they were at length
persuaded publicly to own what they were charged with and so submit to that
guilt which we still, hope and believe they are clear of. And, it is probable,
the fear of what the event might be and the encouragement that, it is said, was
suggested to them, that confessing was the only way to obtain favor, might be
too powerful a temptation for timorous women to withstand, in the hurry and
distraction that we have heard they were then in. Had what they said against
themselves proceeded from conviction of the fact, we should have had nothing to
have said for them, but we are induced to think that it did not, because they
did soon privately retract what they had said, as we are informed, and, while
they were in prison, they declared to such as they had confidence to speak
freely and plainly to, that they were not guilty of what they had owned, and
that what they had said against themselves was the greatest grief and burden
they labored under: Now, though we cannot but judge it a thing very sinful for
innocent persons to own a crime they are not gulity of, yet, considering the
well ordered conversation of those women while they lived among us, and what
they now seriously and constantly affirm in a more composed frame, we cannot
but in charity judge them innocent of the great transgression that has been
imputed to them. As for the rest of our neighbors, who are under the like
circumstances with these that have been named, we can truly say of them that,
while th^^ lived among us, we have had no cause to judge them such persons as,
of late, they have been represented and ^eported to be, nor do we know that any
of (...) neighbors had any just grounds to suspect them of that evil that they
are now charged with.

Dudley Bradstreet John Abbot, sen. Elizabeth Rite

(...) Dane, sen. SamuelBlanchard Wm. Peter's

Thomas Barnard Wm. Ballard Sam. Peter's

The (...), sen. Thomas Hooper Walter Wright

John Barker John Hooper Hooker Ofgood

Hen^fyingolls, sen. Wm. Abbot Benja. Stevens

Wm. Chandler, sen, James Russell Ann Bradstreet

Samuel Martin Oliver Holt Ioanna Dane

Stephen Parker John Presson Eliza. Stevens

Samuel Ingolls Francis Dane, j^n. Eliza. Barnard

Ephraim Stevens George Abbot Phebe Robinson

Daniel Poor Wm. Chandler, jun. Hannah Chandler

John Ingolls John Chandler Hannah Dane

Henry Ingolls, jun. Joseph Robinson Bridget Chandler

John Fry, sen. Thomas Johnson Mary Johnson

James Fry Tho. Johnson, jun. Robert Russel

John Aslebee Andrew Peter's Mary Russel."

Samuel Holt Mary Peter's

AMONG the confessing witches I find Dorothy Falkener, a child of 10 years, A
bigail Falkener of 8, and Sarah Carrier between 7 and 8.

"SARAH CARRIER'S confession Aug. the 11th, 1696.

IT was asked Sarah Carrier by the Magistrates or Justices John Hawth^rne Esquire
and others: How long have thou been a (...)? A. Ever since I was six years old.
Q. How old are you now? A. Near eight years old, brother Richard says I shall
be eight years old in November next. Q. Who made you a witch? A. My mother, she
made me set my hand to a book. Q. How did you set your hand to it? A. I touched
it with my fingers and the book was red, the paper of it was white. She said
she never had seen the black man; the place where she did it was in Andrew
Foster's pasture and Elizabeth Johnson junr. was there. Being asked who was
there beside, she answered her Aunt Toothaker and her cousin. Being asked when
it was, she said, when she was baptized. Q. What did they promise to give you?
A. A black dog. Q. Did the dog ever come to you? A. No. Q. But you said you saw
a cat once. What did that say to you? A. It said it would tear me in pieces if
I would not set my hand to the book. She said her mother baptized her and the
devil or black man was not there, as she saw, and her mother said when she
baptized her, thou art mine for ever and ever and amen. Q. How did you afflict
folks? A. I pinched them, and she said she had no puppets, but she went to them
that she afflicted. Being asked whether she went in her body or her spirit, she
said in her spirit. She said her mother carried her thither to afflict. Q. How
did your mother carry you when she was in prison? A. She came like a black cat.
Q. How did you know that it was your mother? A. The cat told me so that she was
my mother. She said she afflicted Phelps's child last saturday, and Elizabeth
Johnson joined with her to do it. She had a wooden spear, about as long as her
finger, of Elizabeth Johnson, and she had it of the devil. She would not own
that she had ever been at the witch meeting at the village. This is the
substance.

Attest. Simon Willard."

This poor child's mother then lay under sentence of death, the mother of the
other two children was in prison, and soon after tried and condemned, but upon
her confession reprieved, and finally pardoned.

I meet with but one person in near an hundred whose examinations are upon
file, that was dismissed after having been once charged, for which he might
thank one of the girls who would not agree with the rest in the accusation.

"THE examination of Ne^emiah Abbot, at a court at Salem village, by John
Hawthorne and Jonathan Corwin Esq'rs. 22d April 1692.

WHAT say you, are you guilty of witchcraft, of which you are suspected, or
not? No Sir, I say before God, before whom I stand, that I know nothing of
witchcraft. Who is this man? Ann Putman named him. -- Mary Walcot said she had
seen his shape. What do you say to this? I never did hurt them. Who hurt you
Ann Putman? That man. I never hurt her. Ann Putman said, he is upon the beam.
Just such a discovery of the person carried out, and she confessed; and if you
would find mercy of God, you must confess. -- If I should confess this, I must
confess what is false, Tell how far you have gone, who hurts you? I do not
know, I am absolutely free. As you say, God knows. If you will confess the
truth, we desire nothing else that you may not hide your guilt, if you are
guilty, and therefore confess if so. I speak before God that I am clear from
this accusation. What, in all respects? Yes in all respects. Does this man hurt
you? Their mouths were stopped. You hear several accuse you, though one cannot
open her mouth. I am altogether free. Charge him not unless it be he. This is
the man say some, and some say he is very like him. How did you know his name?
He did not tell me himself, but other witches told me. Ann Putman said, it is
the same man, and then she was taken with a fit. Mary Walcot, is this the man?
He is like him, I cannot say it is he. Mercy Lewis said it is not the man. They
all agreed, the man had a bunch on his eyes. Ann Putman, in a fit, said, be you
the man? ay, do you say you be the man? did you put a mist before my eyes? Then
he was sent forth till several others were examined. When he was brought in
again, by reason of much people and many in the windows so that the accusers
could not have a clear view of him, he was ordered to be abroad, and the
accusers to go forth to him and view him in the light, which they did, and in
the presence of the magistrates and many others discoursed quietly with him,
one and all acquitting him, but yet said he was like that man, but he had not
the wen they saw in his apparition. Note, he was a ^illy faced man and stood
shaded by reason of his own hair, so that for a time he seemed to some
bystanders and observers, to be considerably like the person the afflicted did
describe.

"Mr. Samuel Parris, being desired to take in writing the examination of
Ne^emiah Abbot; has delivered it as aforesaid, and upon hearing the same did
see cause to dismiss him. John Hawthorne, John. Corwin, Assistants."

WE see, from the preceding examinations and confessions, the method of
proceeding preparatory to the trial of the accused persons.

FOR three or four months, the afflicted, generally, confined themselves to
their own neighborhood, in their accusations. In the examinations there is,
sometimes, mention made of strangers, whose shapes or specter were unknown to
the afflicted. The first accused, in any other county, was Mrs. Carry, wife of
Mr. Nathaniel Carry, a principal inhabitant of the town of Charlestown. He, as
soon as he heard of it, carried his wife to Salem village, supposing she would
not be known to the afflicted. They happened to arrive, just as the justices
were going into the meeting house, where they held their court, to examine
prisoners. All the prisoners, which were brought in, were accused, and the
girls fell into fits as usual; but Mrs. Carry came in and ^at without any
notice, except that one or two of the afflicted came to her and asked her name.
After the examination, her husband went to the tavern, intending there to
discourse with one of the girls, who he heard had accused his wife. John, the
Indian who pretended to be one of the afflicted, was a servant in the house.
Two of the girls were soon brought in, and instead of giving any opportunity of
discoursing with them, they tumbled about the floor, crying out Carry, Carry, and
a warrant came to apprehend her; the Indian joining with the two girls in the
charge. No bail could be admitted, nor was it to any purpose to make any
defense, and she was ordered to the prison in Boston; but, upon the request of
her husband, was removed to Cambridge goal, where she was kept in irons.
Afterward when the trials came on at Salem, her husband went there to see how
they were managed, and he thought the only chance his wife had for her life,
was by an escape, which, by some means or other. he effected, and fled with her
to New York, where Governor Fletcher entertained them very courteously. -- They
petitioned, I suppose before the escape, that she might be tried in the county
where she lived. If the court thought they were held to try the fact in the
county where it was committed, there seems to have been room for an argument,
her body being in Middle^ex at the same time that her spectre and the body of
the afflicted persons were in E^^ex.

Mrs. Carry was committed about the middle of May.Toward the end of the month,
Capt. John Alden of Boston was accused, who was thereupon sent down to Salem.
He had been many years commander of a stoop in the colony service, employed for
supplying the forts east with provisions and stores; and although, upon his
first appearing, the justices allowed that he always had the character of an
honest man, yet one of them, Gidney, soon after, let him know he then saw
reason to think otherwise of him. Alden, in his account, says, that the accuser
first pointed to another man and said nothing, but that the man who held her
stooped down to her ear and then she cried out Alden, Alden. All were ordered
into the streets and a ring made, and then she cried out, there stands Alden a
bold fellow with his hat on, sells powder and shot to the Indians, lies with
the squaws and has papooses and c. He was immediately taken into custody of the
Marshall and required to deliver up his sword. A further examination was had in
the meeting house, and his hands were held open by the officer, that he might
not pinch the afflicted, who were struck down at the sight of him, and made
their usual cries; all which, the justices deemed sufficient grounds for
committing him to goal, where he lay 15 weeks, and then he was prevailed on by
his friends to make his escape, and to absent himself until the consternation
should abate, and the people recover the use of their reason.

ALTHOUGH the number of prisoners had been increasing, from February until the
beginning of June, yet there had been no trials. The charter was expected from
day to day, and the new constitution of government to take place. Soon after
it is arrival, commissioners of oyer and terminer were appointed for the trial
of witchcrafts. By the charter, the general assembly are to constitute courts
of justice, and the governor with the advice of council is to nominate and
appoint judges, commissioners of oyer and terminer, etc. but whether the
governor, with advice of council, can constitute a court of oyer and terminer,
without authority for that purpose derived from the general assembly, has been
made a question; however, this, the most important court to the life of the
subject which ever was held in the province, was constituted in no other
manner. It was opened at Salem, the first week in June. Only one of the
accused, Bridget Bishop, alias Oliver, was then brought to trial. She had been
charged with witchcraft twenty years before. The accuser, upon his death bed,
confessed his own guilt in the accusation; but an old woman, once charged with
being a witch, is never afterward wholly free from the accusation, and she
being, besides, of a fractious temper, all the losses the neighbors met with
in their cattle and poultry, and accidents in oversetting their carts, etc.
were attributed to her spite against them, and now suffered to be testified
against her. This evidence, together with the testimony of the afflicted, and
of the confessors, what they had heard from the specter and seen of her
spectre, and an excrescence, called a teat, found upon her body, were deemed by
court and jury plenary proof, and she was convicted, and on the 10th of June
executed. The further trials were put off to the adjournment, the 30th of June.
The governor and council thought proper, in the mean time, to take the opinion
of several of the principal ministers upon the state of things as they then
stood. This was an old charter practice. They gave their opinion as follows. I
fancy this must be what Douglass had heard something of and calls by mistake
"the address of many of the very popular but very weak ministers or clergy to
Sir W. P. a very weak governor, with thanks for what was already done, and
exhorting him to proceed."


"THE return of several ministers, consulted by his Excellency and the
honorable council upon the present witchcraft in Salem village.

Boston, June 15th, 1692.

"1.THE afflicted state of our poor neighbors, that are now suffering by
molestations from the invisible world, we apprehend so deplorable, that we
think their condition calls for the utmost help of all persons in their several
capacities.

"2. WE cannot but, with all thankfulness, acknowledge the success which the
merciful God has given to the sedulous and assiduous endeavors of our
honorable rulers, to defeat the abominable witchcrafts which have been
committed in the country, humbly praying, that the discovery of those
mysterious and mischievous wickednesses may be perfected.

"3. WE judge that in the prosecution of these and all such witchcrafts, there
is need of a very critical and exquisite caution, left by too much credulity
for things received only upon the devil's authority, there be a door opened for
a long train of miserable consequences, and Satan get an advantage over us; for
we should not be ignorant of his devices.

"4. As, in complaints upon witchcrafts, there may be matters of enquiry which
do not amount unto matters of presumption, and there may be matters of
presumption which yet may not be matters of conviction, so it is necessary,
that all proceedings, thereabout, be managed with an exceeding tenderness
toward those that may be complained of, especially if they have been persons
formerly of an unblemished reputation.

"5. WHEN the first enquiry is made into the circumstances of such as may lie
under the just suspicion of witchcrafts, we could wish that there may be
admitted as little as possible of such noise, company and openness as may to
hastily expose them that are examined, and that there may be nothing used as a
test for the trial of the suspected, the lawfulness whereof may be doubted by
the people of God; but that the directions given by such judicious writers, as
Perkins and Bernard, may be observed.

"6. PRESUMPTIONS whereupon persons may be committed and, much more,
convictions whereupon persons may be condemned, as guilty of witchcrafts, ought
certainly to be more considerable than barely the accused person's being
represented by a spectre unto the afflicted; Inasmuch as it is an undoubted and
a notorious thing, that a demon (...), by God's permission, appear, even to
ill purposes, in the shape of an innocent, yea and a virtuous man. Nor can we
esteem alterations made in the sufferers, by a look or touch of the accused, to
be an infallible evidence of guilt, but frequently liable to be abused by the
devil's leger-demain.

"7. WE know not whether some remarkable affronts given the devils, by our
disbelieving those testimonies whose whole force and strength is from them
alone, may not put a period unto the progress of the dreadful calamity begun
upon us, in the accusation of so many persons, whereof some, we hope, are yet
clear from the great transgression laid to their charge.

"8. NEVERTHELESS, we cannot but humbly recommend, unto the government, the
speedy and vigorous prosecutions, of such as have rendered themselves
obnoxious, according to the directions given in the laws of God and the
wholesome statutes of the English nation, for the detection of witchcrafts."

THE judges seem to have paid more regard to the last article of this return,
than to several which precede it; for the prosecutions were carried on with all
possible vigor and without that exquisite caution which is proposed.

AT the first trial, there was no colony or provincial law against witchcraft
in force. The statute of James the first must therefore have been considered as
in force in the province, witchcraft not being an offense at common law. Before
the adjournment, the old colony law, which makes witchcraft a capital offense,
was revived, with the other local laws, as they were called, and made a law of
the province.

AT the adjournment, June 30, five women were brought upon trial, Sarah Good,
Rebekah Nurse, Susannah Martin, Elizabeth How, and Sarah Wilder.

THERE was no difficulty with any but Nurse. She was a member of the church and
of a good character, and, as to her, the jury brought in their verdict not
guilty; upon which the accusers made a great clamor, and the court expressed
their dissatisfaction with the verdict, which caused some of the jury to desire
to go out again; and then they brought her in guilty. This was a ^ard case, and
can scarcely be said to be the execution of law and justice in money. A part of
the oath the King takes at his coronation, "which Judges should have written on
their hearts." Foster's crown law.
In a capital case, the court often refuses a verd^ct of, guilty, but, rarely,
if ever, sends a jury out again, upon one of, not guilty. It does not indeed
appear, that in this case the jury was ordered out again; but the
dissatisfaction expressed by the court seems to have been in such a manner as
to have the same effect. The certificate given by the foreman of the jury, to
satisfy the relations of the woman, shows how the fact was.

"July 4th, 1692.

"I Thomas Fisk the subscriber hereof, being one of them that were of the jury
last week at Salem court, upon the trial of Rebekah Nurse, etc. being desired,
by some of the relations, to give a reason why the jury brought her in guilty,
after the verdict not guilty; I do hereby give my reasons to be as follows

"WHEN the (...) not guilty was given, the honored court was pleased to object
against it, saying to them, that they think they let slip the words which the
prisoner at the bar spoke against herself, which were spoken in reply to
Goodwife Hobbs and her daughter, who had been faulty in setting their hands to
the devil's book, as they had confessed formerly; the words were 'What! do
these persons give in evidence against me now? they used to come among us.'
After the honored court had manifested their dissatisfaction of the verdict,
several of the jury declared themselves desirous to go out again, and thereupon
the honored court gave leave; but when we came to consider the case, I could
not tell how to take her words as an evidence against her, till she had a
further opportunity to put her sense upon them, if she would take it; and then
going into court, I mentioned the words aforesaid, which by one of the court
were affirmed to have been spoken by her, she being then at the bar but made no
reply nor interpretation of them; whereupon, these words were to me a principal
evidence against her. Thomas Fisk."

NURSE, being informed of the use which had been made of her words, gave in a
declaration to the court, that "when she said Hobbs and her daughter were of
her company, she meant no more than that they were prisoners as well as
herself; and that, being hard of hearing, she did not know what the foreman of
the jury said;" but her declaration had no effect.

MR. Noyes, the minister of Salem, a zealous prosecutor, excommunicated the
poor old woman and delivered her to Satan, to whom he supposed she had formally
given herself up many years before; but her life and conversation had been
such, that the remembrance thereof, in a short time after, wiped off all the
reproach occasioned by the civil or ecclesiastical sentence against her.

IT is said, that at the trial of Sarah Good, one of the afflicted persons fell
into a fit, and after recovery, cried out, "that the prisoner had stabbed her
and broke her knife in doing it;" and a piece of the knife was found upon the
afflicted person; but a young man declared, that, the day before, he broke that
very knife and threw away the piece, this afflicted person being then present.
The court took so much notice as to bid her tell no more lies, but went on to
improve her as a witness against other prisoners. This story is related by
Calef* who, by his narrative, gave great offense, having censured the
proceedings, at a time ^hen in general the country did not see the error they
had been in; but in his account of facts which can be evidenced by records, and
other original writings, he appears to have been a fair relator.
Something happened, not unlike to this, in a trial before Sir Matthew Hale.
The afflicted children, in their fits, would shriek out upon the least touch
from Rose Cullender, one of the witches, but remained quite insensible when any
body else touched them. Le^t there should be any fraud, Lord Cornwallis, Sir
Edmund Bacon, Sergeant Keeling and other gentlemen attended one of the girls,
whilst she was in her fits, at another part of the hall, and one of the witches
was brought, and an apron was put before the girl's eyes; but instead of the
witches hand, another person's hand was taken to touch the girl, who thereupon
shrieked out as she used to do. The gentlemen returned and declared to the
court they believed the whole was an imposture. Notwithstanding this, the witch
was found guilty, and the judge and all the court were fully satisfied with the
verdict, and awarded sentence accordingly.

SUSANNAH MARTIN had been suspected ever since 1669, so that many witch stories
were reported of her and given in evidence against her. One of these women,
being told at her execution by the minister Mr. Noyes, that he knew she was a
witch, and therefore advised her to confess, she replied, that he lied, and
that she was no more a witch than he was a wizard; and if he took away her life
God would give him blood to drink. Calef. -- They have a tradition among the
people of Salem that a peculiar circumstance attended the death of this
gentleman, he having been choked with blood, which makes them suppose her, if
not a witch, a Pythonissa, at least, in this instance.


AT the trial of another of them, it is said, that, one of the afflicted cried
out in court upon Mr. Willard, a minister of Boston, and that she was
immediately sent out of court; and it was given out that she was mistaken in
the person. Calef.
There was one Willard then in prison for witchcra^t.

AT the next adjournment, Aug. 5th, George Buroughs, John Procter and
Elizabeth his wife, John Willard, George Jacobs and Martha Carrier were all
brought upon trial and condemned, and all executed upon the 19th of August,
except Elizabeth Procter, who escaped by pleading her belly.

BUROUGHS had been a preacher, The confessing witches were examined concerning
him. -- "Richard Carrier affirmed to the jury that he saw Mr. George Buroughs
at the witch meeting at the village and saw him administer the sacrament. Mary
(...) and her daughter Mary affirmed that Mr. George Buroughs was at the witch
meetings and witch sacraments, and that she knows Mr. Buroughs to be of the
company of witches. Aug. 3. 1692."
several years before this, at Salem village, where there had been some
misunderstanding between him and the people. Afterward he became a preacher at
Wells in the province of Main. We will be a little more particular in our
account of his trial. Among the sufferers discovered in England by Matthew
Hopkins in 1645, there was one Mr. Lewis, whom Mr. Baxter calls an old reading
parson, and says that he confessed he had two imps, and that he sent one to
sink a ship which he saw on the coast, and that afterward he saw the ship
sink. Doctor Hutchinson, in his observations upon the Suffolk witches, says,
Mr. Lewis was an ancient clergyman, near fourscore, who read Q. Elizabeth's
homilies instead of sermons, but being what was then called a malignant parson,
he was more easily convicted; that upon his trial he asserted his innocence,
and at his execution read the service for burial himself; that the confession
Mr. Baxter mentions was from the evidence of persons at his trial, and as
Hopkins had swam him several times till he was near drowning, such confession,
or any other, was not matter of great wonder.
The indictment was as follows.

"Anno Regis et Reginae, etc. quarto.

E^^ex ss. THE Jurors for our sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen,
present, that George Buroughs, late of Falmouth in the Province of
Massachusetts bay, clerk, the ninth day of May, in the fourth year of the reign
of our sovereign Lord and Lady William and Mary, by the grace of God of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King and Queen, defenders of the faith,
etc. and diverse other days and times, as well before as after, certain
detestable arts called witchcrafts and forceries, wickedly and feloniously has
used, practiced and exercised, at and within the town of Salem, in the county
of Essex aforesaid, in, upon and against one Mary Walcot of Salem village, in
the county of Essex, single woman; by which said wicked arts, the said Mary
Walcot, the ninth day of May, in the fourth year above said, and diverse other
days and times as well before as after, was and is tortured, afflicted, pined,
consumed, wasted and tormented, against the peace of our sovereign Lord and
Lady the King and Queen, and against the form of the statute in that case made
and provided. Endorsed Billa vera." Three other bills were found against him
for witchcrafts upon other persons, to all which he pleaded not guilty, and put
himself upon trial, etc.

THE afflicted persons, and the confessing witches were first examined; for
although, by the advice of the elders, their evidence was not conclusive, yet
some presumption arose from it, and with other circumstances to corroborate it,
the proof might be sufficient to convict. One circumstance was, that, being a
little man, he had performed feats beyond the strength of a giant, viz. had
held out a gun of seven feet barrel with one hand, and had carried a barrel
full of cider from a canoe to the shore. Upon his urging, that an Indian, who
was present, held out the gun also, and the witnesses not remembering that any
Indian was there, it was said the Indian must have been the black man or the
devil, who the witnesses swore looks like an Indian. Other evidence was given
of his harsh treatment of his wives, having been twice married, and of his
pretending to them that he knew what had been said to them in his absence, and
his persuading them to give it under their hands in writing, and to swear to
it, that they would not reveal his secrets; and it was further said they had
privately complained to the neighbors that their house was haunted with
spirits: And a brother of one of his wives swore, that going out after
strawberries, upon their return, he went into the bushes on foot, and though
they rode a quick pace, yet when they came near home, to their astonishment,
they found him with them, and that he fell to chiding his wife for talking to
her brother about him, and said he knew their thoughts, which, the brother said
was more than the devil knew; to which Buroughs replied, that his god told
him. Against this evidence he urged, that a man was with him, to show that
another walked as fast as he did; and this was immediately determined to be the
black man also. And, upon the whole, he was confounded and used many twistings
and turnings, which I think we cannot wonder at. At his execution, he concluded
his dying prayer with the Lord's prayer; probably to convince some of the
spectators of his innocence, for it was the received opinion, that a true witch
could not say the Lord's prayer without blundering, "She was bid to say the
Lord's prayer. When she came to forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them
that trespass against us, she said, so do I. No other mistake, in saying the
prayer, remarkable." A woman's examination, Sept. 21. 1692.
and in many of the examinations it was used as a test, and several of the old
women not saying it right, this was improved against them.

SEPTEMBER the 9th, Martha Cory, Mary Esty, Alice Parke^, Ann Pude^ter, Dorcas
Hoar, and Mary Bradbury were tried, and September 17th, Margaret Scott, Wilmot
Read, Samuel Wardwell, Mary Parker, Abigail Falkner, Rebekah Eames, Mary Lacey,
Ann Foster and Abigail Hobbs, and all received sentence of death. Those in
italick were executed the 22d following.

MARY ESTY, who was sister to Nurse, gave in to the court a petition; in which
she says, she does not ask her own life, although she is conscious of her
innocence, but prays them, before they condemn any more, to examine the
confessing witches more strictly; for she is sure they have belied themselves
and others, which will appear in the world to which she is going, if it should
not in this world.

THOSE who were condemned and not executed, I suppose, all confessed their
guilt. I have seen the confessions of several of them. Wardwell also confessed,
but he recanted and suffered. His own wife, as well as his daughter, The
daughter upon a second enquiry denied that she knew her father and mother to be
witches; the wife was not asked a second time.
accused him and saved themselves. There are many instances, among the
examinations, of children accusing their parents, and some of parents accusing
their children. This is the only instance of a wife or husband, accusing one
the other, and surely this instance ought not to have been suffered. I shudder
while I am relating it. Besides this irregularity, there were others in the
course of these trials. The facts laid in the indictments were, witchcrafts
upon particular persons, there was no evidence of these facts, but what was
called spectral evidence, which, in the opinion of the ministers, was
insufficient; some of the other evidence was of facts ten or twenty years
before, which had no relation to those with which they were charged; and some
of them no relation to the crime of witchcraft. Evidence is not admitted, even
against the general character of persons upon trial, unless to encounter other
evidence brought in favor of it; much loss ought their whole lives to be
arraigned, without giving time sufficient for defense. Against many of the
women there was likewife given in evidence the return of a jury of one man, a
doctor, and eight women appointed to examine their bodies for tetts and other
devil's marks. The search was curious enough, but the return is too indelicate
to appear in this relation. Some said the credulity was such that a flea bite
would pass well enough for a tett or the devil's mark.


GILES CORY was the only person, besides those already named, who suffered. He,
seeing the fate of all who had put themselves upon trial, refused to plead; but
the judges, who had not been careful enough in observing the law in favor of
the prisoners, determined to do it against this unhappy man, and he had
judgment of peine fort et dure for standing mute, and was pressed to death; the
only instance which ever was, either before this time or since, in New England.
In all ages of the world superstitious credulity has produced greater cru^lty
than is practiced among the Hottentots, or other nations, whose belief of a
deity is called in question.

THIS court of oyer and terminer, happy for the country, sat no more. Nineteen
persons had been executed, all asserting their innocence; but this was not
enough to open the eyes of the people in general. The goal at Salem was filled
with prisoners, and many had been removed to other goals; some were admitted to
bail, all reserved for trial, a law having passed constituting a supreme
standing court, with jurisdiction in capital, as well as all other criminal
cases. The general court also showed their zeal against witchcraft, by a law
passed in the words of the statute of James the first, but this law was
disallowed by the King. If the court was of opinion that the statute extended
here, I see no necessity of a provincial act exactly in the same words; if the
statute did not extend here, I know not by what law the first that was tried
could be sentenced to death.

THE time, by law, for holding the court at Salem, was not until January. This
gave opportunity for consideration; and this alone might have been sufficient
for a change of opinions and measures, but another reason has been given for
it. Ordinarily, persons of the lowest rank in life have had the misfortune to
be charged with witchcrafts; and although many such had suffered, yet there
remained in prison a number of women, of as reputable families as any in the
towns where they lived, and several persons, of still superior rank, were
hinted at by the pretended bewitched, or by the confessing witches. Some had
been publicly named. Dudley Bradstreet, a justice of peace, who had been
appointed one of president Dudley's council, and who was son to the worthy old
governor, then living, found it necessary to abscond. Having been remiss in
prosecuting, he had been charged by some of the afflicted as a co^^^^erate. His
brother, John Bradstreet, was forced to fly also. Calef says it was intimated
that Sir William Phips's lady was among the accused. It is certain, that one
who pretended to be bewitched at Boston, where the infection was beginning to
spread, charged the secretary of the colony of Connecticut. "As to what you
mention, concerning that poor creature in your town that is afflicted, and
mentioned my name to yourself and son, I return you hearty thanks for your
intimation about it, and for your charity therein mentioned; and I have great
cause to bless God, who, of his mercy hitherto, has not left me to fall into
such an horrid evil." Extract of a letter from Secr'y Allen to Inc. Mather,
Hartford, 18 March, 92-3.
Mrs. Hale, wife to the minister of Beverly, was accused also; which caused her
husband to alter his judgment and to be less active in prosecutions than he had
been.

AT the court in January, the grand jury found bills against about 50 for
witchcraft, one or two men, the rest women; but, upon trial, they were all
acquitted, except three of the worst characters, and those the governor
reprieved for the King's mercy. All that were not brought upon trial he ordered
to be discharged, It is said, the governor's lady, when Sir William was absent,
saved one poor woman from trial. "In Sir William's absence, his lady, I suppose
upon account of her name's being Mary, (William and Mary) was solicited for a
favor in behalf of a woman committed by one of the judges, on accusation of
witchcraft, by a formal warrant under his hand and feal, and in close prison
for trial the next assizes, then not far off. The good lady, proprid ^irtute,
granted and signed a warrant for the said woman's discharge, which was obeyed
by the keeper, and the woman lives still for aught I know. Truly, I did not
believe this story till I saw a copy of the mittimus and discharge, under the
keeper's hand, attested a true copy, for which discovery the keeper was
discharged from his trust and put out of his employment, as he himself told me.
M. S. letter.
Such a goal delivery was made this court, as has never been known at any other
time in New England.

SEVERAL persons had been charged and imprisoned in the county of Middlesex
also, and at the first court at Charlestown they were brought to trial, but the
jury acquitted them all. Some of the court were dissatisfied. The juries
changed sooner than the judges. However, it was not long before one, at least,
of the judges of the first court of oyer and terminer was sensible of his
error. Mr. Sewall, at a public fast, gave in to the minister a bill,
acknowledging his error in the late proceedings, and desiring to humble himself
in the sight of God and his people. It is said, that, the chief justice, Mr.
Stoughton, being informed of this action of one of his brethren, observed for
himself that, when he sat in judgment, he had the fear of God before his eyes
and gave his opinion according to the best of his understanding; and although
it might appear afterward, that he had been in an error, yet he saw no
necessity of a public acknowledgment of it.

ONE of the ministers, who, in the time of it, was fully convinced that the
complaining persons were no impostures, and who vindicated his own conduct and
that of the court, in a narrative he published, remarks, not long after, in his
diary, that many were of opinion that innocent blood had been shed. None of the
pretended affli^ted were ever brought upon trial for their fraud, some of them
proved profligate persons, abandoned to all vice, others passed their days in
obscurity or contempt.

THE opinion which prevailed in New England, for many years after this tragedy,
that there was something praeternatural in it, and that it was not all the
effect of fraud and imposture, proceeded from the reluctance in human nature to
reject errors once imbibed. As the principal actors went off the stage, this
opinion has gradually lessened, and perhaps it is owing to a respect to the
memory of their immediate ancestors, th^^ many do not yet seem to be fully
convinced. There are a great number of persons who are willing to suppose the
accusers to have been under bodily disorders which affected their imaginations.
This is kind and charitable, but seems to be winking the truth out of sight. A
little attention must force conviction that the whole was a scene of fraud and
imposture, began by young girls, who at first perhaps thought of nothing more
than being pitied and indulged, and continued by adult persons, who were afraid
of being accused themselves. The one and the other, rather than confess their
fraud, suffered the lives of so many innocents to be taken away, through the
credulity of judges and juries. The general court, about 20 years after, upon
the petiti^ns of the relations of those who had been executed, and of several
persons who had been charged and fled, and whose goods had been seized, made
grants for and in consideration of the losses sustained; but the petitioners
alleged, that they bore no proportion to the real damage. Philip English, a
merchant in Salem, received L.300. -- He computed his damages at L. 1500. --
Enquiry was made by a committee, and they professed to report such sums as each
petitioner had suffered.


IT was proposed that the members of the general court should, during the
recess, consider of such laws as were necessary to be established; for the act
reviving the colony laws was to continue in force no longer than until November
1692.

THIS was a work of great importance, and required the (...) heads, and ought
to have been committed to select persons upon a preconcerted plan, the whole of
which each person should have kept in view; for want thereof the people of the
province have been sufferers ever since; the construction of many laws has been
doubtful and varying, it being impossible to reconcile the several parts to any
general principle of law whatsoever. Besides, being passed one after another,
as they happened to be brought in, and sent to England for allowance, some were
disapproved; others, which depended upon or had some connection with those
which were disapproved, were allowed; whereas, if one complete code or system
had been prepared and sent to England, such alterations would have been
proposed, as might finally have issued in a well digested consistent body of
laws; and a temporary provision might have been made, until this perpetual rule
should be settled. Seven years had passed, and four different acts had been
sent, one after another, to England, for establishing courts of justice, before
the royal approbation could be obtained. It was the practice of the
administration then, and, it seems, at that time to have been well enough
received in the province, "I am also obliged to acknowledge your Lordships
favor in making known the reasons of the repeal of diverse acts and laws made
within this province, which is of good information and direction unto the
general assembly in their new making of others to those purposes." Extr. from
Lt. Gov. Stoughton's letter to lords of trade, Sept. 30. 1697.
to point out, either in the order disallowing laws, or to the agent who
presented them, the particular exceptions, and to propose such alterations as
might render them acceptable, except in such cases where the law in all it is
parts was disapproved. By poyning's act, so called, it is provided, "that no
parliament be hereafter holden in the said land of Ireland but at such season
as the King's lieutenant and council there first do certifi^ the King, under
the great seal of that land, the causes and considerations, and all such acts
as them seems should pass in the same parliament, and such causes,
considerations and acts affirmed by the King and his council to be good and
expedient for that land." By an act of the parliament of England 3d and 4th
Phil. and Mar. it was determined, that the meaning of the words "good and
expedient for that land" was that the acts sent to England might be passed in
such form and tenor as sent over, or that any part of them might be changed and
altered before they were sent back to Ireland to be passed by the parliament
there. A question, however, was started in the 12th of K. James ^. and it was
referred to the chief justice, etc. to consider both the Irish and English act,
and although it may seem difficult to include correction and alteration in
affirmation, yet, it was certain, the act of Phil. and Mar had so explained it;
and thus, although the acts themselves are to be originally drawn or proposed
in Ireland, yet the amendments or alterations, which may be as material as the
acts themselves, originate in England. This seems unconstitutional in an
English government. It is not certain, however, that there may not be
conveniences arising hereby to the people of Ireland sufficient to balance all
inconveniences.


THE legislature consisting of many of the same persons who had composed the
legislature under the old charter, we find the same spirit, in most of the laws
which were first passed, as had been in the colony laws. The first act was a
sort of Magna charta, asserting and setting forth their general privileges, and
this clause was among the rest, No aid, tax, tallage, assessment, custom, loan,
benevolence or imposition whatsoever, shall be laid, assessed, imposed, or
levied on any of their Majesty's subjects or their estates, on any pretense
whatsoever, but by the act and consent of the governor, council and
representatives of the people assembled in general court. The other parts of
the act were copied from Magna charta. This was soon disallowed. So was an act
for punishing capital offenders; amongst whom are ranked idolaters, blasphemers
and incestuous persons, and, what the benignity of the common law makes
manslaughter, was by this act expressly declared to be wilful murder. This law
was framed from the judicial laws of Moses. Diverse other acts, which discovered
the same spirit, met with the same fate. The danger they had been in from Sir
Edmund Andros's calling their titles in question. I imagine, must have
occasioned an act for quieting possessions; declaring that three years quiet
possession should give a title, with the usual savings of infants, etc. This,
probably, was thought too short a term, and therefore disallowed; as was also
an act for the equal distribution of insolvents estates; the rule of law for
paying debts according to their nature and degree was thought preferable; but
the people having never been used to this, it would have been very
inconvenient, and, upon further trial, the act, or one to the same purpose, was
allowed. It is indeed difficult to assign a sufficient reason, why not only one
set of creditors of a deceased insolvent shall be paid their full debts to the
exclusion of all others; but even an executor or administrator shall have it in
his power to pay himself, to the exclusion of others whose debts were of the
same nature.

OTHER acts, which were passed, were approved, viz. one for prevention of
frauds and perjuries, conformable to the statute of Charles the 2d; others for
punishing criminal offenses, in many parts mitigating the penalties at common
law; for the observation of the Lord's day; solemnizing marriages by a minister
or a justice of peace; settlement and support of ministers and schoolmasters;
regulating towns and counties; requiring the oaths appointed instead of the
oaths of allegiance and supremacy, as also the oaths of officers; establishing
fees; ascertaining the number and regulating the house of representatives, and
diverse other acts of immediate necessity and general utility, which have been
in force ever since; but none of more universal influence than the act for
settlement of the estates of persons dying intestate. In a new country the
length of time an estate has been in a family cannot be urged for the further
continuance of it; In Russia, it is said, they distinguish between lands that
have been a long time in a family and those of late original. "Lands, that have
not been above twenty years in a family, fall to the younger children
proportionably with the eldest." Voyage to the northern co^sts of Europe.
where improvements are continually making, the personal estate is continually
changing into real, which increases the natural injustice of one child's taking
the real estate of the parent, to the exclusion of the other children; it was
therefore thought reasonable, that the real as well as personal estate of a
parent should be equally distributed among his or her children, saving to the
eldest son, either from the rule in the law of Moses, or a supposed just claim
from primogeniture, a double share. The act therefore ingeneral, was planned
upon the statute of distributions, but gave two shares to the eldest son, and,
undoubtedly, in the distribution among the children of an intestate, respected
real estates in like manner with personal; the widow had her thirds in the real
for life only.

IT is evident, that the principal point in view was to make real estates
partible among the children of an intestate, and that they never considered the
full operation of the clause in the statute, and which is also brought into the
act, providing, that where there are no children the whole estate shall go to
the next of kin to the intestate. Accordingly, for more than thirty years after
the passing this law, it was the prevailing practice, I am not sure it was so
in every instance, for real estates to descend and be distributed by the courts
of probate as at common law, the instance of children of an intestate only
excepted. At length, by judgments at common law first the half blood, then the
father and the mother have been determined to be entitled to the real in like
manner with the personal estate. General entails have been adjudged,
notwithstanding, not to be partible. I suppose, upon this principle, that by
this act the common law is altered only with respect to intestate estates, and
takes place in devises as if it had not been made. It had been expressly
declared in the laws of Plymouth colony, that lands in ^ee simple should go to
all the sons, the eldest a double share, but entails should go according to the
laws of England.


THE new government, as we have observed, found themselves in a state of war.
The authority of the colony had appointed Elisha Hutchinson, who was one of the
assistants and chief officer of the regiment of Boston, to be commander of the
forces. He was at Por^smouth, in New Hampshire, when the charter arrived, and
had disposed his men upon the eastern frontiers, so as to cover the few
inhabitants which remained there after the destruction of York. Captain
Convers, with 15 men, was posted in a garrison house at Wells, called Storer's
garrison; Col. Sto^er the present possesor kept up the stockadoes, and one or
more of the flankarts until since the year 1760, rather as a memorial than
necessary defense. We may observe here, that, in every frontier settlement
there were more or less garrison houses, some with a flankart at two opposite
angles, others at each corner of the house; some houses surrounded with
pallisadoes, others, which were smaller, built with square timber, one piece
laid horizontally upon another, and loop holes in every side of the house; and,
besides these, generally in any more considerable plantation, there was one
principal garrison house, capable of containing soldiers sent for the defense
of the plantation and the families near, whose houses were not fortified. It
was thought justi^iable and necessary, whatever the general rule of law might
be, to erect such ^orts, castles, or bulwarks as these upon a man's own ground,
without commission or special license therefore.
and about as many more were on board two sloops, which went from Boston with
provisions. About the 10th of June, the inhabitants were alarmed, by their
cattle running home from the woods in a fright, and some wounded. This notice
caused the several families to betake themselves immediately to this one house,
where they were scarce lodged, when an army of French and Indians, of three or
four hundred, surrounded the house. A French officer, Labrocree, was commander,
and Madockewando, Moxus, Egeremet and other noted Indian chiefs were under him.
They first attempted the garrison house; but having no cannon, they were
repulsed and went to the sloops. The river, where they lay, is not above 18 or
20 feet broad, but the banks (...) away so that they could not leap aboard.
They set the sloops on fire several times, with fire arrows, but the fire was
as often extinguished, and, after a variety of contrivances to shelter
themselves from the English shot, they gave over and returned to the garrison,
where they had no better success. The women not only tended the men with
ammunition and other necessaries, but many of them took their muskets and fired
upon the enemy. Very good terms were offered the garrison, if they would
surrender, but no regard was paid to them; an army of French and Indians were
not to be trusted. Being drove again from the garrison, they made a second
attempt upon the sloops by a fire raft, which fortunately drove ashore and
broke, without any damage to the vessels. Having spent eight and forty hours in
this way, they withdrew, with the loss of Labrocree, their commander, and some
few of the men, In their retreat, they wreaked their malice, in torturing a
poor Englishman, John Diamond, who was taken prisoner in passing from the
^loops to the fort, and in killing all the cattle they could find.

SIR William Phips was charged by his instructions to build a strong fort at
Pemaquid. This he performed the first summer, going down in person. The country
in general disliked it. They have been reproached for grudging at so small an
expense for their own safety; Discovery and settlement of the English in
America in Harris's collection.
but this was not the principal cause of their aversion to a fort here. It
answered no other purpose than to keep possession of that particular harbor,
and was not convenient for a post for any marching parties, who from time to
time were sent out for discovery of the enemy, nor for the settlers of the
frontiers to retreat to. The ministry, I think, had a view in it, which the
people of the province seem not to have considered, viz. preventing the French
from claiming Acadie as a derelict country, and perhaps taking possession of it
as such. However, the fort was built and a very respectable one; and a garrison
maintained there at the charge of the province. The French immediately formed a
design, or prosecuted what was before designed, to possess themselves of the
place. Two ships of war, le Poli and l'Envi^ux, under Iberville, were to
attempt the place by sea, whilst Villebone, with a body of Indians, did the
same by land. The ships came late in the fall, and finding an English vessel at
anchor under the guns of the fort, and having no pilots, nor any body
acquainted with the coast, they thought it prudent to retreat. The Indians had
assembled in great numbers, and were very much dissatisfied, depending upon
driving away their troublesome neighbors the English. The French, at Quebec,
supposed these extraordinary preparations, which frustrated their attempt, were
caused by the intelligence which two deserters, who had been spirited away by
Mr. Nelson, gave to the authority in the Massachusetts, but this was a mistake.
Charlevoix, and Vol. I. Hist. Mass. P. 378.


WHILST the governor was at Pemaquid, building the fort, he sent Major Church,
the celebrated commander in Philip's war, with part of the forces to Penobscot,
and upon his return he ordered him to Kenebeck. Church took three or four
prisoners and some plunder at Penobscot, and discovered a great number of
Indians; but for want of whaleboats could not pursue them. At Kenebeck, he
burned a ^ort which the Indians had at Taconnick, and destroyed their corn, but
neither killed nor took prisoners any of the enemy.

WE meet with nothing else memorable this year relative to the frontiers. The
Indians had not been very active; they were sensible of their ill treatment
from the French, who had often abandoned them, and it was the influence of the
priests and the bigotry of the Indians to the romish religion, which prevented
their forsaking the French interest and adhering to the English; besides, the
English had several of their principal people prisoners at Boston, of whose
redemption they were very desirous, and had no hopes of accomplishing it,
except by a treaty of peace.

The agents thought the case to be the same under the new charter. This was the
reason why in the first draught the deputy governor as well as the council was
to be annually (...) by the assembly, when the governor was appointed by (...)
crown.
but it was now thought proper to choose him one of the twenty eight. They were
not sure of always having a lieutenant governor so agreeable to the people as he
was. The governor refused his consent to Mr. Cook. He had opposed, when he was
in England, the appointment of the governor. He was however in real esteem with
the people, and the negative was impolitic.

REPEATED applications had been made for a naval force to be sent from England,
sufficient in conjunction with land forces to be raised in New England and New
York, for the reduction of Canada, but without success; other affairs of the
war not permitting this, though deemed important, to be engaged in. In 1692, it
was resolved there should be an expedition the next year. "It has pleased the
King, out of his great goodness and disposition for the welfare of all his
subjects, to send a considerable strength of ships and men into the
West Indies, and to direct Sir Francis Wheeler, the admiral, to sail to
New England from the Caribbee islands, so as to be there by the last of May, or
middle of June at farthest, with a strength sufficient to overcome the enemy,
if joined and seconded by the forces of New England. I mean such a supply of
ships, men and provision as may secure a conquest of Nova Scotia and Canada the
only means to make New England happy and secure hereafter. There never can be
such an occasion for you to assist with your best persuasions, or for the
people of New England to show their zeal for their religion and love to their
king and country. His Majesty has taken care, besides the ships of war, to send
you a thousand experienced soldiers, if their number be not diminished by their
service in the West Indies, under a commander who has looked the same enemy in
the face, and will show an example worthy to be followed. Sir William Phips, I
suppose, will be at the head of the New England volunteers, and will easily
acquiesce, according to the rules of war, in leaving the chief command as his
Majesty has determined it." Extr. from Blaythwait's letter to I. Mather, 20
Feb. 92.3.
A fleet was to be employed in the winter, in reducing Martineco, and, having
performed that service, was to go to Boston, there to take on board a body of
land forces under Sir William Phips, and so proceed to Quebec. Had Quebec been
the only object, and reasonable notice given to the colonies, there was reason
to expect success. By the fleet's going to the West Indies, the whole design
was blasted. If sickness had not weakened them, the force would still have been
insufficient for the reduction of Martineco; but the mortality was so great,
that before Sir Francis Wheeler, the commander in chief, came to Boston with
the fleet, June 11th, he had buried 1300 out of 2100 sailors, and 1800 of 2400
soldiers. It may well be supposed the admiral had done with the thoughts of the
Canada expedition. He asked the opinion of the governor and council, whether
they thought the strength he then had was sufficient, and they gave their (...)
that it was not.
The land army, perhaps, might have been recruited, but a supply of seamen
could not be obtained. Besides, not the least preparation had been made, he
brought the news himself of his proposed attempt. The letters, dated in
February, the vessel being by some means or other delayed or beat off the
coast, did not arrive until July. In an affair of such importance and in a time
of war, notice might well have been expected by many different conveyances. Sir
Francis settled, with the government, a plan for another year, viz. 2000 land
forces to be sent from England, and 2000 more to be raised in the colonies, the
ships and forces from England to be at Canso by the first of June, where the
forces from the colonies were to be ready for them; the whole force to go up
the river, there to divide, and attack Montreal and Quebec at the same time.
Considering the state Canada was then in, this seems to have been no
injudicious plan. A rendezvous at Boston would have been known at Quebec, by
persons from the frontiers, before a fleet could have gone up: he river. With
Canso (Cape Breton not being then settled) the French in Canada had less
communication: The whole force going up the river was not less judicious.
Former and later attempts have shown, how uncertain the mutual aid would have
been, of an army up the river and another marching within land.

THE distemper, which had been in the fleet, spread in Boston and was more
malignant than ever the small pox had been, or any other epidemical sickness
which had been in the country before; and many families left the town and
resided in the country, until the infection ceased.

THE molestations upon the frontiers, this year, were not very great.
Preparations were made for carrying on the war. Captain Convers, who had
behaved well, was appointed with a Major's commission, to the command of the
forces eastward. With a small army, of 4 or 500 men, he marched to Taconick, on
Kenebeck, but met with none of the enemy, except one party which he surprised,
not far from Wells. On his return, he made some stay at Saco river; and about
two leagues up the river, on the western side, near the falls, a very proper
station, he built a stone fort, an irregular pentagon with a tower. This was in
the heart of the Indians hunting ground, at that time, and was thought to have
accelerated a treaty of peace. An apprehension prevailed among them, at the
same time, that the Iroquois, instigated by the English, would fall upon them.

THURRY, a French missionary at Penobscot, spread no pains to prevent it, but
they were ineffectual. The Indians sued for peace, and the English were glad of
a respite from war. Pemaquid being appointed for the place of treaty, on the
11th of August the articles were signed, and hostages delivered by the Indians,
as a security for their sidelity. This security could not be obtained from them
in later treaties. It was ineffectual at this time.

CHARLEVOIX has not truly represented this transaction. He may have been
misinformed, by the Indians who have always kept from the French, as far as
they could, the submissions made to the English. He says, Sir William Phips had
engaged a few of the Abenakis to a sort of an accommodation, and that two of
their chiefs, in the month of May, had promised that they would conclude upon
articles of peace, and gave two hostages for the performance of their promise,
and that Phips came in person to Pemaquid to have finished the affair, if de
Villieu, a French officer, had not, by his diligence, prevented; for being
seconded by the priest Thurry, he found out the secret of recovering
Madockewando, who had declared in favor of the English, and prevailed upon him
to raise 250 men and make a descent upon Piscataqua river 36 miles from Boston,
Charlevoix has brought the treaty, made in 1693, into 1694, and by calling it
only a proposal for a treaty, has given a gloss to the whole affair, and
extenuated the per, fidy of the Indians in their hostilities, soon after, and
the guilt of the priest in exciting them.

UPON the western frontiers, in the summer of this year, the Indians, led on by
the French, made what the latter call la petite guerre upon our new
settlements, but forces constantly kept up, prevented any remarkable
destruction.



I Crave leave further to acquaint your Lordship, that the governor of New York
having written unto his Excellency the governor here, signifying his
appointment of a meeting at New York, upon the first wednesday of this month,
of commissioners from the several governments of New England, Virginia, etc. to
concert and agree upon a certain quota of men and money for the defense of
Albany, etc. in observance of their Majesty's commands; it happened to be at
such a time and under such a conjuncture of affairs here, that no meet persons
could be procured to attend that congress. Much may be said to excuse this
province from contributing toward the charge of maintaining and defending the
frontiers belonging to New York, being at such a considerable distance from the
frontiers of this province far more large and exposed, which have been defended
and maintained at their own charge, and many thousand pounds more spent in the
support and defense of New Hampshire. Were the whole account of the charge of
the war to be proportioned among the several colonies, it would plainly appear,
upon a right computation, that we have not been so forward to complain of the
burden as some of our neighbors; but it is hoped a true and impartial
representation of this matter will apologize for us unto their Majesty's, that
we be not included in the charge at New York. A new apportionment was made in
1700, in which Massachusetts and New Hampshire were left out. Neither of them
had the intended effect. New York had suffered greatly by the destruction of
Schenectady, and Albany was thought to be in danger. These apportionments were,
principally, for the sake of that province. The next war, they provided for
their own security, by a neutrality which carried the whole force of the enemy
upon their neighbors.


Sir WILLIAM PHIPS'S rule was short. His conduct, when captain of a ship of
war, is represented very much to his advantage; but further talents were
necessary for the good government of a province. He was of a benevolent,
friendly disposition; at the same time quick and passionate. A close attachment
to his friends engaged him in a dispute with the collector of the customs; and
provocation, both from the collector and the captain of a man of war, caused
him to break out into some indecent fallies of passion and rage, and to treat
both of them in such a manner as was dishonorable to him. Mr. Brenton, a young
gentleman of a principal family in RhodeIsland government, had been appointed
collector for the port of Boston. This was before the establishment of
custom-houses in the plantations by act of parliament. The people thought it
enough to enter and clear at the naval office, and questioned the authority of
the collector. Under the first charter the acts of trade had not been duly
regarded. In 1681 Edward Randolph came over with a commission as collector.
Soon after the general court passed a law for erecting a naval office, which
Randolph represented as done in opposition to him. After the charter was
vacated, diverse vessels from Malaga, etc. were seized and condemned for illicit
trade, and Randolph makes no complaint of being impeded in the execution of his
office during that time; but upon his return to England after the revolution he
gave in a list of near 30 vessels which had been guilty of breaches of the acts
of trade and prayed that he might be restored to the office of collector; and
the agents were required by the Lords of the council to make answer. They
denied the fact as to many of the vessels, and exculpated the government as to
the rest, alleging that the general court had declared that they would
strictly observe the acts of trade, and, that none might plead ignorance, had
ordered them all to be published. Sir William Phips appointed one Benja.
Iackson naval officer. The sense of the people upon the office of collector
will appear from the following extract of a letter to the agents. "Mr. Brenton,
their Majesty's collector, has been endeavoring to impose upon the government,
by obliging all masters of ships and other vessels to enter and clear with him,
thereby burthening the people with unnecessary and unreasonable fees, of which
complaints have been frequently made. We do not find any act of parliament
requiring the same, there being nothing of the growth or produce of this
province from whence any customs arise, and the governors of the several
plantations are especially injoined by law to take care that the acts of trade
and navigation be duly observed, under a severe penalty for their neglect."
Letter to H. Ashurst and ^. Phips, Feb. 21. 1692.3.


The governor being the naval officer, and acting by his deputy, did not
discountenance this opinion of the people. A vessel arrived from the
Bahama-islands, with a load of fustick, for which no bond had been given. Col.
Foster, a merchant of Boston, a member of the council, and fast friend to the
governor, bought the fustick, at such price that he was loath to give up the
bargain. The collector seized the vessel and goods; and upon Foster's
representation to the governor, he interposed. There was at that time no court
of admiralty. By the charter, the King reserved admiralty jurisdiction, but no
court had been constituted. I have a manuscript, sent at that time to England,
which says, the governor imagined, that, by virtue of his commission for
vice admiral, he had a right to sit as judge, and that he condemned several
prizes, and, among the rest, the St. Joseph, brought in by a privateer of the
Leeward-islands, which the captain would have carried thither for condemnation,
but was not permitted. Be this as it may, it is certain that Sir William took a
more summary way of deciding this case, and sent an order to the collector to
forbear meddling with the goods; and, upon his refusal to observe orders, the
governor went to the whars, and after warm words, on both sides, laid hands
upon the collector, but with what degree of violence was controverted by them.
The governor prevailed, and the vessel and goods were taken out of the hands of
the collector.

THERE had been a misunderstanding also between the governor and captain Short,
of the Nonesuch frigate. In their passage from England, a prize was taken; and
Short complained that the governor had deprived him of part of his share or
legal interest in her. Whether there were grounds for it, does not now appear.
The captains of men of war, stationed in the colonies, were in those days
required to follow such instructions as the governors gave them, relative to
their cruizes and the protection of the trade of the colonies, and the
governor, by his commission, had power, in case of any great crime committed by
any of the captains of men of war, to suspend them, and the next officer was to
succeed. The governor required captain Short to order part of the men belonging
to the Nonesuch upon some service, which I do not find mentioned, probably to
man some cruizer, there being many pickeroons about the eastern coasts, but he
refused to do it. This was ill taken by the governor; and meeting captain Short
in the street, warm words passed, and at length the governor made use of his
cane and broke Short's head. Not content with this, he committed him to prison.
The right of a governor, to commit by his own warrant, had not then been
questioned. From the prison he removed him to the castle, and from thence on
board a merchant vessel bound to London, to be delivered to the order of one of
their Majesty's principal secretaries of state; giving the master a warrant or
authority so to do. The vessel, by some accident, put into Portsmouth in
New Hampshire. Sir William, who seems to have been made sensible of some
irregularity in these proceedings, went to Portsmouth, required the master of
the merchantman to return him the warrant, which he tore to pieces, and then
ordered the cabin of the ship to be opened, secured Short's chests; and
examined the contents. Short was prevented going home in this vessel, and went
to New York, to take passage from thence for England; but Sir F. Wheeler
arriving soon after at Boston, sent for him and carried him home with him. The
next officer succeeded in the command of the ship, until a new captain arrived
from England. Short was restored to the command of as good a ship. Brenton's
complaint was made to the Lords of the treasury, about the same time, and
referred to the board of trade, and both came before the King, who was
solicited immediately to displace the governor. This the King refused to do,
without hearing what he had to say in his defense; and he was ordered to leave
his government and make answer in England. The governor's friends in New
England, excused him by the great provocation he received; both from the
captain of the man of war and the collector. This would serve better to excuse
a private person, than the governor of a province. The prejudices were great
against him in England. Mr. Dudley, who was upon the spot and desired to
succeed him, heightened them. There was a strong party against him also within
the province. By negativing Mr. Cook, he had made many of those who had
opposed all measures, except the restoration of the old charter, to be his
enemies. Dudley had been trying to reconcile himself to his countrymen ever
since the revolution: He had great family interest. Stoughton, the lieutenant
governor, retained his friendship, and secretly corresponded with him, and was
very cold in Sir Williams's interest. "In my last I enclosed the copies of
several complaints against your governor, Sir William Phips. I am sorry to see
you weakened by your own hands, and those friends among yourselves that design
the interest of the country so little agree in the means and manner of doing
it. You are reproached here, that your governor is of one opinion, your deputy
governor of another, and that the negative voice is used to keep out a third
person from your council; and yet you all seem to design the same end. By these
measures, your enemies get ground of you, and laugh and scoff at you." Letter
from Sir H. Ashurst, Ian. 30. 1693.4.
They who had been in favor of the charter were for him. They were the most
numerous, but not most active and zealous. The private letters, sent to
England, were generally against him. He had a hard task to keep a majority of
the general court in his favor. An address was proposed and carried in the
house of representatives, humbly praying his majesty, that the governor might
not be removed; but of 50 members present, 24 voted against it. M. S.
The non resident act was not then in force; and it appeared, that most of the
inhabitants of Boston, who represented towns in the country, were against the
address. The party in favor of the address, to prevent further trouble if there
should be further occasion for any thing to be done in favor of the governor,
brought into a bill, which was then before the house, a clause restraining
towns from choosing any person to represent them in the general court, other
than freeholders and residents within such towns. This provision is generally
looked upon as a privilege, and a point gained by the people; but it certainly
was occasioned by what is commonly called the prerogative party in government,
and however salutary, was designed as an abridgment of liberty. "It was very
surprising to me to see the laborious methods taken to obtain an address from
the general assembly here, for the continuance of Sir William in the
government. The opposers were gentlemen, principally of Boston, who were too
near Sir William to think well of him, but served in the house for several
towns and villages, at some distance, where some of them were born, and others
had their estates and improvements above any dwellers in the place for which
they served. To be rid of them all at once, a bill was brought in, or rather a
clause brought into a bill, that no man whatsoever should serve in the house of
commons for any town, unless where he did at that time live and dwell, which
passed with the dissent of 24, the whole house consisting of 50, and with some
heat in the upper house. Sir William hereupon rushes into the house of commons
and drives out the non residents, and I am mistaken if either for estates or
loyalty they left any of their equals in that house." Letter to London, Nov. 1.
1694. Douglass whose foible it was to speak well or ill of men very much as he
had a personal friendship for them, or had a personal difference with them, of
which I may instance more especially in his most elaborate endeavors to set Mr.
Shirley in a disadvantageous light, his labored encomiums of several I choose to
avoid mentioning, because for some of them he had other foundation, had taken
up a prejudice against the two Mathers, father and son, and remarks upon the
occasion of this act, "It is said that anno 1693, there were some Boston
gentlemen representatives for some of the out towns, but not agreeable to the
reverend I. Mather. Mr. Byfield for Bristol is mentioned. Mr. Mather of great
interest with the weak governor Phips and with the devotionally bigoted house
procured this act."
Sir William left Boston the 17th of November.

AN injudicious use of power produced, what were judged by the crown necessary
regulations, sooner than perhaps they would otherwise have been made, viz. the
establishment of a judge of admiralty, "I find great offense taken at your
governor Phips, for beating the captain of the man of war there for not
yielding his shipmen to the governor's command elsewhere. My son seems to
apprehend him a person not competent to be a governor, for so doing; and, as a
commissioner of the admiralty, seems to indulge the captain's complaint, and
reflect upon the governor as an act misbecoming his post. I fear the
consequence of this prejudice against the governor by our admiralty
commissioners espousing the captain's interest against him, which I doubt will
be; and my son seems to reflect upon the whole plantation, for choosing a
governor of no better principles or practices than to forget himself so far as
to cane or strike a commission officer, none of his, which will much provoke
the admiralty to send a judge thither, of and for the admiralty, not the
governor to take his post." Sir Nath. Rich to I. Mather, London. Ian. 25. 93.
4. Sir. N. Rich probably misunderstood his son; the immediate motive to the
appointment of a judge of admiralty was not the caning of the captain, but the
governor's improper use of admiralty power.
powers to the officers of the customs, and the oath to the governors by the
7th and 8th of William; and the remembrance of this, together with other acts
of plantation governors, might also cause the power over the ships of war to be
taken from them, although it was suffered to continue some years after this
time.

THE government falling into Mr. Stoughton's hands, upon Sir William's leaving
the province, seems to have been administered by him to good acceptance in
England, and to the general satisfaction of the people of the province. The
rule of a Lieutenant Governor it is expected will be short; it is scarce worth
while to form parties against him within the government; and if there should be
any misrule, which requires check or censure from England, it is of less
consequence, his authority being so soon to be superseded. This is not the only
reason why the administration of Mr. Stoughton and one of his successors, Mr.
Dummer, have been generally well spoken of. They had each of them spent some
time in England, and better knew what conduct whould be approved of there; they
were well acquainted with the tempers of their own countrymen; each of them,
very prudently, rather aimed at an easy quiet administration, than at any thing
great and striking; considering themselves as at helm, to keep the ship in its
steady course; they seldom relied wholly upon their own judgments, acting in
the most common affairs by advice of council, which served as a justification
of any measures which might be unpopular, or in which (...)(...) be any
mistake, and yet took not away the credit of such as proved to be well judged,
and were generally applauded. At the first election, Mr. Cook being chose of
the council, although he had ever been of the party opposite to the lieutenant
governor, yet he approved of the choice.

THE treaty, last year, at Pemaquid, had produced near a twelvemouth's quiet to
the frontiers. The French did not intend it should last so long. They kept the
Indians from restoring the prisoners according to their engagements. The
hostages were no security whilst the Indians had a much greater number of the
English in their power. New bostilities therefore were every day expected. At
length, the 18th of July, they fell with fury upon a village at Oyster river,
in New Hampshire province, killed and carried away 94, some accounts say about
100 men, women and children. This was a heavy blow. The English represent the
enemy as a very great army. Charlevoix says there were 250 of Penobscot and St.
John's Indians, besides some of father Bigot's mission, Norridgewocks.
and only one Frenchman. He adds, that 230 English perished. His account, of
the number of the enemy, is most to be depended upon; and our account, of the
loss we sustained. Madockewando, a Penobscot, who was the head of the party,
went with the body of his countrymen to Quebec, and presented the scalps to
Frontenac, the governor of Canada. Charlevoix, lib. 15.
We have nothing of prisoners. Toxus, the Norridgewock chief, with about 40 of
that tribe, marched along toward Merrimack river. In their way, after an
unsuccessful attempt upon the house of one Blackford, they murdered Mrs. Cut,
the widow of president Cut, and three of her people, at her farm house. Having
crossed Merrimack, on the 27th of July they fell upon Groton, about 40 miles
from Boston. They were repulsed at Lakin's garrison house, but fell upon other
houses, where the people were off their guard, and killed and carried away from
the vicinity about forty persons. Toxus's two nephews were killed by his side,
and he had a dozen bullets through his blanket, according to Charlevoix, who
adds, that he carried the fort or garrison and then went to make spoil at the
gates of Boston; in both which facts the French account is erroneous.

IN August, some stragglers killed ten or eleven persons at Spruce creek and
other parts of Kittery, and knocked in the head, scalped and left for dead a
little girl named Downing, about 7 years old, who was found alive the next
morning, and lived many years afterward; and September the 4th, Joseph Pike, a
deputy sheriff, and another person with him, were shot down between Almsbury
and Haverhill.

AFTER all these outrages, Bomazeen, a noted Norridgewock chief, one who had
signed the treaty at Pemaquid, and yet was afterward a principal actor in the
carnage upon the English, came strait to Pemaquid with a flag of truce,
pretending he came from Canada with several more who were in company with him,
and that he was very sorry for what had happened. "November to Bomazeen, with
ten or a dozen Indians, called over the barbican, desiring to speak with Capt.
March, and set up a flag, by which they did implicitly own themselves enemies
and breakers of the peace. We did not put out our's until an hour o^ two after
their's; would have persuaded them there was no reason for it, that flags were
used between enemies in time of war, not friends in time of peace; minding them
of the late agreement at Pemaquid; but they called earnestly for it. We
resolved to seize Bomazeen at any rate, except positive violation of promise.
We made no other promise, before he came over, but that he should be welcome,
we should be glad of his company, would treat him kindly, and do him no hurt.
After he was seized, we told him the same, and observed it punctually, so long
as he staid here; but withal told him we must know who did the mischief at
Oyster river and Groton, etc. of which they made themselves ignorant; why the
peace was so soon broken and by whom; that they must go to Boston and abide
there till Sheepscote John was sent to fetch in the other Sagamores, and then
they should come again with some of the English to treat, etc. We thought it
not unlawful, nor culpable to apprehend such persidious villains and traitors
(though under a white rag) that have so often falsified their promise to the
English, viz. at Cocheco, at Casco fort, at Oyster river and other places; that
make no conscience of breaking the peace whenever it serves their turn,
although never so solemnly confirmed with subscriptions and oaths. They have no
regard to the law of nations, and therefore deserve no human respect. Besides,
we are credibly informed, they came with a certain design to betray their
Majesty's fort here, under pretense of trade, friendship, etc. and so they are
fallen into a pit of their own digging. Neither did we aim at any thing more
than their detainment as prisoners, supposing some advantage might accrue to
the poor captives, if not the country thereby. If your honors judge it not
fairly done, they are now in your hands to dispose of and deal with them as may
be for their Majesty's honor, and as the circumstances of the case requires."
Letter from John Pike to Gov. and Council, Pemaq. 7 Ian. 1694.
The commanding officer at the fort considered them as rebels, and sent them to
Boston, after a promise or encouragement given them of safety. The French
called this English treachery. Charlevoix.
The government of the Massachusetts supposed, that for their persidy they were
to be treated as land pirates and murderers. Be it so, yet the public faith
given to them is not to be violated. This is one of those actions which have
caused the English to be charged with injuring the Indians and provoking them
to all the cruelties which have been committed, as a just return. I do not
undertake to justify it; but think, that instead of imprisoning Bomazeen and
the rest for several months at Boston, they ought to have been set at liberty,
whether we consider the affair in a moral or political view. I know of no other
action of this fort which can be justly charged upon the government. Mention is
made of a descendant of D'Aulney, governor of Acady, who scattered a mungrel
breed in that part of the country, and several others coming in to Saco, at the
same time Bomazeen came to Pemaquid, and, Charlevoix says, they were all
killed; but I can find nothing of it in any English accounts (...).
We shall be obliged to rel^re more unjustisiable actions of some particular
inhabitants.

SIR William Phips, upon his arrival in London, was sued, by Dudley and
Brenton, in actions of twenty thousand pounds damage. Sir Henry Ashurst bailed
him. What were the grounds of Dudley's action does not appear. Sir William
urged in his defense against Brenton, that there was no custom-house
established in the plantations by act of parliament, and that Brenton had no
authority to compel masters to enter and clear with him; the naval officer,
then known and established by act of parliament, being the only proper officer
for that purpose.

CAPTAIN Short exhibited no articles in form. Sir William's friends in
New England supposed his affairs in England would have been all accommodated,
and that he would have returned in a short time to his government, if death had
not prevented. He laid his arrest so much to heart, that it was supposed to
have brought upon him or increased the sickness of which he died the 18th of
February, 1694-5.

AFTER Mr. Mather and the other agents, who solicited for the settlement of
the government, left England, Sir Henry Ashurst, alone, appeared as agent. In
1693, Constantine Phips (afterward Lord Chancellor of Ireland) was joined with
Ashurst, and both instructed by the general court. They were both of them
friendly to Sir William.

MR. Dudley had been making friends, with a view to supplant the governor while
he was living; and, upon his death, solicited for the government with fresh
vigor and application. "Mr. D -- thought himself as sure of being governor, as
you are of my friendship. He had laid it with the D. of Leeds, Sidney,
Blathwait and my Lord Cutts, who has made Portland entirely for him, and the
matter settled, and poor Sir William Phips arrested in an action of L 20, 000,
by Mr. D.'s and Mr. B,'s affidavits, for which I was bail. I have been opposing
your grand enemies, who have got all those letters to recommend him from your
ministers. I hope he will trouble you no more. The reversing of Leisler's
attainder has I hope a traiu of good consequences. I shall never do N. England
so much good, as by getting this bill passed. I hope the door is nailed against
him, and you will have the Earl of Bellamont governor. I could not believe what
Sir William Phips told me of Mr. Stoughton and Mr. Addington. I perceive I had
wrong notions of things." Sir H. Ashuest's less. to Mather 5 (...). 95. "I drew
a bill for reversing the attainder of Capt. Leisler, Mr. Milburn and Mr.
Governor, which passed the Lords without opposition; but when it came to the
Commons, Dudley having notice of it, made all the opposition to it imaginable,
which was the thing we desired; for by that means, we had several hearings
before a full committee of the Commons, and had the opportunity of giving a
full account of those proceedings, and letting the world see how great a part
he acted in that tragedy. Since that, he is not so much as talked of to be
governor, but the three competitors are, the E. of Bellamont, Major Bremin and
Col. Layton, and I believe my Lord Bellamont is the most likely to have it."
Constable. Phips to I. M. May 5. 95.
Without losing his old friends, he successfully applied himself to bring over
some who had been his violent enemies. He recovered the favor of many of the
ministers in New England, and recommended himself, by a grave serious
deportment, to the diffenters in England; whilst, at the same time, by his good
sense and polite behavior, he acquired the notice and esteem of many
considerable persons at court. His income was very moderate; and yet, with
economy, he made a decent appearance in England, and gave several of his
children education there, whilst the rest of his family was supported by him in
New England. A vacant government had diverse candidates, but it looks as if he
would have carried it from the rest, if it had not been for the opposition made
by the two agents for the province, Ashurst and Phips, who were obliged to urge
against him the share he bore in the trial and condemnation of Leisler at
New York; and, for the sake of laying open that affair to the prejudice of
Dudley, they both of them promoted a bill in the house of commons, of which
Ashurst was a member, for reversing Leisler's attainder. Mr. Dudley could stand
it no longer, and withdrew his solicitations for that time; and soon after, by
the interest of Lord Cutts, obtained the place of lieutenant governor of the
Isle of Wight, of which his Lordship was then governor. From that time, Lord
Bellamont was looked upon as the governor of Massachusets-Bay, although he was
not actually appointed until the next year.

THE acts of trade had been very little regarded in any of the colonies.
Bucaniets or pirates, who in times of peace made their depredations upon
Spanish ships and settlements in America, were very numerous. They brought
their plunder chiefly to New York, and some to other colonies. With a view to
put a stop to these mischieff the Earl of Bellamont was pitched upon as the
most proper person for the government of Newyork, "It is well known, that, for
several years, two very pernicious things have been growing in our American
colonies; an unlawful trade, in fraud of the acts of navigation, infinitely
prejudicial to England, and the cursed practice of piracy utterly destructive
of all commerce. In the beginning of the year 1695, his Majesty thought fit to
name the Earl of Bellamont to be governor of New York, a place remarkably
infected with those two dangerous diseases. The Earl has often tole me, that
what the King said to him, when he first let him know his pleasure, was that,
which principally induced him to accept of the employment. His Majesty did him
the honor to say, he thought him a man of resolution and integrity, and, with
those qualifications, more likely than any other he could think of to put a
stop to that illegal trade, and to the growth of (...) for which reason he made
choice of him for that government, and for the same reason intended to put the
government of New England into his hands." Account of proceedings in relation
to Capt. Hidd, Land 1701.
and, probably, to make the appointment worth accepting, as well as to render
the other purposes more effectual, Massachusets-Bay and New Hampshire were put
under the same person.

not less desirous of peace than the Indians, if they could have had any
security for the continuance of it. One of the hostages, Sheepscote John,
undertook to go from Boston as a mediator, and, by his influence, fifty canoes
of Indians came within about a league of the fort at Pemaquid, the 20th of May,
and sent in eight captives; acknowledged their fault in violating the last
treaty, and proposed the release of captives on both sides, and the
establishment of a durable peace. A truce of 30 days was agreed upon; and
commissioners were to come from Boston, to settle the terms of the peace. The
commissioners, Col. Phillips, Lt. Col. Hawthorn and Major Convers, soon after,
met delegates from the Indians at Pemaquid, but refused to enter upon any
treaty with them until all the English, in their hands, should be delivered up.
Bomazeen, their great warrior, and some others, were left in prison at Boston.
The Indians looked upon themselves not well used; sensible, that when they had
parted with all their prisoners, they should have no way of obtaining the
release of their own people, except by a new set of captives. They therefore
refused to treat any further, and left the place abruptly. The government, I
imagine, expected that, by retaining some of the Indians as hostages, some
restraint would be laid upon the rest, from exercising cruelty toward English
prisoners, seeing we should have it in our power to retaliate it upon their own
people; and chose rather to risk the continuance of the war than put with this
security.

CHARLEVOIX, who supposes the lieut, governor, Stoughton, to have been there in
person, says, the Abenaquis insisted upon the release of their brethren, who
were detained in violation of the flag of truce and the laws of nations, and
Stoughton only returned bloody reproaches for their late hostilities, and
terrible threats if they did not deliver up the authors of them. The Indians
were as stout as he was. At length, both sides began to fosten. Stoughton was
not willing to drive to extremity a people, who had formerly known how to make
themselves a terror. They were desirous, at any rate, of recovering their
relations out of the hands of the English; being fully determined, that when
they had accomplished their ends, they would revenge the blood of such of them
as had been murdered; but perceiving that, whilst they were in treaty, the
English were preparing to surround them, they ran to their arms. -- This, no
doubt, was the account they gave to their priest, when they returned home.

IMMEDIATE notice was given to the frontiers to be upon their guard, but this
did not provent spoils upon diverse places. In July, Major Hammond of Kittery
was taken prisoner and carried to Canada, but, being above the ordinary rank of
the Indian captives, he was very kindly used by Count Frontenac, the governor;
and soon returned in a vessel which went from Boston for exchange of prisoners.
In August, they killed and took fifteen at Billerica. and plundered the house
of -- Rogers, and soon after surprised and killed the sergeant of Saco fort. In
September, they killed four, and wounded fix, belonging to Pemaquid fort. In
October, they came upon the house of John Brown of Newbury, and carried away
nine persons; but being pursued and overtaken, in the night, by a party under
Capt. Greenleaf, they first tomahawked all their prisoners, which effectually
prevented them from joining the pursuers, and then took to their heels and
escaped. Some of these unhappy prisoners lived several months, and some, more
than a year; but all, finally, died of their wounds, except a lad who happened
to be wounded in the shoulder, and not in the head, as the rest were.

hazard, when they could be tracked upon the snow. The spring of 1696 opened as
usual. In May, a poor fellow, who had been a captive before, and made his
escape, was killed at Cocheco. In June, three women, sisters, going with their
husbands from York to Wells; one of them, wife of Thomas Cole, with her husband
were shot down, the others escaped. In the same month, several houses were
burnt by the enemy, within the limits of Portsmouth; twelve or fourteen of the
inhabitants were slain, and four taken prisoners. One woman was supposed to be
left dead, and her scalp was carried to Canada, as the evidence of it; but
those, who went out to bury the dead, finding her alive, carried her home, and
she recovered. The Indians, generally, are content with a piece, not larger
than the palm of the hand, from the top of the crown; and, if it was not for
the blows of the tomahawk, many might have survived the operation of the knife.
Some who have lost the skin, from the whole crown, have recovered and lived
many years.

IN July, they attacked Cocheco again, a plantation which often suffered;
killed three of the inhabitants, as they were going home from public worship,
wounded three more, and carried other three away prisoners to Penobscot.

WE have taken no notice of Nova Scotia, although included in the bounds of the
Massachusetts charter; the inhabitants in general, for several years having been
under the power and command of the authority sent from France: But, this year,
the affairs of that and of the other parts of the government are more
interwoven.

AFTER the conquest of that province, by the Massachusetts colony in 1690, the
French in Europe gave themselves but little concern about the recovery of it,
and the English as little about its preservation or security. The Massachusetts
were unable to bear the charge of a sufficient military force, to keep the
inhabitants in subjection: They gave commissions to judges, justices and other
officers, and required oaths of sidelity; and, in 1691, gave power and
authority to Mr. Nelson, who was bound there from Boston upon a trading voyage,
to be commander in chief in Acadie; but when he came near the river St. John's,
he was taken by Mons. Villebon, who, having a commission from the French king,
had been in to Portroyal and ordered the English flag to be struck and the
French flag to be hoisted there, but intended to make St. John's the place of
his residence, and took possession of it, where he carried on great trade with
the Indians, supplying them with warlike stores, provisions, etc. without which
they could not have carried on the war. In 1692, soon after Sir William Phips's
arrival, an attempt was made by the province, with a small naval force, to
remove Villebon; but it proved unsuccessful. In 1695, Capt. Eams, in his
Majesty's ship Sorlings, was sent from Boston to intercept the stores with
which Villebon, every spring, had been furnished from France; but the French
ship happened to be of greater force than usual, and, after an engagement at
the mouth of the river, Eams was glad to retreat. It seems that, until now, the
Massachusetts looked upon themselves as in some sort of possession, and that
there had not been an entire revolt of the whole province; for, this year, the
general court, from a sense of their inability to protect it, petitioned the
crown that the province might be freed from any further expense in the defense
or Portroyal or St. John's, and that garrisons might be kept in both those
places, at the charge of the nation. This, perhaps, might be deemed a refusal
to exercise jurisdiction over that part of the province, and a renunciation of
their right; and, accordingly, after the treaty of Utrecht, when possession was
returned to the crown, it was settled a distinct province; otherwise, jus
postliminii might have taken place, as well with respect to the rights of a
body corporate, as those of particular persons.

THE disappointment, last year, which the Sorlings, a single ship, met with,
occasioned the force to be doubled this year, to effect the like purpose. Capt.
Paxton, in the Newport, came to New England in company with the Sorlings, In
1694.
and both ships were ordered, together with a yacht or tender in the province
service, to lay off the river St. John's, to wait the arrival of the storeship.
It happened, unfortunately, that the French at Quebec were, at the same time,
fitting out two men of war, with the addition of two companies of soldiers and
fifty Michmack Indians, in order to reduce the New England fort at Pemaquid.
These ships were of superior force to the English ships, and Iberville, This
was not the Iberville who laid the foundation of the French colony at
Missisippi in 1690. He died in a year, or two after that.
an experienced officer, commanded. When they had put into a port upon their
passage, Villebon, from St. John's, informed them of the situation and
circumstances of the small English fleet. They went immediately in quest of
them, and came upon them when they were not expected. The Newport, after the
loss of one of her topmasts, surrendered. A fog arose, which gave the Sorlings
and the tender an opportunity for their escape, and they returned to Boston,
with the news of this second disappointment. The French commander, being
strengthened with the Newport, went in to St. John's and there refitted. From
thence, he proceeded to Penobscot, where the Baron St. Castine was waiting for
him, with two hundred Indians. The whole force arrived before the fort at
Pemaquid, the 14th of July. Capt. March, who was a good officer, had resigned
the command of the sort a few months before, and was succeeded by a very
different man, Capt. Chubb. Iberville, upon his arrival, sent a summons to
surrender. Chubb returned a vain foolish answer, that if the sea was covered
with French vessels, and the land with Indians, yet he would not give up the
fort. The Indians, thereupon, began their fire, and return was made by the
musketry and with a few cannon from the fort. This brought the first day to a
close. In the night, Iberville landed his cannon and mortars; and the next day,
before three in the afternoon, had raised his batteries and thrown five bombs
into the fort, to the great terror of Chubb and the gar^ison. Castine, about
this time, found some way of conveying a letter into the sort, and let them
know that, if they delayed surrendering until an assault was made, they would
have to do with savages, and must expect no quarter, for he had seen the King's
order to Iberville to give none. Original letter in Castine's hand writing.
This did the business, the chamade was beat immediately, and the sort was
surrendered, upon the terms offered by the French, that the garrison should be
sent to Boston and exchanged for the like number of French and Indian
prisoners; only, a special security or engagement was insisted upon from the
French commander, that their persons should be protected against the rage of
the Indians.

CHUBB'S conduct was universally censured, and at first he was put under
arrest, but came off without any other punishment than being laid aside. The
fort had 15 cannon mounted, and ninety able men to manage them, and no want of
ammunition or stores. The French suppose, that if there had been a brave
defense, the event would have been doubtful; at least, that the fort could not
have been carried without a great loss of men; and attribute the surrender to
the cowardice of the garrison, who compelled the commander to act contrary to
his own inc^ination. Charlevoix.
This makes the acquisition to appear of more importance.

AFTER all, there is room to doubt whether a better garrison could have with
stood that force, until relief might have been afforded from Boston. The French
were provided with cannon and mortars, were numerous enough to resist any
^allies from the garrison, without interrupting the siege; there were no
casemates nor other shelter for the men, and the magazine itself was bomb proof
in one part of it only, which was under a rock.

THE reason of the garrison's requiring an extraordinary caution against the
rage of the Indians, was this. They were conscious of their own cruelty and
barbarity, and feared revenge; and a security from it might probably hasten the
surrender, left it should afterward not be in their power to obtain it. In the
month of February before, Egeremet, a chief of the Machias Indians; Toxus,
chief of the Norridgewocks; Abenquid, a sagamore of the same tribe; and several
other Indians came to the fort, to treat upon exchange of prisoners. Chubb,
with some of his garrison, fell upon the Indians in the midst of the treaty,
when they thought themselves most secure, murdered Egeremet and Abenquid with
two others. Toxus, and some others, escaped, and some remained prisoners; one
Indian was found in the fort, in irons, when the French took possession of it.
Such was the fury of Castine's Indians, that there was no way of securing the
garrison but by removing them to an island, under a constant guard of French
troops, until provision was made for transporting them to Boston. Some writers
palliate and seem inclined to justify this action of Chubb. Surely, the cruelty
shown by the Indians to the English must have biassed and blinded them Private
letters, which passed at this time, between some of the best men in the
province, condemned it as an horrid piece of villainy.

THE French remained at Pemaquid until the 18th of July, demolishing the fort,
their plunder was small, and then went to Penobscot, where they tarried until
the 3d of September.

WHEN the news of the loss of the man of war and of the fort came to Boston, it
was expected the enemy would proceed westward as far as Portsmouth. Five
hundred men were raised without delay, and marched thither, to be ready for the
defense of New Hampshire. Two men of war, the Arundel and Orford, arriving at
the same time at Boston, a detachment from the militia was sent on board them,
to serve as marines; and these ships, together with the Sorlings, and a
merchant ship of 20 guns, and a fireship taken up by the province, were sent in
quest of the enemy, and came in sight of them just as they failed from
Penobscot. The French, who were well acquainted with the coast, kept their
ships close in shore. Whether the English were afraid of the coast, or were too
far astern, or did not make sail enough, does not appear; it is certain, they
did not come up with them the first day, and the next day being foggy they
reached St. John's river, and the English vessels returned to Boston. The
French account Charlevoix.
takes no notice of the fog, makes the five English vessels seven, and says,
they steered for St. John's river, whilst the French fleet went to Cape-Breton
and from thence to Newfoundland. The French writers supposed two expeditions to
have been but one, and imagined a number of small vessels, under Col. Church,
were the same which pursued Iberville. As the Orford was returning, she met
with a French shallop belonging to St. John's, with 23 soldiers under Villeau,
their captain, and brought them prisoners to Boston. Charlevoix seems to
mistake Villebon for Villeau, and, finding him soon after at St. John's,
defending his sort, he takes it for granted he must have been released, as
having a passport and not liable to be retained.

WHEN Mr. Stoughton found the enemy was gone back to the eastward, he ordered
Col. Church, who had the command of the 500 men at Portsmouth, to embark them
on board brigantines and other small vessels, and to range along the eastern
shore. Church saw none of the enemy, except now and then an indian canoe, until
he came to Penobscot, where he did not arrive until after the French fleet had
sailed, and the coast clear. Not being willing to return without doing some
service, he resolved to know the condition of the province of Nova Scotia, and
failed directly up to Chignecto or Beaubassin. Upon the discovery of the
English forces, most of the French inhabitants left their houses and fled into
the woods. The English pursued, and soon met Bourgeois, (Church calls him
Bridgman) a principal inhabitant, coming to ask quarter for himself and family;
which was readily granted. Upon his examination, it appeared that there were
Indians mixed with the French in the woods, and orders were thereupon given to
renew the pursuit, and to offer quarter to all the French, but to give none to
the Indians. Bourgeois was ordered, also, to give notice to all his countrymen,
who would come in, that they should be well received. Many of the inhabitants
came in, and it was proposed to them to join with the English, in pursuing the
Indians, and upon their complying, their houses should be spared, what of their
goods had been taken should be restored, and the rest of their substance
preserved. This was a hard condition and, in effect, obliging them to quit
their country, for otherwise, as soon as the English had left them without
sufficient protection, the incensed Indians would have fell upon them without
mercy. They therefore refused to comply, and their houses were thereupon burnt,
and their cattle, sheep, etc. destroyed, and their goods became plunder for the
army.

CHARLEVOIX says, that Bourgeois produced a writing, by which Sir William Phips
had given assurances of protection to the inhabitants of Chignecto, whilst they
remained faithful subjects of King William; and that Church gave orders, that
nothing in their houses, etc. should be touched; but whilst he was entertained
by Bourgeois, together with the principal officers, the rest of the army
dispersed themselves among the other houses and behaved as if they had been in
a conquered country. This may be true. Men raised from the militia of any
country, until they are used to discipline, are seldom exemplary for due
subordination. Charlevoix adds, that many of the inhabitants, not trusting to
the promises of the general, refused to come in, and that it was well they did;
for, soon after, he broke through all bounds, and left only the church and a
few houses and barns standing and, having discovered, posted up in the church,
an order of Frontenac, the governor of Canada, for the regulation of trade, he
threatened to treat them as rebels, set fire to the church, and the houses which
he had before spared and which were now all reduced to ashes; and having done
this, he presented a writing, which he told them was an acknowledgment of their
having renewed their subjection to King William, and would be a security to
them in case any English should again land among them.

THE condition of these Acadians was truly deplorable. Their natural attachment
was to the French. They were bigoted to the roman catholic religion, in
proportion to the meanness and other disadvantages of their education.
Commerce, small indeed, led them to some connection with the English. For a
whole century together, they were, once in a few years, changing their masters;
and no sooner had owned themselves the subjects of one crown, but they were
left to fall again under the power of the other. It was hardly reasonable,
where protection was refused or neglected, to charge them with being traitors
and rebels. When under English government, although allowed the exercise of
their religion, yet their priests, always suspected of drawing them over to the
French, were hated and often molested by the English. Their civil liberty was
much the same under either government. They had certain persons, annually
chosen, whom they called deputies and sometimes selectmen, They corrupted their
language, having greater converse with the English than with the European
French; and intermixed many English words, as et vous too, instead of et vous
aussi, pas yet, instead of pas encore, and many like expressions.
which they borrowed from the English colonies of New England, but they had no
other authority than to bring and carry messages from and to their governors;
and upon any general disturbance or affair of general concern, the whole
village or district was summoned to appear. Thus they were always depressed and
without spirit. No people are more confined to their own country than they
were, few or none of them upon any occasion ever passing so far as New England.
Their fate at last was hard and pitiable.

BUT to return to our story. Church left Chignecto, the 20th of September, and
stood with his transports for the river St. John's, and landed his men, not
without some opposition, upon the east side. He took several prisoners;
interrupted the building of a new sort at the mouth of the river, and destroyed
the materials they had prepared for it; brought away twelve of their cannon and
what plunder he met with. Being informed there was not depth of water in the
river for his vessels, he made no attempt to go up to Villebon's fort, but
departed for Boston; intending to touch at all the harbors and rivers upon the
eastern coast, in his way.

MR. Stoughton, having much at heart the removal of Villebon from St. John's,
ordered the Arundel, Capt. Kiggins, Charlevoix calls him Sikik.
who returned to Boston the beginning of September; the province galley, Capt.
Southack, and a transport sloop, Capt. Alden, The same who was imprisoned for
witchcraft, when Hawthorn the colonel had been one who examined him.
to go out and meet Church with his forces, and attempt to drive Villebon from
his fort. A reinforcement for the land forces was sent in the transport, and
the command of the whole given to Col. Hawthorn, of Salem, one of the council.
This was an impolitic measure, unless any misconduct in Church made it
necessary that he should be superseded; and it is evident, by his own account,
that he was not a little mortified; and although he submitted, it was with
reluctance, and every thing went on heavily. The men also, having their faces
toward home, were loath to turn back, but were obliged to it; being met by the
ships not far from the river. Villebon had timely notice of the return and
reinforcement, and made the best preparations he could for his defense. Four of
the small vessels went up the river, and landed their men near the fort,
October the 7th. They raised a battery for two field pieces, and began to fire
with them and with their musketry, the same day; and the French made return.
When night came on, which proved very cold, the English lighted their fires to
keep them from perishing. This made them a mark for the French cannon, which
disturbed them to that degree, that they were obliged to put out their fires
and to be exposed all night to the inclemency of the weather. They were soon
discouraged, for the next night they reimbarked; and having joined those at the
mouth of the river, made the best of their way to Boston. No notice was taken
of any loss on either side, except the burning a few of the enemy's houses; nor
is any sufficient reason given for relinquishing the design so suddenly. It is
probable that the forces were not provided with rents, nor clothing,
sufficient to defend them from the cold, which they had reason to expect to
increase every day, and it is certain the old colonel Church was offended at
being superseded in command.

WHILST the forces, which used to be employed for the defense of the frontiers,
were upon other service, the inhabitants kept close confined to their garrisons
and were hindered from their labor; the Indians being upon the watch in every
quarter, and now and then would seize or shoot down a man, who ventured to step
out of his door. Besides those mentioned, in the beginning of summer, Major
Frost and his wife were killed at Berwick, as they were returning from meeting;
and two men, who went to carry the news to the garrison at Wells, were ambushed
and slain. In October, four soldiers were killed, belonging to the fort at
Saco. A late author says, a dreadful desolation was threatened, and;more for
want of management than power; Discovery and settlement of the English in N.
America, (...) Harrit's collection.
but this is not so judicious, as some others of this author's reflections. The
settlement of a new country could never be effected, if the inhabitants should
consine themselves to cities or walled towns. A frontier there must be, and
nothing less than making every house a fort, and furnishing every traveller
with a strong guard, could have been an effectual security against an enemy, as
greedy after their prey as a wolf, and to whom the woods were equally natural
and familiar.

Charlecoix.
Nothing more was intended by the French court than the possession of
Newfoundland, and the removal of the English from Acadie. Both these were
effected, for after lberville had taken the fort at Pemaquid, he went with his
ships to Newfoundland, and possessed himself of St. John's and the other
harbors there, and made a very successful expedition. This was not only a much
easier acquisition than Boston would have been, to a stronger squadron than
Iberville's; although it was not then one fourth part so well fortified as it
is at this time; but, by gaining all the ports in Newfoundland, the whole
colony was gained; whereas, the gaining of Boston would not have enabled them
to have possessed even the rest of that province nor, without a very great land
army, could they have held the possession or Boston alone one winter, against
so great a number of inhabitants as were then in the province. The winter of
1696 was as cold as had been known from the first arrival of the English; slays
and loaded sleds passing great part of the time upon the ice from Boston as far
as Nantasket. Greater losses in trade had never been known, than what were met
with in this year; nor was there, at any time after the first year, so great a
scarcity of food; nor was grain ever at a higher price. Lord Bellamont had been
expected for two years past. His long delay occasioned some doubt, whether he
had not laid aside the design; but, in February 1696, Mr. Blaithwait writes,
you may be in expectation, some time this summer, of my Lord Bellamont, who is
now in a way of receiving his dispatches for the government of New England, and
probably of New York too, for the better uniting our strength against the
French and Indians. In the mean time, I hope the colony of the Massachusetts
will take care to defend themselves against the further encroachments of the
enemy, and protect their neighbors of New Hampshire, for the common interest.


THE last year of the war proved more alarming to the province than any of the
preceding years. An invasion was every day expected, for several weeks
together; and news was brought to Boston, that a formidable French fleet had
been seen upon the coast. It was indeed a very critical time, perhaps equal to
that when the Duke d'Anville was with a squadron at Chibuctou. The force, under
the Duke, was superior, but the province, at that time, was in proportion
stronger and better able to repel it. France expected that a very strong
squadron would be sent from England to recover the ports in Newfoundland, which
Iberville had taken the last year. Great preparations were therefore made, to
defeat such squadron, and, after that, or in case it should not proceed, then
to lay waste the English colonies. Frontenace the governor of Canada, upon whom
great dependence had always deservedly been placed, had orders to raise 1500
men, prepared to march upon short warning; but, at this time, the service for
which they were intended was not communicated. He made provision accordingly,
and they would have been all ready upon eight days notice. The remembrance of
this danger is lost in New England. Charlevoix's account will be new to most
people. The intended expedition, against Boston, was very well concerted, and
would not have failed, as all which preceded it had done, if it had been
vigorously pursued. The king had entrusted the command with the Marquis of
Nesmond, an officer of great reputation, and had appointed for the service ten
men of war, a galliot and two frigates. Boston was not the only object. He had
orders to be ready to leave Breast, with part of the squadron, by the 25th of
April, at farthest, in order to join the other part which lay at Rochel under
commodore de Magnon; and, with all possible dispatch, to proceed to Placentia
bay in New ^undland, that he might be before hand of the English, who, it was
said, were determined to recover all they had lost the year before in that
island, and to clear it entirely of the French. If he found Placentia besieged
by the English, he had orders to attack them; if they should be gone before he
arrived, he was to follow them and give them battle whether they had succeeded
or not. After their defeat, he was to sail for Penobscot: dispatching, at the
same time, a packet boat to Quebec, This seems to be the greatest defect in the
plan. The time in passing up the river St. Lawrence, embarking the troops, and
coming down to Penobscot, from the uncertainty of that navigation, might take
up the greatest part of the summer, and render the whole design abortive.
to inform Count Frontenac of his route, that so that general might meet him at
Penobscot, with fifteen hundred men, which he was to have in readiness. As soon
as the junction was made, and the troops embarked, the fleet, without loss of
time, was to go to Boston, and, that town being taken, it was then to range the
coast to Piscataqua; destroying the settlements as far into the country as they
could, and so effectually as that it might take the English a long time to
re-establish themselves. If there should be time left for further acquisitions,
the fleet was to go to New York; and having reduced that city, the French
American troops were to march through that colony to Canada, laying the country
waste as they went along. -- The king had this expedition so much at heart,
that he had given permission to de Nesmond to strengthen his fleet with the
addition of certain ships. destined for another expedition in Hudson's bay, if
he should happen to meet them at Placentia and think them necessary."

WE shall next see, from the same author, how this enterprise happened to fail
of success.

As the French court had not received the news of the siege By the Massachusetts
forces.
of Naxoat (St. John's river) when the instructions were prepared, but it
happened to be brought a short time after; upon de Nesmond's anchoring in
Rochelle road, he found orders had been sent from court to meet him there,
requiring him to give the chevalier de Villebon all that aid both of men and
stores which should be necessary to maintain him in, or restore him to his
post. When de Nesmond came to Placentia, he found there a letter waiting for
him from the count de Pontchartrain, giving him intelligence of 18 English
ships, laden with salt and ready to sail from Lisbon, under convoy of a man of
war; which ships were to be employed in the cod fishery at Newfoundland; and he
was required to do every thing in his power to prevent their escaping him. The
count added further, that if he should be so fortunate as to beat the English
fleet, which was expected to be or have been at Newfoundland, then it was the
king's pleasure that he should range the eastern coast of Newfoundland, and
take or burn all the English shipping he could meet with. But de Nesmond
departed too late, to carry so many and so great designs into execution.
Besides, meeting with contrary winds, he had above two months passage, not
arriving at Placentia until the 24th of July, There, he heard no news of the
English fleet. He held a grand council of war, in order to determine whether
immediately to proceed to Boston or not. All the voices were in the negative,
and for these reasons; there was no assurance that it could be a prudent
measure, whilst they were wholly ignorant of the situation and circumstances of
the enemy; moreover, let there be ever so great dispatch in giving notice to
Count Frontenac, the Canada forces could not be at Penobscot before the 10th of
September; and by that time the fleet would not have above 50 days provisions
left, and would be in no capacity of undertaking any thing."

IT was known in New England, that a formidable French fleet was at no great
distance, and the approach of it was every day expected. There were no great
hopes of an English fleet to encounter it. The inhabitants were in great
consternation. The lieut. governor of the Massachusetts made the best
preparations he could. The militia, for several weeks, were held in readiness
to march to the sea ports. The castle at Boston was, then, but an
inconsiderable fortress. Such additions were made, as the time would admit of;
and, when the danger was over, many persons expressed themselves, in the
accounts they gave of it to their friends, as if they had no doubt that the
ships would have been stopped from coming up to the town. It was expected, a
great body of French and Indians from Canada would fall upon the eastern
frontiers, when the French fleet was upon the sea coast; five hundred men were
therefore raised, and sent under Major March, for the defense of that part of
the province.

THIS scheme of the French, in all probability, saved the lives of many of our
inhabitants. The greatest part of the summer, the strength of Canada, which
would have been employed for our annoyance, was kept in a state of inaction,
waiting for orders to move; and until September we were quiet, both eastward
and westward. A party of the enemy then fell upon Lancaster and killed twenty
or thirty persons, Mr. Whiting, the minister of the town, being one of them.
Governor Bradstreet died at Salem March 27th, 1697, aged 94 or 95. We have had
frequent occasion to mention him, especially in the first part of our history,
where he appears in the character of an assistant, secretary, agent,
commissioner for the united colonies, and at length governor. He seems to have
been of a moderate genius, such an one as we often see by a long course of
steady inoffensive conduct rise from step to step, but at those intervals when
there happens to be none more shining or enterprizing to obstruct it. He was
the youngest of all the assistants who came over with the first charter, but
had been senior assistant many years before he attained to the chair. At
length, in the 76th year of his age, it fell to his lot. It is not improbable
that some, who would otherwise have been his competitors, acquiesced in his
advancement from the same considerations that the competitors in the conclave
at Rome have often acquiesced in the choice of a very old Cardinal to the
Popedom. When King Charles demanded a surrender of the charter, he was for
complying. The event proved it to be easier to reassume after a forced
surrender than after a judgment against it. The King had promised lenity upon a
compliance, and threatened all severity if the colony forced him to a judgment
against them. This influenced Mr. Bradstreet. He thought it wisdom to save part
of the privileges of the colony rather than lose the whole. Besides, it was
submitting to the necessity of the times, submitting to a power they could not
resist. Some said if judgment went against them, one time or other it might be
reversed. He thought that Duresse per minas might be pleaded to avoid their own
act, if ever a favorable opportunity should offer for it. He was reproached
for his pusillanimity. If he was upright, the censure of the opposite party
should not transmit reproach to posterity. The most tenacious are not always
most virtuous: Men will sometimes, pursuing popular measures, run risques in
public affairs, which they would not think prudent in their private concerns.
The reason is obvious. Their particular share in the public, if the event
should prove unfortunate, has not equal weight upon their minds with the
applause which they are sure of, succeed or not, for fortitude and heroism. Bad
men in this way can oftentimes also gratify their private affections, or their
hatred and desire of revenge, at the public expense.


The distance would agree well enough with St. Francis or Becancour, but
Charlevoix says, this settlement began six or seven years later, in 1704.
the settlement of which, as the Indians said, had been begun a little while
before, about 250 miles from Haverhill. When they had traveled 150 miles, the
Indians told the women, there was one ceremony which could not be dispensed
with upon their arrival. They must be stripped and run the gantlet through the
village. This discipline has been sometimes so cruelly administered, that the
poor captives have sunk under it. The women had been assigned as servants to an
Indian family, It was the practice of the Indians, after they had fell upon the
English and were out of danger, to divide into small parties or single families
and disperse for the sake of more advantageous hunting in their return.
consisting of two men, three women, and seven children, besides an English
boy, who had been prisoner a year and an half. The terror of the Indian gantlet
seems to have inspired Dunstan with resolution, and she prevailed upon the
nurse and the English boy to join with her in the destruction of the Indian
family. The Indians kept no watch. The boy had been with them so long, as to be
considered as one of their own children. From women, ordinarily, attempts of
this sort are not to be expected. In the morning, a little before day, Dunstan
arose, and, finding the whole company in a sound sleep, calls upon her
consederates to join with her, and with the Indian hatchets, they silenced such
as they began with, and yet took care not to make so much noice as to awaken
the rest; and in this manner they dispatched the whole family, except a
favorite boy, whom they designedly left, and an old woman they supposed they
had killed, but who jumped up, and with the boy made their escape. They took
off the scalps from ten, to bring home with them. Their danger was great from
the enemy and from famine, in traveling home above an hundred miles, through
thick woods and across mountains and rivers; but they arrived safe with their
trophies. They received a reward of fifty pounds from the general court, and
many presents from their neighbors; and Col. Nicholson sent them a valuable
present from Maryland, Nicholson was then governor of Maryland.
the same of so uncommon an action having soon spread through the continent.

THE lieutenant governor, Stoughton, had held the reins four years, and had
kept free from controversy with the other branches of the legislature. The
defense of the province, by sea and land, was enough to employ the attention of
the public. Internal disputes and controversies in states are, ordinarily, most
effectually avoided or suspended by imminent external dangers. Besides, Mr.
Stoughton now stood so well in the esteem of the people, that they chose him,
at every election, one of the council; although, at the same time, he was
commander in chief. Before the year expired, a new governor might arrive, in
which case he would take his place as a councellor. Sheriffs, in England, are
named or remain in commission for the peace during their shrievalty, although
the exercise of their authority, as justices, is suspended for such time.

THE earl of Bellamont embarked on board one of his Majesty's ships early in
the fall. The merchant vessels, which failed at the same time for Boston, all
arrived safe with short passages; but the man of war was blown off to Barbados,
and there wintered, not arriving at New York until sometime in May. Immediately
upon the advice of his lordship's arrival, a committee was sent with
congratulations from the Massachusetts, and, during his residence at New York,
he was frequently consulted, and all matters of importance were communicated to
him, and his advice or directions were generally followed; but the
administration of all acts of government were in the name of the lieutenant
governor, as commander in chief. The party disputes, which ran high at NewYork,
and detained his lordship there about a year, do not come within our design. In
general, we may observe, that he countenanced the Leislerians. His lordship was
one of the committee of parliament to enquire into the trials of Leisler and
Milbourne, and told Sir Henry Ashurst those men were murdered and barbarously
murdered.
This, together with the interest which had been made for Mr. Dudley in England
in opposition to his lordship, seems to have prejudiced him in favor of all
Dudley's enemies in New England. Whilst he was at New York, he kept a constant
correspondence with Mr. Cook, one of the council for the Massachusetts, who was
a principal man of that party; and seems to have placed more confidence in him
than in Mr. Stoughton, who ever remained, in his heart, attached to the Dudley
party.

THE peace of Ryswick was proclaimed in Boston December the 10th 1697. The war
with the Indians did not immediately cease. The beginning of the next year,
they showed themselves at Kittery, where they killed an old man; and at the
same time they carried away three persons from York. In July, they appeared
upon the western frontier and took three or four prisoners at Hatfield: But the
French no longer daring to afford them assistance, they spent the rest of the
year in contriving a peace. Upon intimations, given by the Indians to any of
the forts or out posts that they are disposed to peace, the English are very
ready to embrace the offer. The principal object is the recovery of the
captives, which at the end of the war have generally been numerous. In October,
Major Convert and Captain Alden were sent to Penobscot to settle preliminaries;
one of which was to be the release of all prisoners, but no more could be
obtained, on this head, than a promise to return all such as desired it; the
Indians refused to compel any who inclined to remain with them. In the winter,
John Phillips, Esquire of the council, with Major Convers, and Cyprian Southack,
commander of the province galley, went with full powers to conclude a treaty.
The Indians are not very nice in acknowledging their perfidy in such terms as
the English prepare for them, and make such submissions and promises of future
fidelity as are desired. The treaty was in the same terms with that in 1693.
Several captives were restored, and others were promised in the spring; but
many remained, males and females, who mingled with Indians and contributed to a
succession of savages to exercise cruelties upon the English frontiers, in
future wars, and perhaps upon some of their own relations.

THE leaving bounds to be settled be ^een the English and French, upon the
continent, by commissaries, and the ambiguous terms made use of in treaties
(perhaps artfully introduced by the French) have been the causes of new
disputes between the two crowns; and, in one instance at least, have very soon
brought on a new War. After the treaty of Aix la Chapelle in 1748.
The peace of Ryswick was scarcely proclaimed in New England, when the
inhabitants were made sensible of the designs of the French to make themselves
sole proprietors of the fishery, and to restrain the English from the
possession of any part of the country contained in the Massachusetts charter to
the eastward of Kennebeck. It was understood by the English court, that, by the
treaty of Ryswick, all the country westward of Saint Croix was to remain to the
English, as being within the bounds of the province of Massachusets-Bay. The
French court, immediately after the treaty, asserted an exclusive right to the
fishery upon the seacoasts and to all the inland country. Acadie has been
stretched and contracted at different times, as the French found it to serve
their interest.
A French man of war, bound from France to Port Royal, met one of our fishing
vessels off Cape Sables, sent for the skipper to come on board, and caused to
be translated and read to him in English an order of the French king for
seizing all English vessels found fishing on the coasts, and told him to give
notice of this order to all other vessels. Villebon, governor of St. John's
river, writes, soon after, to Mr. Stoughton, that he had orders, from the
French king, his master, to take possession of and defend the whole country as
far as Kennebeck. I am expressly ordered by his Majesty, to maintain the bounds
between New England and us, which are from the head of Kennebeck river unto
it is mouth, leaving the course of the river free unto both nations, and I
expect that you will no longer consider the Indians inhabiting there as your
subjects. -- I am informed, that you have diverse fishermen on our coasts, and
that you permit your people to trade in the French ports. You may well expect,
Sir, that I shall seize all the English who shall be found fishing or trading;
for you cannot he ignorant, that it is plainly prohibited by the treaty between
the two crowns, which you yourself sent to me. Mons. de Bonaventure, commander
of the Envieux, has also sent you some of your fishing vessels, which he had
taken, and acquainted you, that if they returned, either for fishing or
trading, he would make prize of them. Villebon's letter 5 Sep. School.


THE Norridgewock Indians, this year also, built a church, at their chief
settlement upon Kennebeck river, which was complained of by the Massachusetts
government as a French encroachment; but I know not for what reason, except
their having a Frenchman for their priest can be thought one.

REPRESENTATIONS were made to the ministry, and the right of the English to the
eastern country, as far as St. Croix, was insisted upon. The Lords of trade
write thus to the Earl of Bellamont. As to the boundaries, we have always
insisted and shall insist upon the English right as far as the river St. Croix;
but in the mean while, in relation to the encroachments of the French and their
building a church on Kennebeck river, that seems to us a very proper occasion
for your Lordship's urging the general assembly of the Massachusets-Bay to
rebuild the fort at Pemaquid, which they ought to have done long ago, and
thereby they might have prevented this and many other inconveniences. October.
30. 1700.


THE French persisted in their molestations of the English fishermen, and there
seems to have been no great concern about it in the English ministry; other
greater affairs, in difference between the two crowns, engaged the attention,
and brought on a new war; and it was well they did, for it looks very probable,
that this dispute about the fishery would not have made a breach, but if peace
had continued, too French would have excluded the English, and this valuable
branch, once lost, might never have been recovered.

KING JAMES, always under the influence of France, had relinquished his right
to Acadie or Nova Scotia; and although his governor (Andros) for the short time
the King remained afterward upon the throne, retained the possession of
Pemaquid, and challenged a right to St. Croix; and although the friendship
between the two monarchs might prevent any severity upon the English fishermen,
yet the French insisted upon their right both to the country and coasts. The
war, upon the revolution, suspended the dispute about title. At the treaty of
Ryswick, England was not disposed to urge any points which would retard the
peace; and the French immediately after renewed the same claim they had made
under King James.

The general court in that day always adjourned to attend the lecture. An
anecdote or two, or what the French call personalitez, will give us an idea of
some parts of his lordship's character. The precise part of the country,
however treated with respect in public, were not most agreeable for private
company and more intimate acquaintance. Among the more liberal was one
Bullivant, an apothecary, who had been a justice of peace under Andros. Lord
Bellamont, going from the lecture to his house, with a great crowd round him,
passed by Bullivant standing at his shop door loitering, "Doctor," says his
fordship with an audible voice, "you have lost a precious sermon to day."
Bullivant whispered to one of his companions who stood by him, "If I could have
got as much by being there as his lordship will, I would have been there too. A
speech of his to his lady, when his table was filled with representatives from
the country towns, is yet remembered: -- Dame, we should treat these gentlemen
well, they give us our bread.
with great reverence, and professed great regard and esteem for the preachers.
He avoided all unnecessary contests with private persons, or with either branch
of the legislature. His inclination led him to Mr. Dudley's enemies, but he did
not neglect those who were friendly and attached to him. There was perfect
harmony in the general court whilst he presided. There was something singular
and unparliamentary in his form of proceeding in council; for he considered
himself as at the head of the board in their legistative; as well as executive
capacity. He concerned himself in all their debates; Henry IV. sat in the House
of Lords in De la Pole's case; but the Lords protested against the King's
interposing in their rights and privileges. -- In the reign of his predecessor
Richard 2d, the houses of parliament had resolved that the King has the
appointing what matters shall be first handled in parliament and, after that,
what next, and so on to the end of the session.
proposed all business, and frequently recommended to them to resolve into a
committee upon bills or clauses in bills, and then, as the entries stand, he
left the chair, and the committee (being ready to report) reassumed; nor did he
think it proper they should act as a house of parliament in his absence; but
when detained at home, by messages from time to time, directed their going into
a committee and preparing business against such time as he should be able to
attend. This was guiding them in all their debates and resolves, as far as his
influence would extend, which was not a little way; and yet afterward, as a
separate branch, he had his negative upon all their proceedings which were not
according to his mind. This irregularity does not seem to be the meet effect of
his lordship's authority and influence over the council. The constitution under
the new charter was not settled. They came off by degrees from their practice
under the old charter. The governor, created by the people, used, then, to vote
with the assistants; and although he had no negative, yet he had a casting
voice. While Mr. Stoughton was commander in chief, he had always been chosen of
the council; it can scarcely be supposed that he gave his voice as one of the
council, in legislative matters.
Lord Bellamont finding this to have been the practice, and considering how
much it increased his share in all acts of government, might be disposed to
retain it. Experience taught, what was not at first conceived, the great
difference between the privilege of proposing or originating and that of
rejecting. In some succeeding administrations, it has given cause of exception
and complaint when the governor has interested himself in the debates of the
council, to influence their determinations and abridge them of that freedom, to
which they are equally entitled with the other branches of the legislature. He
was the first governor who imitated the lord lieutenant of Ireland, in formal
speeches, as the king's representative, to the two houses of parliament; copies
of which were delivered to the speaker and afterward printed. Extracts, from
one or two, show they were calculated ad captandum. The unfavorable sentiments
of the inhabitants, in general, of the reign of the Stuarts, were well known to
him; no subject could be more engaging than a censure upon that family. He
concludes his first speech, which is a very long one, in this manner. I should
be wanting to you and myself too, if I did not put you in mind of the
indispensable duty and respect we owe the king, for being the glorious
instrument of our deliverance from the odious fetters and chains of popery and
tyranny; which has almost overwhelmed our consciences and subverted all our
civil rights. There is something that is godlike in what the king has done for
us. The works of redemption and preservation come next to that of creation. I
would not be misunderstood, so, as to be thought to rob God of the glory of
that stupendous act of his providence, in bringing to pass the late happy and
wonderful revolution in England. His blessed work it was, without doubt, and he
was pleased to make king William, immediately, the author and instrument of it.
Ever since the year 1602, England has had a succession of kings, who have been
aliens in this respect, that they have not fought our battles nor been in our
interests, but have been, in an unnatural manner, plotting and contriving to
undermine and subvert our religion, laws and liberties, till God was pleased,
by his infinite power and mercy and goodness, to give us a true English king,
in the person of his present majesty, who has, upon all occasions, hazarded his
royal person in the fronts of our battles and where there was most danger; he
has restored to our nation the almost lost character of bravery and valor; and,
what is most valuable of all, his majesty is entirely in the interest of his
people. It is therefore our duty and interest to pray to God, in the most
fervent manner, that he would bless our great king William with a long and
prosperous reign over us, to which I am persuaded, you that are present and all
good people will heartily say amen."

His last speech had expressions, strong enough, upon the same strain. The
parting with Canada to the French and the eastern country called Acadia or Nova
Scotia, with the noble fishery on that coast, were most execrable treacheries
to England, and intended, without doubt, to serve the ends of popery. It is too
well known, what interest that King favored, who parted with Nova Scotia, and
of what religion he died."

BY avoiding offense to particular persons, and by a general conformity to the
cast or prevailing disposition of the people, his Lordship obtained a larger
sum, as a salary and gratuity, not only than any of his predecessors, but also
than any who succeeded him, when the inhabitants were more numerous and more
opulent, and money, compared with the necessaries of life, had become less
valuable; for he remained but 14 months in the province, and the grants made by
the general court amounted to L.2500 lawful money, or L.1875 sterling.

HIS time was much taken up in securing the pirates and their effects, which,
we have observed, was a great ^nducement with the king to send him to America.
Before his arrival in Boston, several suspected persons had been seized. After
30 or 40 years indulgence, there succeeded a general abhorrence of bucaneering;
and the bucaneers, or freebooters, were hunted from one colony to another. A
large sum of money was seized in the possession of one Smith, part of it
foreign coins and the impressions unintelligible; and he was brought upon
trial, but the evidence produced being insufficient to satisfy the jury, he was
acquitted.

ABOUT the same time, one Bradish was apprehended. He had been boatswain's mate
of a ship sitted out by merchants and tradesmen of London to India, in the
interloping trade. The crew turned pirates; and, having left the master ashore
at Polonais, gave the command to Bradish. They came to America, and lodged
large sums of money and goods with persons upon Long Island and other places
within and near to the government of New York, and then dispersed; some to
Connecticut, others to Massachusetts bay, where Bradish was taken and others of
his crew and sent to England. The vigilance, used in pursuing and apprehending
them, appears from the account Mr. Stoughton transmitted to the secretary of
state. "I have further to observe unto your honor that, about the 19th of March
last past, there arrived at the cast end of Long Island, in the province of New
York, the ship or hack-boat named the Adventure, of London burden about 350
tons, mounted with 22 guns, Thomas Gullock late commander; which ship failed
from Gravesend the 16th day of March 1697-8, bound to the Island of Borneo in
India, upon an interloping trade; being set forth by Capt. Henry Tate and
Capt.Hammond, who kept a brewhouse in Thames Street, and Mr. Samuel Shephard
and the Heathcoats, merchants in London. Having proceeded so far onward of the
voyage as Polonais, they there stopped to water; and the said commander, with
several of the officers, mariners and some passengers being on shore upon the
said Island, and the Boatswain gone on board with water, the rest of the ship's
company combined and conspired together to leave the said commander and others
with him on shore upon the said Island, and to run away with the ship and
lading; which they accordingly put in execution, on the 17th day of September
last past, cut the cables and brought the ship to fail, offering the yawl to
some of the company that refused to join with them in the said piracy, to
transport them to the shore; which they accepted of and several went off in her
to the said Island; the surgeon's mate and two other youths they forced to stay
in the ship: The chief mate also, with the boatswain and armourer, not
consenting, unto the said villainous act, but unwilling to go ashore at the
aforesaid Island, they gave the long boat unto them with necessary provisions,
etc. three days after, being then about 20 leagues from the land; in which they
went off from the ship, the remainder of the company on board, being five or
six and twenty in number, made choice of one Joseph Bradish, the boatswain's
mate, to be their commander, whom they preferred for his skill in navigation,
and directed their course for Mauritius, where they fitted the ship, took in
some fresh provisions and two young gentlemen named Charles Seymour and John
Power, who being on a voyage for India, in a ship under the command of one
Capt. Pie, were unhappily left behind on the said Island; and from Mauritius
they came about cape bon esperance and in some short time after made a sharing
of the money on board, which was contained in nine chests, stowed in the bread
room, and set forth three or four and twenty single shares, besides the
Captain's which was two shares and a half. In weighing out the money, some
received 1500 others 1000 dollars for a single share. They afterward made a
second sharing of broad cloths, serges, stuffs and other goods on board. They
stopped at the Island of Ascension, took some turtle and fresh provisions
there, and thence directed their course for this continent and arrived as
aforesaid at Long Island, where the said Capt. Bradish went on shore, carried
the most of his money and some rings and jewels with him; committed them to the
care of a gentlement on said Island; sent a pilot on board to remove the ship
and bring her to an Island called Gardner's Island; but the wind not favoring
them, ran over to Block Island within Rhode Island government; from whence they
sent two of the company to said Rhode Island to buy a floop, but the government
there, having notice that a ship was hovering about those parts, suspected to
be a pirate, seized on the said two men and detained them; the intelligence
whereof being carried to the ship, and some floops being described coming from
said Island toward the ship, the company, fearing that they were manned out
from thence to seize them, forthwith came to fail and stood off to sea ward;
the floops following, came up with them, and being informed what the floops
were, permitted them to, come on board and bought one of the floops and hired
another to transport them and their money, allowing the floops men to take what
they pleased out of the ship and gat on shore some in one place and some in
another; landing at farm houses, where they provided themselves with horses,
and seattered into diverse parts of the country; the captain, and some others
with him, coming into this province: upon the first intelligence whereof, a
proclamation was issued and hue and cries sent through the province and into
the neighboring governments to pursue and seize all such of them as could be
found, with their treasure. The captain, with ten more of the company, are
apprehended and in custody here in order to a trial; who upon examination
severally confessed the particulars before recited; and a considerable quantity
of money, to the value of near three thousand pounds, with several goods and
merchandises taken out of the said ship are seized. Seven or eight more are
apprehended within Connecticut government, and pursuit is making after the
rest. The justices of the peace and other officers, in their respective
stations, have been very vigorous in the prosecution of these villains, and the
people in general have just resentment and abhorrence of such vile actions, and
the government here will be very zealous in the discountenancing and punishing
all such criminals." Alr. Stoughten's letter to Mr. Seer's Vernon, Ap. 12. 1699.
But Kidd was his lordship's chief object. His own reputation and that of
several of his friends depended upon his seizure, being the only effectual way
of removing the jealousies and unjust surmises, not only against several of the
ministry, but even against the king himself. In order to suppress the piracies
committed by English subjects in India, etc. it was thought proper to fit out a
ship for that special purpose. Lord Rumney, Summers and others, became
adventurers, to the amount of six thousand pounds sterling, and a grant was
made to them of all captures, saving one tenth only reserved to the king. Lord
Bellamont seems to have had the principal direction. Upon enquiry for a proper
commander, Mr. Livingstone, a principal inhabitant of New York being then in
London, recommended Kidd who had sailed out of New York, and having a family
there, no question was made of his attachment to it, and there was no suspicion
of his ever turning pirate himself. From London he went first to New York,
where he broke through the instructions he had received, shipping his men upon
new terms; and when he arrived in India, not only connived at and suffered to
continue, a known pirate vessel, but committed diverse alarming acts of piracy
himself, to the endangering the amity subsisting between the East India company
and the princes in that part of the world. The least said, by the enemies of
the administration, was that, from a greedy desire of gain, an ill-judged
measure had been engaged in, which would be attended with very mischievous
consequences, and the malice of some insinuated a criminal intention in the
undertaking.

WHERE Kidd would seek an asylum was uncertain. Strangely infatuated, he came
from Madagascar to Boston, and made a bold open appearance there, July the
first this year, and some of his crew with him. On the third, he was sent for
by the governor and examined before the council. What account he could give of
himself does not now appear, but he was not immediately committed, and only
ordered to draw up a narrative of his proceedings; which neglecting to do in
the time assigned him, on the sixth he was apprehended and committed to prison.
Being a very resolute fellow, when the officer arrested him in his lodgings, he
attempted to draw his sword, but a young gentleman, Mr. Thomas Hutchinson,
afterward, for many years one of the council.
who accompained the officer, laying hold of his arm prevented him, and he
submitted. Several of his men were secured at the same time, and advice having
been sent to England, it was thought an affair of so much importance, that a
man of war was sent to carry them there; where Kidd, Bradish and diverse others
were condemned and executed. The party writers in England pretended, that after
Kidd's arrival he had assurance from some anti-courtiers, who examined him in
prison, that his life should be spared if he would accuse his employers. but
that he was not bad enough to comply with such a proposal.

LORD Bellamont held two sessions of the general court this year; the first,
the anniversary for the election of counselors, the latter the 31st of March
following, occasioned by a general rumor through the colonies, that the Indians
(from all quarters, not only those upon the frontiers, but those who were
scattered through the towns in the several colonies) had united and agreed, at
an appointed time, to fall upon the English in order to a total extirpation.
The Indians were no less alarmed with a report, that the king had withdrawn his
protection from them, and ordered his subjects to unite in their destruction.
These reports were supposed to have been raised by evil minded persons among
the English or Dutch; but it is more probable, the Indians of the six nations,
I remember that when the commissioners from several governments were at Albany,
upon treaty with the Indians of the six nations, in the year 1745, Hendrick,
the Indian chief (who afterward lost his life fighting under the English when
baren Dieskau was defeated) had contrived, a little while before the treaty, to
spread a rumor, among his countrymen, that the English had laid a plan for
their destruction; and that arms, ammunition, etc. were provided and sent to
the frontiers, in order to make a stroke upon them, when they least expected
it. The commissioners were surprised at the general discontent discovered (...)
Indians, their frequent assembling and their backwardness in conferring with
the English; and having some intimation of the rumor, they resolved to search
to the botton of it. Hendrick, finding himself in danger of being discovered,
and fearing the resentment of his own countrymen, came to the commissioners
privately, and desired they would make no further enquiry; he would undertake
to quiet the Indians and remove their fears. The commissioners considered him
as a necessary man, who had been very useful in bringing his countrymen to
agree to measures proposed by the English, and that it was good policy not to
expose him, and left it to him to convince the rest, that their suspicions were
groundless, which he effected in a very short time.
to obtain the presents which accompanied all treaties between the English and
them, were the contrivers and managers of the whole affair. Such was the
consternation in the Massachusetts, that several acts passed the general court
for levying soldiers; for punishing mutiny and desertion; for holding all the
militia in readiness to march; and for enabling the governor to march them out
of the province, which, by charter, he was restrained from without an act of
assembly. As it happened, there was no occasion for carrying these laws into
execution; the general terror subsiding soon after.





WHEN Sir Richard Onflow and Mr. Harley We have a tradition that Mr. Harley had
some New England blood in him, his mother being a grand daughter of Sir Richard
Saltonstall. A letter from her to one of her sisters in New England is said to
have been preserved many years after his death for the sake of this passage in
it. "I am now going to carry Bob up to the inns of court to make a man of him."
were competitors for the speaker's place, his inclination led him to the
latter, from whom he had received favors; but his favorite object, which he was
then pursuing, obliged him to comply with the court and vote for the former. He
made use of the dissenting interest in England to obtain his commission and to
recommend him to his countrymen upon his arrival. "Revd Sirs, London 13 Aug.
1701.
The just and great concern we have for the welfare of New England has, upon
all occasions, engaged us to improve that little interest we have or can make
at court, in the appointment of your governor from time to time, that he may be
such a one as may seek your good, and under whom you may be secure and
encouraged in your holy religion, and also in your civil rights and privileges;
and such a one we hope and have a great deal of reason to believe is Col.
Dudley, whom the king was pleased upon his departure to appoint your governor,
and we crave leave to acquaint you that we were very well pleased in his
Majesty's nomination upon many accounts, our own personal knowledge of his
character to be a man of learning, prudence and sobriety, and of good
acceptance with the present government of England for his faithful service in
the Isle of Wight, and that his family, estate and interest is in your country.
Upon the whole, we judge it an especial act of the King's favor toward you,
that he, among so many others that always offer upon such accounts, should be
determined for you. We hope and believe it is the especial providence of God,
and shall heartily pray that you may soon see him and have the benefit of his
good conduct and care for you, and do not doubt but you will joyfully receive
him and assist him with your prayers and advice. At all times we are, Revd
Sirs, Your most affectionate and humble servants,

John Quick Robert Billio Josiah Chorley Norwich Fr. Glascocke John Long
Jeremiah White Richd Stretton Tho. Powell. minister of the gospel, Matt.
Sylvester."



Letter from dissenting ministers in England to the ministers of Massachusetts
bay.
There was another difficulty still remaining, the king was not willing to
appoint a governor who he knew had been very obnoxious to the people. A
petition was therefore procured, from such persons belonging to the
Massachusetts bay as were then in London, and from the principal New England
merchants, praying that Mr. Dudley might be appointed governor. He had also the
address to reconcile himself to Mr. Mather the younger, and to obtain from him
a letter favoring his cause, which he made known to the king, and which removed
his objection; "I have been so hurried in parliament, and indisposed by my late
attending committees, that I could not find leisure to write to you; or rather,
I was so out of humor with my ill usage here and in New England, for my
faithful 12 years service, that I had no heart to write. I see, he that is
faithful to his religion and his country must expect his reward above. Before
the king died, I had another hearing before the council and the king, Mr.
Dudley and Mr. Phips on the one side, and I alone on the other. Mr. Dudley
produced Mr. Cotton Mather's letter, and read it to the king; and Mr. Phips and
he averred, that there was not one minister not one of the assembly but were
impatient for his coming. I wish you very happy under his government. As to my
Lord Cornbury, he was bred at Geneva, and would no more have attempted upon
your religious interest than I would. I could not believe that my Lord Weymouth
should hinder his own son in law from being chosen parliament man, that Mr.
Dudley, when I opposed him, might get in, and that Mr. Blaithwait and the
bishop of St. Asaph, should so earnestly be for Dudley's going, and that on
purpose to serve the interest of your churches. Mr. Stretton gat all the
Non-coxs to subscribe that letter. Poor Mr. Glascock wept to Mr. How for
signing it. Whatever you please to say or think of me, I have the testimony of
my conscience, that in the integrity of my heart, in the sight of God, I have
served New England with all my might." Sir H. Ashurst to I. M. March 25. 1702.
Sir Henry Ashurst was mistaken in his opinion of Lord Cornbury. Mr. Smith, in
his history of New York, has given us an account of the arbitrary severe
treatment the dissenters received from him. A circumstantial account of his
prosecuting two itinerant preachers I have seen, under the hand of one of them.
The southern colonies being destitute of ministers of any sort, the diffenting
ministers in London, with some principal men of their congregations made
provision for the support of two itinerant missionaries from Virginia to
New York, who were to be absent two years; and upon their return, two others
were to be sent out, and so from time to time. The two first were George
Macnish from Scotland, and John Hampton from Ireland; but being strangers to
America, Francis Makennie, another minister who had been there before,
accompanied them. Beginning their mission at Carolina they traveled northward;
and M' Nish being left to take care of five meeting houses in Somerset,
Maryland, the other two went on to New York. They waited upon the governor, and
were civilly received; and some of the inhabitants who desired to hear them,
applied to his Lordship to give them leave to preach in the Dutch or French
church, but he refused it, and the ministers of the churches did not care to
admit them against his mind. Makennie, in compliance with the desires of the
people, preached in a private house with the doors open, and a day or two after
left New York in order to preach at Newtown on Long Island where he and Hampton
who had preached in the meeting house at Newtown were apprehended by a warrant
from the governor, carried before him and charged with preaching in his
government without his license: They replied, that they presumed upon the
liberty given by an act of parliament the 1st of William and Mary, and had
obtained certificates according to the directions of the act which they
delivered him. He told them the act was local, and they must find sureties for
their good behavior, and especially not to preach any more in his government.
This they declined, and were committed to custody, where they continued many
weeks at the expense of 40s. per week. During their consinement, they applied
to the ministers of Boston, desiring them to represent their case to some
gentlemen in England who might appear in their behalf, which occasioned among
others the following letter. Sirs, Boston, N.E. April 1. 1707. We have lately
given you some account of the violent and illegal actions of my lord Cornbury,
governor of New York, in imprisoning two qualified presbyterian ministers (Mr.
F. M. and Mr. I. H.) for offering to attend the duties of their ministry in his
government, under the shelter of the act of toleration. The gentlemen lay
prisoners for more than six weeks at forty shillings per week charges, upon a
mittimus signed by my lord, not in the queen's name and without any crime
specified, Though both my lord and the queen's attorney denied the act of
toleration to extend unto the plantations, yet they have since made the act of
uniformity, notwithstanding the clauses of limitation in it, so extensive. The
chief justice, finding himself under a necessity to grant the gentleman an
habeas corpus, which would have discharged them, my lord (from whom they have
no hope of obtaining here any satisfaction for their false imprisonment all
this while) served a new mittimus upon them. A grand jury was packed, whereof
three were justices of the peace, who had already, as such, appeared against
the prisoners; the rest of the English were high flying churchmen, and the
biggest part were Dutch and French, who neither knew the English law nor spoke
the English tongue, and either were dependents on my lord or suspected of
popery. This grand jury found against Mr. Francis Mackennie a bill, that on the
22d day of January he did preach and teach at the house of one William Iackson,
where were assembled together above the number of five persons at one time, and
did voluntarily and unlawfully use other rites and ceremonies and form and
manner of divine worship than what are contained in a certain book entitled,
the book of common prayer and administration of the sacraments, against the
statute in that case made and provided. Mr. John Hampton was discharged, being
a man of less interest. On this bill, the said Mr. Francis Mackennie is bound
over to the court in June, when he expects another jury of the same complexion,
and that their design is then to make a prey of him. Except a speedy relief be
obtained, the issue will be, not only a valt oppression on a very worthy
servant of God, but also a confusion upon the whole body of diffenters in those
colonies, where they are languishing under my lord Cornbury's arbitrary and
unaccountable government. We do therefore earnestly solicit you, that you
would humbly petition the queen's majesty on this occasion, and represent the
sufferings of the dissenters in those parts of America which are carried on in
so direct violation of her majesty's commands, of the laws of the nation, and
the common rights of Englishmen. The distance of a thousand leagues between
England and these colonies, and the uncertainty of communication in this time
of war, make our condition under oppressors the more insupportable, ever any
relief or so much as a check, to such a governor as my lord Cornbury, can be
obtained; and bespeaks the more lively compassion of those unto whom we cry, as
we now do unto you to be our advocates. It is the cause of the oppressed that
you now have to plead; the cause of not only many thousands in America, but of
a great part of the English nation, and indeed the common cause of humanity
itself. You may depend upon the truth of the representation here laid before
you, and it is to be wished that it may be published unto the whole English
nation. The desires of many, of the most eminent persons in New England, thus
address unto you by the pen of, Sirs, your most humble servant. To Sir H.
Ashurst, Sir W. Ashurst, and Sir Edm, Harrison, London.
and although Lord Cornbury, a near relation of the late Queen and the Princess
Ann, being appointed for New York, expected Massachusetts also, yet Mr. Dudley
prevailed; and his commission passed the seals. The king's death, a few months
after, caused him the trouble of taking out a new commission from the Queen,
but he had the unusual favor shown him of remitting most if not all the fees.

manuscript minutes and letters, which I have seen, about the time, and after
the settlement of the charter, take it for granted, that upon the death or
absence of the governor and lieutenant governor the senior counselor would
preside, and an instruction from the crown has been given for that purpose; but
the expression in the charter, if it will admit of this construction, does not
favor it: We must not wonder therefore, that twentseven counselors did not
readily give up their share in the administration to him that happened to be
the eldest. It is a defect in the constitution, for although, for certain
purposes, seven counselors make a quorum, yet in all acts, as commanders in
chief, it has been judged necessary, that fifteen (or a majority of the whole
number) should give their consent. This must be extremely inconvenient,
especially in time of war, when dispatch, often, and secrecy, sometimes, are of
great importance.

MR. Stoughton's father was esteemed by the people; was commander in chief of
the forces of the colony in the first war against the Pequod Indians, and after
that, many years a magistrate; and of a considerable estate for those times.
This circumstance caused his own natural endowments, which were cultivated and
improved by the best education the country afforded, to be more observed and
valued. He was, in early life, a candidate for the ministry; Many gentlemen,
before and since Mr. Stoughton, who have been probationers for the ministry,
have afterward made a figure at the bar, and in the legislative as well as
executive courts of the province, gained great reputation; and some, who have
been settled ministers, have not been less esteemed for leaving their parishes
where an insufficient support has been afforded, or there has been other good
cause assigned; but these instances are more rare. The New England clergy do
not assume an indelible character; however, after having been once ordained,
or, to use one of their own as well as a scriptural expressive term, separated
to the work of the ministry, there seems to be some more special reasons
requisite to justify the forsaking this, than would be sufficient in the case
of a civil employment or course of life.
but the people judged him proper to take his father's place as a magistrate;
then employed him as their agent in England; and urged him a second time to
engage in the same service. It is no blemish in his character that he had many
opposers. Every man, who makes it more his aim to serve than to please the
people, may expect it. From the observations he made in his agency, he was
convinced it was to no purpose to oppose the demands of king Charles; and from
the example of the corporations in England, he was for surrendering the charter
rather than to suffer a judgment or decree against it. In such case, a more
favorable administration might be expected to succeed it, and in better times
there would be a greater chance for re-assuming it. He consented to act as one
of the council under Sir Edmund Andros, in hopes, by that means, to render the
new form of government more easy. By this step he lost the favor of the people,
and yet did not obtain the confidence of the governor, who would willingly have
been rid of him, seldom consulted him, and by the influence he had over the
majority of the council, generally, carried the votes against his mind. He
joined upon the revolntion with the old magistrates, who made no scruple of
receiving him, in re-assuming the government; but upon the election afterward
made by the people he did not obtain a vote. At the desire of the council and
representatives he drew up a narrative of the proceedings of Sir Edmund and his
accomplices; signed by him and several others of the council, They conclude
their narrative with these words, These are the chief matters which upon this
occasion. without any undue prejudice against any man, or design to justify the
defects of ourselves in the performance of our own shares of duty, but in
answer to the desire signified to us as above, we have to set forth; professing
truly, that by such a state of things as we had the experience and feeling of,
the places that we held were rendered exceeding uneasy to us, and that out of a
sincere respect to the prosperity of these their majesty's plantations, we
could not but be very desirous, that through the favor of God and our
superiors, all due redress might in a good happy season be obtained; and the
way of governing English subjects in their majesty's dominions, without an
assembly of the people's representatives, be banished forever. Will. Stoughton
Thomas Hinkley Wait Winthrop Barth. Gedney Sam. Shrimpton.
in which they modestly take exception to many things in the administration,
and exculpate themselves from any share in them. He was nine years lieutenant
governor, and fix of them commander in chief; had experienced the two extremes
of popular and absolute government; and not only himself approved of a mean
between both, but was better qualified to recommend it, by a discrect
administration, to the people of the province. He died a bachelor, Instead of
children, he saw, before his death, a college reared at his expense, which took
the name of Stoughton hall. The foundation stone was laid the 9th of May School.
He had good reason to think it would transmit a grateful remembrance of his
name to succeeding ages.

SIR Henry Ashurst Sir Henry was finally dismissed just before Lord Bellamont
left the province.
and Constantine Phips had continued agents for the province, in England, for
ten years together. Diverse attempts had been made, by Mr. Mather's friends, to
send him again to England in the service of the province; and, after Mr.
Stoughton's death, the two houses came to a resolution to choose some person in
the province, and send him to England as their agent; and a great interest was
made that Mr. Mather might be the man; but it happened that Mr. Cook, who had
not forgot their former difference when joint agents, stood as well with the
assembly at this time as he had ever done, and had influence enough to prevent
Mr. Mather from succeeding. The choice fell upon Waitstill Winthrop, grandson
to the first governor of the Massachusetts and son to the first governor of
Connecticut, and who either out of respect to his family, or for some other
reason which does not now appear, was considered as president of the council,
although there were many who by priority of appointment, the rule generally
observed, should have preceded him.

THE French claim to the country east of the river Kennebeck and to an
exclusive fishery upon the seacoast were the reasons publicly assigned for
the choice of an agent at this time, and an address to the king had passed the
council and assembly, and Mr. Winthrop's instructions were prepared. These
proceedings of the French were really alarming. The professed reasons, however,
were not the true reasons. Mr. Dudley's solicitations for the government were
known, and, although his interest in the province was increasing, yet, a
majority of the general court had a very ill opinion of him. Mr. Winthrop was a
good sort of a man, and although he was of a genius rather inferior to either
of his ancestors, yet he was popular, and the party against Mr. Dudley wished
to have him governor. They flattered themselves that his being acceptable to
the country would, together with his family and his estate, both which were of
the first rate, be sufficient to recommend him, but they were mistaken.
Winthrop was a plain honest man. Dudley had been many years well acquainted
with the customs and manners of a court, and would have been more than a match
for him. Just as he was about to embark, news came that Mr. Dudley was
appointed governor and Thomas Povey lieutenant governor. The reason of Mr.
Winthrop's appointment to the agency immediately appeared. The vote for his
instructions was reconsidered and his voyage laid aside. It was thought proper,
however, that the address to the king should be forwarded. This was sent to Mr.
Phips. A second address accompanied it, occasioned by advice of a bill being
brought into the house of lords for dissolving charter governments. It is not
probable that the Massachusetts charter was the special occasion of this bill.
It differs so little from the commissions in the royal governments, as they are
called, as not to be worth notice. About this time, or a little before, the
spirit against the king had caused the reassumption of many grants which he had
made of private estates. If there was a special prejudice against colony
charters, it is probable the charter to Pennsylvania was the most
exceptionable. The proprietor was obnoxious, had absconded a few years before
upon a suspicion of treasonable practices, and was still under a cloud. The
Massachusetts instruct their agent as follows. As to the bill, said to be lying
before the house of lords, for the dissolving charter governments in the
plantations, we entreat you to be very watchful in that matter and use utmost
diligence, by all convenient means, to prevent our being comprehended in or
concluded by the same. Our circumstances are different from those of other
plantations under charter government, our first settlement being wholly at our
own cost and charge, and by our present settlement we are already reduced to a
more immediate dependence on the crown, his majesty having reserved to himself
the nomination of our governor, lieutenant governor and secretary, and a
negative on our laws. In their address to the king they thus express
themselves. And forasmuch as we are given to understand that, through the
suggestions of some persons not well affected to charter governments, a bill
has been preferred in the house of lords for vacating charter and proprietary
governments within your majesty's plantations, we in all submission crave leave
humbly to pray your majesty's grace and favor toward your good subjects within
this your province, that no such suggestions may make an impression in your
royal breast to deprive us of those privileges which we enjoy under your
majesty's most gracious grant, and that we may not be included in any such act
to our prejudice, without having opportunity given us of being heard and
speaking for ourselves. The bill was dropped in the house of lords, and, a war
with France being every day expected, the longest sword was to determine the
points complained of in the first address.

THE sending these addresses to Phips was grievous to Ashurst. Sir Henry
Ashurst was son to Henry Ashurst, Esquire who had a great hand in settling the
corporation for propagating the gospel among the Indians in New England and
parts adjacent. Sir Henry being a zealous diffenter, accompanied Mr. Baxter
when he was brought to his trial before a savage judge, was at the expense of
fees for his counsel and, after the trial, led him through the crowd and
conveyed him away in a coach. Notwithstanding this, he was created a baronet in
the same reign, when dissenters, in opposition to the church of England, were
in favor, just before the revolution. His lady was daughter of lord Pager. He
died in 1710, leaving only one son, Sir Henry Ashurst, who married a daughter
and coheiress of Sir Thomas Draper, of Sunninghill-park, Berkshire, and was
member for Windsor in 1714, and died in 1732 without issue, so that the title
is extinct, but the descendants of the first Henry by the younger branches
remain, and the family is still respectable.
Although he had not very shining talents, yet being a member of parllament,
having a great family Interest, and being an honest man and conscientious in
the discharge of his trust, he had been very serviceable to the province. He
had however the fate of most agents. As Soon as the party against him found they
were strong enough they left him out of the agency, and he made frequent
complaints that they had slighted his services and neglected giving him an
adequate reward. All the agents who had been employed before him, except Mr.
Winslow, were unsuccessful and several, probably for that reason, thought
unfaithful. The first who were employed were Weld, Peter's, and Hibbins, in
1640. They borrowed money for the service of the colony, and proper care not
being taken by the government for the payment, these agents, for several years
after, were contending about the proportion in which they should pay it
themselves. Winslow, who went over in 1646, soon found more profitable
employment, but his allowance was so scant from the colony that the corporation
for propagating the gospel among the Indians allowed him L.100 sterling for
promoting that design, but wrote to the government that it ought to be
restored. Bradstreet and Norton were sent in 1660. Norton laid the reproaches
he met with so much to heart as to affect his health and shorten his life. In
1677 Stoughton and Bulkley were employed, and soon after their return it was
said by those who charged Bulkley with too great compliance with court
measures, that his sun set in a cloud. He died of melancholy. Stoughton was
reproached, and, although he had a majority of the court in his favor, he could
not be prevailed on to risque his reputation a second time. Dudley and Richards
were the next, in 1682. The former managed the whole business and bore the
whole blame but, being of a very different temper from some of his
predecessors, instead of laying to heart the flight of his countrymen, he was
politic enough to improve frowns at home to procure favors from abroad. Mather,
Cook and Oaks were employed to solicit the restoration of the first charter.
In this they failed. Mather without the consent of his brethren accepted the
present charter, and although, at first, a majority of the court acknowledged
his merit, the opposite party soon after prevailed, and he failed of his
expected reward, and complained all his life of the ingratitude of his
countrymen, after having spent not only his time but part of his estate in
public service. I would draw a veil over our transactions relative to agents,
if my obligations to truth would permit me. Errors and failings, as well as
laudable deeds, in past ages, may be rendered useful, by exciting posterity to
avoid the one and to imitate the other.

CHAP. II.
From the arrival of Governor Dudley, in 1702, to the arrival of Governor
Shute, in 1716.
Col. Hutchinson had the command of the castle when Mr. Dudley's arrived, but
was removed and succeeded by lieutenant governor Povey.
Foster, Addington, Russell, Phillips, Brown, Sargent and others, who had been
of the council which committed him to prison, where he lay 20 weeks, were of
the council when he arrived. Upon such political changes, a general amnesty is
oftentimes advisable and necessary.

THE affront and insult shown by Lewis the 14th, not only to the prince upon
the throne, but to the English nation, in proclaiming another person king, had
rendered a war with France inevitable, before the governor left England. The
news of its being proclaimed arrived, in a few weeks after him. Nothing less
could be expected than a war with the Indians also. Ever since the peace, in
School, the governor of Canada, by his emissaries, had been continually exciting
them to hostilities; and justified himself upon this principle, that the
Indians having cast themselves upon the French, long since, as their
protectors, and being proprietors of the eastern country, where the English had
usurped a jurisdiction, which as far westward as Kennebeck rightfully belonged
to the French, the English therefore were to be considered as intruders and
invaders upon the jurisdiction of the French and upon the property of the
Indians.

THE governor, the first summer, visited all the eastern frontiers as far as
Pemaquid; taking such gentlemen of the general court with him as he thought
proper; He always refused to allow the two houses to appoint committees to
attend him upon any treaties.
met the delegates from the Indian tribes and confirmed the former treaties
which had been made. He had recommended, in his first speech to the assembly,
the rebuilding the fort at Pemaquid; and the gentlemen, who accompanied him
east, reported in favor of it, and their report was accepted by the council;
but the house continued of the same mind they had formerly been, urging that
all the money they could raise would be wanted for other services more
necessary than that, and refused to comply with the governor's proposal. His
heart was set upon it; the ministry continued their prejudice in favor of this
particular spot, and, it is not improbable, that he had given encouragement he
should be able to carry a point, which his predecessors could not, and
therefore was the more mortified at the failure.

THE Indians, upon the Massachusetts frontiers, continued quiet this year, but
the Nova Scotia Indians seized three of the fishing vessels belonging to this
province, upon a report that war was declared. The council attempted to recover
them, and by the interposition of Bruillon, governor of Nova Scotia, two, if
not the third, were restored.

that in their list of elections, presented to him, he took notice that there
were several gentlemen left out, that were of the council last year, who were
of good ability, for estate and otherwise, to serve her majesty and well
disposed thereto, and that some others who were new elected, were not so well
qualified; some of them being of little or mean estate; and withal signified,
that he should expunge five of the names in their list, viz. Elisha Cook and
Peter Sargent Esq's, Mr. Thomas Oaks, Mr. John Saffin and Mr. John Brandford,
and dismissed the house, who returned to their chamber:" Genesis court records.
Cook had been of the council nine or ten years, had been assistant before the
revolution, married a daughter of governor Leveret, and was allied to the best
families in the province, had a better estate than the governor himself, but
then he had been agent in England, and discovered greater zeal for prosecuting
the complaints against Andros, Dudley, etc. than any of his fellow agents.
Sargent had married the relict of Sir William Phips. Oaks had been one of the
agents in England also, and under the direction of Cook. Saffin was a
principal inhabitant of Bristol (the father of Thomas Saffin in Stepney church
yard, whose memory the author of the spectator has immortalized) and Bradford
was grandson of the first worthy governor of Plymouth.

THERE had been but one instance, of the governor's refusal of a councellor,
since the charter. The right of refusal could not be disputed. Had the power
been frequently exercised, less exception would have been taken to this
instance; but the long disuse of it caused the re-assumption of it, upon so
many persons at once, to be more disagreeable. Oaks was of the House, and,
notwithstanding the negative as a councellor, remained there; and, if he could
be of any consequence, this would add to his weight.

LORD Cornbury, governor of New York, some time in the month of May, advised
Mr. Dudley of an army of French and Indians, intending to make a descent upon
Deerfield, in the Massachusetts province. The intelligence was brought to
Albany, by some of the praying or christianized Mohawks, who had been to visit
their friends at Cagnawaga in Canada, who formerly had belonged to the same
village, about 40 miles from Albany. This design was not immediately carried
into execution.

WHILST every one was fearing hostilities from the Indians, several Englishmen,
pretending friendship to Castine, son of the Baron de St. Castine by an Indian
woman, who now lived at Penobscot, plundered his house, etc. and made great
spoil. Upon his complaint to the government, he was assured the action should
not go without due punishment, and that restitution should be made. About the
same time, the Indians did mischief to some of the people upon Kennebeck: Which
action was first, I cannot ascertain. Perhaps neither of them was from
resentment or revenge for the other.

BEFORE the end of the year, the blow threatened in the beginning of it, was
struck upon Deerfield. This was the most remote settlement upon Connecticut
river, except a few families at Squakheag or Northfield adjoining to it.
Deerfield, being easiest of access of any place upon the river, had often
suffered by small parties. I 1697, an attempt was made upon it, but failed of
success, through the vigilance and bravery of the inhabitants, with Mr.
Williams their minister at their head. Col. Schuyler, of Albany, had obtained
information of the designs of the enemy upon it this year, and gave notice
seasonable enough to put the people upon their guard. It was afterward thought
remarkable, that the minister had it strongly impressed upon his mind, that the
town would be destroyed. It would not have been very strange if this impression
had never been off his mind. He warned his people of it in his sermons, but too
many made light of the intelligence, and of the impressions which naturally
followed. The government, upon his application, ordered 20 soldiers as a guard.
The party, which had been fitted out at Canada, consisted of about 300 French
and Indians, under Hertel de Rouville, who had four brothers with him; their
father had been a noted Partisan, but was now unable to take so long a march.
They came upon the town, the night after the 28th of February. In the fore part
of the night, and until about two hours before day, the watch kept the streets;
and, then, unfortunately went all to sleep. The enemy, who had been hovering
about them, and kept continually reconnoitring, perceived all to be quiet, and
first surprised the fort or principal garrison house. The snow was so high, in
drifts, that they had no difficulty in jumping over the walls. Another party
broke into the house of Mr. Williams, the minister, who, rising from his bed,
discovered near 20 entering. He expected immediate death, but had the firmness
of mind to take down a pistol, which he always kept loaded upon his tester, and
to present it to the breast of the first Indian who came up to him. The pistol,
fortunately for Mr. Williams, snapped only and missed fire. Had he killed the
Indian, his own life no doubt would have been taken in revenge. Being, in
effect, disarmed, he was seized and pinioned, and kept standing, in his shirt
only, in that cold season, the space of an hour. In the mean time, his house
was plundered, and two of his children and a negro woman murdered. His wife and
five other children were suffered to put on their clothes, and then he himself
was allowed to dress and prepare for a long march.

OTHER parties fell upon other houses in the town, and slew about 40 persons,
and made about 100 more prisoners. Sun about an hour high, the enemy had
finished their work, and took their departure, leaving all the houses,
outhouses, etc. in flames. Mrs. Williams had scarcely recovered from her lying
in, and was in a weak state. The enemy made all the haste they could, lest a
superior force should overtake them. The second day, she in her husband know
she was unable to travel any farther, as fast as they did. He knew the
consequence, and would gladly have remained with her and assisted her; but they
had different masters, and leave could not be obtained, and he was carried from
her and soon after heard that her master had sunk his hatchet into her (...)
One cannot easily conceive of greater distress, than what an affectionate
husband must then have felt. About twenty more of the prisoners, in their
travel toward Canada, gave out and were killed also. This is not mentioned as
an instance of savage barbarity. Their own preservation often depends upon
their destroying their prisoners. Henry the sifth of England killed, in cold
blood, the flower of France, when he supposed his own little army to be in
danger. The Indians, after these onsets, always expected to be pursued. If they
left their grown captives in the woods they would discover them to their
pursuers, if such captives should be found by them. To leave young children to
die would be more cruel than to kill them outright. Their barbarities are
committed, when they are intoxicated with liquor or enraged with passion. Some
of the children, who were taken at Deerfield, they drew upon slays; at other
times they have been known to carry them in their arms or upon their backs to
Canada. This tenderness has occasioned the beginning of an affection, which in
a few years has been so rivetted, that the parents of the children, who have
gone to Canada to seek them, could by no means prevail upon them to leave the
Indians and return (...) One of Mr. Williams's daughters married an Indian
husband and yet lives with them. I saw at Albany two or three men, in the year
1744, who came in with the Indians to trade, and who had been taken at Groton
in this, that is called Queen Ann's war. One of them -- Tarbell, was said to be
one of the wealthiest of the Cagnawaga tribe. He made a visit in his Indian
dress and with his Indian complexion (for by means of grease and paints but
little difference could be discerned) to his relations at Groton, but had no
inclination to remain there.
They were 25 days between Deerfield and Chambli, depending upon hunting for
their support as they traveled. Most of the captives were redeemed after some
years. Two of Mr. Williams's sons, after their return, were worthy ministers,
of amiable characters, one at Waltham, now deceased; the other still living at
Long-Meadow in Springfield.
Vaudreuil, the French governor of Canada, treated these prisoners with
humanity; and although the Indians have been encouraged, by premiums upon
prisoners and scalps, to lay waste the English frontiers, yet the captives, who
have been carried to Canada, have often received very kind usage from the
French inhabitants.

THE unfortunate provinces, of Massachusets-bay and New Hampshire, were the
only people upon the continent against whom the French and Indians, during a
ten years war, exerted their strength. Connecticut and Rhode Island were
covered by the Massachusetts. New York took care of themselves, and of the
colonies south of them, by a neutrality which the Iroquois or six nations
(influenced by those who had the direction of Indian affairs) engaged to
observe between the English and French. This was, in effect, a neutrality
between the French and the English governments to the southward of New England.
Nothing could be more acceptable to the Canadians. The New England governments
felt the terrible consequences. Charlevoix gives this account of it.
Teganissorens arrived, a little while after, at Montreal, and, in the
conference which he had with the commander in chief, he appeared, at first, to
be out of human, which boded ill to the business he came upon. The Europeans,
says he, are an out of the way people; after they have made peace, one with
another, they go to war again, for mere nothing at all. This is not our
practice; after we have once signed to a treaty, there must be some very strong
reasons to induce us to break it. He went on and declared, that his nation
should not engage in a war which they did not approve of, neither on one side
nor the other. Monside Vaudreuil let Teganissorens know, that he desired
nothing further; and, that the Iroquois might have no pretense to break so
advantageous a neutrality, he determined to send out no parties toward
New York. Again, upon another occasion, At all events, the six nations, and
especially the Tsonon heans, Seneka's
were resolved strictly to observe the neutrality which they had sworm and of
which they had begun to feel the benefit; but you may see that they were much
set upon including the English, that they might be considered as mediators
between them and us. Mr. Vaudreuil, who had very (...) seen through their
design, had acquainted the court with it, and received for answer, that if he
(...) able to carry on the war to advantage without putting the crown to any
extraordinary expense, he should reject the proposals of the Iroquois;
otherwise, he might settle a nautrality for America, upon the best terms he
could, but that it was not for his majesty's honor that his governor and
lieutenant general should be the first mover of it. The minister added, that he
thought it would be most proper for the missonaries to let the Indians know,
that the French did not desire to disturb the peace of the country; that although
they were very well able to carry on a vigorous will, you they proferred the
quiet of Canada to all the advantages they might reap from the superiority of
their arms; and if the six nations. convinced that this was out disposition,
should cause the English to ask a nemrality for their colonie M. Vaudreuil
might consider of it; but that he should not come to a conclusion without
orders from the king.

I am sensible Charlevoix says, that the Bostoneers would have obtained the
same thing from the Abenaquis or eastern Indians. It is certain, that the
Massachusetts government would have been content (provided the eastern Indians
had continued at peace with the English) that they should not be obliged to go
to war against the French; but the Massachusetts, in all their treaties with the
eastern Indians, made peace for the other governments as well as for
themselves; and hostilities against Connecticut or New York would have been
deemed a breach of the peace, as well as those against the Massachusetts;
whereas the New-Yorkers, or rather the Albanians, suffered the Canada Indians
to go thoroughly their province and fall upon any of our frontiers, without
looking upon it to be a breach of the neutrality, and carried on great trade
both with French and Indians, at the same time; and sometimes the plunder, made
in the county of Hampshire, became merchandise in Albany. Some of the best
people detested such proceedings, particularly Col. John Schuyler of Albany;
who, by means of the Indians of the six nations in the English interest,
informed himself of the intended expeditions of the French, and French Indians,
and gave frequent notice to the people upon our frontiers to be upon their
guard; but most of the inroads made upon us he had it not in his power to
discover.

THAT the French might improve this plan to greater advantage, they drew off,
about this time, a great number of the Abenaquis families from Penobscot,
Norridgewock, Saco, Pigwacket, etc. and settled them at Becancour and St.
Francois, in Canada, where they were known to the English by the name of St.
Francois Indians. Here they were under the constant direction of the governor
of Canada, and were sent out, from time to time, with parties of the six
nations in the French interest and French Canadians, to massacre the men, women
and children upon the east and west frontiers. Charlevoix says, they were
intended as a barrier against the inroads of the six nations, in case of a
future war between them and the French."

THE Massachusetts, thus harrassed and perplexed, thought it necessary to remain
no longer on the defensive only; and, in the fall, sent out three or four
hundred men to a noted settlement of the Indians at Pigwacke^; and another
party to the ponds, Ossapy, etc. upon the back of the eastern frontier; but
neither party met with the enemy. Soon after, Col. March going out with another
party, killed and took about a dozen of the enemy. This measure not answering
expectation; to encourage small parties of the English to go out and hunt the
Indians, the general court promised a bounty or reward; no less than forty
pounds, for every Indian scalp. Capt. Tyng went out in the winter and brought
in five.



ALL these attemps failing, a still more expensive undertaking was agreed on.
It was supposed, that an army, to sweep the coast and country from Piscataqua
river to Nova Scotia, would strike terror into the Indians and bring them to
reason. Col. Church, noted for his exploits in former wars, especially in
Phillip's war, was pitched upon to command in this expedition, and had orders
to inlist as many as he could, both of English and Indians, who had been in
service before. This is called, by Charlevoix, an expedition against Portroyal;
but Church was instructed not to make any attempt against the fort there, and
to ravage the country only. Mr. Dudley had intimations of the Queen's
intention, to sent ships the next year for the reduction of that fortress. This
he, publicly, gave as his reason. His enemies charged him with a secret desi^^
that the place might be preserved, for the sake of unlawful rade with the
inhabitants in which ^e was to be a sharer.


CHURCH had 550 soldiers under him, in 14 small transports, and was provided
with 36 whaleboats, and convoyed by the Iersey man of war, of 48, the Gosport
of 32, and the province snow of 14 guns. He stopped first at Montinicus, and
sent two of his boats to Green-Island, where he took four or five French and
Indians, who served him for pilots up Penobscot river and to the Indian
settlements there. In this river he killed and took captive diverse of the
enemy; among the captives were Castine's daughter and her children, her husband
and father being gone to France, where Castine had an estate upon which he
lived after he left America. The transports lay at Mount Desert. Church, having
taken from them (...) from supply of provisions, went in the boats up the (...)
Passimaquady. In the harbor, he found only a French woman and her children,
upon an island, and (...) family upon the main, near to it. He then went up the
river, where he took prisoners, Gourdon a French (...) and his family, who
lived in a small cottage. Church seeing some of his men hovering over another
hut, he called to them to know what they were doing; and upon their reply, that
there were people in the house who would not come out, he, hastily, bid his men
knock them in the head; which order they immediately observed. He was much
blamed for this, after his return, and excused himself but indifferently. He
feared the enemy might fall upon his men, who he saw were off their guard,
which put him in a passion. He went as high up the river as the falls, taking
or destroying all in his way; missed Chartiers, another French officer who
lived or was posted there. The transports took in the forces at the harbor or
mouth of the river, and carried them to Menis; the men of war standing for
Port Royal. At Menis, he met with some opposition, the enemy firing from the
banks as he rowed up the river to the town; but he lost none of his men. They
found plenty, not only of fresh provisions but good liquor in the town, which
occasioned such disorders among the men, especially the Indians, that it was
necessary to stave all the casks which had any wine or spirits in them, and it
was done accordingly. Here, the lieutenant of Church's own company, Barker,
(Charlevoix calls him the lientenant general) and one man more were shot down,
which were all that were lost in the expedition. After plundering the
inhabitants of all their goods, they set the town on fire, and then embarked on
board the transports. The inhabitants of a village, upon another branch of the
river, supposed the English to be gone, and that they should escape; but Church
went back with his boats, and, going up this branch, came unexpectedly upon the
village and took what prisoners he had a mind to, and among the rest, two
gentlement who had been sent by the governor of Port Royal to bring two
companies of soldiers for the defense of the place against the men of war which
appeared in the gut. Church gave the gentlemen leave to return, for the sake of
sending a message by them to the governor, to desire him to acquaint the
governor of Canada, that if he did not prevent his French and Indians from
committing such barbarities upon poor helpless women and children, as the
people of Deerfield had suffered the last year, he would return with a thousand
Indians and let them loose upon the frontiers of Canada to commit the like
barbarities there. This the French governor must know to be a gasconade.

THE forces after this, went up what is called the eastern river and destroyed
the settlements there, and then returned to the transports, and joined the men
of war at Port Royal; where it was agreed, both by sea and land officers, that
no attempt should be made. The men of war returned to Mount Desert harbor, and
Church, with his transports, went up to Chignecto. The inhabitants all fled,
taking with them as much of their substance as they could carry away; the rest
they le^t to the mercy of the English, who laid all waste. From Chignecto they
went to Mount Desert; the men of war being gone to Boston, the transports
followed; and stopping at Casco-bay, Church found orders lodged there, from the
governor, to go up Kennebeck river as far as Norridgewock fort; but having
intelligence that it was deserted, and his men having undergone much fatigue,
he thought it best to return home.

THIS expedition Mr. Dudley supposes, in his speech to the assembly, struck
great terror into the Indians, and drove them from our frontiers; but it
appears from Church's jo^rnal, that the poor Acadians, who had been so often
ravaged before, were the principal sufferers now, and that the Indians were
little or nothing annoyed. Mr. Dudley laid himself open to censure. The
prosessed design was the reduction of Port Royal. When it was known that this
never was the real design, it was not an easy thing to persuade the people that
want of orders from the queen was the true cause. A correspondence between the
friends of the governor and the French in Acadie was suspected, and it was said
the place must be preserved for the sake of trade, in the profits of which the
governor was to have his share. "When Church went with his forces to Port Royal
he could easily have taken the fort, or done any thing in the world, but the
reason which he has often given for his not doing it is, because you absolutely
forbad him, you peremptorily forbad him. The cause you assigned was, because
the matter had been laid before the queen, and the queen had sent over no
orders for it, and though the queen had sent no orders we send with a pretense
to take it. -- But the story grows now too black a story for me to meddle with
it -- The expedition ba^^led -- The fort never so much as demanded -- An
eternal grave stone laid on our buried captives -- A nest of hornets provoked
to fly out upon us -- A shame cast upon us that will never be forgotten -- I
dare not, I cannot meddle with these mysteries." -- Cotton Mather's letter to
Gov. Dudley, Ian. 20. 1707.


AN exploit of Caleb Lyman, of Northampton, deserves to be recorded. Hearing of
a small party of Indians at Cohass, far up Connecticut river, he went out with
only five friend Indians, and, after nine or ten days travel, came upon the
enemy Indians in the night, killed seven out of nine, the other two escaped,
but wounded.

THIS may be placed among the favorable years; but the frontiers were not
without annoyance. In April, an Indian scout killed Edward Tayl^^ at Lamprey
river and carried his wife and child to Canada; Major Hilton with 20 men
pursuing without overtaking them. They lay in wait to take Major Waldron at
Cochecho, but missed him, carrying off one of his servants in his stead. July
31. About four hundred, French and Indians, fell upon Lancaster, and assaulted
six garrison houses at the same time, which made a brave defense. They burned
many other dwelling houses and the meeting house. An alarm was soon spread, and
300 men were in the town before night, who engaged the enemy with some loss on
both sides. The beginning of August, a party of the enemy, lying in wait, fired
upon a small scout going from Northampton to Westfield, killed one man and took
two prisoners; but more of our forces being behind, they came up, retook the
two men and killed two of the Indians. Soon after, they killed lieutenant Wyler
and several others at Groton, and at a plantation called Nasheway.

Almsbury, Haverhill and York, in the Massachusetts; and Exeter, Dover and
Oyster river, in New Hampshire, suffered more or less, this summer, by the
enemy.

THE licentious practice, indulged among the seamen, of making depredations
upon foreign nations in the east and west Indies was not wholly suppressed.
John Quelch (who had been master of the brigantine Charles, and had committed
many piratical acts upon the coast of India) came with several of his crew and
landed, some in one part of New England, some in another. Quelch and six more
were condemned at Boston and executed. Some were admitted to be witnesses for
the king, some reprieved, and some pardoned. The governor, upon this occasion,
found old prejudices against him reviving. Reports were spread, of large sums
of money falling into the hands of the governor and of his son, the queen's
advocate, which however groundless easily obtained credit. I have taken so many
facts and remarks, in my first volume, from a manuscript history of Mr. William
Hubbard, one of the ministers of Ipswich, that I may not omit taking notice of
his death, Sept. 14th, 1704, at the age of 83 years; and giving him the
character, he deserved, of a man of learning, of a candid and benevolent mind,
accompanied, as it generally is, with a good degree of catholism; which, I
think, was not accounted the most valuable part of his character in the age in
which he lived. Among his other children. Nathanael Hubbard, Esquire shone with
peculiar luster, inherited his father's virtues, especially that amiable spirit
of benevolence. He was of the council, and one of the justices of the superior
court, too late in life for his country to reap any long benefit. The governor,
in the month of March this year, returning by water from his other government
of New Hampshire, before the brigantine in which he had taken his passage came
up with Cape Ann, was surprised with as violent a storm as had been known and
of as long continuance. There being advice brought to Boston of his sailing
from Portsmouth and nor further intelligence of him, it was generally
apprehended that the vessel must have foundered. At length came news of his
arrival in the harbor of Gloucester, having been four days a^ anchor on the
back of the cape, expecting every hour to perish. In a proclamation for a
public thanksgiving, a few days after, notice is taken of his wonderful
preservation from shipwreck. Ap. 4. 1704, died at Newbury Daniel Pierce, Esquire of
the council. July 20. 1704, died at Marshfield Peregrine White, aged 83 years
and 8 months, the first born in Plymouth colony.


house being present, addressed his excellency and prayed him to reconsider his
negative, and to approve of the choice. This was out of character, and the
house dishonored themselves and had the mortification of being denied. This
year, neither of the persons were chose of the council, but one of them, Mr.
Oaks, being chosen speaker of the house, upon the governor's being acquainted
therewith, he signified to the house that he disapproved of their choice, and
directed them to proceed to the choice of another, which they refused to do. It
had been always the practice, for the governor to give directions to the two
houses to proceed to the choice of counselors; but the dispute about the
speaker prevented it at this time, the council inserted themselves, and the
question being put, whether it was in the governor's power, by virtue of the
character, to refuse the election of a speaker and direct the choice of
another, they determined it was not, and immediately joined the house in
electing counselors. The next day the governor declared, that he looked upon
it to be her majesty's prerogative to allow or disallow the choice of a
speaker, but he would not delay the assembly by disputes, when the affairs of
the war were so pressing, saving to her majesty her just rights at all times.

THE governor had it in special command to recommend three things to the
assembly; the rebuilding the fort at Pemaquid; the contributing to a fort at
Piscataqua; and the establishing honorable salaries for the governor,
lieutenant governor and judges of the courts. He had been pressing these things
from his first arrival, but could obtain neither of them, and as to salaries,
they not only refused fixing a salary, but allowed him only L.500 per annum,
viz. 300 of it in the spring and 200 in the fall. To the lieutenant governor
they gave L.200 annually, as lieut. governor and captain of the castle; and
although it was more than any lieut. governor has received since, yet he found
it insufficient to support him, and this year, by the way of Lisbon, went back
to England and never returned to the province. A message from the house this
year to the governor, though not very elegant, shows the sense they had of
these matters.

May it please your excellency,

IN answer to those parts of your excellency's speech, at the beginning of the
session, referring to her majesty's directions for the building a fort at
Pemaquid, contributing to the charge of a fort at Piscataqua, and settling of
salaries, we crave leave to offer,

IMPRIMIS, as to the building a fort at Pemaquid, we are humbly of opinion,
that her majesty has received misrepresentations concerning the necessity and
usefulness of a fort there; wherefore, this house, in their humble address to
her majesty, dated the 27th of March 1703, and since twice repeated, did among
other things lay before her majesty our reasons why we could not comply with
her expectations in that affair, as

FIRST, the little benefit said fort was to us, not being, as we could discern,
any bridle to the enemy or barrier to our frontiers, being out of the usual
road of the Indians and one hundred miles distant from any English plantation;
and seemed only to make an anchorage for a few fishing boats, that accidentally
put in there; but the expense thereon was very great, not less than twenty
thousand pounds.

SECONDLY, the charge of the said fort will be such that we cannot see how the
province can possibly sustain it, having already laid out several large sums of
money in raising new sortifications at Castle Island, etc. which was set forth
in the address and memorial accompanying the same; but we understand we have
been so unhappy, as that the said address and memorial did not reach her
majesty's hands, because proceeding from this house alone, although the
addressing her majesty is a privilege ever allowed to the meanest of her
subjects. We did therefore at our session in February last join the council, in
making our humble address to her majesty upon the affair aforesaid, which we
hope, has some time since arrived to her majesty's favorable acceptance.

THE second article is the contributing to the charge of Piscataqua fort. --
The fort in that province has been built several years past, when it was not
desired or thought necessary that this province should assist them therein. The
late reforms and reparations made of the same, as we have been informed, stands
that whole province about the sum of five hundred pounds, which does not amount
to the quota of several particular towns, within this province, toward the
charge of the war one year; and all the navigation and trade of this province,
coming down Piscataqua river, have been charged with a considerable duty
toward the support of that fort; and this province has always afferded such
guards as were needful for their haling of masts, timber, etc. for her
majesty's service, whilst the principal benefit and advantage of the trade has
accrued to that province. And they have never contributed any thing to the
charge of our forces, forts and garrisons, or guard by sea, that are as great a
safety and defense to them as to ourselves; but the public charge of that
government has been much less proportionably than the charge of this; which
being considered we hope no assistance will be expected from us toward the
charge of the said fort.

THIRDLY, as to the settling fixed salaries, the circumstances of this
province, as to our ability to support the government, are at times so
different, that we fear the settling of fixed salaries will be of no service to
her majesty's interest, but may prove prejudicial to her majesty's good
subjects here: and as it is the native privilege and right of English subjects,
by consent of parliament, from time to time, to raise and dispose of such sums
of money, as the present exigency of affairs calls for; which privilege we her
majesty's loyal and dutiful subjects have hitherto lived in the enjoyment of,
so we hope and pray always to enjoy the same under our most gracious sovereign
and her successors.

THE governor then proposed the several matters to the council.

1st. Whether they advised to the building a fort at Pemaquid.

2d. Whether they advised to a contribution toward the charge of Piscataqua
fort.

3d. Whether they advised to the settling a fixed salary for the governor and
lieutenant governor for the time being.

And they gave a negative answer to each question.

IT was a great disappointment, to be able to carry neither of these points,
which the ministry were very much set upon, and which it is not improbable they
were encouraged might be obtained. Had they been matters less unpopular, yet
the governor's weight, at this time, would have been scarce sufficient to have
carried them through. The prejudices against him were great. The people in
general looked upon him as an enemy, even to the privileges of the new charter.
Sir Henry Ashurst procured an original letter, wrote by the governor's son
Paul, who was then attorney general, to Mr. Floyd, and sent it to New England,
in which were these expressions, the government and college are disposed of
here in chimney corners and private meetings, as confidently as can be -- this
country will never be worth living in for lawyers and gentlement, till the
charter is taken away -- My father and I sometimes talk of the queen's
establishing a court of chancery in this country. I have wrote about it to Mr.
Blathwait. Copies were dispersed about the province, and the letter was soon
after printed. Mr. Dudley had no rest the first seven years; besides the
opposition he met with in his administration, endeavors were using, soon after
his arrival, to supplant him, and his enemies prevailed upon Sir Charles Hobby,
(who had been knighted as some said for fortitude and resolution at the time of
the earthquake in Iamaica, others for the further consideration of L.800
sterling) to go to England and solicit for the government. He was recommended
to Sir H. Ashurst, who at first gave encouragement of success. Hobby was a gay
man, a free liver and of very (...) behavior from what one would have expected
should have recommended him to the clergy of New England; and yet, such is the
force of party prejudice, that it prevails over religion itself, and some of
the most plous ministers strongly urged, in their letters, that he might be
appointed their governor instead of Dudley; for which Ashurst himself, after
his acquaintance with Hobby, reproves and censures them.

THE governor, this year, sent Mr. Livingston, William Dudley the governor's
son, and two or three other gentlemen, to Canada, for the exchange of
prisoners; who brought back with them Mr. Williams the minister and many of the
inhabitants of Deerfield, with other captives. Vaudreuil, the French governor
sent a commissioner to Boston, with proposals of neutrality, which were
communicated to the general court, who did not think proper to take any steps
toward effecting it. They wished and hoped instead of a neutrality for the
reduction of Canada; whereas the employment given to the French strength in
Europe might well cause Vaudreuil to fear the want of protection and dispose
him to secure himself by a neutrality. Dudley, however, kept the matter in
suspense with Vaudreuil for some time, and to the policy of his negotiation it
was owing, that the people upon the frontiers enjoyed remarkable tranquillity,
and he values himself upon it in his speech to the general court. Charlevoix
says, it was evident Mr. Dudley had no intention to agree, that he was a long
time in treaty and at length declared that he could come to no agreement
without the consent of the other English colonies; and thereupon Vaudreuil
caused hostilities to be renewed against the people of New England. He adds,
that the Canadians were much dissatisfied with their governor, for suffering
Mr. Dudley's son Afterward, Col. Dudley, the governor's youngest son, many
years a member of the house, speaker, and then of the council, deservedly
esteemed and constantly employed in the most important services of government.
to remain some time at Quebec, under pretense of finishing the treaty, and for
permitting a New England brigantine to go up and down the river. Thomas Hinkley
Esquire many years governor of Plymouth colony died at Barnstable aged 74.


Tam ficti pravique tenax quam nuncia very.VIRG.
The house of representatives took the first opportunity of satisfying
themselves. It was suggested there, that the superior court had no cognizance
of the offense; and that admitting Nova Scotia to be part of the province, yet
it was not within the bounds of any county, and there was no authority, but the
general court, that could punish it.{The carrying the goods from Boston and the
conspiracy there, were not considered.) Besides, no persons could be supposed
to have the public interest so much at heart, and none so like to search to
the bottom. They thereupon resolved, that the superior court had not
jurisdiction, and that a parliamentary enquiry was necessary; and, in imitation
of the house of commons, they framed articles of accusation and impeachment
against the several persons apprehended, for traitorously supplying the queen's
enemies etc. These were signed by the speaker, and sent by a committee to the
council (June 25) praying, that such proceedings, examinations, trials and
judgments may be had and used upon and relating to the said persons as is
agreeable to law and justice.It was expected that the council should proceed,
as the house of lords do upon an impeachment. No wonder the council did not
immediately proceed. In trying a capital offense it behoved them to be well
satisfied of their jurisdiction. No notice is taken of the affair, in the
council books, for above a fortnight. The governor sat every day in council,
and he still continued the practice of directing, every day, upon what business
the council should proceed. It having been reported, that the house, in their
examination of the prisoners, enquired how far the governor was concerned; on
the 9th of July they passed a vote, vindicating themselves from an aspersion
cast upon them, as having, in the examination of the prisoners, made in the
first question, whether the governor was not concerned with them in the
unlawful trade; wickedly insinuating, that the house had suspicion thereof,
which they declared to be utterly false; and they thanked his excellency for
his utmost readiness and forwardness, upon all occasions, in detecting and
discouraging all such illegal trade and traders. For this the governor gave
them thanks.

BEFORE the 13th of July, the house were either convinced that the from of
proceeding was irregular, or else that they could not support the charge of
high treason, and ordered a bill to be brought in for inflicting pains and
penalties; some moved for a bill of attainder, but the court being near rising,
a message was sent to the governor, desiring that the prisoners charged might
be kept in close custody, until the next session, in order to further
proceeding against them.

AT the next session, a few weeks after, the persons charged, with two or three
other, accomplices of less note, were brought upon trial before the whole
court; the governor's son, Paul Dudley, the queen's attorney, supporting the
charge. The prisoners were heard by council in their defense. The court
pronounced them all to be guilty, and then proceeded to determine their
punishment. A committee of the two houses reported a fine of L.1000 on Mr.
Borland and three months imprisonment; L.350 on Roger Lawson and three months
imprisonment; L.400 on Samuel Vetch and one year's imprisonment; L.1000 on
William Rowse, one year's imprisonment and incapacity of sustaining any office
of public trust; L.100 on John Phillips, jun. and one year's imprisonment; and
L.100 on Ebenezer Coffin. The house accepted this report, with an addition to
Rowse's punishment, that he sit an hour upon the gallows with a rope about his
neck; but the board disagreed to and reduced all the fines except Rowse's, and
disagreed to the infamous part of his punishment. After a conference between
the two houses, they settled the penalties as follows, viz. on Vetch a fine of
L.200; Borland L.1100; Lawson L.300; Rowse L.1200 and incapacity; Phillips
L.100; and Coffin L.60: all to stand committed until the fines and costs of
prosecution were paid; and six separate acts passed the whole court for these
purposes. By a clause in the charter, the general court is empowered to impose
fines, imprisonments and other punishments, and in consequence of this clause
the proceeding was thought to be regular; but the queen did not think so, and
these acts were disallowed. At the court at Kensington the 24th of September
1707, Present The Queen's most excellent Majesty, His Royal Highness Prince
George, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord
Privy Seal, Lord Steward, Earl of Sunderland, Earl of Berkeley, Lord Bishop of
London, Lord Coningsby, Mr. Bertie, Mr. ViceChamberlain, Lord Chief Justice
Holt, Lord Chief Justice Trevor, Sir Charles Hedges, Mr. Vernon. WHEREAS by
powers granted under the great seal of England, to the governor or commander in
chief of her majesty's province of Massachusets-bay in New England, in America,
the governor, council and assembly of that province are authorized and
empowered to make, constitute and ordain laws, statutes and ordinances for the
public peace, welfare and good government of the said province, which laws,
statutes and ordinances are to be (as near as conveniently may be) agreeable to
the laws and statutes of England, and to be transmitted to her majesty for her
royal approbation or disallowance of them. And whereas, in pursuance of said
powers, there have been passed in the said province, the 7th of August, six
acts, entitled, viz. An act for the punishment of Samuel Vetch, Esquire for high
misdemeanor. An act for the punishment of John Borland, merchant, for high
misdemeanor. An act for the punishment of Roger Lawson, merchant, for high
misdemeanor. An act for the punishment of William Rouse, mariner, late
commander of the sloop Ann, a flag of truce in the immediate service of her
majesty's government of this province, for high misdemeanor. An act for the
punishment of John Phillips, jun. for high misdemeanor. An act for the
punishment of Ebenezer Coffin, mariner, for high misdemeanor. The said several
persons abovementioned having been accused of trading with the French and
Indians at Nova Scotia; which said several acts having been perused and well
considered by the lords commissioners of trade and plantations, who by their
report, this day read at the board, humbly represent their opinion, that the
said acts are not fit for her majesty's royal approbation, the crimes in the
said several acts mentioned being in no wise cognizable before the general
assembly there, in regard they have no power to proceed against criminals, such
proceedings being left to the courts of law there; in which they may best be
carried on by the ordinary rules and known methods justice. Her majesty taking
the same into consideration and approving of the said report, is graciously
pleased, with the advice of her privy council, hereby to declare her royal
disapprobation and disallowance of the said acts; and pursuant to her majesty's
pleasure thereupon, the said acts are hereby repealed and declared void and of
no effect. And her majesty is further pleased to order, and it is accordingly
hereby ordered, that the fines imposed upon the said Samuel Vetch, John
Borland, Roger Lawson, William Rouse, Ebenezer Coffin and John Phillips, by
virtue of the aforementioned acts, be restored and paid back to them, they
first giving sufficient surety, not exceeding the value of the respective
fines, to stand a new legal trial at law, if they should be prosecuted within a
year after their entering into such security; but in case they be not
prosecuted within the term of one year, for the crimes mentioned in the said
acts, that the said securities be void. And the governor or commander in chief
of her majesty's said province of New England, and all other whom it may
concern, are to take notice of this her majesty's pleasure, and yield all due
obedience hereunto accordingly. Edward Southwell." The power of making laws
seems to be understood, by the lords of trade, to be founded upon the
commission to the governor. Perhaps a form used in allowing or disallowing acts
of the royal governments, without considering the charter, was taken up for the
Massachusetts.


The governor was under a disadvantage, any obstruction to the two houses would
have been improved as an evidence of the truth of the reports of his being
particeps criminis; his compliance did not satisfy the people. An ill
impression against persons in authority is not easily effaced. Several persons,
some in Boston, the most in London, signed a petition, "To the Queen's most
excellent Majesty. "The humble petition of your majesty's most loyal subjects,
inhabitants in your majesty's dominions in America or trading thereto, shows,
"THAT Col. Joseph Dudley, whose arbitrary and tyrannical proceedings had
exposed him to the just resentments of his countrymen before the happy
revolution, has been nevertheless so fortunate as to obtain the government of
the Massachusetts colony in New England. "That your petitioners are certainly
informed of diverse unheard of corruptions and oppressions, and unjust and
partial practices of the said Dudley, on which they might ground many
complaints against him; but they are so sensible of the imminent danger which
threatens your majesty's subjects in this and the neighboring colonies,
through his male administration, that they at this time beg leave humbly and
singly to represent to your majesty, "That the said Dudley has countenanced a
private trade and correspondence with your majesty's enemies, the French of
Canada and the Indians which are in their interest, and furnishing them with
ammunition and provisions. "That the persons, managing the said correspondence,
pretended a voyage to Newfoundland, and being accused of high treason by the
general assembly of New England, the said governor, by his interest and power,
delayed their prosecution till the ammunition he had furnished the enemy was
used by them to the destruction of your majesty's good subjects, and that
colony thereby put to thirty thousand pounds charge. "That many of the best and
most prudent members of the lower house of representatives being tired with his
delays, and necessitated to go home and defend their plantations from the
enemy, he prevailed with those that remained, who were scarce a number to make
a house, that the accusation against his agents should be changed from treason
to misdemeanor; and they being convicted, he labored to mitigate their fines;
all which was so apparent to the people of New England, that they threatened to
pull down his house. "That he had the confidence, nevertheless, to apply to the
general assembly for an address to your majesty in his favor; but this
application was received with a general murmur and contempt, and nothing done
therein. And although he has since endeavored to obtain your majesty's good
opinion, by collecting a number of names, of persons under his command and
influence, to give him a character, your petitioners, who apprehend their
wives, families and estates to be in imminent danger, under such a governor, do
therefore humbly pray, that said Dudley may be speedily removed, and that your
majesty would be pleased to give such directions thereupon, as to your
majesty's great wisdom shall seem meet, and your petitioners as in duty bound
shall ever pray. Nath. Higginson, William Partridge, Steph. Mason, Ion Cawley,
Thom. Tailor, B. Wright, Richard Partridge, Thomas Allen, Joseph Bishop, Hugh
Musson, Alex. Holmes, Michael Wilson, John Burridge, Will. Wharton, John
Hincks, Thomas Newton, John Morton, I. Wright, Francis Clark, In Bulfinch.
"Read before the queen in council, at Kensington, the 10th of June, and ordered
to be heard, at Windsor, the 28th of the same month, before her majesty in
council." Stephen Mason was appointed one of the assistants or counselors by
the charter.
full of invectives against the governor, which was presented to the queen.
Upon information of this petition, the council and house of representatives
passed votes declaring their sense of the injury done the governor by the
persons signing this petition or address. "Upon reading the copy of an address
to her majesty against his excellency, our present governor, signed Nath.
Higginson, etc. Voted, that we firmly believe and are of opinion, that the
allegations therein, of the governor's trading or allowing a trade with her
majesty's enemies the French and Indians in their interest, is a scandalous and
wicked accusation; the contrary being always apparent to all her majesty's good
subjects under his government, more especially to this board, and in
particular, to the general officers attending his excellency, as the secretary
and commissary general; his negotiations and letters with the agents or
messengers from the French governor or commanders of the neighborhood, being,
from time to time, laid before the council and the assembly, when they have
been sitting, and are sensible of his indefatigable care and protection of his
majesty's good subjects. Passed unanimously." Council records. "A vote passed
in the house of representatives and sent up, being in the words following --
Upon reading the address offered to her majesty against his excellency our
present governor, signed Nath. Higginson, etc. Voted, that we firmly believe
and are of opinion, that the allegations therein, of the governor's trading or
allowing Vetch, Borland and Lawson to trade with her majesty's enemies the
French and the Indians, in their interest, is a scandalous and wicked
accusation." Idem. "The vote of council was unanimous, but Samuel Sewall, long
known by his title, Judge Sewall, being in intimate friendship with some, who
at that time had a very bad opinion of the governor, was either influenced by
them and persuaded he had gone too far in giving his assent to this vote, or
for some other reasons, was so dissatisfied with his conduct, that he could not
be easy, without declaring his dissatisfaction and protesting or remonstrating
against his own conduct. The original paper which he sent to one of those
friends is still preserved. "Tuesday, November 23d, 1707. "The reasons of my
withdrawing my vote from what was passed in council, upon Saturday November the
first, relating to an address offered to her majesty, signed, Nath. Higginson,
etc. "Because my motion, for leaving the consideration of it till the Monday
following, was not admitted, and it was entered upon and passed about noon, in
a very short time, being a matter of great concernment to our liege lady queen
Anne, to the province, to his excellency our governor and to the council and
representatives. The governor's personal interest was much in it, and
therefore, I humbly conceive, the vote ought to have been debated and framed by
the members of council, apart by themselves, in the absence of the governor.
"The words firmly believe, and always apparent, were never pleasing to me; and
now, I do not firmly believe that the governor did no way allow Mr. Borland and
Capt. Vetch their trading voyage to her majesty's enemies the French. Qui non
vetat peccare, cum possit, jubet. Not that I suspect the governor designed to
hurt the province, but to gratify grateful merchants. And I readily and
thankfully acknowledge the governor's orders, for the defense of the frontiers,
to be truly excellent, both respecting the suitableness of the orders
themselves and the quickness of their dispatch; and I bless God for the success
that has attended them. "I have been acquainted with Mr. Nath. Higginson these
40 years, and I cannot judge the offering this address to her majesty to be, in
him, a scandalous and wicked acculation, until I know his inducements; and I
fear this censure may be of ill consequence to the province in time to come, by
discouraging persons of worth and probity, to venture in appearing for them,
though the necessity should be never so great. Samuel Sewall."
Mr. Higginson, who is at the head of the petitioners, was originally of New
England and educated at Harvard college, afterward he traveled to the
East Indies, and upon his return became a merchant in London, was a member of
the corporation for propagating the gospel among the Indians of New England
etc. and had so good interest, that some persons of note by their letters,
signified that they thought the two houses impolitic in the severity of their
expressions, which, from being their friend, might at least cause him to become
cool and indifferent.

BESIDES this petition, a pamphlet from New England appeared, about the same
time in London, charging the governor with treasonable correspondence, and it
was expected, that his enemies would prevail. Mr. Povey wrote to him from
London, that he must prepare to receive the news of being superseded; Sir
William Ashurst writes, "London, May 10. 1707. As to Mr. Dudley, though he may
meet with some with you that will sacrifice their country and consciences to
his interest, I can assure you he will not meet any such here. I doubt not, but
in a little time he will be succeeded by a more worthy person, and the country
freed from his oppressions."
but he was so fortunate, as either to convince the queen and her ministers of
his innocence, or by some other means to lay the storm which had been raised
against him. 'The charge of supplying the enemy with ammunition is incredible.
Those persons who were convicted, had he been an accomplice, would have
discovered him. He left them to suffer such punishment as the court thought
proper to (...). There was no certainty that the acts would be repealed and,
after they were repealed, some remained long in prison; Rouse lay there 18
months, unable to find security. The whole that appeared upon the trial, was an
invoice of 100 m. of nails, which, at the request of the governor of
Port Royal, Mr. Dudley allowed to be shipped. This was foundation enough,
though in no degree criminal, to give rise to all the calumny. It is not
improbable, from the remonstrance of Mr. Sewall, who was a person of great
integrity, that connivance might be shown of some supplies of merchandise, and
that this (...) might be abused to the supply of powder, shot, etc. contrary to
the governor's mind. It was the general opinion, that, without these supplies,
the French could not have proceeded in their expedition against Newfoundland,
where the harbors this year were much spoiled, and great loss and damage was
sustained, not by the Europeans only, but by the New-Englanders, who had then
large commerce there. There were some who supposed this affair to be brought,
by the governor's influence, before the general court to pre^ent in being
carried into the common law courts, where the ^wortd^ would have been public,
and where he could not have set limits to the enquiry. If this was the ^ase, it
shows that he was no contemptible politician, for they who were the most
disaffected to him, in the general court, were the most zealous for taking
cognizance of it. "The whole affair of those grateful merchants will by degrees
be brought to light, yea it is already so, and the communications between
Roxbury and the prison are discovered, will be published on the house top, and
some fear 'twill be found minor suit ipsa in^amia viro. A trial of that nature
by the general assembly is a thing which you had always decried with the
greatest abhorrence; yet you permitted it, yet you promoted it, yet you managed
it when a personal advantage might come out of it. The people were ensnared,
the country endangered." C. Mather's letter to Dudley, Ian. 20. 1707. A small
sum (L.600) was collected in the churches this year and sent for the relief of
such of the poor inhabitants of St. Christophers as had been distressed by the
enemy.


THAT I might finish what relates to this prosecution, which was a subject of
conversation for many years after, I have been led a year or two forward. I
meet with no remarkable devastations by the enemy in 1705, but, in April 1706,
they renewed their inroads and murdered eight or ten people, in one house, at
Oyster river. There was a garrison house near, where the women of the
neighborhood had retreated, their husbands being abroad at their labor, or
absent upon other occasions. This house being attacked, the women put on their
husbands hats and jackets, and let their hair loose, to make the appearance of
men; and firing briskly from the flaukarts, saved the house and caused the
enemy to retreat.

COL. Schuyler gave intelligence of 270 men having marched from the frontiers
of Canada, which was an alarm to all the frontiers of New England; for it was
uncertain upon which part they would fall. They made their first appearance
upon Merrimack river, about Dunstable, surprised and burned a garrison house
there, in which 20 soldiers were posted, and did other mischief. Five of their
Indians, probably from the same party, ventured down as far as Reading, about
15 or 18 miles from Boston, surprised a poor woman, who had eight children with
her in a lone cottage, killed the woman and three of the children and carried
away the rest; but the distant inhabitants were alarmed time enough to overtake
them in their retreat, and recovered three of the children. Chelmsford,
Sudbury, Groton, Exeter, Dover and other plantations had more or less of their
people killed or taken; some of the latter they murdered before they could
reach Canada, others very narrowly escaping. A poor woman, Rebekah Tailor,
after the misery of a long travel to St. Lawrence river, near to Montreal,
having offended her Indian master, he took off his belt and fastened one end of
it round her neck and threw the other over the limb of a tree; but the weight
of her body broke the limb. He was making a second attempt, when the noted
Bomazeen came by and rescued her. In their march, their hunting failing, they
were kindling a fire to roast a child of one Hannah Parsons, when a strange
dog, falling in their way, supplied, the child's place. A Gronton soldier,
Samuel Butterfield, defended himself bravely and killed one of their chiefs.
This occasioned a dispute about the kind of punishment, some being for burning
alive, others for whipping to death. It was left to the dead man's widow to
determine it. She told them, that, if killing the prisoner would bring her
husband to life, she cared not what kind of death he suffered, but, if not, she
desired to have him for a slave, and her request was granted.

IT appears, by the French accounts, that the Indians themselves were tired of
the war, and with great difficulty were prevailed upon to continue it. To
encourage them, a noted chief, dreaded by the English upon the frontiers, from
the report of his cruelties, Nescambouit, was about this time sent by M.
Vaudreuil to France, to receive his reward from the king himself. Upon his
appearance at court, he held out his arm and bragged, that with that arm he had
flain 150 of his majesty's enemies. The king was so much pleased, that, as was
then reported, he knighted him and settled a pension of eight livres per day
for life.

the Abenakis continued to lay New England desolate; Mr. Dudley either being
unwilling or afraid to accept the neutrality which had been proposed for that
province. He was much affected with the cries of the inhabitants, who were no
longer able to improve their lands, which were continually ravaged by the
Indians, and he thought the only way to put an end to this distress was to
extirpate the French from Acadie.

DUDLEY depended upon the French being extirpated from Canada, as well as
Acadie, otherwise he would have been glad of a neutrality, if he could have had
the queen's leave to agree to it. It was known, that an armament was intended,
this year, from England against the French, either in Canada or Acadie, or
both. Troops were actually destined for this service, and general Maccartney
was to have commanded; but the battle of Almanza, in Spain, made such an
alteration in affairs, that the troops could not be spared, and the expedition
was laid aside. The Massachusetts would have been ready with the forces expected
from them; and it was determined, early in the spring, that such a number of
men should be raised, as might be sufficient for the reduction of Acadie,
although no assistance came from England. At least, the other parts of
Nova Scotia might be ravaged; but for Port Royal, it was doubted whether it
could be subdued: However, the fortress there was "to be insulted, if by a
council of war upon the place it should be found practicable."

ONE thousand men, it was resolved should be raised, in the Massachusetts, and
proposals were made to New Hampshire, Connecticut and Rhode Island to join.
Connecticut declined. The other two governments assisted, and Mr. Dudley, in
his speech to the assembly, acknowledges that he had received a very honorable
assistance from Rhode Island, and a proper force from New Hampshire. The naval
force was barely sufficient for convoy, there being only the Deptford man of
war, Capt. Stukeley, and the province galley, Capt. Southack. The command of
the land forces was given to Col. March, who had behaved well at Casco fort and
upon some other occasions; but had never been tried in any service where other
talents, besides mere natural bravery, were necessary. The flect sailed, from
Boston, the 13th of May, and arrived, the 26th, at Port Royal. March
immediately landed, with 700 men, on the harbor side; Charlevoix says, they
had 24 vessels, the largest of 50 guns; and that they landed 1500 men on the
side where the for^ was and 500 on the other side.
Col. Appleton, with 300 men, landing on the other side. The next day, as March
with his men were advancing toward the fort, they discovered about 200 of the
enemy, with Subercas, the governor, at their head, near the top of a hill. A
short skirmish Un combat vif. Charl^v^ix.
ensued, and Subercas had his horse killed under him; but the numbers being
very unequal, the French soon retreated, leaving two of their number killed,
and having wounded three of the English. On the 29th, Appleton and his 300 men
were attacked by a body of Indians, joined by about 60 Canadians who had
arrived, just before, to man a privateer which lay in the harbor. They killed
two of the English, and then retreated. All the inhabitants forsook their
houses and retired to the fort, which was well garrisoned. They made a
continual fire, with cannon and mortars, upon the English camp; but wanted
skilful engineers; very few of their shells falling so as to be any annoyance.
The Indians, upon every quarter skulking about, shot down every man, who
ventured without the camp. It is evident that our forces were very diffident of
success, from their first landing; and the army would in a great measure have
saved their reputation, if, in conformity to the vote of the court for engaging
in the expedition, they had, at a council of war, determined not to attack the
fort, and proceeded to ravage the country. Some intelligence, which they had
received of the disposition of great part of the garrison to revolt, seems to
have encouraged them, more than any hopes they had of being able to reduce the
place, by a regular siege or sudden attack. The 13th of May, at a council of
war, it was agreed, "that the enemy's well disciplined garrison in a strong
fort, was more than a match for our raw undisciplined army." They opened their
trenches, notwithstanding, and, in three or four days, they had made some
breaches, and determined upon a general assault; but, advancing toward the
fort and finding no deserters come over, they altered their minds, and, the 6th
or 7th of June, the whole army were re-embarked. Col. Redknap (the engineer)
and Col. Appleton went to Boston for further orders; the rest of the army to
Casco-bay. "The ignorance, idleness and slothfulness of some of our officers,
make things go on not so smooth as desired; and by the disobedience of private
soldiers, we lost two men this day in our very fight, scalped and mangled by
the Indians. These and some other difficulties caused the result of a council
of war, this day assembled, which I herewith send. The commander in chief will
make a general ravage of the country and sea coast, which will be all we shall
do at this time." William Dudley to Gov. Dudley, 31 May 1707.
A great clamor was raised at Boston against March and Wainwright, and letters
were sent them from thence, some anonymous, vilifying them as cowards and
deserving the gallows. They charged Appleton with being the first for
decamping, but own it would have been to no good purpose to have remained; as
there was no prospect of carrying the fort. Captain Stukeley, of the Deptford,
gave an account of the strength of the place, and added, that he hoped the
fighting men at Boston, who had wrote so many scurrilous, vilifying letters,
without names, would be satisfied, that regular, well fortified and well
defended, forts are not to be taken by raw men; and he was very certain, that
1500 of the best of them would come back again as the army had done.

MR. Dudley, notwithstanding the dissidence expressed, thought of nothing short
of the reduction of Port Royal, from the beginning; and after so great expense,
in raising such an armed force, and so little diminution of it, he was loath to
give over the design, and (...) immediate orders for the forces to remain where
(...) were, whilst he considered of further measures. March was beloved by the
soldiers; besides, his courage was not suspected, although his capacity for a
general was called in question. It was not therefore, thought proper to recall
him; to appoint a general officer over him, would be as exceptionable. An
expedient was pitched upon, suggested perhaps by the practice of the Dutch.
Three gentlemen of the council were to be sent to the army, with as full powers
to superintend and direct the proceedings as the governor himself would have
had if present in person. Col. Hutchinson, Col. Townsend and Mr. Leverett were
pitched upon for this purpose. They embarked the middle of July in Capt.
Gerrish, with about 100 recruits and several deserters, who had left the army
at Casco. They were not chosen by the assembly, but to keep the power, as far
as he could, in his own hands and at the same time obtain a grant for or
acquiescence in the expense, the governor, in this and other instances, pitched
upon such persons as he knew would be acceptable. Hutchinson and Townsend were
popular men, and Leverett had been speaker of the house.
Upon their arrival, they found parties formed, among officers and men, no
subordination, a coldness in the officers, and an aversion in the privates, to
a return to the ground they had left. But, it seems, the governor had made a
point of it, that, at all events, the army should go back. We have so little
prospect of any service from the marine, after we have taken the ground, that,
for the keeping it, we must have dependence upon our other force, being only
743 officers and soldiers, sick and well; and they are so extremely dispirited,
that we cannot look upon them equal to 300 effective men. However, we have your
excellency's commands, which we yield an absolute obedience to and shall
proceed." Col. Hut^hinson's let. to Gov. Dudley, Casce 26 th July 1707.


I find a round robin among Col. Hutchinson's papers, signed by a great number,
peremptorily refusing to go to Port Royal; but the ringleaders being discovered
and secured, whilst their sentence was under consideration, the rest humbled
themselves and submitted, and the ships of war and transports failed. They
stopped at Passimaquadi, about the 7th of August. March's spirits were broke
and his health affected, so that, when the disposition was making for landing
the army, he declared himself incapable of acting and the command was given to
Wainwright, the next officer. The 10th of August they crossed over to
Port Royal where they landed, but on the opposite side to the fort and, in
every respect, in a much worse condition than before. The nights were growing
cold, the men sickening and the army, in general, incapable of sustaining the
fatigues of a siege. Wainwright's letter to the Commissioners August 14th shows
the state they were in. Our not recovering the intended ground on the opposite
side is a mighty advantage to the enemy, in that they have opportunity, and are
improving it, for casting up trenches in the very place where we designed to
land, and draw up our small forces. Yesterday, the French, about eight of the
clock forenoon, on the fort point, with a small party of St. John's Indians,
began to fire on our river guards and so continued until about three afternoon:
Then appeared about one hundred Indians and French, upon the same ground, who
kept continually firing at us until dark. Several were shot through their
clothes, and one Indian through the thigh. About four in the afternoon, I
suffered a number of men, about 40 or 50, to go down to the bank of the river,
to cut thatch to cover their tents. All returned well, except nine of Capt.
Dimmock's men, who were led away by one Mansfield, a mad fellow, to the next
plantation to get cabbages in a garden, without the leave and against the will
of his officer. They were no sooner at their plunder, but they were surrounded
by, at leat one hundred French and Indians, who in a few minutes killed every
one of them, their bodies being mangled in a frightful manner. Our people
buried them, and fired twice upon the enemy; on which they were seen to run
toward our out guards next the woods, which we immediately strengthened.
Indeed, the French have reduced us to the same state to which we reduced them,
at our last being at Portroyal; surrounded with enemies and judging it unsafe
to proceed on any service without a company of at least one hundred men. I
shall now give you a short account of the state of our people, truly, as
delivered me by Doctor Ellis. There is a considerable number of them visited
with violent fluxes, and although we have things proper to give them, yet dare
not do it; others taken with mighty swellings in their throats; others filled
with terror at the consideration of a fatal event of the expedition, concluding
that, in a short time, there will not be well enough to carry off the sick.

I am distressed to know which way to keep the Indians steady to the service.
They protest they will draw off, whatever becomes of them. It is truly
astonishing, to behold the miserable posture and remper that most of the army
are in, besides the smallness of our number, to be attacked by the enemy which
we expect every moment.

I am much disordered in my health by a great cold. I shall not use it as an
argument to be drawn off my self, but, as you are masters of the affair, lay
before you the true state of the army which indeed is very deplorable: I should
much rejoice to see some of you here, that you might be proper judges of it.

If we had the transports with us, it would be impossible, without a miracle,
to recover the ground on the other side, and I believe the French have
additional strength every day. In fine, most of the forces are in a distressed
state, some in body and some in mind, and the longer they are kept here on the
cold ground the longer it will grow upon them, and, I fear, the further we
proceed the worse the event. God help us.

CAPTAIN Stukeley had given encouragement, that he would lead on an hundred of
his own men; but the bad state of affairs caused him to change his mind, and he
had drawn them off before the date of this letter.

THE army continued ashore until the 20th, when they re-embarked. The enemy
then attacked them. Our accounts say, that we killed and wounded many of the
enemy and finally put them to flight. The French say, that both retreated by
turns. Each seem to have been glad to be rid of the other. About 16 were killed
in the whole expedition, and as many wounded. The French, finding so few dead
bodies, supposed we threw them into the sea.

WHEN the forces returned, Mr. Dudley put the best face upon their ill success.
In his speech to the assembly he says, though we have not obtained all that we
desired against the enemy, yet we are to acknowledge the favor of God in
preserving our forces in the expedition, and prospering them so far as the
destruction of the French settlements and estates, in and about Portroyal, to a
great value; which must needs distress the enemy to a very great degree.

A court martial was judged necessary, and ordered, but never met. The act of
the province, for constituting courts martial, made so many officers requisite,
that it was found impracticable to hold one. Governor's speech.
This must be owing to the great number of persons charged, the remainder being
insufficient to try them.

November 27. 1707. died John Winthrop. Esquire governor of Connecticut and was
buried at Boston, December 4th. The bones of John Winthrop the first governor
of Massachusetts, his son and grandson two governors of Connecticut, rest in the
same tomb in the first or oldest burying ground.
Early in the spring, Mr. Littlefield, the lieutenant of Wells, traveling to
York, was taken and carried to Canada. For several months after, the enemy
seemed to have forsaken the frontiers. It afterward appeared, that they were
collecting their forces in Canada for some important stroke.

SCHUYLER had such influence over the French Mohawks, who kept a constant trade
with Albany, that they inclined to a more general peace with the English than
merely those of New York. The French discovered their indifference, and, to
keep them engaged, a grand council was called at Montreal, the beginning of
this year, and an expedition was agreed upon, in which were to be employed the
principal Indians of every tribe in Canada, the Abenakis Indians, and one
hundred select French Canadians, and a number of volunteers, several of whom
were officers in the French troops. They were to make in the whole 400 men.

DE Chaillons, and Hertel de Rouville (he who sacked Deerfield) commanded the
French, and La Perriere the Indians. To give the less alarm to the English, the
French party, with the Algonquin and St. Francois and Huron Indians, marched by
the way of the river St. Francois: La Perrierce and the French Mohawks went by
lake Champlain: They were to rendezvous at lake Nikisipique, and there the
Norridgewock, Penobscot and other eastern Indians were to join them. They all
began their march the 16th July, but the Hurons gave out and returned, before
they arrived at St. Francois river. One of them had killed his companion, by
accident, which they thought an ill omen and that the expedition would prove
unfortunate. The Mohawks also pretended, that some of their number were taken
sick of an infectious distemper, which would be communicated to the rest, and
they returned. Vaudreuil, when he heard these accounts, sent orders to his
French officers, that, although the Algonquin and St. Francois Indians should
leave them also, yet they should go on, and fall upon some of our scattered
settlements. When the Indians are tired of murdering poor helpless women and
children, Vaudreuil employs his French officers to do it. Those Indians,
however, did not leave them, and, being about 200 in all, they marched between
four and five hundred miles through the woods to Nikipisique, where they found
none of the eastern Indians. This was a happy disappointment for the English.
Had the whole proposed number rendezvoused there, Newbury, or perhaps
Portsmouth, might have been surprised and destroyed; but, the army being thus
reduced, Haverhill, a small but compact village was pitched upon. Intelligence
had been carried to Boston, that an army of 800 men was intended for some part
of the frontiers, but it was uncertain which. Guards were sent to Haverhill, as
well as other places; but they were posted in the most exposed parts of the
town and the enemy avoided them, or passed undiscovered, and, on the 29th of
August, about break of day, surprised the body of the town, adjoining to
Merrimack river, where were 20 or 30 houses together, several of which they
burned, and attempted to burn the meeting house, but failed. The rest of the
houses they ransacked and plundered. Mr. Rolfe the minister; Wainwright the
captain of the town, and 30 or 40 more, the French say above 100, were killed,
and many taken prisoners. Mr. Rolse's maid jumped out of bed, upon the alarm,
and ran with his two daughters of 6 or 8 years old into the cellar, and covered
them with two large tubs, which the Indians neglected to turn over and they
were both preserved. One was, afterward, wife to the late Col. Hatch of
Dorchester, and is lately deceased; the other still living, the wife of the
Rev. Mr. Checkley, sen. of Boston.
Three very good officers were at that time in the town, Major Turner,
Afterward Col. Turner, a principal merchant of Salem, and many years, a member
of the council.
Capt. Price and Capt. Gardner, all of Salem, but most of their men were posted
at a distance, and, before any sufficient number could be collected, the
mischief was done. The enemy, however, was pursued, overtaken and attacked,
just as they were entering the woods. The French reported, when they got back,
that they faced about, and that our people, being astonished, were all killed
or taken, except 10 or 12, who escaped. The truth is, that there was a brush,
which lasted about an hour, and that the enemy then took to the woods, except
nine who were left dead, among whom was Rouville's brother, and another
officer. Many of the prisoners were also recovered. The governor, in his speech
to the assembly says, we might have done more against them if we had followed
their tracks.

THE return of the French Mohawks might be owing to Schuyler's negotiations
with them, which, it may be said, he would have had no opportunity for, if it
had not been for the neutrality between them and Albany; but, on the other
hand, not only those Indians, at other times, but even the Penobscots and
Norridgewocks were erabled, by this neutrality, to make their inroads upon us.
The governor of Port Royal, in a letter to the count de Pontchartrain, says,
that the Michmacks were quite naked and the Kenebeckans Norridgewocks.
and Penobscots would have been so too, if they had not carried on a trade with
the Indians of Hudson's river or, rather, by their means, with the English, who
allowed a crown a pound for bever, and sold their goods very reasonably.
Charlevoix justly remarks upon it, thus our own enemies relieved our most
faithful allies, when they were in necessity, and whilst they were every day
hazarding their lives in our service. The Massachusetts general court also, this
year, in an address to the queen, say, A letter from M. Vaudreuil, governor of
Canada, to the late governor of Port Royal was sometime since happily
intercepted, and came to our governor's hands; wherein he writes thus, namely,
that he endeavors to keep all quiet on the side of Orange or Albany, having
command from the king his master not to have any quarrel with your majesty's
subjects on that side, or with the Mohawks, which he has strictly observed.
And they are in a profound peace, having met with little or no loss on the land
side, either in men or estates this war.

THE enemy were satisfied with their success at Haverhill, for this season,
and, except now and then a straggling Indian, none of them appeared again upon
the frontiers this summer.

THE party against the governor still pursued their schemes in England for his
removal. Ashurst engaged a committee of the kirk of Scotland, who came up to
London to settle some-affairs with the queen's council, to use their interest,
that Dudley might be removed and a new governor appointed; and he was very
sanguine, that this would do the business, and that Hobby would be appointed,
though not such a person as he could wish; but the earth, he says, must help
the woman. Which, too often means no more than we must do evil that good may
come of it. In the province, the governor's interest was strengthening. Some of
the old senators, who had been disaffected to him, were left out of the
council. Oaks, whom he had negatived as speaker, and one other member for
Boston lost their election, and John Clark and Thomas Hutchinson, two young
gentlemen of the town, who were under no prejudice against him, came into the
house in their stead; and, although, this year Mr. Cook was again chose one of
the council, it was the last effort. The governor persisted in negativing him,
and at the same time negatived Nathaniel Pain of Bristol; but he had so
accustomed them to negatives, that they gave less offense than they would have
done after long difuse.

THE principal subject of the assembly's address, which we have just before
mentioned to the queen, was the reduction of Canada and Acadie by an armament
from England, to be assisted by forces raised in the colonies. Vetch, who the
last year was charged as a traitor, this year appeared, before the queen and
her ministers, soliciting in behalf of the colonies; being able to give a full
information of the condition of the french in America. August 21 st, this year,
died Ezekiel Cheever, venerable not merely for his great age, 94, but for
having been the schoolmaster of most of the principal gentlemen in Boston who
were then upon the stage. He is not the only master who kept his lamp longer
lighted than otherwise it would have been, by a supply of oil from his
scholars. John Higginson, the first minister of Salem, who came over with is
father in 1629 at the age of 14 or 15, lived until the 9th of December 1708,
having also been minister of the same church from the year 1660. His early days
he spent in Connecticut colony, and in 1641 was chaplain to Mr. Fenwick and
Lady Botcler, at the fort at Saybrook. Tuesday the 14th December was remarked
as the coldest day ever known in the country from its first settlement.


The transports and 900 troops, raised by the Massachusetts, were kept in pay
from the 20th of May to the beginning of November.
and Vetch gave a certificate under his hand, that all the governments
concerned had cheerfully and punctually complied with the orders given, except
Pensylvania! Pensylvania, at that time, principally consisted of the people
called quakers, and we are to impute their backwardness to a religious
principle or persuasion, and not to disaffection.
It was left to Lord Lovelace, governor of New York, to appoint the general
officer for the 1500 men, but, by his death, the power devolved upon Mr.
Ingoldsby, the lieutenant governor; and Nicholson who had been lieut. governor
of New York under Andros and afterward lieutenant governor of Virginia and
Maryland, being then in America, was pitched upon as a proper person, and
marched with the forces under his command as far as Wood-creek, there to wait
until the arrival of the fleet at Boston, that the attack on both places might
be made at one time. The transports and troops lay waiting at Boston from May
to September, every day expecting the fleet. No intelligence coming from
England; Vetch, being sensible it was too late to go to Canada, proposed a
meeting, at New London, of the governors of the several colonies, to consider
in what other way the forces raised should be employed against the enemy, that
the expense might not be wholly lost; but Nicholson, unexpectedly, returned
with his men from Wood-creek, and he and Vetch and Colonel Moody met some of
the governors at Rhode Island. Two or three days before the congress (October
11th) a ship arrived at Boston from England, with advice that the forces
intended for America were ordered to Portugal, and with directions to consult
whether the forces raised in America might not be employed against Portroyal,
the ships of war of which there were several then at Boston to be aiding and
assisting. It is said in one of the articles of Lord Oxford's impeachment, that
an expedition against Canada, having been frequently deliberated upon and
maturely considered in a committee of council, was laid aside at dangerous and
impracticable; but there can be no doubt that an expedition was fully
determined upon this year, and was laid aside upon an unexpected change of
affairs in Europe.
There was no great honor or profit to be expected, by the captains of the men
of war, if the expedition should succeed, nothing more being required of them,
than to serve as convoy to the transports, and cover to the forces at their
landing; therefore two of the frigates, whose station was New York, failed
immediately from Boston, without taking leave of any body, and the commanders
of the rest, Mathews, afterward Admiral Mathews, who was then commander of the
station ship at Boston, only excepted, peremptorily refused. As Soon as this was
known to the two houses, the court being sitting, they desired the governor to
discharge the transports and disband the men, it not being safe to proceed
without convoy. This was a heavy charge upon the province, without any good
effect. It was indeed late in the year for the attempt against Port Royal, but
then the prospect of surprising the enemy was so much the greater, and if it
had happened otherwise and the forces and returned without subduing the place,
it would have caused but little increase of the expense.

WHILST Nicholson lay at Wood-creek, the governor of Canada, who had
intelligence of all his motions, sent out an army of 1500 French and Indians,
who left Montreal the 28th July N. S. and the three first days advanced 40
leagues toward the English camp; but upon a report that they were 5000 strong,
and upon the march, to meet the French, and there being discord at the same
time, among the French officers, it was thought best to return to their
advanced posts, and wait to receive the English there. Had they proceeded, they
were equal to the English, better acquainted with the country, would have come
unexpected, and the event would at least have been doubtful for us.

CHARLEVOIX gives an instance of the treachery of the Indians of the six
nations, and of their intention to destroy the whole English army. Speaking of
father Mareuil, who had been a prisoner at Albany, he says, This missionary
having been exchanged for a nephew of the principal officer at Albany, we
learned from him all the circumstances of that affair and to what New France
owed her deliverance from the greatest danger to which she had been at any time
exposed from that quarter. Then having mentioned a grand council of the
Indians, held at Onondago, where all their general meetings upon important
matters were held, he goes on, The Onondago, one of the old men (...) that
nation, who was the speaker, asked whether (...) was out of their minds that
they were situated between two po^ent people, either of which were capable of
totally extirpating them, and that it would be the interest of either to do it,
as soon as they should have no further occasion for them. It behoved them
therefore to be very careful, that they did not lose their importance, which
they would do, unless each of those people were prevented from destroying the
other. This harangue made great impression upon the assembly, and it was
resolved, upon this occasion, to continue the political conduct which they had
hitherto observed. Accordingly, the Iroquois, when they had joined the English
army, and found, as they imagined, that it would be strong enough to take
Mont-real, employed their whole attention in contriving the destruction of it;
and this was the way they went to work. The army being encamped upon the banks
of a small river, Wood-creek.
the Indians, who spent most of their time in hunting, threw the skins of all
the creatures, which they stead, into the river, a little above the camp, which
soon corrupted the water. The English never suspected this treachery and
continued to drink the water; but it caused such a mortality among them, that
father de Mareuil and the two officers, who went to fetch him from Albany to
Canada, judged, by the graves, that there must have been at least a thousand
buried there."

NICHOLSON certainly decamped sooner than was expected, which caused some
dissatisfaction. The army was in a bad state. I have a letter dated New York,
November 4th 1709, which says, that many of the soldiers, who were at the lake,
died as if they had been poisoned.

ALTHOUGH the French were in constant expectation of being attacked themselves,
yet it did not take them off from employing some of their strength, this
summer, against the New England frontiers. In April, a man was taken prisoner
at Deerfield. In May, several men were surprised and taken, as they were
passing to a saw mill in Exeter; and in June, one of the Rouvilles, with 180
French and Indians, made another attempt upon Deerfield, to destroy or carry
away prisoners the poor people who, but a little while before, had returned
from their captivity; but the enemy was discovered at a distance and beat off,
the inhabitants bravely defending themselves. The town of Brookfield, in the
west, and Wells, in the east, soon after lost some of their people, by small
parties of Indians. Feb. 24th 1709, Joseph Hammond of the council died at
Kittery.


These ships being seen in the bay and no certainty of any fleet intended from
England, the usual signal for an alarm was given at the castle, and the militia
in Boston was kept under arms until evening, when news came that they were
English ships. The like happened upon the arrival of a fleet of small merchant
vessels from Saltertudas a year or two after, but the consternation was greater
and more extensive. The number of ships seen off Plymouth, was reported to be
very great, and some of them, it being war time, were fitted with mizen
top-gallant sails and spreetsail-topsails, and other unusual sails for merchant
men, and no doubt was made of their being capital French men of war. The
country were coming in, when one of the small vessels arrived and informed of
the rest.
On the 18th of September a fleet sailed from Nantasket for Port Royal,
consisting of three fourth rates, viz. the Dragon, commodore Martin; the
Chester, The Chester sailed a short time before the rest as a cruizer, and
joined them on the passage.
Matthews; the Falmouth, Riddle; two fifth rates, the Loesta^^e, Gordon, and
the Feversham, Paston, together with the Star bomb, Rochfort, and the province
galley, Southack, with fourteen transports in the pay of the Massachusetts, five
of Connecticut, two of New Hampshire and three of Rhode Island. These, with the
tender and transports from England, made 36 sail. There was a regiment of
marines, commanded by Col. Redding, and four regiments raised in New England,
two commanded by Sir Charles Hobby and Col. Tailer of Massachusets-bay, one by
Col. Whiting of Connecticut, and one by Col. Walton of New-Hampshre. Nicholson
was general and Vetch adjutant-general. One transport, Capt. Taye, ran ashore
at the mouth of the river and was lost, and 26 men were drowned, the rest of
the fleet arrived safe at Port Royal, the 24th of September. The forces were
landed without any opposition. Subercase, the governor, had only 260 men, and
most of them he was afraid to trust out of the fort, left they should desert to
the English. As the army was marching up to the fort, several men were killed
by the inhabitants, who fired from their houses and from behind their fences
and made their escape; and, for three or four days, whilst the necessary
preparations were making by the English, the French threw shells and shot from
the fort, and the bomb-ship, on the other hand, plied the French with her
shells. It was commonly said, after the return of the forces to Boston, that
early intimation was given to the English that they would meet with no great
difficulty, a decent pretense for a surrender was all that was desired. On the
29th, the governor sent out a flag of truce, praying leave for some of his
ladies, who were afraid of the bombs, to be sheltered in the English camp. The
officer, not observing the rules of war, was put under arrest, and an English
officer sent to the fort to acquaint the governor with the reasons of it. The
first of October, the two engineers, Forbes and Redknap, had three batteries
opon, two mortars and twenty four cohorn mortars ready, within 100 yards of the
fort, and began their firing, the French firing their shot and throwing shells
at the same time. The same day, Col. Tailer and Capt. Abercrombie were sent,
with a summons to surrender, and, in consequence thereof a ce^^ation of arms
was agreed upon and the terms of the capitulation were soon settled, and the
next day the following articles signed.

"ARTICLES of capitulation agreed upon for the surrender of the fort at
Port Royal, etc. betwixt Francis Nicholson, Esquire general and commander in chief
of all the forces of her sacred majesty Anne Queen of Great Britain, etc. and
Monsieur Subercase, governor, etc. for his most christian majesty.

1. THAT the garrison shall march out with their arms and baggage, drums
beating and colors flying.

2. THAT there shall be a sufficient number of ships and provisions to
transport the said garrison to Rochel or Rochfort, by the shortest passage,
when they shall be furnished with passports for their return.

3. THAT I may take out six guns and two mortars, such as I shall think fit.

4. THAT the officers shall carry out all their effects, of what fort soever,
except they do agree to the selling them; the payment of which to be upon good
faith.

5. THAT the inhabitants, within cannon short of Portroyal, shall remain upon
their estates, with their corn, cattle and furniture during two years, in case
they are not desirous to go before, they taking the oaths of allegiance and
fidelity to her sacred majesty of Great Britain.

6. THAT a vessel be provided for he privateers belonging to the islands in
America, for their transportation thither.

7. THAT those, that are desirous to go for Placentia in Newfoundland, shall
have leave by the nearest passage.

8. THAT the Canadians, or those that are desirous to go there, may, for during
the space of one year.

9. THAT effects, ornaments and utenfils of the chapel and hospital shall be
delivered to the Almoner.

10. I promise to deliver the fort of Port Royal into the hands of Francis
Nicholson Esquire for the queen of Great Britain, within three days after the
ratification of this present treaty, with all the effects belonging to the
king, as guns, mortars, bombs, ball, powder and all other small arms.

11. I will discover, upon my faith, all the mines, sugasses and casemates.

12. ALL the articles of this present treaty shall be executed upon good faith,
without difficulty, and signed by each other at her majesty of Great-Britain's
camp before Port Royal fort, this second day of October, in the ninth year of
her majesty's reign, Annoque Domini 1710.

Francis Nicholson. Subercase.

MEMORANDUM. The General declared, that within cannon short of Port Royal, in
the fifth article abovesaid, is to be understood three English miles round the
fort, to be Annapolis-royal and the inhabitants within three miles to have the
benefit of that article. Which persons, male and female, comprehended in the
said article, according to a list of their names given in to the general by M.
Allein, amounts to 481 persons."

THE English lost 14 or 15 men in the expedition, besides the 26 drowned when
the transport was lost. The fort had been neglected and was in a very bad
state. Subercase told the general he was very sorry for the king his master, in
losing such a strong fort and the territories adjoining. This was the
compliment to Nicholson, but it was in no condition to stand a siege.
Charlevoix says, Subercase's character suffered a great shock. He mentions
several actions which our accounts take no notice of -- The troops being landed
and nothing to oppose their march, went on toward the fort; but when they came
within reach of the cannon, the governor caused so smart a firing as put them
to a stand, killed a great many of their men, etc." Again, "The eighth (N. S.)
M. Subercase, having observed the spot where the enemy were about to erect
their batteries, made so lucky a fire that Mr. Nicholson, after having lost a
great many men, was obliged to retreat.

THE general having left a sufficient garrison under the command of Col. Vetch,
who was destined, in case of success, to the government of the country,
returned with the fleet and army to Boston, arriving there the 26th of October.

WHILST the forces were at Port Royal, it was thought proper, at a council of
war, to send Castine, who I suppose was in the fort, and Major Livingstone to
Canada, through the country, with letters to M. Vaudreuil, acquainting him that
the country of Acadie was subdued and that all the inhabitants, except such as
were within cannon shot of the fort, were prisoners at discretion; and as the
council had been informed that he had often sent out his barbarous Indians to
murder the poor innocent women and children upon the frontiers of New England,
if he continued that practice they would cause the same execution upon the
people of Acadie or Nova Scotia, now absolutely in their power; This would have
been rather a harder case upon the poor Acadians than any they have ever been
obliged to submit to.
but they abhorred such barbarities, and hoped he would give them no further
occasion to copy after him, but rather would release and send home such
prisoners as had been taken by the Indians. After a most fatiguing hazardous
journey, I have Livingstone's journal. He went about the middle of October from
Port Royal to Penobscot, where he was kindly entertained by Castine, at his own
house; and from thence went up the river in canoes, until they came to an
island where was a great body of Indians, men, women and children. Here, an
Indian, being in a rage because some English prisoners had run away with his
canoe, seized Livingstone by the throat and would have dispatched him with a
hatchet, if Castine had not thrown himself between them and rescued him. The
Indians would not suffer them to proceed, for several days. At length, November
4th, they set out in their canoes and the next day the canoe, the major was in,
overset and one of the Indian guides was drowned. Soon after, the water
beginning to freeze, the ice so shattered their tender vessels and made the
passing so difficult, that they were obliged to betake themselves to the land
and to travel by their compass, through a country so thick with spruce, cedar
and pine wood and underwood, as to be scarce passable, and the greatest part of
the way broken and mountainous land. They were above a fortnight without the
sight of the sun, the weather being stormy or foggy the whole time. They had
spent their provisions six days before they came to any French settlement, and
lived wholly upon moss, leaves and dried berries. At length, the 16th of
December they arrived at Quebec.
having three Indians for their guides, they arrived at Quebec. The governor
sent his answer to the message by two partisans, Rouville and Dupuis, by land
through Albany^ that they might be acquainted with the country and more fit to
be employed in making war upon any future occasion. Charlevoix.
The sum of the answer was, that Nicholson had been so well taught the laws of
war as to know that they did not admit of reprifals upon such inhabitants he
had surrendered upon an express promise of being well treated. That he,
Vaudreuil, never knew the French charged with inhumanity, and he was not afraid
to appeal to the English prisoners, within his government, against such a
charge; they had often been redeemed from the Indians, at great expense, and,
out of pure charity; indeed, the Indians themselves, ordinarily, did not treat
them ill, but let that be as it would, the French were not accountable for the
behavior of the Indians; it was not his fault, that this unfortunate war was
not over a long time ago, and all the miseries, which had been the consequence,
must be attributed to those who had refused the neutrality between the two
colonies; he was very ready to agree to the exchange of prisoners, but he had
not the command of those which were in the hands of his Indian allies; as for
the menace, of delivering up the Acadians to the Indians of New England if the
Indians of New-France should refuse to deliver the English prisoners, it was
contrary to all the rules of justice and humanity, and if it should be carried
into execution he should be obliged to do as much to all the English he had in
his power. This was all the effect of Livingstone's most fatiguing hazardous
journey.

THE affair of the agency in England has often occasioned a division and
contention in the general court. They, who have served the province well and
done every thing in their power, have not done enough. If our rights and claims
do not appear in the same light to those who judge of them in England, as they
do to our selves, we are too apt to attribute it to the want of skill or
fidelity in those who appear for us. At this time, a change in the agency was
agreed upon from a different cause. The change of the ministry in England was
as alarming to New England, as to any part of her majesty's dominions. Mr.
Phips was deeply engaged in the new measures. There could not then have been
any apprehension of his removing to Ireland; but a whig people would not be
satisfied with a tory agent. Sir H. Ashurst never had any great powers, and he
was now declining in age and health. The party that used to support him set up
his brother, Sir William Ashurst, a gentleman of superior character and real
worth. Mr. Dudley did every thing in his power to prevent the choice, but, when
he could not prevail, made a merit of accepting it. An address to the queen was
sent to Sir William, but he refused the agency; he was well acquainted with the
flights put upon his brother and the little or no reward given him for so long
services. When he excused himself, he recommended a New England young
gentleman, then in London, Jeremiah Dummer, Mr. Dummer's grand father, Richard
Dummer, was an assistant the year when Mr. Vane was governor: but, being of the
governor's party, was left out, with others of the same side: and lived many
years after, maintaining a fair character and acquiring a good estate, at
Newbury. His father was an acting justice of peace in Boston. Mr. Dummer,
besides the advantage of bright natural parts, had been very well educated. The
college at Cambridge fitted him for the university of Utrecht, where he spent
some years, and received a doctor's degree. After that, he returned to
New England; but finding no prospect of employment there, that would be
agreeable to him, he went to England, where he arrived a little before the
change of queen Ann's ministry. Contrary to the expectation of his countrymen
and constitnents, he devoted himself to the persons in power, was employed by
lord Bolingbroke in some secret negociations and had assurances of promotion to
a place of honor and profit, but the death of the queen blasted all his hopes.
His letter to a noble lord, upon the Canada expedition, and his defense of the
New England charters, will tend more to perpetuate his memory, in his country,
than all his services in the agency, which were far from inconsiderable. Mr.
Dummer conformed to his patron, lord Bolingbroke, in religion as well as
politics. In the latter, he left him, upon the change of times. In the former,
he is said to have adhered to him to the end of his life. He died in 1739. The
transtation of the travels of James Massey, wrote to encourage scepticisin and
infidelity, was dedicated to Mr. Dummer. Some, who did not know they were
originally wrote in french, supposed he was the author.
who, also procured from the principal merchants in London, trading to
New England, letters in his favor. he was not, at that time, acceptable to Mr.
Dudley, and, in a message to the assembly, he advised them to choose Henry
New-man, Mr. Newman was many years agent for the province of New Hampshire.
a New England man, then in London also, a person of great probity, who had
lived some years in the duke of Somerset's family, and who afterward was
secretary to the society for promoting christian knowledge; but the choice fell
upon Mr. Dummer and the governor did not think proper to negative him.

MR. DUDLEY found means to remove the prejudice of Sir William Ashurst. From
this time, all his letters are in a different strain from what they used to be,
and he represents the times to be such, that there was no prospect of a better
governor, and advises the people, if they could be tolerably easy, not to run
the risque of a change. This was not the only time when such a word of advice
to this, as well as other colonies, would have been seasonable. Mr. Dummer, who
was attaching himself to the new ministry and had great favor shewp him,
engaged also in Mr. Dudley's interest. Mr. Phips, who, at first, opposed him,
had for some time been very friendly to him. It was a rule with him to gain his
enemies, he was sure of his friends. It requires much of that art and skill, of
which he is said to have been master, to render this rule, for any length of
time, successful. He happened also, as we have observed, when he was in
England, to be known to and favored by Mr. Harley, and his interest there was
so established, that he was no longer in danger, until the death of the queen
caused an entire revolution, both as to men and measures. In the province, some
reports against him were of so gross and criminal, a nature, that although they
might find some ready to believe them, at first, yet time alone had sunk the
credit of them, and the remembrance of lesser matters sunk with it, and the
last days of his administration were his best days.

THIS year, the enemy made their first appearance, in the spring, at York, but
found the inhabitants upon their guard. In June, Col. Hilton of Exeter, being
in the woods with 18 men, was ambushed by a party, who, fired and killed the
colonel and two of his company, and took two prisoners, the rest escaping.
Hilton was a good officer, and had behaved well with Church, in 1704, and upon
other occasions; but at this time was off his guard. One hundred men went out
upon the alarm, but had no other success than to bring in the dead mangled
bodies to a decent interment. A few days after, 60 or 70 French and Indians
appeared in the skirts of the town of Exeter, but were alarmed by the firing a
gun, and went off with four children only, which they picked up in the street
or road at play, to the unspeakable distress of their parents upon receiving
the news. In their retreat, they killed one man and took another prisoner. They
then traveled westward and killed several of the inhabitants of Waterbury and
Simsbury in Connecticut, struck down upon Brookfield and Marlborough, and, from
thence, to Chelmsford, where Major Tyng was flain, an officer respected for his
prudence and courage.

THE 2d of August, about 50 Indians came upon Winter harbor, and hovered about
the place, some time, until they had killed four or five and taken eight or ten
of the inhabitants. They insulted the fort, and found the garrison too many to
be taken; but not enough to fally out and attack them. October the 1st, several
persons, as they were going to meeting at Berwick, were way laid, one of them
killed, another had his horse shot under him, the rest escaping. The 10th of
the same (...) Bomazeen, with 60 or 70 more Indians, appeared at
Winter-hardbour, killed three or four and took as many captives; one of the
latter was Johnson Harman, a noted officer in expeditions, the next war,
against the enemy. The Indians, after they had done the mischief, sent a flag
of truce to the fort, and offered to ransom their prisoners, if a vessel should
be sent to Kennebeck river to receive them.

OUR forces had been scouring the woods all the summer, but the parties of the
enemy avoided them. Toward winter, Col. Walton, after his return from
Port Royal, with 170 men ranged the eastern country, and killed a Norridgewock
chief and six or eight others. He made a second march to Winnepisiaukee,
without any success; but in, the mean time, the Indians, he was hunting after,
were seeking for their own bloody game, more or less of which they met with at
Cocheco, York, Wells, etc. July 29. 1710, died at Bristol, in Massachusets-bay,
John Saffin, Esquire who had been one of the council. Feb. 9th 1710.II. died Col.
John Foster, one of the council from the charter, and a wealthy merchant in the
town of Boston of a most fair and unblemished character.


even private persons to exert themselves with more zeal and vigor than had
been done upon any other occasion; and the people submitted, not without
reluctance, it is true, to have their property taken from them, in a way and
manner which I think the people of Great Britain or Ireland, at this day, would
not submit to. A general meeting of all the governors was appointed,
immediately after Nicholson's arrival at New London, and they were sitting when
the fleet arrived. The assembly happened to be sitting at Boston, when the
first orders came. The governor, without delay, recommended to them a full
compliance with the orders he had received. The first thing necessary, was
money. The credit of the treasury was so low in England, that no merchants or
private persons here would take bills, unless the drawers would make themselves
responsible, and there was no body authorized to draw such bills. The general
court determined to issue forty thousand pounds in bills of credit, and to lend
them to merchants and others, for the term of two years. These persons with
their bills of credit purchased bills of exchange upon the treasure in England,
which, it was hoped, before the expiration of the two years, would be paid,
and, if they should not, it would be in the power of the government to continue
the loan, but there was no engagement to do it. The next difficulty to be
removed was the extravagant price to which provisions had started, upon the
advice of this extraordinary demand. For this purpose, an order passed the
court, stating the prices of the several species of provisions necessary for
the service. The owners of the provisions shut up their stores, or removed
their provisions in order to conceal them. The demand, which had raised the
price, they urged, was the common chance in trade, which every merchant was
justly entitled to. Another order soon passed the court, to impress all
provisions, in whose possession soever, and for this purpose to open all doors
and enter. This effected a general compliance. The short time spent for this
purpose and the refusal of particular persons to submit at first, caused a
charge from the officers against the country in general, for unnecessarily
delaying the fleet and army; and he notice was taken of the zeal of the
government and this extraordinary measure for the removal of these impediments.
The addition of so many mouths had caused a sudden rise of all poultry and
fresh meat, and at that season of the year, if the usual consumption had
continued, the forces must have failed of necessary refreshment. This
consideration induced many of the principal gentlemen in Boston, to deny
themselves and to engage, whiie the fleet lay there to eat salt provisions and
no other in their families. The soldiers and seamen; Some of them, deserted and
were concealed by the inhabitants who were justly censured for doing it; but
not so the country, for in all countries, there are more or less persons who
for the sake of gain will do the same. A law against this offense was made,
with a very severe penalty, and a more summary way provided for trial of the
offense than ever had been in any instance before. The desertion of the men put
the Admiral out of temper, and he wrote the governor an angry letter, in which
he tells him, the service had been prejudiced, rather than forwarded since his
arrival at Boston, and demands from the government a supply of men equal to the
loss. This could be done in no other way than an impress. The inhabitants, it
must be owned, would not have submitted to it but, in general, would have
preferred a prison on shore to a man of war at sea.

^^SIDES the mistake, in the plan of this expedition, (...) respect to a speedy
supply of provisions at Boston without previous notice, there was another, in
presuming that skilful pilots were to be obtained there. The best in the
country were shipmasters, who had been once or twice up the river St. Lawrence.
These were employed in other business, upon which their future support
depended, and they were averse to leaving it; but the government impressed them
into the service, and afterward was charged with their defect of skill, which,
admitting it to be true, could not be helped.

THE troops were all landed upon Noddle's island; about a mile from the town,
where they were every day exercised in a healthy air; and it was allowed, that
men were never landed and reimbarked in better order. The land force, including
two regiments from New England, amounted to near 7000 men, an army more than
equal in number to that which afterward reduced Quebec, under general Wolf;
although, in 1711, it was not half so strong as in 1759.

THE fleet, which arrived at Boston, consisted of 15 fail of men of war and 40
transports, and all failed again the 30th of July. Greater dispatch could not
well be expected from such short warning. Nicholson set out for Albany the same
day, to take the command of the forces which were to march by land.

NOTHING remarkable happened in the passage of the fleet to Gaspee, where it
arrived the 18th of August and sailed again the 20th. The next day and the day
after proving foggy, and the wind beginning to blow fresh at E.S.E. the ships
brought to, with their heads to the southward, being out of sight of land and
out of foundings. This, the admiral, in his own account, says was by the advice
of the pilots, both English and French, and that they were of opinion the fleet
would drive into the midst of the channel or river. The New England Pilots
always denied they gave such advice, and declared, upon their oaths, their
opinion was not followed nor regarded. Some of the principal persons on board
one of the ships which belonged to New England, reported that upon the fleet's
being ordered to lie with their heads to the southward the whole ship's company
determined they must drive upon the north shore, and they were confirmed in
their formed jealousy, that it was never intended the fleet should arrive at
Quebec. This, however, is i^^^edible and the admiral, who had not the character
of an abandoned man, was incapable of sacrificing the lives of so many men;
and, it must be presumed, he would not have thrown away his own life, which was
exposed as well as the rest. The pilots from Boston supposed the admiral had a
very mean opinion of them, and laid greater stress upon the judgment of the
French pilots, who, through ignorance or from design, occasioned this wrong
measure. In two or three hours after the fleet brought to, some of the
transports were among the breakers. Eight or nine ships were lost upon the
rocks, about midnight, one thousand of the men that were on board drowned, and
about six or seven hundred saved by the other ships. All the men of war
escaped; the admiral's ship is said to have anchored, and the rest either stood
off or came to anchor; and the next morning, the wind shifting to W.S.W. the
admiral bore away for Spanish river, the men of war and transports following;
but, the wind shifting again to East, they were eight days before they all
arrived, and, as they had the wind, might more easily have gone to Quebec. In a
council of war, it was unanimously resolved, not only not to make any further
trial to go up the river St. Lawrence, but also not to attempt any thing
against Placentia in Newfoundland; the fleet not being sufficiently victualled
for either. They sailed the 16th of September, and the admiral arrived the 9th
of October at Portsmouth and, the 15th, his ship, the Edgar, blew up; the cause
not being known, jealous minds would suggest that even this was not without
design.

THE admiral supposed, in his account of the expedition, that if they had
arrived at Quebec and landed their men, their misfortune would have been still
greater; that the French would either have quitted the place and carried all
their provisions with them, or that they would have defended the place until
the provisions of the fleet and army were spent and they must have laid down
their arms; or if they finally surrendered, it was not to be expected the
provisions, for so small a garrison, would have lasted any time for twelve
thousand men, and French and English must have starved together. Vaudreuil had
made the best preparations he could for their reception, having early notice,
of their coming, from the governor of Placentia. An English prisoner, carried
in there from Boston, gave an account of Nicholson's arrival, of the fleet that
was to follow, and of the forces intended by way of the lake; and the captain
of a privateer saw the fleet within 60 leagues of Boston. This intelligence was
afterward confirmed by an Onondago Indian, who came to Quebec to inform of the
great preparations making at Albany. Charlevoix.


NICHOLSON had made but little progress in his march when he received the news
of this disaster, and, if the fleet had arrived safe, he would have been too
late to have drawn any of the French force from Quebec, before so much of the
provisions of the fleet had been spent that it would not have been safe to have
remained any longer; and it is well he did not proceed, for as soon as Vaudreuil
had advice of so many ships stove, and so many dead bodies with red coats drove
upon the shore, and that the river was clear of ships, he ordered all the
strength of Canada toward Montreal and the lake Champlain, which, if Nicholson
had passed, would have been sufficient to prevent his return.

To complete the charge against the Massachusetts, they are said to have
represented the navigation to Quebec to be easy and without hazard, of which
they were wholly ignorant; for the French, after an hundred years experience,
almost every year suffered shipwreck, and sailing in the bay and river St.
Lawrence was so hazardous that they could hardly obtain sailors for a voyage
thither. The Massachusetts people knew very well that Phips and his fleet went
up and down without difficult, in 1690; that flags of truce had frequently
passed and repassed, and they supposed the French represented the passage
difficult, to deter other nations, and experience now shows that they judged
right.

THE American transports were all preserved, except one victualler, and the
crew of that were saved. The disappointment and loss was grievous to
New England. Some pious minds gave over all hopes of reducing Canada. So many
attempts blasted, plainly indicated, as they conceived, that providence never
designed the whole northern continent of America for one European nation. Upon
the first news in England of the disafter, the blame was laid upon governor
Dudley, and it was said he would be removed, but his conduct soon appeared to
have been unexceptionable. Letters from London in 1711.


Upon the return of the Massachusetts troops, they gave an account of the
freedom used by the sea and land officers, in attributing the whole misfortune
to the colonies. The forces were unreasonably detained at Boston -- The
provisions fell short of what was expected -- The pilots were ignorant and not
fit to be trusted. The general court therefore thought that it was necessary to
exculpate themselves, and that it would be prudent to lay no blame any where
else. The governor, in his speech, October. 17. says I condole with you upon the
sorrowful disafter of the fleet and forces sent hither, by her majesty's
special savor, to all her good subjects in the provinces of North America. I
have had time enough, since the account thereof, to consider the several
articles of her majesty's commands to this government for the putting forward
the expedition, and, therein I cannot charge this assembly with neglect in any
particular; but when I peruse the journal of the proceedings, I think there was
all provision and expedition made, in every article referring to soldiers,
artisicers, pilots, transports and provisions for the service of her majesty's
British forces, as well as our own; which I hope you will see reason to
consider and represent home for our justification, that it may be demonstrated,
that we were in earnest to do our duty, to the utmost, for our own benefit and
establishment, as well as her majesty's honor and just rights.

THREE of the principal pilots, in the service, were sent to Englands, to be
ready to give an account of their conduct, if enquiry should be made. A journal
of the proceedings relative to the expedition was prepared and transmitted,
together with an address In this address, it is among other things asserted,
that one fifth part of the whole inhabitants of the province, capable of
bearing arms, were in pay that summer. The like proportion, were employed two
or three years successively in the late war. This would be thought
extraordinary in any state in Europe.
to the queen. The instructions to the agent were given with prudence and
caution. It chiefly concerns us to set forth that we have done our duty, by
giving all assistance in obedience to her majesty's royal commands, as we have
represented in our humble address herewith transmitted to be presented by you,
and will appear by the journal and orders accompanying the same. We comported
with the supplies, in the large demands made upon us, to the utmost of our
power, beyond what we had at first a reasonable prospect to have provided
timely having so short notice, but made our utmost efforts and happily got
through the same, in which you are to vindicate and justify the government.

IT is not our province, nor must you enter thereinto, to fault or impeach
others, for want of doing their duty, or for their conduct in that affair, any
further than is absolutely necessary for our own vindication. If there be just
cause therefore, her majesty in her princely wisdom will direct the enquiry
thereinto.

THE pilots waited many months in England, ready to answer any questions, but
none were ever asked, nor was any enquiry ever made into the cause of the
failure of the expedition. Upon the whole, it cannot be conceived that the
admiral, general and principal persons employed in the execution of this plan,
pursued any particular measures in order to defeat and overthrow it; that those
who projected it in England, had not good reason to expect from the
insufficient provision made that it must fail of success and, at best, were
well content that it should, is not so certain. The account which Charlevoix
gives of the French pilot does not agree with Walker's. "There was on board the
admired, a French prisoner, one Paradis, an old seaman who was perfectly
acquainted with the river St. Lawrence: This man cautioned him, when he was off
the seven islands, not to venture too near the land, and he obliged him to make
frequent ^ucks and to keep near the wind, which did not favor him. At length
the admiral tired out and, perhaps, suspecting the pilot only designed to wear
out his men, refused to come to stays and bor, dered so near a little island
called the isle of eggs, that he and seven more were driven ashore by a very
sudden squall at south east, and stove to pieces and but very few people were
saved." I will add a brief account of the disafter the fleet met with, from a
letter of the New England commissary, Sampson sheaf. "When I accepted the
employment, of commissary to the New England forces on the Canada expedition, it
was in hopes of doing some good service; wherein I designed to do my best, and
hoped with my diligence and best understanding to have been of some use, but on
the 22d of August, our fleet under the command of Sir Hovenden Walker, about 8
or 10 leagues above the entrance of Canada river, about 11 or 12 at night, met
with a dismal disafter. Ten or eleven of the British transports run on the
north shore and were dashed to pieces against the, rocks. I hear but of one
vessel belonging to New England met with any damage. There is an eminent
providence of God therein, which doubtless we ought to consider; but as to the
instrumental cause, by whose misconduct. remains to be examined, and I hope
will be made evident. The admiral and general were in great danger, they saved
themselves and their ships, by anchoring, but lost several anchors. It was
lamentable to hear the shrieks of the sinking, drowning, departing souls. The
ship, wherein I was embarked, with very great difficulty weathered the rocks,
but we were in no capacity to succo^r them that were in distress. Admiral
Walker, just before our departure from spanish river, set up a cross with an
inscription, dated 15th of September, In nomine patris, and c. the purport of
which was, that thereby he took possession of that country for her majesty.
This will be a bitter pill for New England. The French will now employ their
Indians with redoubled ruge and malice, to distress and destroy our exposed
frontiers. Annapolis Royal, Octo. 6. 1711."


ALTHOUGH the principal object of this expedition was not obtained, yet, in all
probability, Annapolis-royal was saved by it from falling into the hands of the
French. The garrison there was reduced to a handful of men. Between two and
three hundred of the New England forces were kept there, after the place was
reduced, and four in five were dead, and they were afraid even of the Acadians
alone, without any additional strength; but the French court, sensible of their
mistake in not giving more attention to the preservation of that country, when
It was in their hands, pressed the governor of Canada, in the strongest manner,
to exert himself for the recovery of it. A body of troops was raised and ready
to depart from Canada, when the news arrived of the English fleet and other
preparations making; and the men which were designed against Nova Scotia were
detained at home to defend Canada. The French inhabitants of Acadie, having
notice of the force intended from Canada, grew insolent, and it was not safe
for an English man to stir out of the sort. As Soon as they heard of the
disappointment, they became submissive again and made acknowledgment of their
faults; but at the same time let Vandreuil know, that the French king had no
better subjects, and necessary along had brought them to this submission. These
were the inhabitants round the fort, included in the capitulation. Many of
those at a distance had not yet submitted to the English, and Capt. Pigeon, an
officer of the regulars, was sent up the river to destroy some of the French
houses, as well as to cut timber for the repair of the fort. He was surprised
by a great number of Indians, who killed the fort major, the engineer and all
the boat's crew, and took thirty or forty of the garrison prisoners. This
stroke encouraged the inhabitants again to take up arms, and five hundred of
them, with as many Indians as they could collect, were preparing to attack the
sort, expecting an experienced officer from Placentia to head them; but the
governor not being able to spare one, they laid down their arms again and
dispersed.

To meet the French or Indian enemy, who were expected upon our frontiers, Col.
Walton was sent, in the fall, with 180 men, as far as Penobscot, where he
burned two vessels which were designed for privateers or cruizers, and took
some prisoners.

THE year 1711 was rendered remarkable by a fire in the town of Boston, which
from that time until the year 1760 was called the great fire. It was supposed
to have been caused by the carelessness of an old woman in or near what is
called Williams's court; all the houses on both sides of Cornhill, from school
street to what, is called the stone shop in Dock-square, all the upper part of
King Street on the south and north side, together with the townhouse, and what
was called the old meeting house above it, were consumed to ashes. Col. Tailer
arrived in the fall of the year 1711 with her majesty's commission for
lieutenant governor.


tired of relating these inroads of the enemy, many of which I have given an
account of in general terms, and avoided frequently enumerating circumstances
which excite horror from the mere relation. This was the last action of any
consequence. In the spring, after the peace of Utrecht was known in America,
the Indians sent in to Major Moodey at Casco, to pray that there might be peace
between the English and them also, and proposed a treaty to be held there; but
the governor thought it more for his honor to oblige them to come to
Portsmouth, the chief town of one of his governments, than to go to the borders
of their usual residence; and, upon the 13th of July, they entered anew into
articles of submission and pacification, signed by a number of chiefs of their
several tribes, wherein they ask pardon for all their past rebellions and
violations of former promises, and engage to demean themselves for the future
as very obedient faithful subjects of the crown of GreatBritain. An observation
occurs to me which I may properly enough bring in at the close of this war.

these would have been fathers of families and, in the course of 40 years, have
multiplied to near an hundred thousand souls. The same observation may be made
from 1722 to 1762. The inhabitants have not doubled their number. The loss of 2
or 3000 young men, at and after the siege of Louisburgh, will go a great way
toward accounting for the desiciency. It is probable there would have been
200,000 souls more than there are at this time in New England, if the French
had been driven from Canada an hundred years ago.


I cannot avoid a reflection also upon the heavy burden which the province
subjected it self to during this war, I suppose beyond those of any other ten
years from the first settlement. The castle and other fortifications at Boston,
the several forts in the eastern country, the various expensive expeditions
actually prosecuted, and the preparations made for others, added to the
constant defense of the extensive frontiers and to the support of the civil
government, without any relief or compensation from the crown, certainly must
have occasioned such (...) annual burden as was not felt by any other subjects
of Great Britain, and the merit of the people of that day ought not to be
forgot.

THE settlement of the line of jurisdiction between the province and the colony
of Connecticut which was accomplished in the year 1713, after ineffectual
attempts for several years before, deserves particular notice. In 1636 the
first settlers upon Connecticut river removed from the Massachusetts and took
possession of the country upon the near the river on both sides, from
springfield as low as Weathersfield, inclusive of both, and managed their
affairs by virtue of authority from the general court of the Massachusetts. In
1638 the inhabitants of Springfield, which included what was afterward called
Suffield, below on one side of the river, and Enfield on the other side, having
no doubt that they were within the limits of the Massachusetts patent,
petitioned the general court that they might be separated from the other towns
below, and be received and continued as part of the colony, which was granted
and jurisdiction exercised accordingly. In 1642, by order of the general court,
two mathematicians, as they are called in the records, Nathan Woodward and
Solomon Saffery run a line west, as they supposed, from a station three miles
north of Charles river until they came to Windfor, upon Connecticut river,
where it struck the house of Bissell who kept the ferry. The people who had
settled upon Connecticut river had no better title to land or jurisdiction than
possession, the grant made them by the Massachusetts general court being a mere
nullity.

In 1630, the Earl of Warwick had obtained from the council of Plymouth a
patent of the lands upon a (...) line near the sea shore toward the south
west, west and by south, or west, from Naraganset river forty leagues, as the
coast lies toward Virgmia, and all within the breadth to the south sea, and
yet, in 1635, all the kinds between Connecticut river and the Naraganses
country were assigned by the same council to the Marouis of Hamilton. Lord Say
and others had purchased the Earl of Warwick's title, and by their agents built
a sort at the mouth of Connecticut river about the year 1635, and four or five
years after Mr. Fenwick came over with design to take possession of the lands
upon Connecticut river under lord Say, etc. and remained inpossession of the
mouth of the river until 1644, when the settlers purchased the title of the
lords, as it was called, and formed themselves into, or continued the form they
had assumed, of a body politic.

WHEN the line was run by Woodward and Saffery, Fenwick was to have joined, as
the Massachusetts commissioners for the united colonies afterward assirmed,
though Connecticut commissioners denied it, and it 1648, when a dispute arose
about a duty required of Springfield for the support of the sort at the mouth
of the river, the Massachusetts offered to run the line anew if Connecticut
would be at the charge, the Massachusetts having been at the sole charge before,
but this was not agreed to, and the fort being burned down, and the controversy
about the duty at an end, this line seems to have been acquiesced in, and, in
1662, Mr. Winthrop obtained from king Charles a charter for the colonies of
Connecticut and New Haven united, the north line whereof is intended to be the
same with the south line of Massachusetts. From this time, until after the
incorporation of the Massachusetts by a new charter in 1691, we hear nothing
about bounds, except some controversies between Springfield and Wind, for about
their towns grants, and letters from the authority of each government relative
to it; and, in 1686, many of the inhabitants of Roxbury pitched upon a tract of
land to settle upon, which was bounded on the south by Woodward and Saffery's
line, and it was granted to them by the Massachusetts government and took the
name of Woodstock. Grants were also made to particular persons of tracts of
land near to this line.

AFTER the new charter, Connecticut made a more serious affair of what was
called the Massachusetts encroachments, and in 170^, upon the appointment of a
committee by Connecticut with a general power to settle the bounds between the
two governments, the Massachusetts appointed a committee Col. Hutchinson, Mr.
Tailor, Mr. Anthrum, and Mr. Prout.
with a special limited power, viz. to find the southernmost line of the late
colony of Massachusets-bay as anciently run by Nathanael Woodward and Solomon
Saffery, and to make report thereof to the general court. This was not what
Connecticut wanted, for they supposed Woodward and Saffery's line to be
erroneous, however they appointed a committee William Pitkin, Esquire and Capt.
William Whiting.
to attend the work, who reported to their constituents that a line from three
miles north of Charles river, or Woodward and Saffery's station, would run some
miles to the northward of John Bissell's house, where Woodward and Saffery
supposed it to run, and in 1702 Mr. Winthrop, the governor of Connecticut,
wrote to governor Dudley and desired that the Massachusetts would join in
ascertaining the difference of latitude between the Charles river station and
Bissell's house. There were other attempts to bring this affair to a
conclusion, but ineffectual, and in 1708, by a state of the case read in both
houses, it appears that the Massachusetts intended "to rely upon the line
formerly run, as it is therein said, by two skilful artists in the year 1642,
and which has continued the stated boundary for 66 years." They add, that
Connecticut charter which was granted in 1662 was bounded by the south line of
the Massachusetts, which was not then an imaginary or untried line, but well
known to the gentleman Vol. I. P. 100.
who solicited that charter, who if he had thought it contr^v^r^ible would
doubtless have obtained an order for rectifying and adjusting it, and
supposing, which was not granted, that there should be any error or mistake in
the line, yet, having been run and stated so long before the grant of
Connecticut charter and held by possession for 66 years, and towns and
plantations having been granted and settled upon the same, it was unreasonable,
now, to draw it into question.

THERE being so little prospect of the Massachusetts receding from a line of
which they had so long been in possession, Connecticut made their application
to England, and I find by a letter from governor Saltonstall of Connecticut, in
1710, that he was expecting orders concerning it. If any came, probably they
were such as repeatedly afterward were sent to New Hampshire, viz. to settle
the controversy by commissioners appointed or agreed upon by the general courts
of each colony. Be that as it may, it is certain that Connecticut renewed their
application to the Massachusetts, and at length commissions passed the seals of
each government with ample powers to settle the controversy. The Massachusetts
were intent upon securing the property to such persons to whom they had granted
lands and the jurisdiction of those towns which had been settled by them.
Suffield, Enfield and Woodstock were the only towns which could be affected.
Connecticut was also apprehensive that part of the town of Simsbury, which had
been settled by that government, might fall within the Massachusetts. It was
therefore settled as a preliminary, that the towns should remain to the
governments by which they had been settled and the property of as many acres as
should appear upon a balance to have been gained by one government from the
other should be conveyed out of other unimproved lands as a satisfaction or
equivalent, only, as there was about two miles which Windfor claimed upon the
town of Suffield, there having been long contest between these two towns
concerning the validity of the respective grants, it was agreed the two miles
should belong to Connecticut if they fell within their line.

NOTHING could be more equitable nor tend more to the future peace and content
of the inhabitants of the contested borders.

IT appeared, by the report of the commissioners, that 107793 acres of land
were due from the Massachusetts, who accordingly made a grant thereof to
Connecticut. They accepted and made sale of the same and applied the produce to
the support of Yale college and other public uses, and the controverted towns
for many years after continued without molestation under the jurisdiction by
which they were first settled.

THE affairs of the war had so engaged the attention of all persons, that we
hear little of party disputes and discord, for five or six years past; but
as soon as they were delivered from enemies without, a contention began within,
from a new cause, the effects of which were felt many years together. The paper
bills of credit were the cause of this contention. So many bills had been
issued for the charges of the war, particularly the large sum of forty thousand
pounds, issued for the Canada expedition, that they were become the sole
instrument and measure of commerce, and silver and gold were entirely banished.
Of two instruments, one in use in a particular state only, the other with the
whole commercial world, it is easy to determine which must leave that
particular state and which remain. The currency of silver and gold entirely
ceasing, the price of every thing bought or sold was no longer compared
therewith, but with the paper bills, or rather with mere ideal pounds,
shillings and pence. The rise of exchange with England and all other countries,
was not attributed to the true cause, the want of a fixed stable medium, but to
the general bad state of the trade. It was thought that increasing the paper
bills would enliven and reform the trade. Three parties were formed, one very
small, which was for drawing in the paper bills and depending upon a silver and
gold currency. Mr. Hutchinson, one of the members for Boston, was among the
most active of this party. He was an enemy, all his life, to a depreciating
currency, upon a principle very ancient, but too seldom practiced upon, nil
utile quod non honestum.

ANOTHER party was very numerous. These had projected a private bank, or rather
had taken up a project published in London in the year 1684; but this not being
generally known in America, a merchant in Boston was the reputed father of it.
There was nothing more in it, than issuing bills of credit, which all the
members of the company promised to receive as money, but at no certain value
compared with silver and gold; and real estates, to a sufficient value, were to
be bound as a security that the company should perform their engagements. They
were soliciting the sanction of the general court, and an act of government to
incorporate them. This party, generally, consisted of persons in difficult or
involved circumstances in trade, or such as were possessed of real estates, but
had little or no ready money at command, or men of no substance at all; and we
may well enough suppose the party to be very numerous. Some, no doubt, joined
them from mistaken principles, and an apprehension that it was a scheme
beneficial to the public, and some for party sake and popular applause.

THREE of the representatives of Boston, Mr. Cook, son to the agent, we have
so often mentioned, Mr. Noyes, a gentleman in great esteem with the inhabitants
in general, and Mr. Pain, were the supporters of the party, Mr. Hutchinson,
the other (an attempt to leave him out of the house not succeeding) was sent
from the house to the council, where his opposition would be of less
consequence. The governor was no favorer of the scheme, but the lieutenant
governor, a gentleman of no great fortune, and whose stipend from the
government was trisling, engaged in this cause with great zeal.

A THIRD Party, though very opposite to the private bank, yet were no enemies
to bills of credit. They were in favor of a loan of bills from the government
to any of the inhabitants who would mortgage their estates as a security for
the re-payment of the bills, with interest, in a term of years, the interest to
be paid annually, and applied to the support of government. This was an easy
way of paying public charges, which, no doubt, they wondered, that in so many
ages the wisdom of other governments had never discovered. The principal men of
the council were in favor of it, and it being thought by the first party the
least of two evils, they fell in with the scheme, and, after that, the country
was divided between the public and private bank. The house of representatives
was near equally divided, but rather favorers of the private bank, from the
great influence of the Boston members in the house, and a great number of
persons of the town, out of it. The controversy had an universal spread, and
divided town, parishes, and particular families. May 8. 1713. died at Yarmouth
John Thacher, Esquire one of the council, in his 75th year. In Vol. 1. P. 395, It
is said Sir Edmund Andros died in Virginia, but I find by letters from London
dated the 24th Feb. 1713-14. that he died there in that week.


The trustees were Andrew Belcher, Addington Davenport, Thomas Hutchinson,
Edward Hutchinson, and John White.
and lent for five years only, to any of the inhabitants at 5 per cent.
interest, one fifth part of the principal to be paid annually. This lessened
the number of the party for the private bank, but it increased the zeal, and
raised a strong resentment, in those which remained.

A vessel, which arrived at Boston from Ireland the 15th of September, brought
the first news of the death of the queen, and the accession of king George the
first; and two days after, a vessel arrived, from some part of Great Britain,
with the printed proclamation in the London Gazette. This, the governor thought
sufficient warrant, without express orders, for proclaiming the king in the
province. The practice in the colonies has not been uniform on the like
occasions. At New Hampshire, the king was proclaimed from the same
intelligence, the 22d of September; The 23d by special order from the governor
the king was proclaimed at Salem, the civil and military officers and principal
gentlemen as well as great numbers of other inhabitants attending. This was not
the only instance of respect shown by Mr. Dudley to this ancient and reptuable
town.
at Rhode Island, the 29th; at NewYork, the 11th of October; at New-Heaven, in
Connecticut, the 14th; at Philadelphia, the 27th; no express orders being
received in any of those places; but at Annapolis-royal it was delayed until
the 2d of December. The propriety of proceeding without express orders has been
questioned, but the absurdity of acts of government, in the name and by
authority of a prince, for months together, after certain intelligence of their
demise, has generally influenced the governors to proceed.

THE secret designs of Queen Ann's last ministry were no where more suspected,
nor more dreaded, than in the Massachusetts; and the first of August was no
where celebrated with greater joy, during the whole of the king's reign.

THE HAZARD stoop sent express from England, with orders to the government, was
lost upon Cohasset rocks, the 12th of November; the vessel being stove to
pieces, and no papers of any consequence saved. Enough washed ashore to make
certain what vessel it was, and one man had been landed and left at Nantucket.
Six months, from the king's accession, expired and no orders had arrived for
continuing officers in their posts. The authority of the governor began to be
called in question. By the charter, upon the death, removal or absence of the
governor and lieutenant governor and there being no person commissionated as
governor within the province, in such cases the government devolves upon the
council or the major part of them. The council deriving their authority from
charter and not from a royal commission, the act of parliament limiting the
continuance in office to six months after the death of a prince, it was
supposed, could not affect their authority. The advice, of the miscarriage of
the first orders, went the first opportunity to England, and new orders were
daily expected, and some were inclined to wait; but, on the 4th of February,
the council assumed the government, the lieutenant governor, being of the
council, joining with the rest, and issued a proclamation for all officers to
continue in their posts, etc.

AN instruction had been given by the queen, in 1707 directing that in case of
the death or absence of the governor and lieutenant governor, the eldest
councellor should preside in the province; but the charter giving the powers of
government to the major part, this instruction was not regarded.

THE administration of the council was short, and nothing of moment was
transacted. On the 21st of March, the king's proclamation was received, and the
governor reassumed with as great parade as if he had been first entering upon
the government, but he had reason to expect his rule would be short. His
friends in the province were increased. Those who had been his greates opposers
had many of them changed sides and were strongly attached to him, and used what
interest they had with Sir William Ashurst "I am glad to hear of the prosperity
of New England, and that the governor engages the good wishes of the people for
his continuance. I am of opinion you cannot be better than you are at present;
If you should have a new one you must expect it to be a necessitous person. --
Certainly you have reason to except more adv(...) that is born among you than
from a stran(...) W. Ashurst to I. Mather, Aug. 10. 1714.
and others that he might be continued, and at their request Ashurst appeared
for him. The Bankers were the chief of the disaffected, and Col. Byfield, Col.
Byfield came from England about the year 1680, and settled soon after at
Bristol, in the colony of New Plymouth. His father was Richard Byfield, one of
the assembly of divines; his mother, sister to bishop Iuxon. He had interest to
obtain a commission for judge of the admiralty in 1703, which he held until
1715. He complained of being injuriously reproved by Mr. Dudley in council, for
some alleged errors in judicial proceedings, and was after that always in the
opposition.
a gentleman of the council, father in law to the lieut. governor, went over to
England to endeavor to supplant him, but wanted interest. In England Mr.
Dudley lost his friends by the queen's death. Col. Burgess, who had served
under General Stanhope, was by his interest, in February, appointed to the
government, and his commissions passed the seals March the 17th, and Ashurst
writes, that the General had promised to be answerable for his good behavior.

Mr. Cook died the 31st of October this year, aged 78. He was esteemed as a
physician, but most remarkable in his political character, having been more
than forty years together employed in places of public trust, always firm and
steady to his principles. I am obliged to Mr. Middlecot Cook, his grandson,
for many of his papers, which have been of great use. The same day Thomas
Oliver, Esquire another of the council, died at Newton. Mr. Addington died this
year also (March 19. 1714-15) He had been secretary before the arrival of the
charter, and had the character of great integrity and of being in every other
respect well qualified for his post. After his death, the governor appointed
his son Paul Dudley and Addington Davenport commissioners for keeping the great
seal and the public records and files, until his majesty should appoint a
secretary for the province. Samuel Woodward arrived at Boston, Sept. 22d, 1715,
with his majesty's commission for secretary. Nov. 16. Ichabod Plaisted, Esquire
another of the council, died in his 52d year.
whom he had so often negatived, into the council, and either from
indifference, or a spirit of forgiveness before his political departure, he now
approved of him.

COL. Burgess intended to stay (...) time in England. The bank party were
impatient (...) the removal of Dudley, who did not favor them, and those second
son William Dudley, who began to have great weight in the house of
representatives, was a violent opposer. An unusual step was taken, that the
governor's commission might be superseded. An exemplification of Burgess's
commission was obtained, and that, with the new commission or warrant to the
lieutenant governor Tailer, were published in Boston, at the same time, the 9th
of November; His commission for lieut. governor under Burgess had been read in
council the 24th of September, and he then took the oaths, but no
exemplification of Burgess's commission was then arrived.
and thereupon Tailer took upon him the administration. It was questioned,
whether this was regular, the commissions lay three or four weeks for the
council to consider of; but at length they advised to the publication. I know
of no other instance of the publication of a governor's commission in the
Ma^^achusets before his arrival in person. In Virginia it must have been
practiced, if a publication has been judged ^^cessary; several of their
governors having never been in the colony. The house of representatives, the
first (...) of their sitting (Nov. 23d) appointed a committee to consider of
the commissions, but no public exception was taken. Mr. Dudley's friends were
sensible he (...) continue but a short time, for the original commission, with
the new governor, would remove all doubt; he himself was in advanced life, near
seventy, and had felt so much of the burden of government, that he might well
be weary of it and, like his friend Mr. Stoughton, wish to retire.

No New England man had passed through more scenes of busy life than Mr.
Dudley. His friends intended otherwise. He was educated for the ministry, and
if various dignities had been known in the New England churches, possibly he
had lived and died a clergyman; but, without this, nothing could be more
dissonant from his genius. He soon turned his thoughts to civil affairs; was
first a deputy or representative of the town of Roxbury; then an assistant;
then agent for the colony in England, where he laid a foundation for a
commission, soon after, appointing him president of the council, first for
Massachusets-bay only, but, under Andros, for all New England. Upon the
revolution, for a short time, he was sunk in disgrace, but soon emerged. He
appeared, first, in the character of chief justice at New York, then, returning
to England, became lieutenant, governor of the Isle of Wight and member of
parliament (...) Newtown, both which places he willingly resigned for the chief
command in his own country. Ambition was the ruling passion, and, perhaps, like
Caesar, he had, rather be the first man in New England than the second in Old.
Few men have been pursued by their enemies with greater virulence, and few have
been supported by their friends with greater zeal. We have seen a second
generation inherit the spirit of their ancestors, the descendants, on one side,
preserving an affection for his family and posterity, and on the other,
retaining equal disaffection against them. Some of his good qualities were so
conspicuous, that his enemies could not avoid acknowledging them. He applied
himself with the greatest diligence to the business of his station. The affairs
of the war and other parts of his administration, were conducted with good
judgment. In economy he excelled both in public and private life. He supported
the dignity of a governor without the reproach of parsimony, and yet, from the
moderate emoluments of his post, made an addition to his paternal estate. The
visible increase of his substance made some incredible reports of gross bribery
and corruption to be very easily received; but, in times when party spirit
prevails, what will not a governor's enemies believe, however injurious and
absurd? At such a time, he was charged with dispensing summum jus to Leisler,
and incurring and aggravated guilt of blood, beyond that of a common murderer.
The other party, no doubt, would have charged the failure of justice upon him,
if Leisler had been acquitted. His cringing to Randolph, when in his heart he
despised him, was a spot in his character; and his secret insinuations, to the
disadvantage of his country, was a greater; both being for the sake of
recommending himself to court favor. I think it is no more than justice to his
character, to allow that he had as many virtues as can consist with so great a
thirst for honor and power.

HIS life would afford convincing evidence, if there was any doubt, that an
humble calm mind enjoys more happiness in private life than an ambitious
anxious mind in the highest station. No man in our history had seen more of the
temporum varietates fortunaeque vicissitudines which Cicero, in one of his
epistles to Lucceius, says afford a pleasing narration, however irksome to the
man who has the experience of them.

COL. TAILER'S strong attachment to the bank party procured him the
administration, for a few months; but was the cause of his losing his
commission for lieutenant governor immediately after. It was supposed, I know
not upon what grounds, that Col. Burgess would favor the same party, and his
arrival was every day wished for by them; whilst the other party dreaded it,
and labored to prevent it. It was said also, that, in other respects, he would
by no means be agreeable to the country; a gentleman of a more grave serious
turn of mind would be more likely to be happy here himself and to render the
people so. Mr. Belcher, afterward governor, who was very opposite to the bank
party, was then in London, he joined with Mr. Dummer, the agent, and they
engaged Sir William Ashurst with them, and prevailed upon Burgess for a
thousand pounds sterling, which Belcher and Dummer advanced equally between
them, to resign his commission, that Col. Shute might be appointed in his
stead. Col. Tailer's friends had endeavored to engage Ashurst in his favor,
but to no purpose; "I have no design to lessen Col. Tailer's merit, but I must
observe on this article, that you seem knowingly and industriously to suppress
the true reason of his popularity, which is his being at the head of the
private bank, and which I take to be a new and strong reason for putting him
out of his employment; and, in this, I do not rely upon my own judgment, but
upon the judgment of many principal gentlemen in the bank of England, who
condemn it as mischievous to the country, and calculated to serve private,
(...) views." Ashursts let. to Mather.
the same interest obtained the lieutenant governor's commission for Mr.
William Dummer, a New England gentleman, who had married a daughter of Mr.
Dummer, one of the commissioners at Plymouth, and was in some post there
himself; but, his wife dying, he had returned to his native country.

COLONEL SHUTE'S family were, generally, dissenters: His father an eminent
citizen in London; his mother, daughter of Mr. Caryl, a dissenting minister of
great note. His brother, afterward lord Barrington, was then a member of
parliament, and at the head of the dissenting interest. The colonel began his
education under Mr. Charles Morton, who about the year 1684, came to
New England and was minister of Charlestown. After tuition under him, he was
sent to Leyden. He went after that into the army under king William, who made
him a captain, served under the duke of Marlborough, was a lieutenant colonel
and wounded in one of the principal battles in Flanders. He had a good
acquaintance, and was well esteemed at court; had the character of a friend to
liberty, and was of an open, generous and humane disposition. A governor of his
character might be supposed to be welcome to New England men, but the interest
of party prevails over all other considerations, and virtue, religion, private
friendship and public good are all sacrificed to promote it. Feb. 14. 1715-16.
died at Salem William Brown, Esquire in his 78th year, an assistant under the old
charter and one of Sir Edmund Andros's council, which seems to have been the
reason of his not being nominated by Mr. Mather, and appointed by king William
under the present charter. This neglect naturally procured him some votes at
the first election afterward, and he was brought into the council and
continued many years. Ian. 14th, the same year, died at Salem Elizabeth Patch,
the first born female in the old colony of Massachusets-bay, so that she must
have lived 86 or 87 years, and April 14th following, died, at Newport Mary
Godfrey, aged about 87, being the first child born there. The longaevity of the
first born in each of this three colonies is worth nothing. See P. 148.


CHAP. III.
From the arrival of Governor Shute, in 1716, to the arrival of Governor
Belcher, in 1730.
the trade, the whole currency soon depreciating to that degree, as, with this
addition, to answer the purposes of money very little more than if it had not
been made. The governor became sensible of it and recommended to them to
provide against it, which they were not able to do, and many of them would not
have been willing if they had been able, being in debt, and by means of the
depreciation discharging their debts by a nominal sum, perhaps of not more than
one half the real value of the debts. He soon found the effects of it upon his
own salary, which they refused to advance as the bills sunk, and having
recommended this measure in a public speech it became more difficult afterward
to refuse repeating it.



AT the beginning of the conference, he delivered them an English and an Indian
bible, which he told them contained the religion of the English, and at the
same time recommended to them Mr. Baxter, a minister who went down as a
missionary, and told them he would explain the bible and instruct them in the
principles of religion. They were at no loss for an answer. "All people, they
said, loved their own ministers; and as for the bible, they desired to be
excused from keeping it, God had given them teaching, and if they should go
from that they should displease God." They were fixed in their religion and it
would have been a loss of time to attempt to move them. The rest of the
conference was upon the right of the English to settle in that part of the
country. Upon complaint made, by the Indians, of encroachments upon their
lands, the governor produced one of the original deeds which had been given by
their sachems. They acknowledged the lands, to the west of Kennebeck, belonged
to the English, but they were sure no sale had ever been made of any lands to
the east. The governor told them, the English would not part with an inch of
the land which belonged to them. The Indians were so offended that they rose
immediately and, without any ceremony, took to their canoes and went to another
island where they had their head quarters, leaving behind an English flag which
the governor had given them. Wiwurna. We are willing to cut off our lands as
far as the mills and the coasts to Pemaquid.


Governor. Tell them we desire only what is our own, and that we will have. We
will not wrong them, but what is our own we will be masters of.


Wiw. It was said at Casco treaty that no more ^orts should be made.


Gov. Tell them the forts are not made for their hurt, and that I wonder they
should speak against them, when they are for the security of both, we being all
subjects of king George.


Wiw. We cannot understand how our lands have been purchased, what has been
alienated was by our gift.

His excellency hereupon ordered that a deed of sale of lands on Kennebeck
river, made by six Indian sagamores to Richard Wharton, should be opened and
exhibited to them, which was done and partly read and interpreted to them.


Wiw. As for the west side of Kennebeck river I have nothing to say, but am
sure nothing has been sold on the east side.


Gov. I expect their positive answer and compliance in the matter, that the
English may be quiet in the possession of the land, they have purchased.


Wiw. We don't know what to think of new forts built.


Gov. I have spoke to that already and told them they are for our mutual
defense.


Wiw. We should be pleased with king George if there was never a fort in the
eastern parts.


Gov. Tell them that wherever there is a new settlement I shall always order a
fort, if I think it proper, and that it is for the security of them and us; and
so do the French. Are any people under the same government afraid of being made
too strong to keep out enemies?


Wiw. We are a little uneasy concerning these lands, but are willing the
English shall possess all they have excepting forts.


Gov. (...) we will not take an inch of their land, not will we part with an
inch of our own.


Wiw. We shall have fishing and fowling where we will.


Gov. It is freely consented to and they are assured of it.

Then the Indians rose up at once and withdrew in a hasts abrupt manner,
without taking leave, and left behind them their English colors, returning to
the head quarters at Puddlestone's island.


Conference at Arowsick, 1717.
In the evening, several of them returned to Arowsick with a letter from Ralle
to the governor, acquainting him, that the French king did not allow, that in
any treaty he had given away the land of the Indians to the English, and would
protect the Indians against the English encroachments. The governor let them
know, that he highly resented the insolence of the jesuit, and the next morning
ordered the signal for sailing. Ralle, in his letters, often laments the
unsteadiness of the Indians. They were afraid at this time of a new war. The
old men were loath to quit their villages at Norridgewock and Penobscot, where
they lived at case, and encamp in the woods or, which was much worse, depend
upon the French who, they would often say, treated them like dogs when there
was no immediate occasion for their service. This consideration induced them to
send two of their number with a message to the governor, acknowledging that
yesterday they had been rude and unmannerly and earnestly desiring to see him
again. He let them know he would see them upon no terms, unless they quitted
their pretensions to the lands which belonged to the English. This the
messengers promised should be done, and desired that the English colors which
they had slighted might be returned them. In the evening, they came again to
the conference and appointed a new speaker as a mark of resentment against the
former who, they said, had behaved ill the day before, and, without entering
into any dispute about particular limits or bounds, declared they were willing
the English should settle where their predecessors had settled, desired to live
in peace and to be supplied with necessaries, in a way of trade, confessed that
some of their inconsiderate young men had offered injuries to the English and
violated the treaty of Portsmouth in 1713. After renewing that treaty, the
conference ended.

THE beginning of an administration in the colonies is generally calm and
without russle. Several months passed, after Col. Shute's arrival, without open
opposition to any measures. The town of Boston at the first election of their
representatives, left out such as had been bank men, and chose such as were of
the other party, but Mr. Cook, who was at the head of the first party, had
interest enough to obtain a place in council. It was, soon after, insinuated
that the governor was a weak man, easily led away, and that he was in the hands
of the Dudleys, men of high principles in government, and it behoved the people
to be very careful of their liberties. Mr. Cook, who had the character of a
fair and open enemy, was free in expressing his sentiments, and the governor
was informed of some contemptuous language in private company, with which he
was so much offended as to procure Mr. Cooke's removal from the place of clerk
to the superior court. A dispute happening about the same time between Mr.
Bridges John Bridges came to New England by way of New York in School, in the
same ship with Lord Bellamont. He was commissioned, together with Benja.
Furzer, by the commissioners of the navy, to enquire into the state of the
country and its capacity for producing naval stores, and they were to survey
all the woods, not merely for masts, but for oak timber for shipbuilding, for
trees for tar, pitch and turpentine, and for land suitable for hemp. There
being no hopes of success from the other parts of the commission, it was soon
confined to the preservation of masts and, so far only, served as a precedent
(...) succeeding surveyors of the woods.
surveyor of the woods, and the inhabitants of the province of Maine,
concerning the property of the white pine trees within that province. Mr. Cook
immediately inserted himself in the controversy, publicly patronized the
inhabitants, and in a memorial to the house of representatives charged the
surveyor with male conduct in threatening to prosecu^e all who without license
from him should cut any pine trees in their own ground, which Mr. Cook
alleged they had good right to do, and he further charged the surveyor with
permitting, such persons as would pay him for it, to cut down the trees which
were said to belong to the king.

THE surveyor thereupon preferred his memorial to the governor and council,
justifying himself in the discharge of his trust, and complaining of Mr. Cook,
one of the members of the council, for officiously concerning himself with the
affairs of the surveyor's office, and obstructing his measures for the service
of the crown. Mr. Cook had many friends in the house ready to support him, and
this dispute was the beginning of the public controversy which continued until
the end of Col. Shute's administration; parties were formed, new subjects for
contention from time to time were furnished, until at length the governor was
forced to leave the province.

know he would excuse him from attending at the board for the ensuing year. The
form of proceeding has always been for a committee of the house to lay before
the governor a list of the counselors elect, upon which he signifies his
consent or refusal and sends back the list by the secretary, which is read in
council and then in the house. In the month of April 1717, a pirate ship, the
Whidah, of 23 guns and 130 men, Samuel Bellamy commander, ventured upon the
coast of New England near to Cape Co^, and after having taken several vessels
seven of the pirates were put on board one of them, who soon gat drunk and went
to sleep. The master of the vessel which had been taken run her ashore upon the
back of the cape and the seven men were secured. Soon after, the pirate ship,
in a storm, was forced ashore near the table land and the whole crew, except
one Englishman and one Indian, were drowned. Six of the company, upon trial by
a special court of admiralty, were pronounced guilty and executed at Boston,
November 15th. The year 1717 was remarkable for a greater mortality among aged
people than had at any time been known. Five of the council died within the
compass of a year, all of them well esteemed. John Hawthorn at Salem, May 10th,
aged 76. Andrew Belcher, October 31st, aged 71. Wait Winthrop, November 7th, --
76. Elisha Hutchinson, December 10th, -- 77, and Eliakim Hutchinson, April 22.
-- 78. The last four of Boston. Henry Dering and his wife, in one grave, and
another inhabitant of Boston, Robert Winsor, and his wife in another, were
buried the same evening, all above 70. The famous Indian warrior Benjamin
Church, who had escaped the enemy's bullets in a great number of encounters
when in the most imminent hazard, met death this year by a fall from his horse,
at the age of 78. Mr. Woodward, secretary of the province, tired of a post of
much labor and little emolument, disposed of it to Josiah Willard, Esquire who
obtained the royal commission and arrived at Boston from London December the
12th.


MR. Cook, soon after, presented his memorial to the council, in which he
justified his own conduct and charged Mr. Bridges with "using his utmost
efforts to invade the rights and properties of the people in the province of
Main by his exorbitant actions, as well as basely betraying the trust the crown
had invested him with, by daily selling and bartering the very logs and timber
which he gave out was the king's, his master, whose bread he then eat." The
council suffered the memorial to lay upon their table, but acted nothing upon
it. Afterward; upon the appointment of a committee by the house, they joined a
committee of council to consider in general of Mr. Bridges's conduct. This
committee, in their report, justified Mr. Cook, and condemned the proceedings
of the surveyor. The council put off the consideration of this report also, but
the house voted their acceptance of it. The governor, of course, transmitted to
the board of trade an account of all these proceedings and very soon received
an answer, censuring the house of representatives for countenancing and
encouraging Mr. Cook. This being laid before the house, they by a vote
declared that the censure of the board of trade was occasioned "by sending home
the papers on one side only, whereby their lordships were informed exparte."
The house had avoided any direct attack upon the governor, until this vo^e,
many of the principal members this year being well affected to him; but the
party, without doors, especially in Boston, had been increasing against him,
and; at the next election for that town, they sent all new members Elisha
Cook, Oliver Noyes, Isaiah Tay and William Clark.
and a change was made in many other towns, unfavorable to the governor's
interest.

THE famous projector Captain Coram, in the year 1718, was busy in a scheme for
settling Nova Scotia and the lands between Nova Scotia and the province of
Main, and a petition was preferred by Sir Alexander Cai^nes; James Douglass and
Joshua Gee, in behalf of themselves and others, praying for a grant upon the
seacoast five leagues south west and five leagues north east of Chibuctow
harbor, where they proposed to build a town, and to improve the country round
it in raising hemp, in making pitch, tar and turpentine, and they undertook to
settle a certain number of families to consist of 200 persons in three years,
the rest of his majesty's subjects not to be prohibited fishing on the coasts
under regulations. To this petition, Mr. Dummer the Massachusetts agent
objected, because of the last clause, which laid a restraint upon the fishery.
The lords of trade, however, reported in favor of it, but it stopped in council.

ANOTHER petition was preferred by William Armstrong and others who had been
officers and soldiers in the army, "praying for a grant of the lands between
Nova Scotia and the province of Main, the said tract of land having been
conquered by the French in 1696 and possessed by them until 1710, when it was
recovered by the English and, by the treaty of Utrecht, was with Nova Scotia
given up by France to the British Crown." The conquest in 1696 was the taking
Pemaquid fort and holding possession of the harbor two or three days. This,
however, was made a serious affair and the agent, Mr. Dummer, was several times
heard before the lords of trade. The general court being restrained from
conveying these lands without consent of the crown, it was proposed, that if
they would consent to resign the jurisdiction between Kennebeck and Penobscot
the crown should confirm the property of the soil, but upon the proposal's
being communicated to the court they instructed their agent to make no
concessions.

ONE Sarah Watts, setting forth that she was heir at law to Thomas Goffe,
deputy governor and one of the 26 patentees of the old colony, claimed a 26th
part of the colony, and the issues and profits for 80 or 90 years. She filed a
bill of complaint in chancery against the province, and there was a commission
of sequestration for several New England ships in the river, which cost the
owners several guineas, each; to the sharpers who had urged the woman to the
suit. The agent was required to answer the bill, which he did by declaring that
if the complainant could make it appear that Thomas Goffe was once seized of a
26th part of the colony, and that she was heir at law to him, which he did not
believe she was able to do, yet he verily believed that when the patentees,
with others, were incorporated into a body politic their respective rights
ceased and passed to the corporation, who had granted the lands away. The poor
woman was at last arrested for debt and sent to Newgate, where she perished.

The house never pass an impost bill or bill for the general tax for the
support of government for a longer term than one year.
and sent it to the council for their concurrence. An amendment was proposed,
viz. to leave out the duty upon English vessels and goods, but the house
adhered to their bill. A conference ensued, for the house were not, then, so
exact as they have been since, in refusing to confer upon money bills. This
produced nothing more than a proposal from the house to alter the word English
to European, which, being trivial, was refused. It seems, the governor, a
little out of time, had taken the opinion of the council upon this question,
whether, consistent with his instruction, he could give his consent to the
bill, which they determined he could not, if it should be offered to him. The
house then ^riest the council with the following resolve, "The house insist on
their vote, forasmuch as the royal charter of this province gives power to the
government to impose and levy proportionable and reasonable assessments, rates
and taxes upon the estates and persons of all and every the proprietors and
inhabitants of the same, which this government has been in the free and
uninterrupted exercise of ever since the enjoyment of the said charter. Sent to
the upper house for their concurrence." The upper house was a new name for the
council, and designed as a ^leer and to intimate that they might consider
themselves in another capacity, than as a privy council. Whatever the ill is,
the upper house is the cause of it, that being the true name of it; a grand
jury being peers as well as they. Mr. Vaughan in Grey's debate^ of the house of
comment.
Perhaps if Cromwell's epithet for his house of lords had come into their
minds, it would have been the other house. Taunts and language which tends to
irritate, can upon no occasion be justifiable from one branch of the
legislature to the other. Upon an agreement and harmony the interest of the
people depends. Upon different apprehensions of this interest, if it be the
real object, the several branches, by the persuasive voice of reason, will
strive to convince each other, and be willing to be convinced as truth shall
appear.

THE council thought themselves unkindly treated and, by a message, desired the
house to alter their vote, but they refused to do it and gave their reasons for
the new form. "The house have received new and unusual treatment from the
board. 1st, It is new and unusual for the council to give his excellency their
advice upon a bill, till they have acted in concert with the house in
concurring or nonconcurring. 2d, It is likewise new and unusual for the council
to desire a free conference, upon a subject matter, and then, at the
management, to inform the house that by a previous vote they had so far engaged
themselves that they could not recede from it. 3d, It is likewise a new and
unusual method for the honorable board, after a message to the house desiring
several amendments to a bill of rates and duties which were in a great measure
agreed to by the house, immediately to nonconcur the bill. 4th, It is likewise
new and unusual for the honorable board to intermeddle so much with the grants
and funds, which this house take to be their peculiar province."

THE house having in this manner, expressed their resentment returned to their
old style, and then the council, by message, let them know that they would not
give their concurrence to any bill laying a duty upon European goods, denied
the charge made against them by the house, of innovations, and intimated that
any further messages would only tend to increase the misunderstanding and
retard the affairs of the government and desired the house, rather to join with
them in a diligent endeavor to bring the session to such a conclusion, as
should promote his majesty's honor and the interest of the province.

SEVERAL weeks having been spent in these altercations, the governor thought it
time to interpose and, sending for the house to the council chamber, he made
the following mild and healing speech to them.

"Gentlemen,

"MY design in sending for you up at this time, is to let you know how
concerned I am at the unhappy misunderstandings, that have been for many years
between the council and your house relating to the impost bill, and to assure
you that no person here present can be more desirous of preserving the
privileges of this people than my self, so far as is consistent with the late
instructions I have received from my royal master, which have by his special
direction been laid before this court. I am fully persuaded, that to act any
way contrary thereto, after the many debates and votes which have been upon
that head, would rather destroy than preserve those privileges we justly prize.
Gentlemen, I desire your serious consideration of what I have hinted, that so
the important affairs of the province yet lying before you may have a speedy
and happy conclusion."

THIS speech which, a year or two after, when the prejudices against the
governor were at the height, would have been excepted to as irregular and
anticipating matters, which it would have been time enough for the governor to
have declared his sense of when they came to be laid before him, had now a good
effect, and the house, the same day, resolved that a new impost bill should be
brought in and that the controverted clause in the former bill should be left
out, but in the preamble to their resolve they make a heavy charge against the
council for not concurring their former bill.

"WHEREAS this house have voted and passed a bill granting to his majesty
several rates and duties of impost and tonnage of shipping, in which was
included one percent. on European merchandise, for which article or clause the
honorable council have several times nonconcurred the said bill,
notwithstanding all proper endeavors have been used by this house to attain the
same which have hitherto proved fruitless, whereby a considerable part of the
revenue, which would have accrued to this province, is for this present session
foregone, which also tends to the depriving this government of their just
rights, powers and privileges granted by the royal charter, Resolved," etc.

THE council were fond of peace and, as soon as this resolve came to their
knowledge, they sent a message to the house desiring they would not print the
resolve in their votes, as it would have an ill effect and would oblige the
council, in their own vindication, to reply, although they wished that all
controversy, between the two houses, might cease. The house printed it,
notwithstanding, and the next day the council sent the following answer.

"THE board are very much concerned to find, among the votes of the honorable
house, a declaration as if the council, in nonconcurring the bill of impost as
it was first framed, had done that whereby a considerable part of the revenue,
which would have accrued to this province, is for this present session
foregone, which also tends to the depriving this government of their just
rights, powers, and privileges granted by the royal charter.

"THIS declaration contains, or implies, such a charge as the council can, by
no means, suffer themselves to lie under, without asserting and solemnly
declaring their integrity, and they are more surprised, at the imputation of
doing a thing which tends to deprive this government of their just rights,
powers and privileges granted by the royal charter, because on the 23d current
the board sent down a message to the honorable house, 'that they were always
ready and desirous to concur with the honorable house of representatives in
such proposals relating to an impost, as may not tend to alter or expose our
present happy constitution under the royal charter;' so that it was from a
sincere and just regard to the rights, powers and privileges of this government
granted by the royal charter, that the council chose rather to omit the duty of
one per cent. on English goods for this session.

"THAT the council apprehended the duty of one per cent. on English goods
affected the trade of GreatBritain and so came within the meaning of his
majesty's late additional instruction, is certain: And, being of that opinion,
it would have been inconsistent for the board to concur the bill of impost as
it was sent up, however, they can boldly and truly say, they have acted from a
principle of duty to his majesty, love and fidelity to their country, and have
nothing more at heart than the just, wife and careful preservation of those
invaluable rights, powers and privileges granted by the royal charter which God
long continue."

This controversy being over the court was prorogued.

BEFORE the next sessions in November, the governor received a reprimand from
the lords justices, the king being absent, for consenting to the duty on
English goods, etc. by the impost act in 1718. This he said before the court.
The same house, which had so long contended with the council, the session
before, for this clause in the bill, now "readily acknowledge the exceptions
taken to it are just and reasonable." An instruction to the governor to support
the surveyor of the woods in the execution of his office, which was
communicated to the house at the same time, was not so favorably received, and
in an answer or remonstrance occasioned by the governor's speech they charge
the surveyor with instances of very gross male conduct. What evidence they had
of it does not now fully appear. The governor, by a message, desired they would
not print their remonstrance.

They sent a committee to acquaint him, they must insist upon the right they
had to make it public. He made a very great mistake and told the committee,
that his majesty had given him the power of the press and he would not suffer
it to be printed. This doctrine would have done well enough in the reigns of
the Stuarts In the present age it is justly exceptionable; although by the
liberty of the press we are not to understand a liberty of printing every
thing, however criminal, with impunity. The house had no opportunity to take
notice of this declaration. Upon another occasion they let him know they had
not forgot it. The governor was so displeased with the proceedings of the house
that he put an end to the session and they never met again.



THE public affairs, in general, were in a very indifferent state. The Indians
upon the eastern frontiers were continually insulting and menacing the English
inhabitants, so that but little progress had been made in settling the country
since the peace and, this year, most of the settlements which had been begun
were deserted and a new war was every day expected.

THE trade of the province declined. There was a general cry for want of money,
and yet the bills of credit, which were the only money, were daily
depreciating. The depreciation was grievous to all creditors, but particularly
distressing to the clergy and other faiary men, to widows and orphans whose
estates consisted of money at interest, perhaps just enough to support them
and, being reduced to one half the former value, they found themselves on a
sudden in a state of poverty and want. Executors and administrators, and all
who were possessed of the effects of others in trust, had a strong temptation
to retain them. The influence a bad currency has upon the morals of the people
is greater than is generally imagined. Numbers of schemes, for private and
public emissions of bills, were proposed as remedies, the only effectual one,
the utter abolition of the bills, was omitted.

BY these calamities, the minds of the people were prepared for impressions
from pamphlets, courants, and other news papers, which were frequently
published, in order to convince them, that their civil liberties and privileges
were struck at and that a general union was necessary. These did not pass
without answers, attributing all the distress in public affairs to the wrath
and resentment, the arts and finister views of a few particular persons, but
the voice of the people in general was against the governor. In our mother
country, when disputes arise between the branches of the legislature upon their
respective rights, parties are formed and the body of the people are divided;
for in a well constituted government it is of importance to the people that the
share even of the popular part of the constitution should not be unduly raised
to the suppression of the monarchical or aristocratical parts. From a regard to
the common interest, therefore, in a dispute concerning prerogative and
privilege, the people, ordinarily, are divided in sentiment. The reason is
obvious why it is less frequently so in a colony. There, the people, in
general, consider the prerogative as an interest, without them, separate and
distinct from the interior interest of the colony: This takes their attention
from the just proportion of weight due to each branch in the constitution and
causes a bias in favor of the popular part. For the same reason, men fond of
popular applause are more sure of success, with less degree of art, in a
colony, than in a state not so connected and, consequently, men who with
unbiassed judgments discern and have virtue enough to pursue the real interest
of their country, are more likely to be ^^proached and vilified.

THE first act of the house of representatives was the choice of Mr. Cook for
their speaker. A committee was sent to the governor, at his house, to acquaint
him with the choice. They reported, at their return, that his excellency said,
"it was very well." In the afternoon, the governor, being in council, sent the
secretary to acquaint the house, that he was now in the chair and ready to
receive their message, respecting the choice of a speaker. They sent back an
answer that his excellency, upon being informed of the choice in the morning,
had said "it was very well" and they had recorded his answer in the books of
the house. The governor replied, that he would receive no message from the
house but when he was in the chair. The journal of the house adds "and that he
had received no such message from the house and given to such answer," but the
general court's records take no notice of this.
The house then proposed, by message, to the council, to join with them in the
business of the day, the choice of counselors; but upon the governor's telling
their committee, who carried up the message, that no election should be made
until he was acquainted who was chosen speaker, the house sent a new committee
to acquaint him with the choice they had made. The governor replied to this
committee, that Mr. Cook had treated him ill as the king's governor and
therefore, according to the power given him by the royal charter, he negatived
the choice and desired they would proceed to choose another person. They sent
back their answer, that they had chosen a speaker, according to their known and
legal privileges, and therefore insisted upon the choice, and at the same time
they renewed their motion to the council to join with them in the election. The
governor told the committee, that he had received a message from the house,
acquainting him with the choice they had made of a speaker, which choice had
been negatived and he was no speaker. Upon this, the house sent their committee
to the board to acquaint them, that two messages having been sent to propose to
the board to join in the choice of counselors and no answer having been given,
they now desired to know whether the board would join in the election or not.

IF there had been any further delay on the part of the board, it is very
probable, the house would have proceeded without them, which must have
increased the perplexity. The governor, therefore, left the board, having first
charged the secretary with the following message to the house, "His excellency
orders me to acquaint you, he is informed that governor Dudley did, in the time
of his government, disallow of a speaker chosen by the house, and that his
proceedings therein were approved by the commissioners of trade and plantations
and that he was thereupon directed by the said commissioners to acquaint the
council, that it would not be thought fit that her majesty's right of having a
negative upon the choice of a speaker be given up, which was reserved to her
majesty, as well by the charter, as by the constitution of England."

NOTWITHSTANDING the warm disputes, in the proceeding year, between the two
houses, only one new councellor was chosen, John Burrill, Esquire This Mr. Burrill
bore a very fair character. I have often heard his contemporaries applaud him
for his great integrity, his acquaintance with parliamentary forms, the dignity
and authority with which he filled the chair, the order and dec^rum he
maintained in the debates of the house, his self denial in remaining in the
house, from year to year, when he might have been chosen into the council and
saw others, who called him their father, sent there before him: to say a great
deal of him in one word, there was as much likeness in his character to that of
the right honorable person who so many years filled the chair in the house of
commons, with such applause, as well can be between small and great. Mr.
Burrill died of the small pox at (...). December 10th 17^^.
of Lynn, who had been many years speaker of the house, but this year was sent
to the board, in the room of Mr. Higginson. The house had been as fond of this
Mr. Burrill as of their eyes. His temperate spirit, until now, had engaged the
whole house in his favor and, from year to year, procured him a general vote,
but this year the house were willing to part with him for a gentleman obnoxious
to the governor, which measure, it was easy to foresee, must give a further
occasion of controversy.

Two of the new elected counselors were negatived, Nathanael Byfield, who had
been soliciting in England for the government when Col. Shute was appointed,
and John Clark, who was a person of many valuable qualities, and obnoxious,
only, for being strongly attached to Mr. Cook and having been a great
supporter of the cause.

AFTER the election, the governor made a further attempt to bring the house to
a compliance by the following speech. "Gentlemen. At the opening of this
session you thought fit to make choice of Elisha Cook, Esquire for your speaker,
and upon your reporting of it to me, I did declare my disacceptance of that
election, and am firm in my opinion that I had good right so to do, by virtue
of his majesty's commission and the powers reserved by the royal charter, and
am also confirmed in it, by what I find transacted by the late governor Dudley,
during his administration, and also by the opinion of the right honorable the
lords of trade and plantations in that matter. I must further observe to you,
that the person you have chosen had invaded the king my master's rights in the
woods of the province of Main, though confirmed to his majesty by an act of the
British parliament, and I have received the thanks of the right honorable the
lords of trade and plantations for removing him out of the council. He has ill
treated me, who am the king's governor, and has been censured by the council
for it which stands upon record in the council books. The council books from
the charter were burnt in the court house in the year 1747 and this censure
does not appear (...) where but in this speech.
How acceptable this matter will be, at home, considering the warning we have
lately had from the court of Great Britain upon the account of passing the
impost bill, will be worthy of your serious reflection. These things I thought
necessary to acquaint you with and advise you to return to your house and choose
some other person speaker, with a reservation of your own rights, until you
shall send to the court of Great Britain, for the explanation of that part of
your charter, relating to the affair of a speaker."

THE house, immediately upon their return to their chamber, entered into a
debate upon this speech and the question being put, whether, for the reasons
assigned by his excellency, the house will proceed to the choice of a new
speaker it passed in the negative, nemint contradicente.

THE governor gave them no opportunity to proceed on any other business, for
the next day he sent for them up again and after another short speech dissolved
the court. "Gentlemen. Out of a tender regard I have for the welfare of this
province, I shall give you the following advice before we part; that when it
shall please God we meet again in a general assembly, which shall be as soon as
possible, you will not let this province suffer by the perverse temper of a
particular person, but that you will choose one for a speaker that has no other
view but that of the public good, one that fears God and honors the king. It is
irksome and disagreeable to me, to dissolve an assembly, but as matters now
stand, I am forced to do it or must give up the king my master's prerogative,
which nothing shall ever oblige me to do, who am the king's governor.
Gentlemen, I do not think it for the honor of his majesty's government that
this assembly should fit any longer and therefore I shall dissolve you."
Neither of these speeches are printed in the journal of the house. The charges
upon their speaker from to have been (...)


WRITS were issued for a new assembly, to meet the 13th of July. The governor
had no great reason to hope for a more favorable house. The people, in general,
thought their privileges were attacked. The charter indeed was silent upon this
point. In a dispute, between the crown and the house of commons in the seign of
king Charles the 2d an expedient was found which seemed to avoid the
acknowledgment of the right of the crown to refuse a speaker, but a provincial
law was principally relied upon which declares "that the representatives
assembled in any great and general court shall be the sole judges of the
elections and qualifications of their own members and may from time to time
settle, order and purge their own house and make such necessary orders for the
due regulation thereof as they shall see occasion." Whether the legislators had
in contemplation the right of the house to choose a speaker, exempt from the
governor's negative, might well be questioned, but it was urged that the due
regulation of the house might very well include this right.

THE towns, in general, sent the former members. Boston discovered how they
stood affected by leaving out Mr. Tay who was one of those persons who serve
upon a pinch, when a favorite cannot be carried by a party, to stop the gap and
prevent an opposite candidate, and he came in several times upon such
occasions. In his room, the town now chose Mr. Clark, the negatived councellor.

THE house was willing to sit and do business, which the choice of the former
speaker would have prevented. They therefore pitched upon a person less
attached to party, Timothy Lindall, one of the representatives of Salem, to
whom no exception was taken. The governor, in his speech, recommended a
peaceable session, but the house could not forget the late dissolution. They
began with a warm message or remonstrance to the governor, in which they tell
him, "the last assembly took no great pleasure in being dissolved, before they
had gone through the usual necessary business; their asserting and maintaining
their just right and ancient privilege of choosing their speaker, and not owning
his excellency's power to negative him, was nothing but what they were strictly
obliged to, and the new house are humbly of opinion, that whoever was of advice
to his excellency, in the matter, did not consult his majesty's interest, nor
the public weal and quiet of the government, but officiously endeavored to
beget unhappy misunderstandings between his excellency and the house and break
off that desirable Harmony which every one ought to keep up; we earnestly hope
and desire the province may never have an assembly, that will willingly forego
such a valuable privilege as K. William and Q. Mary of ever blessed memory
graciously favored the province with, when they gave their royal assent to a
law directing and governing that affair." In this coutroversy the house seem to
have misapprehended their own cause and to have laid most stress upon the
weakest argument. The analogy between the governor and a provincial house of
representatives, and the king and the commons of Great Britain, they leave out
of the question. By charter, ^^ commissions, ^^e form of (...) is settled, the
governor representing the king'^ person, the lower house representing the
people. I see no arrogance, whatever disproportion there may be between Britain
and her colonies, in supposing an analogy between the constitutions, except
where peculiar rights or powers are otherwise settled in the respective
branches.


ALL the subsequent proceedings of this short session show how much the house
was out of temper. An Indian war used to be universally dreaded. To prevent it,
the governor and council had been treating with three of the Penobscot tribe,
who were sent for or came to Boston, and the house were desired to make a grant
for a present to them, but by a vote they refused to do it. Some time after,
they ordered a small sum, ten pounds only. To the controversy with the governor
and the opposition made to the proposals which came from him, the war, which
soon after broke out, was, by the governor's friends, attributed.

THERE had been no public notaries in the province, except such as derived
their authority from the archbishop of Canterbury. The house, now, first
observed, that a notary public was a civil officer, which by the charter, was
to be chosen by the general court, and sent a message desiring the council to
join with the house in the choice of such an officer in each port of the
province. To all instruments which were sent abroad, not only the attestation
of the notary himself would be necessary, but a certificate under the province
seal, to show the authority to attest; the council therefore took time to
consider of the expediency of appointing such an officer, and referred the
matter to the next session, As a public notary in the several ports was judged
to be a necessary officer, the council afterward concurred with the house, and
a choice has been ever since annually made by the general court.
but the house immediately proceeded and chose the officers by their own votes.
The arguments, to prove that an officer to be chosen by the whole court could
derive an authority from the majority of the members of the house of
representatives have not been preserved. They sent a message the next day to
the governor, to desire him to approve of the choice, but he gave them for
answer that as the council did not join he did not see how they could be sworn.


BEING offended with the council, the house sent a message desiring "that
considering the low circumstances of the province no draught be made upon the
treasury for expenses at times of public rejoicing The King's birth day,
accession, ceronation, etc.
for the future."

IT had been usual to make a grant to the governor, for the salary of half the
year, at the beginning of the session. The house deferred it until the close,
and then reduced it from fix to five hundred pounds, although the currency was
depreciated. To the lieutenant governor, they used to make a present, once a
year, never less than fifty pounds, they now reduced it to thirty five. Mr.
Dummer had so much spirit, that he enclosed the vote in a letter to the speaker
acquainting him that "having the honor to bear the king's commission for
lieutenant governor of the province, and having been annually more than fifty
pounds out of pocket, in that service, he did not think it for his honor to
accept of their grant."

THE governor took no public notice of the proceedings of the house. On the 23d
of July he put an end to the session.

DURING the recess of the court (August 7th) a party of the eastern Indians
fell upon Canso, within the province of Nova Scotia, but peopled every summer
from the Mas^achusets. The Indians surprised the English in their beds and
stripped them of every thing, telling them they came to carry away what they
could find upon their own land. Three or four of the English were killed. Some
of the French of Cape Breton were in confederacy and came with their vessels,
the next night and carried off the plunder, together with about (...) quintals
of fish. The English vessels in the harbo^^ were not attempted. A floop
happening to arrive the next day, the master offered his service to go out and
make reprisals, and being furnished with a number of men and two or three (...)
vessels for his confor^^, for want of more ample authority, he took a
commission from (...) Thomas Richards, a Canso justice; and went after the
French and soon brought in six or seven small fishing vessels, having all of
them more or less of the English property aboard.

MR. HENSHAW, of Boston, a principal merchant at Canso, went to Louisbourg with
a complaint to the French governor, who excused himself (...) intermeddling,
the Indians not being French subjects, no^ under his control. The French
p^isoners were sent to Annapolisroyal. The loss, sustained by the English, was
estimated at twenty thousand pounds currency.

THE fears of the people, in the eastern parts of the Massachuse^^, were
increased by this stroke upon Canso. In a short time after, the cattle were
destroyed and the lives of the owners threatened. The governor was still
desirous of preserving peace and, by the advice of council, sent o^ders to Col.
Walton, the commanding officer of such forces, as upon the alarm had been sent
^here, to inform the Indians, that commissioners should be sent to treat with
them. The Indians liked the proposal and promised to attend the treaty.

BEFORE the time appointed, the general court met Nov (...)
and the house passed a resolve, "that 150 effective men, under suitable
officers, be forthwith ordered to march up to Norridgewock and compel the
Indians that shall be found there, or in other those parts, to make full
satisfaction for the damage they have done the English, by killing their swine
and sheep or carrying them away, or stealing provisions, clothing, or any
other way wronging them. And that a warrant be directed to Capt. John Leighton,
high sheriff of the county of York, who is to accompany the forces, for the
apprehending and safe bringing Mr. Rall^ to Boston, who is at present resident
at or near Norrig^wock in Kennebeck river in this pro^^nce, and, if he be not
to be found, that then the sheriff (...) and command the Indians there, or in
the parts adjacent, ^o bring in and surrender up the jesuit to him the sheriff;
and, upon their refusal to comply with either of the said demands, that the
commanding officer is to take the best and most effectual way to apprehend and
secure the Indians, so refusing and safe conduct them to Boston."

THE governor looked upon this resolve to be, in effect, a declaration of war
and an invasion of the prerogative, it necessarily prevented a treaty he had
agreed to hold with the Indians, and a new war must be the consequence of such
a measure. The council were fond of peace and, when the resolve was sent to
them for concurrence, they rejected it. The house were less averse to war. The
charge of carrying it on, it was said, would be no burden to the province, the
French, ^^w, d^rst not joint the Indians and this would be the most favorable
opportunity which could be expected to subdue or utterly extirpate them. That
the charge should be no burden seems to be a paradox, but a wild (...) had
filled the minds of great part of the people of the province, that if bills of
credit could be issued, the advantage to trade would be so great, that the
taxes by which, at distant periods, they were to be drawn in again would not be
felt. Many schemes of public expense were projected, and, among the rest, a
bridge over Charles river broader and much deeper than the Thames at London or
Westminster.

I shall take no pleasure in relating the proceedings of the general court, in
this and the two next years. The best excuse I can make for the house is, that
the attempt made to deprive them of the exclusive right of choosing their own
speaker was deemed by them a grievance, that the royal governments insist upon
this right and there was nothing in Massachusetts charter which took it from
them, that this attempt raised in their minds a jealousy of a design against
their privileges in general and, in this state of mind, they were more easily
prevailed upon by their principal directors, whose principal views were to
distress the governor, to agree to such measures as under other circumstances
they must have disapproved. The rule, perhaps, holds stronger with political
bodies than with individuals, that when just bounds are once exceeded, the
second step is as easy as the first, and so on, until at length they are drawn
by degrees to such excesses as, per saltum, they would have been incapable of.

THE public records of the general court are always open to the inspection of
any of the members, but, that the house might have them under their more
immediate view and charge, they passed a vote, that the secretary should make
duplicates of all public records, and that one set should be lodged in such
place as the house should appoint. The council, willing to have duplicates for
greater security, concurred with an amendment, viz. in such place as the
general assembly should direct, but this amendment the house rejected.

THE house, finding the council a bar to their attempts, resolved, in one
instance, to act by themselves. There was a complaint or suggestion, that false
musters were made by some of the officers in the pay of the province. The house
taking the affair into consideration resolved, "that one or more meet persons
be appointed by this house clerk of the check, who shall, from time to time,
have an inspection into the forts, garrisons and forces, and take care that
every one have their compliment of men, and the better to enable them to
execute the trust reposed in them, that when and so often as they shall see
reason, the commanders of the forts, garrisons and captains of any of the
companies, in the pay of this government, shall call forth their men before
them, and, if any do not appear, the commanding officer to give the reason of
such absen^ men, and that no muster roll shall be accepted, and paid by the
treasurer, unless approved of by the clerk of the check." The governor did not
intend to admit this officer, appointed by the house, into the forts,
garrisons, etc. which by the charter the crown had reserved to the governor,
but he kept silent.

To another act of the house the council took exception. A message was sent by
the house to the council to let them know they had appointed a committee to
prepare a bill for levying soldiers, "taking it to be their peculiar care."
Lest it should be understood that this was to exclude the council from
concurring or non-concurring such bill, or from advising to the levying
soldiers upon an emergency in the recess of the court, the council desired the
house to withdraw those words, "taking it to be their peculiar care," which
they agreed to.

AT this session, the house, again, withheld one hundred pounds from the
governor's usual half year's salary. He had passed it over without notice
before, but now he thought it proper to lay before them a royal instruction to
recommend to the assembly to establish a sufficient allowance for him by a
fixed salary. They sent him a reply, "that they humbly conceived what was
granted him was an honorable allowance, and the affair of settling salaries
being a matter of great weight and wholly new to the house and many of the
members absent, they did not think it proper to enter upon the (...) of it, but
desired the co^rt might rise." The (...) complied with their request. (...)
Massachusetts province afforded subject for some part of the (...) of the people
of England in this remarkable year. (...) have an imaginary value set upon
them, sometimes (...) sometimes lower, and continually afford subject for
bubble^ among ourselves. Mr. Dummer raised a bubble from the eastern lands, but
had not time for any very great success. "It remains now that I give an account
to the general court of a very considerable undertaking which I set on foot and
have been carrying on for several months past in hopes to procure thereby many
great advantages to the province. I have projected a scheme to raise hemp and
flax in the eastern frontiers of the province of Main for the supply of this
kingdom. In order to accomplish this design, I proposed that the lands between
St. Croix and Penobscot should be granted to the undertakers and their assigns
by the crown, and that they should also have a charter of incorporation, with
all reasonable privileges and advantages allowed them. "I set my self heartily
to work and, that I might lay a good foundation, I chose 17 managers for the
carrying it on, who are all persons of great distinction and attend diligently
upon the business at every meeting. My Lord Barrington is one, and Col. Bladen
of the board of trade is another, and Alderman Bailis a commissioner of the
customs is a third. The rest are either men of note and figure in parliament,
as Mr. Young first commissioner for stating the accounts of the army, or
eminent citizens, as Sir Iustus Beck, who is one of the greatest merchants in
the kingdom. Being thus strong, I had no reason to take notice of Coram and
friends or to have any apprehensions of what they were doing or capable of
doing against me, yet, for quietness sake, I sent them word that, if they would
withdraw their petition and give me no more trouble, they should find an
account of profit from this undertaking beyond what they could ever expect if
it were to be under their own conduct. Coram immediately submitted to my
petition, but when he afterward was told that I had left out of my petition
the tract of land between Kenebeck and Penobscot, he ran about in a mad rage
declaring he would rather starve than come into it, and that the whole design
was only a trick in me to save that fine country for the villainous people of
New England -- I have therefore since treated and agreed with his partners and
patrons by whose interest he was supported, so that Coram is now entirely
dropped and I have no opposition. "Nevertheless, it is the opinion of the
managers to rest a little till the ministry has quelled the great number of
companies that are erected every day in defiance of the late act of parliament,
and are so offensive to the government that the best scheme in the world would
suffer some disgrace by appearing at this time. I have only to add, that I have
reserved twenty thousand pounds of the subscription for the use and benefit of
the province, which, when the time comes, (...) put in the name of proper
trustees for that end." Dummer's letter Sept. 17. 1720. The time never came for
appointing trustees for the province. The great bubble was breaking, which no
doubt inclined the managers of this small one to stop a little. The capital was
to be one hundred thousand pounds sterling. Query, Whether there are no bubbles
rising in England, from the wa^le lands of America, at this day?




THEY refused, directly or virtually, every proposal. To the first the house
tell him, in their answer, "they had passed a bill for issuing one hundred
thousand pounds more in bills of credit." Fifty thousand pounds had been issued
the last year, 1720, and distributed to the several towns in proportion to
their taxes, the bills to be repaid at a limited time, and the governor seemed
to approve of and encourage this way of issuing bills at his first arrival, but
was afterward convinced of their mischievous effects. Having about this time
received an instruction laying him under a restraint in issuing bills of credit
except for necessary charges, unless by such acts or orders as should not have
effect until his majesty's pleasure was known, he chose to found his objection
to the bill upon his instruction. This instruction was not occasioned by the
bad effect of bills upon the currency as later instructions and acts of
parliament have been, but by a complaint from merchants trading to New York of
an act of assembly there for issuing bills equal to forty thousand ounces of
plate which were all applied, to the governor as a gratuity over and above his
stated salary, to the council for pretended services at the revolution near 30
years before, and to the house of representatives for their services. After the
bills were in private hands, to revoke the act would work injustice, but to
prevent such acts in any colony for the future, circular instructions were
ordered to the several (...)
This, alone, had a direct tendency to increase the mischief, but they add that
"to prevent their depreciation they had prohibited the buying, selling and
bartering silver, at any higher rates than set by act of parliament." This
certainly could have no tendency to lessen it. Such an act can no more be
executed than an act to stop the ebbing and flowing of the sea. It would
probably carry awa^ and keep out all silver and gold. The depreciation of their
currency, would, notwithstanding, have been as visible by the rise of exchange
with foreign countries and have been as sensibly felt by every creditor among
themselves. To his other proposals they say, "they know of no trade carried on
by any people of the province with Cape Breton and do not think any law to
prevent a trade there is necessary; and for seditious and scandalous papers,
the best way to suppress or prevent them is, for the executive part of the
government to bring the authors to condign punishment, and if proper measures
had been taken to discover and punish the authors of a libel called News from
Robinson Crusoe's island, wherein the members of the house are grossly reflected
upon, few or none would have dared, afterward, to publish any thing of that
nature or tendency, but to suffer no books to be printed without license from
the governor will be attended with innumerable inconveniences and danger;
"This was a just return to the governor's declaration, that the (...) had given
the power of the press.
as to the five nations, the house do not know enough of their number, nor what
the other governments intend to give, and, therefore, cannot judge what is
proper for them to do; and for the allowance to the governor, they think it as
much as the honor and service of the government calls for, and believe the
inhabitants of the several towns through the province are of the same mind."

THERE never had been an instance of any governor's refusing or neglecting, at
the beginning of the year, to appoint a fast, in conformity to the practice of
the county, but the house now endeavored to anticipate the governor and
appointed a committee to join with a committee of council to prepare a
proclamation for a public fast. The council refused to join and acquainted the
house they could find no precedent, but the house replied that, if such days
had not the sanction of the whole court, people would not be liable to
punishment for working or playing. The governor, willing to conform to the
house so far as would consist with maintaining his right of issuing
proclamations, mentioned in the proclamation which he soon after published,
that the appointment was, by advice of council and upon a motion from the house
of representatives, but the house refused to meet him and declared they had
never made any such motion, and ordered that no members of the house should
carry any proclamations to their towns, for the present. The day was, however,
observed as usual, except that one Mr. William Clark.
of the representatives of Boston would not attend the public worship but
opened his warehouse as upon other days.

CERTAIN persons had cut pine trees, upon that part of the province of Main
which had not been granted by the general court as private property. A deputy
to the surveyor of the woods gave license to cut the trees, as belonging to the
king. The house appointed a committee to join with a committee of council,
which joint committee were to seize and secure, for the province, the same logs
which had been cut by license. The council concurred with a "saving to his
majesty all such rights as are reserved by the royal charter and act of
parliament to trees for the royal navy."

THE house desired this saying might be withdrawn. not that they apprehended
the reservation made in the charter or the provision by act of parliament were
of no force, but they alleged that the trees they designed to seize were cut
by one deputed by the deputy of the surveyor of the woods, and cut, not for the
royal navy, but for other uses, and therefore they did not come within reason
of the reservation or provision.

FINALLY, upon the council's refusing to join, the house appointed a committee
of their own to seize the logs, and directed the attorney general to prosecute
those who had trespassed and made spoil upon the province lands. After they
were seized, the house again desired the council to concur a vote or order for
securing and converting the logs to the benefit of the province. This, without
any judicial determination, was still more irregular and the council declined
meddling with them.

As the time approached for issuing writs for a new assembly, the governor made
the following speech to them, before their dissolution.

"GENTLEMEN of the house of representatives. In my speech at the beginning of
this session, I gave you the reasons of my meeting you at this time. I have
since received your answer, which I shall take care to transmit, by the first
conveyance, that his majesty may see, not only how his governor of this
province is treated and supported, but what sort of regard is paid to his own
royal instructions. I shall also lay before the right honorable the lords
commissioners of trade and plantations, the bill for prohibiting a trade to
Cape Breton, which I recommended to you several sessions and which had twice
the concurrence of his majesty's council, but was as often thrown out in your
house, notwithstanding the message that accompanied that bill.

"I am very much surprised you should refuse two other bills, which came down
from the council, the one to prevent riots, the other to prohibit the making
and publishing libels and scandalous pamphlets, the passing of which would, in
my opinion, have tended both to the honor of the government and the public
peace.

"BUT what gives me the greatest concern is, that the proceedings of your
house, with respect to the woods in the province of Main, are directly contrary
to the reservation of his majesty's right in the royal charter and an act of
parliament, which were both set forth in my proclamation, dated the 1st of
November 1720, for preventing the destruction and spoil of his majesty's woods.

"I could heartily wish, that instead of obliging me to make such
representations to the lords of trade, as I fear will not be to your advantage,
you had acted with that calmness and moderation, which becomes the subjects of
a prince, who possesses those qualities in an eminent degree, and, which
becomes the representatives of a province, that, without any encroachment on
the royal prerogative, enjoys as many and as high privileges, as the greatest
advocates for liberty can desire or expect.

"I must therefore recommend to you a loyal and peaceable behavior and to lay
aside those misunderstandings and animosities that of late prevail so much
among you, which you will find to be your truest and best interest."

DOCTOR Noyes, one of the representatives of Boston, died whilst the court was
sitting (March 16th) after a short illness. He was very strongly attached to
the popular party, and highly esteemed by them, was of a very humane obliging
disposition and, in private life, no man was more free from indelicacies. Mr.
William Hutchinson who succeeded him was also a gentleman of a very fair
character, sensible, virtuous, discreet, and of an independent fortune. He
began his political life at a time when persons, thus qualified, were wanted
for the service of their country, to moderate the passions of those who were
less temperate and who had the lead in the house. In general, he adhered to the
popular party also, but lived but a little while. Longer experience might
probably have convinced him, that he would have shown his gratitude to his
constituents more, by endeavoring to convince them that they were running to an
extreme, than by encouraging the same extremities himself.

THE session of the general court, in May, this year, began as unfavorable as
any former session. The house chose for their speaker John Clarke, Esquire who the
year before had been negatived by the governor as a councellor. To prevent a
negative, as speaker, they projected a new form of message directed to the
governor and council jointly, to acquaint them "that John Clarke, Esquire is chosen
speaker of the house and is now sitting in the chair." This was undoubtedly a
very extraordinary contempt of the governor. Mr. John White, He died before the
year was out (Dec. 10.) of the small-(...)
a gentleman of unspotted character, had been clerk of the house for many
years. He was no zealous party man, but his most intimate friends, who esteemed
him and sought his company for the sake of his valuable accomplishments, were
strongly attached to the governor. This, alone, was enough to dismiss him and
Mr. William Pain, brother by marriage to Mr. Cook, and who had formerly been
of the bank party, was appointed clerk in his stead.

THE governor was more wroth than upon any occasion before. He came to council,
in the afternoon, and sent immediately for the house, no doubt, with an intent
to dissolve the court. He had several faithful advisers about him and, whilst
the house were preparing to come up, he sent a message to stop them and to let
them know he accepted their choice of a speaker. This was giving a construction
to their message, which they did not intend, and it was giving his consent
before it was asked, but it was to be preferred to a dissolution; for a
dissolution of the court, before the election of counselors, according to the
construction the house have sometimes put upon the charter, would have been a
dissolution of the government, for one year at least, because the time
mentioned for the first election was the last Wednesday in May. The counselors
named in the charter were to continue until others were chosen and appointed in
their stead. I do not know of any words in the charter which would make the
choice upon another day invalid, although that be the day more particularly
designed for that business. The house showed their resentment against the
lieutenant governor and Mr. Belcher, who were both left out of the council. The
rest were continued.

THE next step was the appointing a committee to carry a list of the new
elected counselors to the governor; but the committee was not to desire his
approbation, though this form had never been omitted in any one instance. The
governor sent the list back and took notice of the omission. The house
thereupon resolved, "that considering the smallpox was in Boston and they were
very desirous the court should be removed to Cambridge they would send the list
in the usual terms, saving their right to assert their privileges at a more
convenient time." What privileges they had in their minds it is difficult now
to discover. Surely they could not imagine the election would have been valid
without his consent. The governor negatived Col. Byfield, the rest he consented
to. An odd afair happened in the house, this ^itting of the court. One of the
members sat down in prayer time. The speaker, after prayers, asked him the
reason of it. He said he could not join with them in calling God " our father."
The house immediately resolved "that Philip Tabor be expelled this (...) as not
worthy to continue a member thereof.


THE court was adjourned to Cambridge. The governor, in his speech, took no
notice of past differences. All was fair and smooth, and all was fair in the
house also, the first fortnight, but, on the 19th of June, the governor's
speech at the dissolution of the last assembly was ordered to be read and a
committee was appointed "to vindicate the proceedings of the house from the
insinuations made by the governor of their want of duty and loyalty to his
majesty." This committee made a report, not in the form of an address or
message to the governor, but of a narrative and justification of the
proceedings of the last assembly and the house accepted it and ordered it to be
printed.

To vindicate the past proceedings about the pine trees, a full consideration
was now had of the several acts of parliament and the reservation to the crown
in the province charter. The house did not deny a right in the crown to the
trees, whilst they were standing and fit for masts, but supposed that, as soon
as they were felled and cut into lengths fit for boards or timber only, the
right of the crown ceased and the owners of the sort recovered or acquired a
new property in them. This, it was said, would render the provision made for
the preservation of the trees, which at best is insufficient, to be of no
effect, nothing being more easy than for the owners of the soil to procure the
trees to be felled and cut into short logs, without possibility of discovery.
However, they came to the following resolution, viz. "That inasmuch as a great
number of pine trees have been cut in the province of Main which, when
standing, were fit for masts for the royal navy, but are now cut into longs of
about 20 feet in length, and 'although the cutting them should be allowed to be
an infringement of his majesty's rights reserved in the charter.' yet in the
condition they are now in, being no longer capable of being used for masts, it
is lawful for and behooves this government to cause such logs to be seized and
converted to their own use and to bring (...) persons who cut down the trees to
punishment." It consequence, and for the purposes, of this resolve a committee
was appointed.

THE reservation in the charter is in these words, "for the better providing
and furnishing of masts for our royal navy we do hereby reserve to us, our
heirs and successors all trees of the diameter of 24 inches, and upwards of 12
inches from the ground, growing upon any soil or tract of land not heretofore
granted to private persons. And we restrain and forbid all persons whatsoever
from felling, cutting or destroying any such trees without the royal license of
us, our heirs and successors first had and obtained, upon penalty of forfeiting
one Hundred pounds sterling unto us, our heirs and successors, for every such
tree."

IT was said further (...) this occasion that although the crown reserved the
(...) and restrained all persons from cutting them, (...) necessity of the
trees for national use and service ^ight be sufficient to justify, yet it was
not equitable to take them without a valuable consideration. The crown had made
an absolute grant of the province of Main to Gorges, from whom the Massachusetts
purchased. The Massachusetts charter indeed was declared forfeited. Where the
right was, after that, might be disputed, but this was a hard judgment, and it
was the plain intent of the charter, in general, to restore rights, except that
of the form of jurisdiction or administration of government, to the former
state.

BE this as it may, it has however been thought, by some judicious persons,
that considering the extreme difficulty, at present, of convicting trespassers
of cutting the king's trees and, by such conviction, putting a stop to the
spoil and havoc continually making, it would be good policy to allow the
owners or proprietors of these lands a sum for every tree, felled for a mast,
equal to what it would be worth when cut into logs for boards or timber. This
would be scarce a tenth part of the value of the tree for a mast, and yet would
take away the temptation to cut it for logs, and would encourage the preserving
and cultivating the young trees, which are at present of letter dimensions.
Trees that are incapable of ever serving for masts, either from decay or other
defects, although of sufficient diameter, might also be allowed to be cut for
logs and it would be no prejudice to the crown. At present, the trespassers
make no distinction, and trees are continually cut worth twenty pounds
sterling, for a mast, which, when cut into logs, are scarce worth twenty
shillings. Very few trees are cut for masts by trespassers. The notoriety of
halling, selling and shipping masts will render it very difficult, when the
burden of proof where the masts were cut shall lie upon the person who claims
the property, to escape discovery and conviction, whereas, among the multitude
of logs which are continually let loose to float down rivers to saw-mills, the
greatest part of the trespasses will escape notice.

THERE are great numbers of white pines, growing in parts of the country so
remote from the sea or any river by which they can be floated to the sea, that
the expense of bringing them thither would be twenty times the value of a mast
in England. It seems unnecessary to deprive the inhabitants of such places from
making use of the trees for timber and boards, when they must infallibly decay
and die in the ground, if they are to serve for no other purpose but masts.

But to return.

THE house neglected making any provision for the support of the governor, or
the other officers of the government who depend upon the court for their (...).
They waited to see how far the governor would consent to their several acts and
votes. On the other hand, the two houses having chose the treasurer, impost
officer, and other civil officers, the governor laid by the lift, and neither
approved nor disapproved. When the house sent a message to the council, to
enquire whether the governor had passed upon the lift, he directed the
committee to tell the house that he should take his own time for it. This
occasioned a reply from the house, and diverse messages and answers passed upon
the subject. At length the house, by a vote, determined they would not go into
the consideration of grants and allowances before his (...) had passed upon the
acts, resolves and elections of tha^ (...). This was in plain terms avowing
what 4word^ (...) at first charged them with tacitly intending. To have
recurred to this instance would have laid the house under disadvantage in the
dispute, some years after, about a fixed salary. To compel the governor to any
particular measure, by making his support, in whole or in part, depend upon it,
is said to be inconsistent with that freedom of judgment, in each branch of the
legislature, which is the glory of the English constitution. This was not all.
The house withheld the support of all the other salary men, because the
governor would not comply with the measures of the house.

RESENTMENT was shown against some of the governor's friends. The agent in
England, Mr. Dummer, in some of his letters, had informed the court of the
sentiments of the ministry upon the proceedings of the house of
representatives, and of the general approbation in England of the governor's
conduct. A faithful agent would rather tell them the truth, than recommend
himself to them by slattery and false representations. He lost the favor of the
house, who, upon the receipt of these letters, voted, that it was not for the
interest of the province Mr. Dummer should be continued agent any longer, and
therefore, it was ordered that he should be dismissed. Mr. Dummer was
publishing his defense of the charters when this vote passed for his
dismission. "I think it now past all doubt that a bill will be brought into the
house of commons at their next session to disfranchise the charter governments
and therefore I have printed a manuscript which has lain by me some time in
defense of our charters. I have dedicated it to my lord Carteret one of his
majesty's principal secretaries of state and who has the plantations under his
care, for which I had his Lordship's permission. It will come out to morrow and
I will put up a few of them under cover to you for the use of any members of
the general court who may have a desire to see what I have wrote on the
subject. "I expect no thanks from the assembly for this service as I had none
for the counterfeit bills sent them over last spring, though I thought it an
important service. -- It is a hard fate upon me when, I am doing the province
and the gentlemen in it all the honor and justice that is in my power, that
some persons in the lower house should take equal pains to lessen and expose
me. I wish they do not prejudice themselves by it in the end. It matters very
little what becomes of me." Dummer's letter 11 th Sept. 17^^.
This vote they sent to the council for concurrence who desired the house to
inform them of the grounds and reasons of this dismission. The house voted the
message to be unprecedented, and insisted, that the council had nothing else to
do but to concur or nonconcur, and then they non-concurred the vote; but this
was much the same, with a dismission, at least for a time, for an agent having
no fixed salary depends upon temporary grants which the house refused to make,
after this vote.

PAUL DUDLEY Esquire another of the governor's friends had the misfortune also of
falling under the displeasure of the house. He had been chosen, by a small
majority, councellor for Sagadehoc. By the charter, it was necessary for him to
have been an inhabitant or proprietor of that part of the province for which he
was chosen. He dwelt in the old colony of Massachusetts. It was suggested, in
the house, that he had no lands at Sagadehoc, and they appointed a committee to
enquire into this fact. Upon their applying to Mr. Dudley for evidence of his
title, he told them it was too late, they should have enquired before the
election. Perhaps he was in an error. He went on and told the committee, he had
a deed which he would not expose to the house but he would show it to two or
three of the members. Upon this they sent another committee to inform him it
was expected he should produce his deed, the next morning, to be laid upon the
speaker's table. He replied that he would not produce his deed before the
house, for they might possibly vote it insufficient. In this part of the
province there are scarce any lands which have not more than one claimer, and
it is not improbable some of the members of the house claimed the lands in Mr.
Dudley's deed. The vote of the house would not have determined his title, but
might have undue influence upon a jury in a judicial proceeding.

MR. Dudley's answer was unsatisfactory, and the house voted that it was an
affront, that his declining to produce his deeds gave sufficient grounds to
believe that he was no proprietor and it was therefore resolved that his
election be declared null and void. This vote being sent to the council was by
them unanimously non-concurred.

No grants had been made and no officers for the ensuing year had been
constituted; the house, notwithstanding, sent a message to the governor to
desire the court might rise. He refused to gratify them. Thursday the 13th of
July had been appointed for a public fast. The members desired to be at home
with their families and, on Wednesday, by a vote, they adjourned themselves to
Tuesday in the next week. The House of commons adjourn for as long time,
without any immediate act of royal authority, but, I presume, never contrary to
a signification of the mind of the king; and the adjournments over holidays are
as much established, by ancient usage, as the ordinary adjournments from day to
day, and, being conformed to by both houses of parliament, no inconvenience can
arise. But the charter was urged, by the governor, to be the rule in this
assembly, not the analogy between a Massachusetts house of representatives and
the commons of Great Britain. The governor, by charter, has the sole power of
adjourning, proroguing and dissolving the general court. Taken strictly, it
would be extremely inconvenient, for the act of the governor would be necessary
every day. Upon a reasonable construction, therefore, the house had always
adjourned from day to day, but never for so great a number of days. The
council, who were obliged to spend near a week without business, unanimously
voted, upon hearing the house had adjourned, that such adjournment, without his
excellency's knowledge and consent, was irregular and not agreeable to the
charter.

THE governor, afterward, made this adjournment one of the principal articles
of complaint against the house.

UPON Tuesday, like the first day of a session, there was scarcely a house for
business. The next morning some votes passed, which were offered to the
governor, and which he would not suffer to be laid before him, until he had
sent for the house and told them they had made a breach upon his majesty's
prerogative, which he was under oath to take care of, and he insisted upon an
acknowledgment of their error before they proceeded to business.

THE house, by a vote or resolve, declared they had no design to make any
breach upon the prerogative, but acknowledged, they had made a mistake in not
acquainting his, excellency and the board with the adjournment.

THE governor observed to them, that they had, industriously, avoided
acknowledging that the sole power of adjourning, as well as proroguing and
dissolving the general assembly, is vested in his majesty's governor, by the
royal charter. They thereupon agreed to the following message. "The house of
representatives dutruly acknowledge, that by the royal charter your excellency
and the governor for the time being have the sole power and authority to
adjourn, prorogue and dissolve the general court, and the house further
acknowledge, that your excellency ought to have been acquainted with the design
and intention of the house in their adjournment from Wednesday the 12th to
Tuesday the 18th instant, before they did adjourn, and that it was so designed
and casually omitted."

THE house carefully distinguished between the power of adjourning the general
court and adjourning the house of representatives, one branch only, and seem to
suppose, that their only mistake was their not acquainting the governor and the
board with their intention, which was, by no means, satisfactory to the
governor, and he immediately ordered the house to attend him in the council
chamber. The speaker ordered all the members of the house to be called in and,
expecting a dissolution, they resolved, "that all the votes of the house in the
present session, more especially relating to any misunderstanding or difference
that has arisen between his excellency and the house, shall be prepared to be
sent home and that the speaker transmit them to William Tailer, Esquire non
resident in London, or, in his absence, to such meet persons as he shall think
sit, desiring them to lay the same before his majesty in council; or any where
else, if need require, to obviate any complaint that may be made by his
excellency the governor against the proceedings of this house for their just
and necessary vindication." So much time was taken up in this vote, or resolve,
that the governor was highly offended and sent a second time, requiring them to
attend him forthwith. It has always been the practice of the house, before and
since, upon a message from the governor, to stop all business and go up without
delay. The speaker, at this time, was among the forwardest in the oppositions.
There was no need of four or five members to hold him, as the speaker of the
house of commons was once held, in the chair, until a number of strong
resolutions had passed the house.

THE governor directed his speech to the house only. "Gentlemen of the house of
representatives. I am very much concerned to find in the printed journal of the
house, first, an order to appoint a committee to draw a memorial upon, or
representation of, my speech, made before the dissolution of the assembly in
March last, and, afterward, the memorial itself, signed by Mr. Cook, in the
name of the committee.

"THIS treatment is very surprising, from a house of representatives that
prosess so much loyalty and respect to his majesty's government. It appears to
me to be very irregular, that the present house of representatives, whereof
John Clarke, Esquire is speaker and which consists of a majority of new members,
should take upon then to answer my speech made to a former house of
representatives, whereof Timothy Lindall, Esquire was speaker. These proceedings
are not only improper, but without precedent from any former assembly.

"I must also observe to you that you have not shown that respect which is due
to me as governor of this province, by suffering this order or memorial to go
into the press; before it was communicated to me, which; if you had done, I
could have convinced you, that it would have been very much for the service of
your constituents, that neither the order nor the memorial should have appeared
in print.

"IT is my opinion, that you will quickly be convinced how much you have been
wanting in your duty and interest, by disowning the authority of the right
honorable board, which his majesty has constituted to superintend the affairs
of the province and all the other plantations.

"For these reasons, I should have dissolved the general court when the
memorial first appeared, but I was in hopes the house might have been brought
to correct or expunge it. Instead of making this use of my tenderness, you have
gone on in the most undutiful manner to withdraw from his majesty's and your
country's service, by adjourning yourselves for near a week, without my
knowledge or consent, contrary to the royal charter, which absolutely vests in
the governors of this province the power of adjourning, proroguing and
dissolving, and that at a time when I thought it for the interest of the colony
to adjourn you for two days only, having an affair of the greatest consequence
to communicate to the house, which was to persuade you to take some effectual
measures to prevent the plague coming among us, there being nothing so likely
to bring it in as the French silk and stuffs which are constantly brought into
this province.

"THESE your unwarrantable proceedings oblige me to dissolve this assembly."

THIS speech, and the dissolution which followed, further allienated the minds
of the people from the governor. Some of his friends wished he had carried his
resentment no farther than putting an end to the session and giving time to
deliberate. There was no room to expect a change for the better, upon a new
election.

THERE was yet no open was with the Indians, but they continued their insults.
The French instigated them and furnished them with ammunition and provisions.
Governor Shute published a proclamation requiring the inhabitants to remain
upon their estates and keep possession of the country. No wonder the
proclamation was not obeyed. I know no authority he had to require them to
remain. If the preservation of their own property was not sufficient to keep
them there, it could not be expected they would remain merely as a barrier for
the rest of the province.

IN the month of August, two hundred Indians with two French jesuits came to
George town upon Arowsick island, armed and under French colors, and, after
some parley with the inhabitants, left a letter to be delivered to the
governor, in which they make a heavy charge against the English for unjustly
invading the property of the Indians and taking from them the country which God
had given them,

RALLE, their spiritual father, was their patron also in their temporal
concerns. Either from a consciousness of their having conveyed the country to
the English, or from a desire of peace and quiet they were averse to engaging
in war. When they were at their villages, the priests were continually exciting
them to act vigorously and drive all the English to the westward of Kennebec,
and such was their influence over them that they would often set out from home,
with great resolution to persist in their demands, and in their parleys, with
the commanders of forts, as well as at more public treaties, would appear, at
first, to be very sturdy, but were soon softened down to a better temper and to
agree that the English should hold the lands without molestation. When they
returned home, they gave their father an account of great firmness they had
shown in refusing to make any concessions, and to this we are to impute the
errcneous relation of these treaties by Charlevoix and others.

BUT about this time Toxus, the Norridgewock chief, died. When they came to
choose another Toxus, the old men who were averse to war, contrary to kall's
mind pitched upon Ouikouiroumenit, who had always been of the pacific party.
They took another very disagrecable step and submitted to send four hostages to
Boston, sureties for their good behavior and for the payment of the damages the
English had sustained. Vaudreuil, the governor of Canada, was alarmed and
thought it (...) to exert himself upon this occasion. He writes to father
Ralle, of the 15th of June, "I was at Moutreal, my (...) father, when your
letters of the 16th and 18th of May came to my hands, informing me of the bad
step taken by the Norridgewocks, i^ choosing Ouikouiroumenit (...) to the
deceased Toxu^, of the great loss which the whole Abenakis nation har^
sustained by his death, and the di^isions prevailing among the Norridgewocks,
many of whom, and especially their chiefs, have betrayed the interest of their
tribe in openly favoring the pretensions of the English to the country of
Norridgewock. The ^aint hearts of your Indians in giving hostages to the
English, to secure payment of the damage they have sustained, and the audacious
language which they have used to the Indians, in order to keep possession of
their country and to drive you out of it, fully convinced me that every
advantage would be taken, of the present state of affairs, to subject them to
the English, if the ^tmost care should not he immediately taken to prevent so
great a misfortune. Without a moment's delay, I set our, in order to apply
myself to the business at Montreal and from thence to St. Francois and
Becancour, where I prevailed with the Indians of those villages vigorously to
support their brethren of Norridgewock and to send two d^^uties for that
purpose, to be present at the treaty and to let the English know, that they
will not have to do with the Norridgewocks alone if they continue their
injuries to them. The intendant and I have joined in a letter, to desire father
(...) Chase to take a journey to Norridgewock, in order to keep those Indians
in their present disposition and to encourage them to behave with firmness and
resolution. He will also go to Penobscot, to engage them to send some of their
chiefs also, to be present on this occasion and to strengthen their brethren."

BEGOIR, the intendant, writes at the same time to Ralle, "I wrote, my reverend
father, to Mons. de Vaudreuille, who is at Montreal, the sentiments of father
de la Chase and my own, viz. what we think convenient to be done, until we hear
from the council of the marine whether the French shall join the Indians to
support them openly against the English, or shall content themselves with
supplying ammunition, as the council has advised that M. Vaudreuil might do, in
case the English should enterprise any thing against them. He thought it more
proper to send the revd. father la Chase, than Mons. de Croisil, lieutenant,
etc. because the English can have no room to except to one missionary's
visiting another, the treaty of peace not forbidding it, whereas, if a French
officer was sent, they might complain that we sent French men into a country,
which they pretend belongs to them, to excite the Indians to make war upon them.

"It is to be wished that you and your Indians may be suffered to live in quiet
until we know the king's intentions whether we shall openly join the Indians if
they are attacked wrongfully; in the mean time we shall assist them with
ammunition which they may be assured they shall not want.

"P.S. Since I wrote the foregoing the Indians of St. Francois and Becancour
have desired M. Vaudreuil that, M. de Croisil may go with them to be a witness
of their good disposition, and he has consented to join him with father de la
Chase."

THE Massachusetts people made heavy complaints of the French governor, for
supporting and stirring up enemies against them in time of peace between the
two crowns, but he justified himself to his own master. Ralle was ranked by the
English among the most infamous villains, and his scalp would have been worth
an hundred scalps of the Indians. His intrepid courage and servent zeal to
promoted the religion he professed and to secure his neophytes or converts to
the interest of his sovereign were the principal causes of these prejudices.
The French, for the same reasons, rank him with saints and heroes. He had been,
near forty years, a missionary among the Indians, and their manner of life had
become quite easy and agreeable to him. They loved and idolized him, and were
always ready to hazard their own lives to preserve his. His letters, upon
various subjects, discover him to have been a man of superior natural powers,
which had been improved by an education in a college of jesuits. The learned
languages, he was master of. His latin is pure, classical and elegant. He had
taught many of his converts, male and female, to write, and corresponded with
them in their own language, and made some attempts in Indian poetry. When he
was young he learned to speak dutch and so came more easily to a smattering of
english, enough to be understood by traders and tradesmen who had been employed
in building a church and other work at Norridgewock. He corresponded, in latin,
with one or more of the ministers of Boston and had a great fondness for
showing his talent at controversy. Pride was his foible and he took great
delight in raillery. The English idiom and the flat and bald latin, in some of
his correspondents letters, afforded him subject. Some of his contemporaries,
as well as Cotton, Norton, Mitchel, and others of the first ministers of the
country, would have been a match for him. He contemned and often provoked the
English, and when threatened with destruction by them, if they should ever take
Norridgewock, he replied -- if --. We shall see, by and by, that he met with
the same fate with others long before him, who by the like laconick and
insulting answers had unnecessarily provoked their enemies.

THE English charge the Indians with persidy and breach of the most solemn
engagements. The jesuit denies it and justifies their conduct, from their being
under duresse, at such times, and compelled to agree to whatever terms are
proposed to them; particularly, when they met governor Shute, at Arowsick, in
1717, he says, the body of the Norridgewocks had fully determined, that the
English should settle no farther upon Kennebeck river than a certain mill; for
all the pretense they had to go beyond that, was a bargain of this fort, made
by some Englishman with any Indian he happened to meet with, "I will give you a
bottle of rum if you will give me leave to settle here, or if you will give me
such a place; give me the bottle, says the Indian, and take as much land as you
have a mind to: The Englishman asks his name, which he writes down and the
bargain is finished. Such fort of bargains being urged against the Indians, at
the treaty, they rose in a body and went away in great wrath, and, although
they met again the next day and submitted to the governor's terms, yet when
they came home all they had done was disallowed by the body of the nation and
rejected." Whilst the English kept within the mill the jesuit forbad the
Indians molesting them, but if any settled beyond those bounds he allowed and
encouraged the Indians to kill their cattle and to make other spoil.

THE consideration made by the purchasers of Indian lands was not always so
inconsiderable as the jesuit mentions, and the purchases were from chiefs or
reputed chiefs or sachems, and possession had been taken and improvements made
scores of miles beyond the limits he would restrain the English to, more than
sixty years before.

THE French governor, Vaudreuil, in his manuscript letters, and the French
historian, Charlevoix, in print, suppose the English settles to be mere
intruders, and charge the English nation with great injustice in dispossessing
the Abanakis of their country. The European nations, which have their colonies
in America, may not reproach one another upon this head. They all took
possession, contrary to the minds of the natives, who would gladly have been
rid of their new guests. The best plea, viz. that a small number of families
laid (...) to a greater part of the globe than they were capable of improving,
and to a greater proportion than the general proprietor designed for so few
people, who therefore had acquired no such right to it as to exclude the rest
of mankind, will hold as well for the English as any other nation. The first
settlers of the Massachusetts and Plymouth were not content with this, but made
conscience of paying the natives to their satisfaction for all parts of the
territory which were not depopulated or deserted and left without a claimer.
Gorges the original (...) of the province of Man made grants or conveyance of
great part of the sea coast and rivers of that province without purchase from
the natives, other parts had been purchased from them by particular persons and
the remaining part, as well as the country ^ast of it, the government claimed
by conquest, but it must be confessed that in the several treaties of peace
this right had not been acknowledged by the Indians nor insisted upon by the
English, this controversy being about those parts of the country which the
English claimed by purchase and no mention made of a right to the whole by
conquest.

THE governor, immediately after the dissolution of the general court, issued
writs for a new house a representatives and the court met, the 23d of August,
at the George tavern, the extreme part of Boston, beyond the ifthmus or neck,
the small pox then prevailing in the town. The house chose Mr. Clarke, their
former speaker, and informed the governor of it by message, and he sent his
approbation, in writing, to the house. They passed a resolve, that they
intended no more by their message than to inform the governor and council of
the choice they had made and that they had no need of the governor's
approbation.

THE first act of the house gave new occasion for controversy. They were so
near the town as to be in danger and, instead of desiring the governor to
adjourn or prorogue the court to some other place, they passed a ^ote for
removing the court to Cambridge and sent it to the council for concurrence. The
council nonconcurred the vote. The governor let the house know, that he should
be very ready to gratify them if he was applied to in such manner as should
consist with the sole right in him of adjourning, proroguing and dissolving the
court. They replied, that they were very willing to acknowledge his right, so
far as respected time, but as to place, by the law of the province the court
was to be held in Boston, and therefore an act or order of the three branches
was necessary to remove it to any other place. They let the governor know
further, that although they had convened in consequence of his summons yet, as
many of the members apprehended their lives in danger, they would leave the
court and go home. There was a quorum, however, who chose to risque their lives
rather than concede that the governor had power, by his own act, to remove the
court from Boston to any other town in the province, or risque the consequence
of refusing to remain a sufficient number to make a house.

THE governor had received from England the opinion of the attorney general,
that he had good right to negative the speaker, and the lords commissioners of
trade and plantations had wrote to him and signified their approbation of his
proceedings. These papers he caused to be laid before the house. The house drew
up a remonstrance in which they justify their own conduct and that of former
assemblies, in their controversies with the governor, and with a great deal of
decency declare, that, with all deference to the opinion of the attorney
general, they must still claim the right of folely electing and constituting
their speaker, and they humbly presumed that their so doing could not be
construed a flight of or disrespect to his majesty's instructions, or bearing
upon the royal prerogative. The governor gave them ^ short and very moderate
answer; that he had made his majesty's instructions and the royal charter the
rule of his administration, that he did not desire to be his own judge, the
former house had voted to send an account of their proceedings to England and
it would be very acceptable to him, if the present house would state the case
and send it home to persons learned in the law, and given them directions to
appear for the house, that his majesty might judge between his governor and
them, but in the mean time it was his duty to follow his instructions until
they were countermanded.

HERE seems to have been a calm interval. The flame was abated but the fire not
extinguished. Fresh fuel soon caused a fresh flame. The grant to the governor
afforded proper matter. It was said the house were bad oeconomists. To save an
hundred pounds in the governor's salary they put their constituents to the
expense of five hundred pounds for their own wages. If the governor's demand
was unreasonable, the house may be justified although the wages of the members
for the time spent in the debate amounted to much more than the sum in dispute.
The currency also continued to depreciate, but this is a consideration which
never had its just weight. Twenty shillings one year, must be as good as twenty
shillings another. They received and paid their private dues and debts in bills
of credit according to their denominations, why should not the government's
debts be paid in the same manner? A majority of the house were prevailed upon
to vote no more than five hundred pounds, for half a year's salary, equal to
about an hundred and eighty pounds sterling.

THE governor was irritated, instead of obtaining an established salary of a
thousand pounds sterling per annum, which he had been instructed to insist
upon, his whole perquisites from the government would not afford him a decent
support, and they were growing less every day by the sinking of the currency in
its value.

THE house, from an expectation that the governor, would, from time to time,
make complaints to the ministry, voted L.500 sterling. to be paid into the hands
of such persons as should be chosen to defend their rights in England, but the
council refused to concur the vote, because it was not expressed by whom the
persons should be chose.

AT the close of the session, the house and council came into a vote, and the
governor was prevailed with to consent to it, "that 300 men should be sent to
the head quarters of the Indians, and that proclamation should be made
commanding them, on paid of being prosecuted with the utmost severity, to
deliver up the jesuits and the other heads and fomenters of their rebellion and
to make satisfaction for the damage they had done, and, if they refused to
comply, that as many of their principal men as the commanding officer should
judge meet should be seized, together with Ralle, or any other jesuit, and sent
to Boston, and, if any opposition should be made, force should be repelled by
force." Judge Sewall, This gentleman was a good friend to the aboriginals of
every tribe, not from mere humanity and compassion, but he was much inclined to
think they were part of the ancient people of God, and that the ten tribes, by
some means or other, had strolled into America. He was a commissioner from the
corporation for propagating the gospel among them, and with his own substance
built them a synagogue and did many other charitable acts.
one of the council, scrupled the lawfulness of this proceeding against the
Indians and entered his diffent. After the general court was prorogued, the
governor, notwithstanding he had consented to the vote, suspended the
pro^e^^tion until the Indian hostages escaped from the castle, but a war being
then deemed inevitable, orders were given for raising the men. The hostages
were taken and sent back to their consinement and then the orders were recalled.

A promise had been made, by the governor, to the Indians, that trading houses
should be built, armourers or smiths sent down, at the charge of the province,
and that they should be supplied with provisions, clothing, etc. for their
^urs and skins. Treaty at Arowsick.
The compliance with this promise was expected from the general court, and, at
any other time, it would have been thought a well judged measure, but the
unhappy controversy with the governor would not suffer any thing, from him, to
be approved of, and the private traders provoked the Indians by their f^auds
and other injuries and, it seems, the governor, as well as good Mr. Sewall,
scrupled whether a declaration of war against them was just or prudent. This,
house and council chose to call the proceedings against them a prosecution for
rebellion but, if a view be taken of all the transactions between the English
and them from the beginning, it will be difficult to say what fort of subjects
they were, and it is not certain that they understood that they had promised
any subjection at all.

THE house, dissatisfied with the governor for not carrying into execution a
vote of the whole court, resolved at the beginning of the next session, "that
the government has still sufficient reason for prosecuting the eastern Indians
for their many breaches of covenant." The vote being sent up for concurrence,
the council desired the house to explain what they intended by prosecution, but
they refused to do it and desired the council either to concur or non-concur.
The house refusing to explain their meaning, the board undertook to explain it
and concurred the vote with a declaration that they understood it to be such a
prosecution as had been determined the former session. This no doubt was
irregular in the council and left room to question whether it was a vote of the
court, the house not having agreed to it as the council qualified it. However,
in consequence of it, a party of men were ordered up to Norridgewock, and
returned with no other success than bringing off some of Ralle's books and
papers, his faithful disciples having taken care to secure his person and to
fly with him into the woods. This insult upon their chief town and the spoil
made upon their priest will not long remain unrevenged.

THE session began at Boston the 3d of November. The governor prorogued the
court to meet at Cambridge, the 7th; and before they proceeded to business, to
avoid any dispute about the place of meeting, which would have obstructed the
important affairs of the province, he gave his consent to a vote of the two
houses, that by this instance of the governor's adjourning the court no
advantage should be taken in favor of his sole power of removing the court from
place to place. In his speech, he had taken no notice of party disputes and
only recommended to them to raise money for the service of the government and
particularly of their exposed fronti^rs.

THE house, in their vote for supply of the treasury, brought in a clause which
had not been in formen votes and which the council supposed would lay such
restraint upon the money in the treasury, that it would not be in the
governor's power, with their advice and consent so much as to pay an express
without a vote of the whole court; they therefore non-concurred the vote, and
tho house refused my provision without that clause. In the midst of the
dispute, Mr. Hutchinson, one of the members for Boston, was seized with the
small pox and died in a few days. Nov. 30.
The speaker, Mr. Clarke, was one of the most noted physicians in Boston and,
notwithstanding all his care to clean^e himself from infection after visiting
his patients, it was supposed, brought the distemper to his brother member,
which so terrified the court, that after the report of his being seized, it was
not possible to keep them together and the governor found it necessary to
prorogue them. Nov. 17.
At the next session in March, the house insisting upon the form of supply
which they had voted in the last session, the council concurred.

AN affair happened, during this session, which showed the uncertainty of the
relation the Indians stood in to the English. Castine, son by an Indian woman
to the Baron de St. Castine, who lived many years, in the last century, at
Penobscot, had appeared among the Indians, who were in arms at Arowsick. By an
order of court, he had been afterward seized in the eastern country and
brought to Boston and put under close confinement.

THE house ordered, that he should be brought upon trial in the coun^y of
Suffolk, before the superior court, and that the witnesses who saw him in arms
should be summoned to attend. This, no doubt, would have been trying in one
county a fact committed in another. The council non-concurred and voted to send
for witnesses; that the court might judge in what manner to proceed against
him, but this was not agreed to by the house. Some time after, a committee was
appointed to examine him. Castine was a very subtle fellow and made all fair
with the committee. He professed the highest friendship for the English and
affirmed that he came to Penobcot to prevent the Indians from doing mischief,
and promised to endeavor to influence all that tribe to keep peace. The
committee, therefore, reported and the two houses accepted the report, that he
should be set at large. The governor approved of this proceeding. He had yet
hopes of preserving peace. To have punished him as a traitor, would have
destroyed all hopes of an accommodation. It might also very well be questioned
whether it would have been justifiable. The tribe or nation, with which he was
mixed, has repeatedly, in words of which they had no adequate ideas,
acknowledged themselves subjects; but, in fact, in concomitant as well as
precedent and subsequent transfactions with them, had always been considered as
free and independent, and, although they lived within the limits of the
charter, the government never made any attempt to exercise any civil authority
or jurisdiction over them, except when any of them came within the English
settlements and disputes had arisen between them and the English subjects.

THE house who, the last session, were for prosecuting the Indians and could
not reasonably have supposed that they would bury, as they express themselves,
the late march of the English to Norridgewock, seem, notwithstanding; to be
suddenly changed from vigorous measures for bringing them to terms, to schemes
for appealing and softening them; and a present was ordered to be sent to
Bomaseen, the Norridgewock captain, to engage him in favor of the English.

THE small pox, this year, made great havoc in Boston and some of the adjacent
towns. It was brought into the harbor of Boston about the middle of April by
the Saltortugas fleet.
Having been prevented spreading for near 20 years, all born within that time,
besides many who had escaped it before, were ^able to the distemper. Of 5889
which took it in Boston 844 died. Inoculation was introduced upon this
occasion, contrary to the minds of the inhabitants in general, and not without
hazard, to the lives of those who promoted it, from the rage of the people.
Doctor C. Mather, one of the principal ministers of Boston, had observed, in
the philosophical transactions, a letter of Timonius from Constantinople, and a
treatise of Pylarinus, Venetian consul at Smyrna, giving a very favorable
account of the operation, and he recommended a trial to the physicians of the
town, when the small pox first began to spread, but they all declined it except
Doctor Boylston, who made himself very obnoxious. To show the confidence he had
of success, he began with his own children and servants. Many sober pious
people were struck with horror and were of opinion that, if any of his patients
should die, he ought to be treated as a murderer. The vulgar were enraged to
that degree, that his family was hardly safe in his house and be often met with
affronts and insults in the streets.

THE faculty, in general, disapproved his conduct, but Doctor Douglass made the
most zealous opposition. He had been regularly bred in Scotland, was assuming
even to arrogance, and in several fugitive pieces, which he published, treated
all who differed from him with contempt. He was credulous and easily received
idle reports, of persons who had received the small pox by inoculation taking
it a second time in the natural way, of others who perished in a most
deplorable manner from the corrupt matter which had so insected the mass of
blood as to render the patient incurable. At other times, he pronounced the
eruption from inoculation, to be only a pustulary fever, like the chicken or
swine pox, nothing analogous to the small pox and that the patient, therefore,
had not the least security against the small pox, afterward, by ordinary
infection.

ANOTHER practiser, Lawrence, Dalhonde, who had been a surgeon in the French
army, made oath that at Cremona, about the year 1696, the operation was made
upon 13 soldiers, 4 of which died, 3 did not take the distemper, the other 6
hardly escaped and were left with tumors, inflammations, gangrenes, etc. and
that, about the time of the battle of Almanza, the small pox being in the army,
two Muscovians were inoculated, one without any immediate effect, but six weeks
after was seized with a frenzy, swelled all over his body and was supposed to
be poisoned, and, being opened after his death, his lungs were found ulcerated,
which it was determined was caused by inoculation.

THE justices of the peace and selectmen of the town called together the
physicians who, after mature deliberation, came to the following conclusions.
"That it appears by numerous instances, that inoculation has proved the death
of many persons, soon after the operation, and brought distempers upon many
others which, in the end, have proved deadly to them. That the natural tendency
of infusing such malignant filth in the mass of blood is to corrupt and putrify
it, and if there be not a sufficient discharge of that malignity, by the place
of incision or elsewhere, it lays a foundation for many dangerous diseases.
That the continuing the operation among us is likely to prove of the most
dangerous consequence." The practice was generally condemned.

THE common people imbibed the strongest prejudices, and such as died by
inoculation were no more lamented than self murderers. Doctor Mather, the first
mover, after having been reproached and vilified in pamphlers and news papers,
was at length attacked in a more violent way. His nephew, Mr. Walter, one of
the ministers of Roxbury, having been privately inoculated in the doctor's
house in Boston, a villain, about three o'clock in the morning, set fire to the
fuze of a granado shell, filled with combustible stuff, and threw it into the
chamber where the sick man was lodged. The fuze was fortunately beat off by the
passing of the shell through the window, and the wild fire spent itself upon
the floor. It was generally supposed I remember to have seen the shell, which
was not filled with powder but a mixture of brimstone with bituminous matter;.
that the bursting of the shell by that means was prevented. A scurrilous
menacing writing was fastened to the shell or fuze.

THE moderate opposers urged, that the practice was to be condemned as trusting
more to the machination of men, than to the all wise providence of God in the
ordinary course of nature, and as tending to propagate distempers to the
destruction of mankind, which proved it to be criminal in its nature and a
species of murder. The magistrates, I mean those in Boston, supposed it had a
tendency to increase the malignity and prolong the continuance of the
infection, and that therefore it behoved them to discountenance it.

AT length, the house of representatives laid hold of it, and a bill was
brought in and passed to prohibit all persons from inoculation for the small
pox, but the council were in doubt and the bill stopped.

SUCH is the force of prejudice. -- All orders of men, in that day, in greater
or lesser proportion, condemned a practice which is now generally approved and
to which many thousands owe the preservation of their lives.

BOYLSTON continued the practice, in spite of all the opposition. About 300
were inoculated, in Boston and the adjacent towns. It is impossible to
determine the number which died by it. Douglass would have it there was one in
fourteen, whilst the favorers of the practice would not allow more than one in
seventy or eighty. It was evident, from the speedy eruption, that many had
taken the distemper before they were inoculated. Indeed, where persons have
continued in an infected air for months together no true judgment can ever be
made of the experiment. It happened that in the same month in which inoculation
began in Boston, two children, a daughter, I suppose, of lady Mary W. Montague
and a son of doctor Keith, were inoculated in England. Then an experiment was
made upon 6 condemned criminals. After that, 3 or 4 children were inoculated,
and the spring following several children in the ^ospitals. The success of
these attempts encouraged the like with two of the princesses, which succeeded
very favorably




THE Indians were meditating mischief, from the time the English were at
Norridgewock, but committed no hostilities until June following. They came then
with about 60 men, in twenty canoes, into Merrymeeting bay and took prisoners
nine families, but gave no marks of their usual rage and barbarity. Some of
their prisoners they released immediately and others in a short time after.
Enough were retained to be a security for the return of their hostages from
Boston. Another small party of Indians made an attempt upon a fishing vessel
belonging to Ipswich, as she lay in one of the eastern harbors, but the
fishermen being armed they killed two or three of the Indians and the rest
retreated. The collector of the customs at Annapolis-royal, Mr. Newton, with
John Adams, son of one of the council for Nova Scotia, were coming from thence,
with captain Blin, to Boston, and, putting in to one of the Passimaquadies,
went ashore, with other passengers, and were all seized and made prisoners, by
about a dozen Indians and as many French; the people left on board the sloop
cut their cables and fled to Boston.

ANOTHER party of Indians burned a sloop at St. Georges river, took several
prisoners and attempted to surprise the fort.

INTELLIGENCE of these several hostile acts came to Boston, whilst the general
court was sitting, but there seemed to be no disposition to engage in war.
Instead of the former vigorous resolves, upon lesser provocations, the house
proposed that a message should be sent to the Norrigewock Indians to demand the
reasons of this behavior, restitution of the captives, and satisfaction for
damages, and acquaint them that, if they refused, effectual methods would be
taken to compel them. The hostages, given by the Indians, were sent down to the
eastward and, upon the restoring the English captives, they were to be set at
liberty.

THE friends of the English captives were importunate with the government to
take measures for their redemption, and a view to effect this seems to have
been the chief reason which delayed a declaration of war. But, soon after the
prorogation of the court, news came that the Indians had burnt Brunswick, a
village between Casco bay and Kennebeck, and that Capt. Harman, with part of
the forces posted upon the frontiers, had pursued the enemy, killed several and
taken 15 of their guns. Immediately after this news (July 25) the governor, by
advice of council, caused a declaration of war to be published.

FOREIGN wars often delivered Greece and Rome from their intestine broils and
animosities, but this war furnished a new subject for contention. The governor
often charged the party in the house, with assuming the direction of the war
and taking into their hands that, power, which the charter gives to the
governor. He gave them a hint in his speech (August 8th) at the opening the
next session. "One thing I would particularly remark to you, which is that, if
my hands and the council's be not left at a much greater liberty than of late
they have been, I fear our affairs will be carried on with little or no spirit.
Surely, every person who wishes well to his country will think it high time to
lay aside all animosities, private peeks and selfinterest, that so we may
unanimously join in the vigorous prosecution of the weighty affairs which are
now upon the carpet."

THE house, in an address to the governor, signified their sentiments of the
necessity of this declaration of war and promised "all necessary and cheerful
assistance." A committee, of the two houses, settled the rates of wages and
provisions for the forces, to which no exception was taken, but they went
further and determined the service in which they were to be employed, 300 men
to be sent upon an expedition to Penobscot, and the rest to be posted at
different places on the frontiers, and qualified their report, by desiring the
governor to give orders accordingly. He let them know, that the king his master
and the royal charter had given him the sole command and direction of the
militia and all the forces, which might be raised on any emergency, and that he
would not suffer them to be under any direction but his own and those officers
he should think sit to appoint. The house made him no answer. The destination
of the military forces in this manner and making the establishment of their
wages depend upon a compliance with it, had not been the practice in former
wars and administrations, but the governor found he must submit to it, or the
frontiers would be without (...) gave up his own opinion with respect to the
Penobscots and had laid the same plan which the committee had reported and he
intended to prosecute it, which made his compliance more easy. The house, being
dissatisfied with Major Moody, who had the command of the forces, passed a vote
desiring the governor to dismiss him. The council non-concurred this vote,
"because he was condemned unheard," and substituted another vote to desire the
governor to send for him, that he might attend the court, but this the house
would not agree to and sent a separate message to the governor to desire him to
suspend the major from his post. The governor sold them he was surprised they
should desire so high a piece of injustice as the punishing a man without
hearing what he had to say for himself, and let them know he would enquire into
the grounds of their complaint. Several other votes passed, relative to the
forces, which the governor did not approve.

AT the next session, November 15th, he recommended a law to prevent mutiny and
desertion, for want of which the men were daily running away. The house thought
it necessary to be first satisfied, whether the desertion in the army was not
owing to the unfaithfulness of the officers and appointed two committees, one
to repair to the head quarters on the eastern, and the other on the western
frontiers, with powers to require the officers to muster their companies, when
an exact lift was to be taken of the men that appeared, an account of all
deserters and of all such as were absent upon furloe, or had been dismissed or
had been exchanged, together with diverse other powers. They then applied to the
governor to give orders to all in command to pay a proper deference to the vote
and order of the house respecting repeated abuses and mismanagements among the
forces, etc.

THIS the governor thought he had good right to except to, and he made the vote
itself, as well as the manner in which it was to be executed, an article of
complaint against the house to the king, but he was prevailed upon to consent
to it, and either made or intended to make this condition, that the committees
should make report to him. The house urged this consent against him but, in
England, it was not thought a sufficient justification.

THE conceding in one point naturally led to a demand of the like concessions
in others.

IT was thought a salutary measure to send for delegates from the Iroquois, who
were in friendship with us, and to desire them to use the influence they had
over the eastern Indians, in order to their making satisfaction for the
injuries done and to their good behavior for the time to come. When the
delegates came to Boston, the house voted that the speech to be made to them by
the governor should be prepared by a committee of the two houses. The governor
had prepared his speech and he directed the secretary to read it to the house
of representatives, but this was not satisfactory and they sent a message, to
desire that what the secretary had read might be laid before the house. The
governor refused, at first, but, upon further consideration consented, defiring
they would speedily return it. They sent it back to him and let him know they
could not agree to it, unless he would speak in the name of the general court,
and the house, of representatives might be present when the speech was
delivered. This was disagreeable to him, and a novelty to the Indians, who had
always considered in their treaties, the governor of Pennsylvania, as well as
the governor of New York, to be treating with them in their own names, or the
name of the king, and not of their respective assemblies, but he submitted.

IN consequence of the vote of the house, in the last session, the governor had
directed an expedition to Penobscot, although it was not altogether agreeable
to his own judgment. It seems he had hopes of an accommodation, with that tribe
at least. Col. Walton, who had the command on the eastern frontiers, selected
forces proper for the purpose, and they had actually begun their march, when
intelligence arrived to the colonel that Arowsick was attacked, by a great
number of Indians. He immediately sent an express with orders to the forces to
return, and acquainted the governor with his proceedings. The council advised
to keep the whole forces for the defense of our own inhabitants, and to suspend
acting upon the offensive until winter, which they judged a more proper season
for the expedition; and the men, in consequence of this new advice, were
employed in marches upon the back of the frontiers. But the house were
dissatisfied, and sent a message to the governor "to desire him to order, by
express, Col. Walton to appear, forthwith, before the house, to render his
reasons why the orders relating to the expedition had not been executed." This
was not only to take Walton from the command, as long as the house should think
fit to detain him, but the orders, 'relating to the expedition.' might be
understood to mean the orders which had been given by the house and not what he
had received from the captain general. The governor told the committee that he
would take no notice of the message from the house unless it was otherwise
expressed, besides, he and the council were well satisfied and the thought
every body else was. He added, that he intended the officers should give an
account 'to him' of their conduct. The next day (Nov. 20th) they sent another
message to him to desire him to inform the house, whether he would send for
Walton as they had desired. He then told the committee, he would send his
answer to the house when he thought proper. Upon this, they seem to have
appointed a messenger to go to the eastward, upon what occasion does not
appear, and the next day passed the following extraordinary vote. "Whereas this
house did on thursday last appoint a committee to wait on his excellency the
governor, praying his orders for Col. Walton's appearance before the house, and
renewed their (...) to him yesterday, and his excellency has not yet seen cause
to comply with that vote, and the denial of Col. Walton's being sent for has
extremely discouraged the house, in projecting any future schemes for carrying
on the war, under any views of success. And this house, being zealously
inclined to do what in them lies to bring this people out of the calamities and
perplexities of the present war, and to spare no cost and charge to effect so
great a good, were some things at present remedied; we do therefore, once more,
with the greatest sincerity and concern for our country's good, apply, to your
excellency for your speedy issuing your orders concerning Col. Walton, to be
dispatched by the messenger of this house going into those parts." The governor
did not like to be so closely pressed, and when the committee came to his house
he told them, he would not receive the vote and, as it is inserted in the
report and journal of the house "he went his way." They then appointed their
speaker and eight principal members, a committee to wait upon the governor and
desire him to return to the chair, "on some important affairs which lay before
the house," but he refused to see the committee and directed his servant to
tell them he would not then be spoke to by any body.

WALTON was a New Hampshire man at the head of the forces, a small part only of
which were raised in that government. This might prejudice many, but there was
a private grudge against him, in some of the leading men of the house, and they
never left pursuing him until they effected his removal.

THE house, finding the governor would not comply, all their messages to him
being exceptionable, as founded upon a supposed right in the house to call the
officers out of the service to account before them whenever they thought
proper, and also to order the particular services in which the forces should be
employed without leaving it in the governor's power to vary, they made some
alterations in the form of their request and (Dec. 4th) passed the following
vote, "Whereas this house have been informed of diverse miscarriages in the
management of the war in the eastern country, voted that his excellency the
governor be desired to express Col. Walton, that he forthwith repair to Boston
and, when he bath attended upon his excellency, that he would please to direct
him to wait on this house, that they may examine him, concerning his late
conduct in prosecuting the war, more especially referring to the late intended
expedition to the fort of Penobscot. " This being more general and not confined
to the laying aside the expedition, which was known to be in consequence of
orders, the governor was willing it should be constructed favorably and sent
for Walton.

THE council having steadily adhered to the governor, he took this opportunity
to recommend to the house to act jointly with the council in messages to him of
general concern, and at the same time, in a verbal message by the secretary
endeavored to soften the temper of the house. "Mr. speaker, his excellency
commands me to acquaint this honorable house that he has taken into
consideration the several messages relating to Col. Walton, and thinks it most
agreeable to the constitution and what would tend to keep up a good agreement
between the council and house of representatives for all their messages, of a
public nature and wherein the whole government is concerned, to be sent up to
the council for their concurrence and not immediately to himself; however, that
he will give order for Col. Walton's coming up to town and, when he has
received an account of his proceedings, the whole court shall have the hearing
of him if they desire it." In this way, the governor intended to guard against
any undue proceeding, there being no danger of the council's condemning a
measure to which a little while before they had given their advice and consent,
but the house improved the hint to a very different purpose, and on the 5th
December voted "that a committee, to consist of eleven members of the two
houses seven of the house of representatives and four of the council, shall
meet in the recess of the court, once in 14 days, and oftener if occasion
should require to concert what steps and methods shall be put in practice,
relative to the war, and having agreed upon any projections of designs, to lay
them before his excellency for his approbation, who is desired to take
effectual care to carry them into speedy execution." This was unprecedented,
and had it been only a devolving the powers, by the constitution entrusted with
the whole legislature, could not be justified, but it was an assuming the power
given to one branch only, the governor, and then devolving it to a few of their
own number. Such innovation are dangerous. They may be improved to serve the
purposes of an arbitrary prince or governor, as well as those of a popular
faction. When Richard 2d had a packed parliament devoted to his will and
pleasure he procured an act or order, under color of dispatching business,
which invested the whole authority of parliament in the king, with twelve peers
and in commoners. On the other hand, in 1641, the lords and commons having
determined to adjourn from the 9th of September to the 20th of October,
appointed committees, viz. seven of the lords and forty three of the commons,
to take care during the (...), of the must weighty and urgent affairs.
In affairs of government, of what nature soever, this was an innovation in the
constitution, but in matters relative to the war it was taking the powers from
the governor, which belonged to him by the constitution, and vesting them in a
committee of the two houses. The council unanimously nonconcurred the vote, and
altercation ensued, between them and the house, but the council persevered. In
the mean time the governor was engaged with the house in fresh disputes.

THE committee of the house, which had been sent to the eastern frontiers,
returned and, instead of making their report to the governor, which was the
condition of his consent to their authority and of his orders to the officers
to submit to them, they made their report to the house. This was disingenuous.
It would not do to urge that he had no right to make conditions to their votes,
for he had given no consent, unless it was condition, and without his conform
they could have no authority. In the first year of the reign of the late King
William, a motion was made in the house of commons for an address to his
majesty to send persons into Ireland to take account of the numbers of the army
and the provisions, which the king assured them he would do. Afterward, a
motion was made that the commons should send some of their members and of their
own nomination. The king being informed of it sent the following message.
"William R. "His majesty having already declared his resolutions to prosecute
the war in Ireland with the utmost vigor, and being desirous to use the means
that may be most satisfactory and effectual in order to it, is graciously
pleased, that this house do recommend a number of persons, not exceeding seven,
to be commissioned by his majesty, to take care of the provisions and such
other preparations as shall be necessary for that service. "His majesty is
further pleased to let the house know that, upon consideration of the address
of the 11th or November, he gives them leave to nominate some persons to go
over to Ireland, to take an account of the number of the army there and the
state and condition of it, who shall receive his majestys orders accordingly."
This is called a condescending message. It is certain the house of commons did
not think sit to take these powers upon them, but, after a vote of thanks to
his majesty, "Resolved, that this house does not think to recommend any member
of this house to be employed in the service of Ireland for the purposes
expressed in his majesty's gracious message^^ on saturday last. "Resolved, that
this house does humbly desire to be excused from recommending any persons to
his majesty to be employed in the service of Ireland; but humbly leave it his
majesty's great wisdom to nominate sit persons for (...)
As Soon as he heard of the report, he sent to the house for his original order,
which he had delivered to the committee. They answered that they were not
possessed of it, but the chairman of the committee had left an attested copy on
their files, which he might have if he pleased, but he refused the copy and
insisted upon the original. He then sent for John Wainwright, the chairman of
the committee, to attend him in council and there demanded the return of the
original order. Wainwright, in general, was what was called a prerogative man,
but the house had enjoined him not to return the order. He acknowledged he had
the order in his possession, but desired to be excused from delivering it, the
house having directed him to deliver no original papers. The original vote of
the house and the governor's order in consequence of it came to my hands by
accident.

"In the house of representatives, Nov. 11. 1722.

"WHEREAS this house have been informed of repeated abuses and mismanagements
among the officers now in pay, tending greatly to the dishonor and damage of
the government, and are desirous to use all proper and suitable methods for the
full discovery thereof. -- And, to effect the same, have sent a committee from
the house to enquire into these rumors and report how they find things. -- We
the representatives do most earnestly desire your excellency's orders, by the
same committee to, the commanding officer and all others in command there, to
pay all proper deference to the vote and order of this house respecting that
matter.

John Clarke, speaker."

BOSTON, Nov. the 17. 1722.

To the officer commanding in chief at the eastward.

"I do hereby give orders to the commanding officers and all other inferior
officers to pay deference to the committee, and do expect that the committee
lay first before me their report as captain general and, afterward, upon the
desire of the house of representatives, it shall be laid before them.

Samuel Shnte."

THE house expected the governor would complain of them for usurping a military
power, and might refuse to part with the original votes or orders by which he
had signified his consent to it, the condition not preceding the exercise of
such power.

SOON after (Dec. 18th) Col. Walton came to town and the house sent their
committee to desire the governor to direct him to attend the house, the next
morning, but the governor refused to give such orders, and told the committee
that, if his officers were to answer for their conduct, it should be before the
whole court. They then sent their door keeper and messenger to Walton, to let
him know the house expected his attendance. He went immediately, but refused to
give any account of his proceedings, without leave from the governor. The next
day, Walton was ordered to appear before the whole court, and the governor sent
a message by the secretary, to acquaint the house, that they might then ask any
questions they thought proper, relative to his conduct, but they resolved, that
their intent, in sending for him, was that he should appear before them. The
next day, he sent another message to acquaint the house that Walton was then
before the governor and council, with his journal and if the house inclined to
it he desired them to come up, and ask any questions they thought proper. They
returned for answer, that they did not think it expedient, for they looked upon
it not only their privilege, but duty, to demand, of any officer in the pay and
service of the government, an account of his management, while employed by the
public.

THIS perhaps, in general, was not the cause of dispute, but the question was,
whether he was culpable for observing the orders which the governor had given
contrary to the declared mind and order of the house. They then passed an order
for Walton, forthwith to lay his journal before the house. This was their last
vote relative to this affair, whilst the governor was in the province. He had,
without making it public, obtained his majesty's permission to leave the
province and go to England. The prejudice, in the minds of the common people,
increased every day. It was known to his friends, that as he fat in one of the
chambers of his house, the window and door of a closet being open, a bullet
entered, through the window and door passages, and passed very near him. If
some thought this a mere accident, yet, as he knew he had many virulent
enemies, he could not be without suspicion of a wicked design, but his
principal intention, in going home, was to represent the conduct of the house,
to call them to answer before his majesty in council, and to obtain a decision
of the points in controversy, and thereby to remove all occasion or pretense
for further disputes. His departure was very sudden. The Seahorse man of war,
Captain Durell, lying in Nantasket, bound to Barbados to convoy the Saltorrugas
fleet, the governor went on board her Dec. 27th intending to go from Barbados,
the first opportunity, for London. Not one member of the court was in
thesecrer, nor indeed any person in the province except two or three of his
domestics. The wind proved contrary; for three or four days, during which, the
owners of the ship Ann, Capt. Finch, which was then loading for London, by
employing a great number of hands, had her fitted for the sea and sent her to
Nantasket and offered the governor his passage in her and he went on board and
failed the first of January.

UPON a review of this controversy with governor Shute, I am apprehensive some
of my readers will be apt to doubt the impartiality of the relation. Such steps
and so frequent by one party, without scarce any attempts by the other, are not
usual, but I have made the most diligent search into the conduct of the
governor; as well as the house, and I am not sensible of having omitted any
material fact, nor have I designedly given a varnish to the actions of one
party, or high coloring to those of the other. Some will say, it was
unnecessary to publish to the world transactions which tend to set the country
in an unfavourable light. I profess to give a true relation of facts. I see no
difference between publishing false facts for truth and omitting any which are
material for the forming a just conception of the roll. Col. Shute had the
character of being humane, friendly and benevolent, but somewhat warm and
sudden upon provocations received, was a lover of case and diversions, and for
the sake of indulging his inclinations, in those respects, would willingly have
avoided controversy with particular persons or orders of men in the government;
but it was his misfortune to arrive when parties ran high and the opposition
had been violent. With great skill in the art of government, it might not have
been impossible for him to have kept both parties in suspense, without
interesting himself on either side, until he had broke their respective
connections or the animosity had subsided; but, void of art, with great
integrity, he attached himself to that party, which appeared to him to be
right, and made the other his irreconcilable enemies. His negativing Mr. Cook,
when chose to the council, was no more than what he had (...) undoubted right
to do by charter, but the refusal to accept him as speaker; perhaps, was
impolitic, the country in general supposing it to be an invasion of the rights
of the house and it would have been less exceptionable to have dissolved them
immediately, which he had a right to do, than to dissolve them after an
unsuccessful attempt to enforce his negative when his right was doubtful in the
province, although not so with the attorney and solicitor general, who
supposed the house of representatives claimed a privilege which the house of
commons did no^. The leading men in the house of representatives did not think
so. That point had not been in question in England since the reign of King
Charles the second, when it was rather avoided than determined, and it was not
certain that the house of commons in the reign of King George the first would
more readily have given up the point than their predecessors in the time of
King Charles. The house, in the other parts of the controversy, had less to say
for themselves, and, with respect to the attempts upon his military authority,
were glad to be excused by an acknowledgment of their having been in the wrong.
The clipping his salary which, at the highest, would no more than decently
support him, was highly resented by him, and I have heard his friends say, that
he would have remained in the government and waited the decision of the other
points, if the two hundred pounds, equal to about fifty pounds sterling, the
deduction made, had been restored. "I must acquaint you that another thing,
that gives great offense to the ministry, is that they hear the governor is
made uneasy in his government and yet they receive no complaints of his
misconduct or male administration. Colonel Shute is known at court and at the
offices of state under the character of a very worthy gentleman, and one of a
singular good temper, fitted to make any people happy that are under his
command. When therefore they find the contrary in New England, they conclude
from it that we would have no governor at all from hence, but want to be
independent of the crown. Now though this be a strained and most injurious
inference, yet they will not easily be persuaded out of it. I could not satisfy my
conscience without mentioning this article, though I am sensible it will afford
a handle to my enemies to reproach me as minding the governor's interest more
than the country's." Dummer's letter 23d April 1721. "The affairs of the
country are, in the opinion of all men here, in desperate circumstances. I was
last night in company with the governor who has laid his memorial before the
board of trade, where it was maintained that the conduct of the assembly in the
affair of the militia was no less than high treason by the laws of England, as
appeared to them by their own printed votes. Their report will in a day or two
be laid before the regency, and what issue it will have there I will not
prophesy. The governor showed me the printed votes with regard to the
dedication of the theses of Harvard college, at which I could not but stand
amazed. I see no hopes of saving the country unless the next general assembly
will disavow the proceedings of the last. The cry of the city here runs
exceedingly against you, and they revive the story of 1641. The governor, I
assure you, grieves and pities you, but knows not how to help you. The blame of
this whole affair is laid here to Mr. C -- and one or two more who, under the
notion of patriots, are like to be the instruments of the loss of the which is
one of the dearest things to you in the world. In what light they will appear
to posterity they will do well to consider. What remains is only to condole
with you the dark state of your affairs." Extract of a letter from Mr. Neale
author of the history of New England.


UNDER an absolute monarch the people are without spirit, wear their chains
despairing of freedom. A change of masters is the sum of their hopes and, after
insurrections and convulsions, they still continue slaves. In a government
founded upon the principle of liberty as far as government and liberty can
consist, such are the sweets of liberty, that we often see attempts for a
greater degree of it than will consist with the established constitution,
although anarchy, the greatest and worst of tyrannies may prove the
consequence, until the eyes of the people are opened and they see the necessity
of returning to their former happy state of government and order.

THE lieutenant governor took the chair, under the disadvantage of being
obliged to maintain the same cause which had forced his predecessor out of it.
Personal prejudice against the governor was the cause of assuming rights
reserved by charter to the crown. The cause now ceased, but power once assumed
is not willingly parted with. Mr. Dummer had demeaned himself very discretely.
His attachment to the cause of the governor lost him some friends and proved a
prejudice to him and to his successors, for it had been usual to make an annual
grant or allowance to the lieutenant governor, in consideration of his being at
hand, or as they expressed it, ready to serve the province, in case of the
governor's absence, but, after the two or three first years from his arrival,
they withheld it. Without any mention of the unhappy state of affairs, in a
short speech to the two houses, he let them know that he would concur with them
in every measure for his majesty's service and the good of the province. An
aged senator, Mr. Sewall, the only person alive who had been an assistant under
the old charter, addressed himself to the lieutenant governor with great
gravity and simplicity, in primitive s^^ile, which, however, obsolete, may be
worth preserving. "If your honor and the honorable board please to give me
leave I would speak a word or two, upon this solemn occasion. Although the
unerring providence of God has brought your honor to the chair of government,
in a cloudy and tempestuous season, yet you have this for your encouragement,
that the people you have to do with are a part of the Israel of God, and you
may expect to have of the prudence and patience of Moses communicated to you,
for your conduct. It is evident, that our almighty faviour counseled the first
planters to remove hither and settle here and they dutifully followed his
advice, and therefore he will never leave nor forsake them, nor theirs; so that
your honor must needs be happy in sincerely seeking, their happiness and
welfare, which your birth and education will incline you to do. Difficilia que
pulehra. I promise my self, that they who sit at this board will yield their
faithful advice to your honor, according to the duty of their place."

THE house thought it necessary to take immediate measures for their defense
and vindication in England. The governor had mentioned nothing more to the
lieut, governor than, that he was embarked and intended to return to his
government early in the fall. This, the lieutenant governor communicated to the
council and the council to the house. They sent a committee immediately to the
lieutenant governor, to pray him to inform them what he knew of the governor's
intended voyage; but he could tell them no more. They then appointed another
committee "to prepare and lay before the house what they think proper to be
done in this eritical juncture, in their just and necessary vindication at the
court at home," and a ship, Capt. Clark, then ready to sail for London, was
detained until the dispatches were ready. Anthony Sanderson, a merchant of
London, had been recommended by Mr. Popple, of the plantation office, in a
letter to the speaker, as a proper person for the province agent. To him the
house sent their papers, to be improved as they should order. In November 1722
died at Salem Daniel Epps, Esquire of the council.




AMONG the other instances of additional power to the house they had, by
degrees, acquired from the governor and council the keys of the treasury and no
moneys could be issued without the vote of the house for that purpose. This is
no more than some colonies, without charters claim and enjoy, but by the
charter, all moneys are to be paid out of the treasury 'by warrant' from the
governor with advice and consent of the council. The right of the house to
originate all acts and orders for raising moneys from the people and to
appropriate such moneys to such services as they thought proper, was not
disputed, but they went further and would not admit that payment should be made
for such services until they had judged whether they were well performed and
had passed a special order for such payment. Thus they kept every officer
dependent, and Walton, because he had not observed their orders to go to
Penobscot, but had conformed to the governor's orders, from whom he derived all
the authority he had to march any where, was denied his pay. Other matters were
alleged against Walton in the course of the dispute, but this seems to have
been the principal.

THE exposed state which the frontiers must have been in, if the forces had
been drawn off, and they could not be kept there without pay, induced the
lieutenant governor to dismiss Walton and to appoint Thomas Westbrooke colonel
and commander in chief, whereupon an establishment was settled by the house,
praemiums were granted for Indian scalps and prisoners, and an end was put to
the session.

THE Indians, we have observed, were instigated by the French to begin the war.
The old men were averse to it. Ralle, with difficulty, prevailed upon the
Norridgewocks. The Penobscots were still more disinclined and, after
hostilities began, expressed their desires of an accommodation. The St.
Francois Indians, who lived upon the borders of Canada, and the St. John's as
also the Cape-Sable Indians were so remote as not to fear the destruction of
their villages by the English. They mixed with the Norridgewocks and Penobscots
and made the war general. In the latter part of July the enemy surprised Canso
and other harbors near to it and took 16 or 17 sail of fishing vessels, all
belonging to the Massachusetts. Governor Phillips happened to be at Canso and
caused two sloops to be manned, partly with volunteer sailors from merchants
vessels which were loading with fish, and sent them, under the command of John
Eliot of Boston and John Robinson of Cape Ann, in quest of the enemy. Eliot, as
he was ranging the coast, espied seven vessels in a harbor called Winnepaug
and concealed all his men, except four or five, until he came near to one of
the vessels, which had about 40 Indians aboard who were in expectation of
another prize falling into their hands. As Soon as he was within hearing, they
hoisted their pendants and called out, strike English dogs and come aboard for
you are all prisoners. Eliot answered that he would make all the haste he
could. Finding he made no attempt to escape, they began to fear a tartar and
cut their cable, with intent to run ashore, but he was too quick for them and
immediately clapped them aboard. For about half an hour they made a brave
resistance, but, at length, some of them jumping into the hold, Eliot threw his
hand grenades after them, which made such havoc, that all which remained
alive took to the water, where they were a fair mark for the English shot. From
this or a like action, probably took rise, a common expression among English
soldiers and sometimes English hunters who, when they have killed an Indian,
make their boast of having killed a black duck. Five only reached the shore.

ELIOT received three bad wounds and several of the men were wounded and one
killed. Seven vessels, with several hundred quintals of fish, and fifteen of
the captives were recovered from the enemy. They had sent many of the prisoners
away and nine they had killed in cold blood. The Nova Scotia Indians had the
character of being more savage and cruel than the other nations.

ROBINSON retook two vessels and killed several of the enemy. Five other
vessels the Indians had carried so far up the bay, above the harbor of
Malagash, that they were out of his reach and he had not men sufficient to
land, the enemy being very numerous.

THE loss of so many men enraged them and they had determined to revenge
themselves upon the poor fishermen, above twenty of whom yet remained
prisoners, at Malagash harbor, and they were all destined to be sacrificed to
the manes of the stain Indians. The powowing and other ceremonies were
performing, when Capt. Blin, in a sloop, appeared off the harbor and made the
signal or sent in a token which had been agreed upon between him and the
Indians, when he was their prisoner, should be his protection. Three of the
Indians went aboard his vessel and agreed for the ransom both of vessels and
captives, which were delivered to him and the ransom paid. In his way to Boston
he made prisoners of three or four Indians near Cape-Sables and, about the same
time, Capt. Southack took two canoes with three Indians in each, one of which
was killed and the other five brought to Boston.

THIS Nova Scotia affair proved very unfortunate for the Indians. The
Massachusetts frontiers afforded them less plunder, but they were in less
danger. On the 16th of September, between four and five hundred Indians were
discovered upon Arowsick island, by a party of soldiers employed as a guard to
the inhabitants while at their labor. They immediately made an alarm, by
firing some of their guns, and the inhabitants of the island, by this means,
had sufficient notice to shelter themselves in the fort or garrison house and
also to secure part of their goods, before the enemy came upon them.

THEY fired, some time, upon the fort and killed one man, after which they fell
to destroying the cattle, about (...) head, and plundering the houses, and set
fire to 26 houses, the flames of which the owners beheld from the fort,
lamenting the insufficiency of their numbers to sally (...) and (...) the
mischief.

THESE were the Indians which put a stop to the march to Penobscot. Page 281.
There were in the fort about 40 soldiers, under Capt. Robert Temple and Capt.
Penhallow. Capt. Temple was a gentleman, who came over from Ireland with an
intent to settle the country with a great number of families from the north of
Ireland, but this rupture with the Indians broke his measures and, having been
an officer in the army, Col. Shute gave him a command here. Walton and Harman,
upon the first alarm, made all the dispatch they could and, before night, came
to the island in two whaleboats with 30 men more. With their joint force the
English made an attempt to repel the enemy, but the disproportion in numbers
was such that, in a bush fight or behind trees, there was no chance and the
English retreated to the fort. The enemy drew off the same night and, passing
up Kennebeck riyer, met the province sloop and firing upon her killed the
master, Bartholomew Stretton, and then made an attempt upon Richmond fort, and
from thence went to the village of Norridgewock, their head quarters.

A man was killed at Berwick, which was the last mischief done by the enemy
this first year of the war.

WHEN the general court met in May, Col. By field, who had been repeatedly
refused by Gov. Shute, being this year again chosen to the council, the lieut.
(...) thought fit to (...) consent also.
next year, no advice had been received of any measures taken by the governor
in England. The house chose their speaker and placed him in the chair without
presenting him to the lieut. governor, which he took no notice of. They
continued their claim to a share in the direction of the war and insisted, that
if any proposals of peace should be made by the Indians, they should be
communicated to the house and approved by them. They repeated also a vote for a
committee of the two houses, to meet in the recess of the court and to settle
plans for managing the affairs of the war, which the lieut. governor was to
carry into execution, but in this the council again nonconcurred.

The lieutenant governor's seal being affixed to a belt given to the delegates
from the Iroquois, who came to Boston to a conference, the house passed a
resolve "that the seal be defaced and that the seal of the province be affixed
to the belt, as the committee of the two houses have agreed," and sent the
resolve to the council for their concurrence. The council, instead of
concurring, voted, as well they might, that the resolve contained just matter
of offense and therefore they desired the house to withdraw it. This produced
another resolve from the house still higher, "that the affixing a private seal,
This was an equivocal expression. It might be called the governor's private
seal in contradistinction to the king's seal, of which he is the keeper, but it
was used by the governor as a public person, all military commissions,
treaties, etc. being in the name of the governor and under his own seal, by
virtue of authority derived from the crown. Civil commissions and other
instruments, in the king's name and with the governor's rest, have the king's
seal, appointed by him for the province, affixed to them.
contrary to the agreement of a committee, was a high affront and indignity to
them, and therefore they very justly expected the advisers and promoters
thereof to be made known to the house. There was a double error in this
transaction of the house, the lieutenant governor having the unquestionable
right of ordering the form of proceeding in treaties or conferences of this
kind, and the house having no authority to direct the king's seal to be applied
to any purpose, the governor being the keeper of the seal, and although in
common parlance, called the province seal, which I suppose led to the mistake
yet is properly speaking the king's seal for the use of the province.

THE lieutenant governor took no public exception to any votes of the house
this session, which we must presume to be owing to his apprehensions that, in a
short time, a full consideration would be had in England of matters of the same
nature during Col. Shute's administration. Before the next session of the
general court (Oct. 23d) the agent Mr. Sanderson transmitted to the speaker,
copy of the heads of complaint exhibited against the house for encroaching upon
his majesty's prerogative in seven instances.

"1st, IN their behavior with respect to the trees reserved for masts for the
royal navy.

2d, FOR refusing to admit the governor's negative upon their choice of a
speaker.

3d, ASSUMING power in the appointment of days for fasting and thanksgiving.

4th, ADIOURNING themselves to a distant day by their own act.

5th, DISMANTLING forts and directing the artillery and warlike stores to other
than the custody of the captain general or his order.

6th, SUSPENDING military officers and refusing their pay.

7th, APPOINTING committees of their own to direct and muster his majesty's
forces."

THE house voted the complaint groundless, and ordered one hundred pounds
sterling to be remitted Sanderson, to enable him to employ council to justify
the proceedings of the house. The vote being sent to the council was
unanimously nonconcurred.

THE house then prepared an answer to the several articles of complaint and an
address to the king, to which they likewise desired the concurrence of
approbation of the council, but they were disapproved and sent back with a vote
or message that "in faithfulness to the province and from a tender regard to
the house of representatives, the board cannot but declare and give as their
opinion, that the answer is not likely to recommend this government and people
to the grace and favor of his majesty, but on the contrary, has a tendency to
render us obnoxious to the royal displeasure."

THE house, however, ordered the answer and address to be signed by the speaker
and forwarded to Mr. Sanderson, to be improved as they should order.

THE council, thereupon prepared a separate address to his majesty and
transmitted it to the governor, The nonconcurrence of council, with these
measures of the house, was resented and the house desired to know what part of
their answer had a tendency to render the government and people obnoxious. Here
the council, very prudently, avoided engaging in controversy with the house.
"It was not their design to enter into a detail, but only to intimate their
opinion, that considering the present circumstances of affairs, some better
method might be taken than an absolute justification." They had shown their
dissatisfaction with the conduct of the house, in every article which furnished
matter for the complaint, except that of the speaker, and did all in their
power to prevent them, but, now this conduct was impeached, the arguments used
by the council in a dispute with the house might be sufficient to justify the
council and set their conduct in an advantageous light, but they would
strengthen and increase the prejudice against the country in general. This was
an instance of public spirit worthy of imitation.

THE house then resolved "that being apprehensive that the liberties and
privileges of the people are struck at by governor Shute's memorial to his
majesty, it is therefore their duty as well as interest to send some suitable
person or persons from hence, to use the best method that may be to defend the
constitution and charter privileges." They had no power over the treasury,
without the council, and therefore sent this vote for concurrence, but it was
refused and the following vote passed in council instead of it. "The liberties
and privileges of his majesty's good subjects of this province being in danger,
at this present critical conjuncture of our public affairs at the court of
Great Britain, and it being our duty as well as interest to use the best
methods that may be in defense of the same, and whereas Jeremiah Dummer, Esquire
the agent of this court, is a person of great knowledge and long experience in
the affairs of the province, and has greatly merited of this people, by his
printed defense of the charter, and may reasonably be supposed more capable of
serving us, in this exigence, than any person that may be sent from hence,
voted, that the said Mr. agent Dummer be directed to appear in behalf of the
province, for the defense of the charter, according to such instructions as he
shall receive from this court." This vote plainly intimated, that by the late
conduct of the house the charter of the province was in danger, but the house
seem to have overlooked it and concurred with an amendment, "that Mr. Sanderson
and a person sent from hence be joined with Mr. Dummer." The council agreed
that a person should be sent home, but refused to join Sanderson. Before the
house passed upon this amendment, they made a further trial to obtain an
independency of the council and voted, that there should be paid out of the
treasury, to the speaker of the house, three hundred pounds sterling, to be
applied as the house should order. Near three weeks were spent in altercations
upon this subject, between the council and the house, at length it was agreed
that one hundred pounds should be at the disposal of the house and two hundred
to be paid to such agents as should be chosen by the whole court. The house
were in arrears to Sanderson, which they wanted this money to discharge, and
then were content to drop him. I have a paper which I suppose was given to the
lords chief justices and the attorney and solicitor general, before the
draught of the province charter was settled, and which contains a variety of
proposals for alterations and additions, each of which are marked in the margin
with a hand that resembles Sir George Treby's, some are said to be already
done, others marked Qu. some intended and some to be proposed, among the latter
I find the following. "The assembly or representatives of the people to have
power to appoint and maintain agents on their behalf in England, allowing them
six hundred pounds per annum, though the governor should not consent thereunto."


THE manner of choosing civil officers had been by a joint vote or ballot of
council and house. This gives a great advantage to the house who are four times
the number of the board. But to be more sure of the person the majority of the
house were found of, they chose Mr. Cook for agent and sent the vote to the
board for concurrence. The council non concurred and insisted on proceeding in
the usual way, which the house were obliged to comply with. The choice,
however, fell upon the same person and he failed for London the 18th of January.

COL. Westbrook with 230 men set out from Kenebeck the 11th February this year,
with small vessels and whale-boats, and ranged the coast, as far east as Mount
Desert. Upon his return, he went up Penobscot river where, about 32 miles from
the anchoring place of the transports, he discovered the Indian castle or
fortress, walled with stockadoes, about 70 feet in length and 50 in breadth,
which enclosed 23 well finished wigwams. Without, was a church 60 feet long and
30 broad, very decently finished within and without, also a very commodious
house in which the priest dwelt. All was deserted, and all the success
attending this expedition was the burning the village. The forces returned to
St. Georges the 20th of March.

CAPTAIN Harman was intended, with about 120 men, for Norridgewock, at the same
time, and set out the 6th Feb. but the rivers were so open and the ground so
full of water, that they could neither pass by water, nor land and, having with
great difficulty reached to the upper falls of Amascoggin, they divided into
scouting parties and returned without seeing any of the enemy.

AN attempt was made to engage the six nations and the Scatacook Indians in the
war, and commissioners William Tailer and Spencer Phips, Esq^^
were sent to Albany empowered to promise a bounty for every scalp if they
would go out against the enemy, but they had no further success than a proposal
to send a large number of delegates to Boston.

THE commissioners for Indian affairs in Albany had the command of the six
nations and would not have suffered them to engage in war if they had inclined
to it. The Massachusetts commissioners were amused and a large sum was drawn
from the government in valuable presents to no purpose. No less than sixty
three Indians came to Boston, August 21st, the general court then sitting. A
very formal conference was held with them, in the presence of the whole court,
but the delegates would not involve their principals in war; if any of their
young men inclined to go out, with any parties of the English, they were at
liberty and might do as they pleased. Two young fellows offered their service
and were sent down to fort Richmond on Kenebeck river. Capt. Heath the
commander ordered his ensign (Coleby) and three of the garrison to go up the
river with them. After they had traveled a league from the fort they judged by
the smell of fire, that a party of the enemy must be near. The Mohawks would go
no further until they were strengthened by more men and sent to the fort for a
whaleboat, with as many men as she could carry. Thirteen men were sent and,
soon after they had joined the first party, about thirty of the enemy appeared
and, after a smart skirmish, fled to their canoes, carrying off two of their
company dead or so badly wounded as to be unable to walk, and leaving their
packs behind. Coleby, who commanded the party, was killed and two others
wounded. The Mohawks had enough of the service and could not be prevailed on to
tarry any longer and were sent back to Boston.

SMALL parties of the enemy kept the frontiers in constant terror and now and
then met with success.

IN April, they killed and took eight persons at Scarborough and Falmouth.
Among the dead, was the sergeant of the fort, Chubb, whom the Indians took to
be capt. Harman and no less than 15 of them aimed at him, at the same time, and
lodged eleven bullets in his body. This was lucky for the rest, many more
escaping to the fort than would otherwise have done. In May, they killed two at
or near Berwick, one at Wells and two traveling between York and Wells. In
June, they came to Roger Dering's garrison, at Scarborough, killed his wife and
took three of his children, as they were picking berries, and killed two other
persons. In July, Dominicus Jordan, a principal inhabitant and proprietor of
Saco, was attacked in his field, by five Indians, but keeping his gun
constantly presented, without firing, they did not care to close in with him
and after receiving three wounds he recovered the garrison. In August, the
enemy appeared westward and, the 13th killed two men at Northfield and, the
next day, a father and four of his sons, making hay in a meadow at Rutland,
were surprised by about a dozen Indians. The father escaped in the bushes, but
the four sons fell a prey to the enemy. Mr. Willard, the minister of Rutland,
being abroad, armed, fell into their hands also, having killed one and wounded
another before he was stain himself. The last of the month, they killed a man
at Cochecho and killed or carried away another at Arundel. The eleventh of
October, about 70 of the enemy attacked the blockhouse above Northfield and
killed and wounded four or five of the English. Col. Stoddard marched
immediately with 50 men from Northampton to reinforce Northfield, 50 men
belonging to Connecticut having been drawn off the day before. Justice should
be done to the government of Connecticut. Their frontiers were covered by the
Massachusetts and, if they had not contributed to the charge of the war, it was
not probable that the Massachusetts people would have drawn in and left
Connecticut frontiers exposed. Nevertheless, they generally, at the request of
the Massachusetts, sent forces, every year during the summer, in this and former
wars, and paid their wages, the provisions being furnished by this government.

IN October, the enemy surprised one Cogswell and a boat's crew which were with
him at Mount Desert. December 25th, about sixty Indians laid siege to the fort
at Muscongus or St. Georges. They surprised and took two of the garrison, who
informed them the fort was in a miserable condition, but the chief officer
there, -- Kennedy, being a bold resolute man, the garrison held out until Col.
Westbrook arrived, with force sufficient to scatter the besiegers and put them
to flight.

THIS summer also, July 14th, the Indians surprised the Capt. Watkins, who was
on a fishing voyage at Canso, and killed him and three or four of his family
upon Durell's island.

DOUGLASS and other writers applaud the administration for conducting this war
with great skill. The French could not join the Indians, as in formers wars.
Parties of the English kept upon the march, backwards and forwards, but saw no
Indians. Capt. Moulton went up to Norridgewock and brought away some books and
papers of the jesuit Ralle, which discovered that the French were the
instigators of the Indians to the war, but he saw none of the enemy. He came
off without destroying their houses and church. Moulton was a discreet, as well
as brave, man, and probably imagined this instance of his moderation would
provoke, in the Indians, the like spirit toward the English. Doctor Increase
Mather, who made a considerable figure in the first part of our history, died
at Boston August 23d, 1723, in the 85th year of his age. He had been a preacher
66 years, and a minister of the same church 62 years together, was many years
president of Harvard college, but rendered himself most conspicuous in the
character of agent for the province in England, where his labors and services
for several years were very great and his reward very small. August 25. A
Nipmug Indian, John Quittamug, came to Boston and was entertained by several
gentlemen who accounted him a great prodigy. Forty years before, he had been
remarked as an old Indian and must now have been above 112 years of age. He
constantly affirmed that in the year 1630, upon a message from the English that
they were in want of corn, soon after their arrival, he went with his father to
Boston and carried from the Nipmug country a bushel and an half of corn all the
way upon his back, that there was then only one cellar began in the town and
that somewhere near the common. He was in good health, his understanding and
memory entire, and traveled on foot 10 miles a day. He lived near the town of
Woodstock. His journey to Boston proved as fatal to him as old Thomas Parr's
journey to London, surviving it a very short time after his return home, having
been feasted by some of the principal gentlemen here as Parr had been at London.




THIS month, news was brought to Boston of the loss of Capt. Josiah Winslow
Capt. Winslow was a young gentleman who had just left the college, but having a
mind formed for action engaged in the service of his country and lost his life.
His father was then of the council. His grandfather, for many years, and his
great grandfather for two years, were governors of Plymouth colony. The latter,
as we observed in the first part of our history, died a commissioner under
Cromwell. General Winslow, who had the command of the provincial forces at Fort
Edward in 1757. is younger brother to Capt, Winslow and possesses the same
martial spirit,
and 13 of his company, belonging to the fort at St. George's river. There went
out 17 men in two whaleboats, April 30. The Indians, it seems, watched their
motions and waited the most convenient time and place to attack them. The next
day, as they were upon their return, they found themselves, on a sudden,
surrounded with 30 canoes, whose complement must be an hundred Indians. They
attempted to land, but were intercepted, and nothing remained but to fell their
lives as dear as they could. They made a gallant defense, and the bravery of
the captain was, in an especial manner, applauded. Every Englishman was killed.
Three Indians, I suppose of those called the Cape-Ann Indians, who were of the
company, made their escape and carried to the fort the melancholy news.

ENCOURAGED by this success, the enemy made a still greater attempt, by water,
seized two shallops at the Isles of Shoals and, afterward, other fishing
vessels in other harbors and, among the rest, a large schooner with two swivel
guns, which they manned and cruized about the coast. A small force was thought
sufficient to conquer these raw sailors and the lieutenant governor
commissioned Doctor Iackson, of the province of Main, in a small schooner with
20 men, and Silvanus Lakeman, of Ipswich, in a shallop with 16 men, to go in
quest of them. They soon came up with them and, not long after, returned with
their rigging much damaged by the swivel guns, and Iackson and several of his
men wounded, and could give no other account of the enemy than that they had
gone into Penobscot.

THE Seahorse man of war Capt. Durrell, being then upon the Boston station, the
lieutenant, master and master's mate, each of them took the command of a small
vessel with 30 men each, and went after the Indians, but, it is probable, they
were soon tired of this new business, for they were not to be found, nor do we
meet with any further intelligence about them. They took it vessels, with 45
men, 22 of whom they killed, and carried 23 into captivity.

AT Groton they killed one man and left dead one of their own number. August
3d, they killed three, wounded one and made another prisoner at Rutland. The
6th, four of them came upon a small house in Oxford, which was built under a
bill. They made a breach in the roof and, as one of them was attempting to
enter, he received a shot in his belly, from a courageous woman, the only
person in the house, but who had two muskets and two pistols charged and was
prepared for all four, but they thought fit to retreat carrying off the dead or
wounded man. The 16th a man was killed at Berwick, another wounded and a third
carried away. The 26th, one was killed and another wounded at Northampton and
the 27th, the enemy came to the house of John Hanson, one of the people called
quakers, at Dover, and killed or carried away his wife, maid and six children,
the man himself being at the friends meeting. Hanson went afterward to (...)
and redeemed his wife, three of his children and the maid. Two of his sons were
killed, a daughter of 17 years of age he was obliged to leave in their hands.
The Indians would permit him to see and converse with her, but would not part
with her upon any terms. Distressing enough!


DISCOURAGED with the ineffectual attempts to intercept the enemy, by parties
of our forces marching upon the back of the frontiers, another expedition was
resolved upon, in order to surprise them in their principal village at
Norridgewock.

FOUR companies, consisting in the whole of 208 men, were ordered up the river
Kenebeck, under Capt. Harman, Captain Moulton, Captain Bourn and lieutenant
Bean. Three Indians, of the six nations, were prevailed with to accompany our
forces. The different accounts given by the French and English of this
expedition may afford some entertainment. Charlevoix, who I suppose was about
that time in Canada and might receive there or from thence the account given by
the Indians themselves, relates it in this manner. "The 23d of August, 12th old
style.
1724, eleven hundred men, part English, part Indians, came up to Norridgewock.
The thickets, with which the Indian village was surrounded, and the little care
taken by the inhabitants to prevent a surprise, caused that the enemy were not
discovered, until the very instant when they made a general discharge of their
guns and their shot had penetrated all the Indian wigwams. There were not above
fifty fighting men in the village. These took to their arms and ran out in
confusion, not with any expectation of defending the place against an enemy who
were already in possession, but to favor the escape of their wives, their old
men and children, and to give them time to recover the other side of the river,
of which the English had not then possessed themselves.

"THE noise and tumult gave father Ralle notice of the danger his converts were
in. Not intimidated, he went to meet the enemy, in hopes to draw all their
attention to himself and secure his stock at the peril of his own life. He was
not disappointed. As Soon as he appeared, the English set up a great shout,
which was followed by a shower of shot, and he fell down dead near to a cross
which he had erected in the midst of the village, seven Indians, who
accompanied him to shelter him with their own bodies, falling dead round about
him. Thus died this kind shepherd, giving his life for his sheep, after a
painful mission of thirty seven years. The Indians, who were all in the
greatest consternation at his death, immediately took to flight and crossed the
river, some swimming and others fording. The enemy pursued them, until they had
entered far into the woods, where they again gathered together to the number of
an hundred and fifty. He must mean men, women and children, if there were but
(...) fighting men (...)
Although more than two thousand shot had been fired upon them, yet there were no
more than thirty killed and fourteen wounded. The English, finding they had no
body left to resist them, fell first to pillaging and then burning the wigwams.
They spared the church, so long as was necessary for their shamefully profaning
the sacred vessels and the adorable body of Jesus Christ, and then set fire to
it. At length they withdrew, with so great precipitation that it was rather a
flight, and they seemed to be struck with a perfect panick. The Indians
immediately returned to their village, where they made it their first care to
weep over the body of their holy missionary, whilst their women were looking
out for herbs and plants for healing the wounded. They found him shot in a
thousand places, scalped, his skull broke to pieces with the blows of hatchets,
his mouth and eyes full of mud, the bones of his legs fractured and all his
members mangled an hundred different ways. Thus was a priest treated in his
mission, at the foot of a cross, by those very men who have so strongly
exaggerated the pretended inhumanity of our Indians, who have never made such
carnage upon the dead bodies of their enemies. After his converts had raised up
and oftentimes kissed the precious remains, so tenderly and so justly beloved
by them, they buried him in the same place where, the evening before, he had
celebrated the sacred mysteries, namely, where the altar stood, before the
church was burnt."

BESIDES the great error in the number of the English forces, there are many
embellishments in this relation in favor of the Indians and injurious to the
English. Not satisfied with the journal alone which was given in by Capt.
Harman, I took from Capt. Moulton as minute and circumstantial an account as he
could give of this affair.

THE forces left Richmond fort, on Kennebeck river, the 8th of August, O. S.
The 9th, they arrived at Taconick, where they left their whaleboats, with a
lieutenant and 40 of the 208 men to guard them. With the remaining forces, the
10th, they began their march, by land, for Norridgewock. The same evening, they
discovered and fired upon two Indian women, one of them, the daughter of the
well known Bomazeen, they killed, the other, his wife, they took prisoner. From
her, they received a full account of the state of Norridgewock. The 12th, a
little after noon, they came near to the village. It was supposed that part of
the Indians might be at their cornfieldsd, which were at some distance, and,
therefore, it was thought proper to divide this small army. Harman, with about
80 men, chose to go by the way of the fields, and Moulton, with as many more,
were left to march strait to the village, which about 3 of clock suddenly
opened upon them. There was not an Indian to be seen, being all in their
wigwams. Our men were ordered to advance softly and to keep a profound silence.
At length, an Indian came out of one of the wigwams and, as he was making
water, looked round him and discovered the English close upon him. He
immediately gave the war whoop and ran in for his gun. The whole village,
consisting of about 60 warriors, besides old men, women and children, took the
alarm, and the warriors ran to meet the English, the rest fled to save their
lives. Moulton, instead of suffering his men to fire at random through the
wigwams, charged every man not to fire, upon pain of death, until the Indians
had discharged their guns. It happened as he expected; in their surprise they
overshot the English and not a man was hurt. The English then discharged in
their turn and made great slaughter, but every man still kept his rank.

The Indians fired a second volley and immediately fled toward the river. Some
jumped into their canoes, but had left their paddles in their houses, others
took to swimming and some of the tallest could ford the river, which was about
60 feet over, and, the waters being low, it was no where more than six feet
deep. The English pursued, some furnished themselves with paddles and took to
the Indian canoes, which were left, others wanted into the river. They soon
drove the Indians from their canoes, into the river, and shot them in the
water, and they conjectured that not more than fifty of the whole village
landed on the other side, and that some of them were killed before they reached
the woods.

THE English, then, returned to the town. Where they found the jesuit, in one
of the wigwams, firing upon a few of our men, who had not pursued after the
enemy. He had an English boy in the wigwam with him, about 14 years of age, who
had been taken about 6 months before. This boy he shot through the thing and,
afterward, stabbed in the body, but, by the care of the surgeons, he
recovered. I find this act of cruelty in the account given by Harman upon oath.
Moulton had given orders not to kill the jesuit, but, by his firing from the
wigwam, one of our men being wounded, a lieutenant, Jacques, stove open the door
and shot him through the head. Jacques excused himself to his commanding
officer, alleging that Ralle was loading his gun, when he entered the wigwam,
and declared that he would neither give nor take quarter. Moulton allowed that
some answer was made by Ralle which provoked Jacques, but doubted whether it was
the same as reported, and always expressed his disapprobation of the action.
Mog. a famous old chief among the Indians, was shut up in another wigwam and
firing from it killed one of the three Mohawks. His brother was so enraged that
he broke down the door and shot Mog dead. The English, in their rage, followed
and killed the poor squaw and two helpless children. Having cleared the village
of the enemy, they then fell to plundering and destroying the wigwams. The
plunder of an Indian town consisted of but a little corn, it being not far from
harvest, a few blankets, kettles, guns, and about three barrels of powder, all
which was brought away. New England puritans thought it no sacrilege to take
the plate from an idolatrous roman catholic church, which I suppose was all the
profaneness offered to the sacred vessels. There were some expressions of zeal
against idolatry, in breaking the crucifixes and other imagery which were found
there. When Sir Edmund Andros was governor, in 1688, in a voyage eastward in
the Rose frigate, he put in to Penobscot, and finding that Castine had fled he
entered his house and seized and brought away a quantity of arms, ammunition
and goods, which were lodged there for supplies to the Indian enemy, but an
altar with pictures and other ornaments he left untouched. This might cause
suspicions of his being a favorer of popety, but a good Protestant would not
have been ^ulpable for the same tenderness.
The church itself, a few years before, had been built by carpenters from
New England. Beaver and other Indian furs and skins set up the church, and a
zeal against a false religion destroyed the ornaments of it.

HARMAN and the men who went to the cornfields did not come up till near night,
when the action was over. They all, of both parties, lodged in the wigwams,
keeping a guard of 40 men. The next morning, they found 26 dead bodies, besides
that of the jesuit, and had one woman and three children prisoners. Among the
dead were Bomazeen, Mog, Job, Carabesett, Wissememet, and Bomazeen's son in
law, all noted war^^rs. They marched, early, for Taconick, being in some pain
for their men and whaleboats, but found all (...). Christian, one of the
Mohawks, was sent, or of his own accord returned, after they had begun their
march, and set fire to the wigwams and to the church and then joined the
company again, The 16th they all arrived at Richmond fort. Harman went to
Boston with the scalps, and, being the chief in command, was made a lieut.
colonel for an exploit in which Moulton was the principal actor, who had no
distinguishing reward, except the applause of the country in general. Capt.
Moulton, afterward, was, many years together, a member of the council, colonel
of a regiment in the expedition to Cape-Breton in 1745, and with reputation
sustained the first military and civil offices in the county of York. He died
at York, in the year 176^.
This has often been the case in much more important services. The Norridgewock
tribe never made any figure since this blow.

ENCOURAGED by this success, Col. Westbrook was ordered to march with 300 men
across from Kennebeck to Penobscot, which he performed with no other advantage
than exploring the country which, before, was little known. Other parties were
ordered up Amaseconti and Amarescoggin, and a second attempt was made upon
Norridgewock, but no Indians were to be found.

THE frontiers, however, continued to be infested. September the 6th, an
English party of fourteen went from Dunstable in search of two men who were
missing. About 30 Indians lay in wait and shot down six and took three
prisoners. A second party went out and lost two of their number. The western
frontier seems to have been better guarded, for, although often alarmed, they
were less annoyed.

discovered an Indian upon a point of land which joined to a great pond or
lake. They had some suspicion that he was set there to draw them into a snare
and that there must be many Indians near, and therefore laid down their packs,
that they might be ready for action, and then marched near two miles round the
pond to come at the Indian they had seen. The fellow remained, although it was
certain death to him and, when the English came within gun shot, discharged his
piece, which was loaded with beaver shot, and wounded Lovewell and one of his
men, and then immediately fell himself and was scalped. His name ought to have
been transmitted as well as that of M. Curtius who jumped into the gulf or
chasm, upon less rational grounds, to save his country.

THE Indians, who lay concealed, seized all the English packs, and then waited
their return at a place convenient for their own purpose. One of the Indians
being discovered, the rest, being about 80, rose, yelled and fired and then ran
on with their hatchets with great fury. The English retreated to the pond to
secure their rear, and, although so unequal in numbers, continued five or six
hours till night came on. Captain Lovewell, his lieutenant Farewell, and ensign
Robins were soon mortally wounded and, with five more were left dead on the
spot. Sixteen escaped and returned unhurt, but were obliged to leave eight of
their wounded companions in the woods without provisions, their chaplain, Mr.
Fry of Andover, was one, who had behaved with great bravery and scalped one
Indian in the heat of the action, but perished himself for want of relief.

One of the eight, afterward, came in to Berwick and another to Saco. This
misfortune discouraged scalping parties. But Indians, as well as English,
wished to be at peace. After Ralle's death, they were at liberty to follow
their inclinations. The Penobscot tribe, however, being best disposed, were
first founded. An Indian hostage and a captive were permitted, upon their
parole, to go home in the winter of 1724, and they came back to the fort at St.
George's the 9th of February, accompanied with two of the tribe, one a
principal sachem or chief. They brought an account that, at a meeting of the
Penobscots, it was agreed to make proposals of peace. The sachem or chief was
sent back, with the other Indian, and promised to return in 23 days and bring a
deputation, to consist of several other chiefs, with him, but Capt. Heath,
having gone out upon a march from Kennebeck, across the country, to Penobscot,
fell upon a deserted village of about 50 Indian houses, which he burned, but
saw none of the inhabitants. The Indians, who went from St. George's, knew
nothing of this action until they came home, and it seems to have discouraged
them from returning according to their promise, and the treaty, by this means,
was retarded. But upon new intimations, in June following, John Stoddard and
John Wainwright, Esq's were commissioned by the lieutenant governor and sent
down to St. George's, to treat with such Indians as should come in there and
settle preliminaries of peace.

A cessation of arms was agreed upon The treaty had like to have been prevented
by the indiscretion of the crew of an English floop. July 9th, as Ca^^in was at
anchor near Neskett, in a small bark, with an Indian boy and an English lad,
Samuel Trask of Salem, whom Castin had redeemed from the Indians. The English
firing upon the bark, Castin was obliged to quit her and with his two boys fled
into the woods. The master of the English vessel ca^ed to him and engaged to do
him no harm, if he would come back and trade with him, which was his business
there, and not only kept out a white flag but sent him a passport or safe
conduct in writing. Having by these assurances drawn him aboard his vessels
again with the two boys, they secured the captive and told Castin they would
give him a bag of biscuit for the ransom of the captive, but that the vessel
and every thing on board was lawful prize. He was obliged, with his Indian, to
quit the vessel, which he was told was a favor, and it seems was soon repented
of, for one of the English seized the Indian, upon which Castin fired and shot
the Englishman dead, and then made his escape with the Indian into the woods.
Castin's letter to Mr. Dummer, 23 July 17^7.
and four delegates came up, soon after, to Boston and signed a treaty of
peace, and, the next year, the lieutenant governor in person, attended by
gentlemen of the court and others, and the lieutenant governor of
New Hampshire, with gentlemen from that province, ratified the same at Falmouth
in Casco-bay. This treaty has been applauded as the most judicious which has
ever been made with the Indians. A long peace succeeded it. Besides Mr. Dummer,
lieut. governor of Massachusetts, John Wentworth, Esquire lieut. governor of
New Hampshire, and Paul Mascarene, Esquire one of the council and a commissioner of
the government of Nova Scotia, were parties to this treaty. In October 1725
died at Ipswich Samuel Appleton, Esquire of the council.


THE pacific temper of the Indians, for many years after, cannot be attributed
to any peculiar excellency in this treaty, there being no articles in it of any
importance, differing from former treaties. It was owing to the subsequent acts
of government in conformity to the treaty. The Indians had long been extremely
desirous of trading houses to supply them with necessaries and to take off
their furs, skins, etc. This was promised by governor Shute, at a conference,
but the general court, at that time, would make no provision for the
performance. Mr. Dummer promised the same thing. The court, then, made
provision for trading houses at St. George's, Kenebeck and Saco rivers, and the
Indians soon found that they were supplied with goods upon better terms than
they could have them from the French, or even from private English traders.
Acts or laws were made, at the same time, for restraining private trade with
the Indians, but the supplies, made by the province at a cheaper rate than
private traders could afford, would have broke up their trade without any other
provision, and laws would have signified little without that. Mr. Dummer
engaged that the Indians should be supplied with goods at as cheap rates as
they were sold in Boston. This was afterward construed favorably for the
government. The goods, being bought by wholesale, were sold to the Indians at
the retail price, in Boston, and a seeming profit, by the commissary's account,
accrued to the government; but, when the charge of trading houses,
truckmasters, garrisons, and a vessel employed in transporting goods was
deducted, the province was still a tributary to the Indians every year.
However, it was allowed to be a well judged measure, tended to preserve peace
and was more reputable than if a certain pension had been every year paid for
that purpose.

DELEGATES from all the tribes of Indians, particularly the Norridgewocks, not
having been present at this first treaty, another was thought necessary the
next year, when the former was renewed and ratified. It was most acceptable to
the Indians to hold their treaties near their own settlement and, in a proper
season of the year, it was an agreeable tour to the governors or commanders in
chief and the gentlemen accompanying them.

To bring this war to a close, we have passed over the other affairs of the
government for a year or two past. Soon after Mr. Cooke's arrival in London
governor Shute exhibited a second memorial against the house of
representatives, for matters transacted after he left the province. The
principal articles of complaint were the several orders relative to the forts
and forces, which, he says, the house had taken out of the hands of the lieut.
governor, and the affront offered to the lieut. governor in ordering his seal
to be effaced upon the belt of warnpum. Several other things seem to be brought
in to increase the resentment against them, as their choosing Mr. Cook, who had
been at the head of all the measures complained of in the first memorial, for
their agent; their refusing to confer with the council upon a money bill; their
endeavoring by their votes to lessen the members of the council in the esteem
of the people; their withholding his salary in his absence; and their assuming
more and more the authority of government into their hands. The council, in
this memorial, are also complained of, they having put their negative to the
vote for choosing Mr. Cook, and yet, afterward, joined in election with the
house, when they had reason to suppose, by the great superiority of the house
in number, that he would be the person.

MR. agent Dummer, who was to act jointly with Mr. Cook, made an attempt to
reconcile the governor to him, but he refused to see him, and the attempt
offended Mr. Cook also and occasioned warm discourse between him and Dummer,
which caused the latter to refuse to act in concert, especially as Mr. Cook
had shown him a private instruction from the house, by which their defense
against the charge of invading the royal prerogative was committed to Mr. Cook
and Mr. Sanderson, to the exclusion of Mr. Dummer.

AFTER diverse hearings upon the subject matter of the complaints, the reports
of the attorney and solicitor general, of the lords committee and, finally,
the determination of his majesty in council, were all unfavorable to the house
of representatives. Appendix.


THE several acts or votes of the house relative to the king's woods, and to
the forts and forces seem to have been generally deemed indefensible, the
agents were advised to acknowledge them to be so, and it was so far relied
upon, that they would be so acknowledged in the province, as that no special
provision was thought necessary for the regulation of their future conduct, the
charter being express and clear. But the governor's power to negative the
speaker and the time for which the house might adjourn were points not so
certain. What was called an explanatory charter was therefore thought
necessary, and such a charter accordingly passed the seals. By this charter,
the power of the governor to negative a speaker is expressly declared, and the
power of the house to adjourn themselves is limited to two days. With respect
to the latter, perhaps, this new charter may properly enough be called
explanatory, the governor having the power, by the principal charter, or
adjourning the assembly and yet, from the nature of the thing, it was necessary
that the house, a part of that assembly, should have the power of adjourning
themselves, for a longer or shorter time; but the power of negativing a speaker
seems to be a new article, wherein the charter is silent; so that whatever
right it might be apprehended the king had to explain his own patents, where
there was ambiguity, yet when an alteration is to be made in the charter, or a
new rule established in any point wherein the charter is silent, the acceptance
of the people, perhaps, is necessary. This seems to have been the reason of
leaving it to the option of the general court, either to accept or refuse the
explanatory charter. It was intimated at the same time that, if the charter
should be refused, the whole controversy between the governor and the house of
representatives would be carried before the parliament. Had the two points
mentioned in the explanatory charter, or the conduct of the house relative to
them, been all that was to be carried into parliament, the general court,
probably, would not have accepted this charter. They would have urged that it
was not certain that a house of commons would have determined that the king, by
his governor, had a right to negative the speaker of a house of representatives
in the colonies, especially as the attorney general had inferred this right
from the right of negative the speaker of the house of commons; but it was
their misfortune that in the other articles of complaint the house was
generally condemned in England, the ministry were highly incensed and it was
feared the consequence of a parliamentary enquiry would be an act to vacate the
charter of the (...). The temper of the house was much changed and, although
there were several members, who had been active in all the measures which
brought this difficulty upon the country, still resolute to risque all, rather
than by their own act give up any one privilege, yet a major vote was carried
in the house for accepting the charter, and in such terms as would induce one
to imagine it rather the grant of a favor than the deprivation of a right.
January 15. 1725. In the house of representatives. WHEREAS his honor the
lieutenant governor has laid before this court in their present session, for
their acceptance, an explanatory charter received from his grace the duke of
Newcastle, with a copy of his majesty's order in council concerning the same,
wherein his majesty has been pleased to confirm the charter granted by their
late majesty's king William and queen Mary, in which former charter there being
no express mention made relating to the choice of a speaker and the house's
power of adjourning, to both which points, in the said explanatory charter, his
majesty has been pleased to give particular directions. We his majesty's loyal
and dutiful subjects, being very desirous to signalize our duty and obedience,
which we at all times owe to his most excellent majesty, have and do hereby
accept of the said explanatory charter. and shall act in conformity thereto for
the future, not doubting but that we shall thereby recommend his majesty's
loyal and dutiful subjects, the inhabitants of this province, to his further
most gracious favor and protection. In council, Read and concurred. Consented
to, Wm. Dummer.
It has been said that the English are Islanders and therefore inconstant.
Transplanted to the continent they are, nevertheless, Englishmen. When we
reflect upon the many instances of frequent sudden changes, and from one
extreme to the other, in ancient times, in the parliament of England, we may
well enough expect, now and then, to meet with the like instances in the
assemblies of the English colonies. This was the issue of the unfortunate
controversy with governor Shute, unless we allow that it was the occasion also
of the controversy with his successor, which is not improbable.

THE governor was offended with Mr. Dummer, for receiving grants from the court
made to him for his service as commander in chief, it being expected that when
the governor is absent, with leave, his salary should be continued, one half of
which, by a royal instruction, is to be allowed to the lieutenant governor; but
the house took a more frugal method and made grants, of little more than one
half the governor's usual salary, to the lieutenant governor immediately, any
part of which he could very ill afford to spare from his own support. His
pacific measures and accommodation or suspension of some of the controverted
points might be another cause of coldness, at least, between the governor and
him.

ANOTHER affair occasioned a mark of royal displeasure upon the lieutenant
governor. Synods had been frequent under the first charter, either for
suppressing errors in principles, or immortalities in practice, or for
establishing or reforming church government and order, but under the new
charter no synod had ever been convened. A convention of ministers had been,
annually, held at the time for election of the council. This might have been in
many respects useful, but it was thought could not have that weight for
promoting any of the forementioned purposes which a synod convened and,
perhaps, their result ratified by the government, would have. There were diverse
ancient members in both houses who had not then lost their affection for the
platform, and an application To the very honorable William Dummer, Esquire lieut.
governor and commander in chief. To the honorable the counselors. To the
honored the representatives in the great and general court of his majesty's
province of the Massachusetts bay assembled and now sitting. A memorial and
address humbly presented. At a general convention of ministers from several
parts of the province at Boston, May 27. 1725. Considering the great and
visible decay of piety in the country and the growth of many miscarriages,
which we fear may have provoked the glorious Lord in a series of various
judgments wonderfully to distress us. Considering also the laudable example of
our predecessors to recover and establish the faith and order of the gospel in
the churches and provide, against what immoralities may threaten to impair
them, in the way of general synods convened for that purpose, and considering
that about forty five years have now rolled away since these churches have been
any such conventions. It is humbly desired that the honored general court would
express their concern for the interests of religion in the country, by calling
the several churches in the province to meet by their pastors and messengers in
a synod, and from thence offer their advice upon that weighty case which the
circumstances of the day do loudly call to be considered. -- What are the
miscarriages whereof we have reason to think the judgments of heaven, upon us,
call us to be more generally sensible, and what may be the most evangelical and
effectual expedients to put a stop unto those or the like miscarriages? This
proposel we humbly make in hopes that, if it be prosecuted, it may be followed
with many desirable consequences worthy the study of those whom God has made
and we are so happy to enjoy as the nursing fathers of our churches. Cotton
Mather, In the name of the ministers assembled in their general convention.
made by the ministers for calling a synod was granted in council, but the
house did not concur. Afterward, by a vote of both houses, it was referred to
the next session, to which the lieut. governor gave his consent. Opposition was
made by the episcopal ministers, but a doubt of success, in the province,
caused them to apply in England, I suppose to the bishop of London. (...)
acquaint you that the bishop of London has laid before the lords justices a
written authentic copy of our ministers memorial to the general court to
empower them to meet and act in a synod, consented to by the lieutenant
governor, and their excellencies are very much displeased with his conduct
herein. It is thought here that the clergy should not meet in so public and
authoritative a manner without the king's consent as head of the church, and
that it would be a bad precedent for dissenters here to ask the same privilege,
which, if granted, would be a sort of vying with the established church. It has
also been insinuated that this synod would have come to some resolutions to the
prejudice of the Church of England, if they had been permitted to convene.
However this may be, it is certainly my duty to apprize the assembly of it for
their better direction in the approaching session, when I suppose, the matter
will be resumed." Dummer's letter, 1st Sept. 1725.
The king being abroad, an instruction came from the lords justices to surcease
all proceedings and the lieutenant governor received a reprimand for giving his
consent to a vote of reference and neglecting to transmit an account of so
remarkable a transaction." A stop was put to any further proceeding in the
affair nor has any attempt for a synod been made since.

"I don't know when or on board what ship the governor intends to embark for
his government. He says he will not go but in a man of war, for fear of meeting
with a pirate, but as there is no prospect of a king's ship going this year to
any part of the continent, I believe, he will think better of it and take his
passage in Capt. Carry, who will fail in about a month." Dummer's letter, 23d
April 1727.
The principal cause of delay seems to have been the insufficiency of the
salary which had been granted for his support and the uncertainty whether the
assembly would make an addition to it. "Col. Shute having petitioned his
majesty in council to settle a suitable salary on him and all the succeeding
governors of New England, the lords of the privy council, instead of sending me
a written message to attend, as is usual in other cases, made a peremptory
order of the 18th of February last, requiring me to attend their board on the
Wednesday following and not to fail on any pretense whatsoever. When I came,
the lords sent for Col. Shute to go in by himself, and after, for me and Mr.
Newman, the agent for New Hampshire. They asked whether, if his majesty should
think fit to send Mr. Shute back again to his government, I believed the
country would receive and support him handsomely. To this I answered, that I
had no instructions upon this subject, but my private opinion was that they
would, for they who had lately in so dutiful a manner accepted the royal
explanatory charter would not fail to show a proper regard to any person whom
his majesty should please to send over as his representative, of which my lord
Townsend, particularly, expressed his satisfaction. There was not a word said
as to the quantum of the salary, but I find since it is stated at L.1000 sterling.
per annum for Massachusetts and 200 for New Hampshire, and the king will
recommend it to the two provinces under his sign manual." Dummer's let.


The duties granted by Barbados and the leeward islands upon their own produce,
to be disposed of by the crown, are the only instances of the kind in the
colonies. Iamaica is exempt. It was said in parliament, in the reign of Charles
the 2d, that this duty was consented to upon condition the planters should be
released from a duty of 40 with. sugar per head reserved when the king granted
the lands. Iamaica was chiefly disposed of by Cromwell, I suppose, free from
the like burden or charge.


THE earthquake on the 29th of October 1727, although not confined to the
Massachusetts, was so remarkable an event in providence that we may be excused
if we give a circumstantial account of it. About 40 minutes after ten at night,
when there was a serene sky and calm but sharp air, a most amazing noise was
heard, like to the roaring of a chimney when on fire, as some said, only beyond
comparison greater, others compared it to the noise of coaches upon pavements
and thought that of ten thousand together would not have exceeded it. The noise
was judged by some to continue about half a minute before the shock began,
which increased gradually and was thought to have continued the space of a
minute before it was at the height and, in about half a minute more, to have
been at an end by a gradual decrease. When the terror is so great, no
dependence can be placed upon the admeasurement of time in any person's mind,
and we always find very different apprehensions of it. The noise and shock of
this and all earthquakes which preceded it in New England were observed to come
from the west or northwest and go off to the east or south east. At Newbury and
other towns upon Merrimack river the shock was greater than in any other part
of Massachusetts, but no buildings were thrown down, part of the walls of
several cellars fell in and the tops of many chimneys were shook off. At New
York it seems to have been equal to what it was in the Massachusetts, but at
Philadelphia it was very sensibly weaker and, in the colonies southward, it
grew less and less until it had spent itself or became insensible. The seamen
upon the coast supposed their vessels to have struck upon a shoal of loose
ballast. More gentle shocks were frequently felt in most parts of New England
for several months after. There have seldom passed above 15 or 20 years without
an earthquake, but there had been none, very violent, in the memory of any then
living. There was a general apprehension of danger of destruction and death,
and many, who had very little sense of religion before, appeared to be very
serious and devout penitents, but, too generally, as the fears of another
earthquake went off, the religious impressions went with them and they, who had
been the subjects of both, returned to their former course of life.

THE trade of the province being in a bad state, and there being a general
complaint of scarcity of money the old spirit revived for increasing the
currency by a further emission of bills of credit. It would be just as rational
when the blood in the human body is in a putrid corrupt state to increase the
quantity, by luxurious living, in order to restore health. Some of the leading
men, among the representatives, were debtors and a depreciating currency was
convenient for them. A bill was projected for fortifying the sea ports. The
town of Boston was to expend ten thousand pounds in forts and stores and, to
enable them to do it, thirty thousand pounds was to be issued in bills and lent
to the town for thirteen years, Salem, Plymouth, Marblehead, Charlestown,
Gloucester, and even Truro, on the cape, were all to be supplied with bills of
credit for the like purposes. After repeated nonconcurrence and long
altercation, the council were prevailed upon to agree to the bill. When it came
to the lieutenant governor, he laid the king's instruction before the council
and required their opinion, upon their oaths, whether consistent with the
instruction he could sign the bill and they answered he could not. Not only the
lieutenant governor, but several of the council, were dependent upon the house
for the grant of their salaries, and this dependence, was improved as, in
diverse instances, it had been formerly. The house referred the consideration of
allowance to the next session and desired the court might rise. The lieut.
governor let them know, by a message, that he apprehended his small support was
withheld from him, because he would not sign a bill contrary to his
instructions. They replied, that he had recommended to them, the making
provision for fortifying the province and, now they had passed a bill for that
purpose, he refused to sign it, and they were obliged, in prudence and
faithfulness to their principals, to come into a vote referring allowances and
other matters to another session, when a way may be found to enable the
inhabitants to pay into the treasury again such sums as may be drawn out for
gratuities Gratuity is a term not usual with the house and seems not so proper
for payment of services.
and allowances. After a recess of about a fortnight, an expedient was found.
Instead of a bill for fortifying, another was prepared with a specious title,
"An act for raising and settling a public revenue for and toward defreying the
necessary charges of the government by an emission of L 60,000 in bills of
credit." This was done to bring it within the words of the instruction, which
restrained the governor from consenting to the issuing bills of credit, except
for charges of government. The interest of 4 per cent or L 2400 -- was to be
applied annually to the public charges and gave color for issuing, the
principal sum of L. 60,000. The lieutenant governor was prevailed upon to sign
it and, the same day, the house made the grant of his salary and the usual
allowance to the judges, most of whom were members of the council, and to the
other officers of the government. This was afterward alleged to be a
compulsion of the lieutenant governor and such of the members of council as
were salary men, to comply with the house of representatives, by withholding
from them their subsistence. The eagerness of the body of the people for paper
bills, more easily acquired in this way than the righteous way of industry and
frugality, no doubt, facilitated a compliance.

THE council, upon this occasion, declined answering upon their oath, as
counselors, when the lieut. Governor asked their advice. They swear that to
the best of their judgment they will at all times freely give their advice to
the governor for the good management of the public affairs of the government.
The lieut. governor proposed the following question to them in writing
"Gentlemen, I find it necessary, in order to my signing the bill entitled An
Act for raising and settling a revenue etc. which has passed both houses, to
have your advice whether I can sign the said bill without the breach of the
instruction of the lords justices of Great Britain, dated the 27th September
1720, and the order of the lords commissioners of trade and plantations, dated
the 8th of February 1726-7. W. Dummer. Feb. 17, 1727." Upon which, the council
came to the following vote. "In council, Feb. 19, 1727, Read, and as the
council have already, as they are one part of the general court, passed a
concurrence with the honorable house of representatives upon the said bill,
they cannot think it proper for them to give your honor any further advice
thereupon, nor do they apprehend the oath of a councellor obliges them thereto.
At the same time, they cannot but think it will be for the good and welfare of
the province and the necessary support of the government thereof, if the bill
be consented to by your honor.

I. Willard, Secretary."

THEY had given their advice or opinion, the same session, upon the bill for
fortifying, after they had passed it, that it was contrary to the instruction,
and instances of the like kind have been frequent before and since this time.

THE lieutenant governor had a further opportunity, before Mr. Burnet's
arrival, of meeting the assembly in May for election of counselors.

THE house discovered, in one instance, this session, a desire to amplify their
jurisdiction. The council and house had made it a practice, ever since the
charter, to unite in the choice of the treasurer, impost officer and other
civil officers, the appointment whereof is reserved to the general assembly.
The council, being in number less than a third part of the house, have by this
means no weight in such elections except when there are two or more candidates
for an office, set up by the house, and then the balance of power, if they are
united themselves, may be with them. This seems to have been an old charter
practice and handed down The two houses, when parties to any petition or cause
desire to be heard, often meet in one house, which no doubt also came from the
old charter, but after they are separated, they vote seperately upon the
subject matter of the hearing. In this session, after a hearing of this fort,
the house passed a vote, "that when a hearing shall be had on any private cause
before both houses together the subject matter shall be determined by both
houses conjunctly." They might as well have voted that, after a conference
between the two houses, the subject matter should be determined conjuctly. The
council were sensible this was taking from the little weight they had and
unanimously nonconcurred the vote.

THE manner of choosing civil officers is a defect in the constitution, which
does not seem to have been considered at the framing the charter, and as, by
charter, officers must annually be elected, it is a defect which must be
submitted to. If either house should elect by themselves and send to the other
for concurrence the right of nomination would be such an advantage as neither
would be willing to concede to the other. In the early days of the charter, it
had been made a question, whether in any acts of government the council had a
negative voice and were not rather to vote in conjunction with the house of
representatives, and Constantine Phips gave his opinion, that they had no
negative. He seems not to have considered, that the charter and the commissions
to governors of other colonies evidently intended a legislature after the
pattern of the legislature of England, as far as the state and circumstances of
the colonies would admit.

THE government, under the old charter and the new, had been very prudent in
the distribution of the territory. Lands were granted for the sake of settling
them. Grants for any other purpose had been very rare and, ordinarily, a new
settlement was contiguous to an old one. The settlers themselves, as well as
the government, were inclined to this for the sake of a social neighborhood,
as well as mutual defense against an enemy. The first settlers on Connecticut
river, indeed, left a great tract of wilderness between them and the rest of
the colony, but they went off in a body, and a new colony, Connecticut, was
settling near them at the same time. Rivers were also an inducement to settle,
but very few had ventured above Dunstable, upon the fine river Merrimack, and
the rivers in the province of Main had no towns at any distance from the sea
into which they empty. But all on a sudden, plans are laid for grants of vast
tracts of unimproved land and, the last session of Mr. Dummer's administration,
a vote passed the two houses appointing a committee to lay out three lines of
towns each town of the contents of six miles square, one line to extend from
Connecticut river above Northfield to Merrimack river above Dunstable, another
line on each side Merrimack as far as Penicook, and another from Nichewanock
river to Falmouth in Casco-bay.

PRETENSES were encouraged, and even sought after, to entitle persons to be
grantees. The posterity of all the officers and soldiers who served in the
famous Naraganset expedition in 1675 were the first pitched upon, those who
were in the unfortunate attempt upon Canada in 1690 were to come next. The
government of N. Hampshire supposed these grants were made in order to secure
the possession of a tract of country challenged by them as within their bounds.
This might have weight with some leading men, who were acquainted with the
controversy, but there was a fondness fo granting land in any part of the
province. A condition of settling a certain number of families in a few years,
ordinarily was annexed to the grants, but the court, by multiplying their
grants, rendered the performance of the condition impracticable, there not
being people enough within the province willing to leave the old settled towns,
and the grantees not being able to procure settlers from abroad.

THE settlement of the province was retarded by it, a trade of land jobbing
made many idle persons, imaginary wealth was created, which was attended with
some of the mischievous effects of the paper currency, viz. idleness and bad
economy, a real expense was occasioned to many persons, besides the purchase
of the grantees title, for every township by law was made a propriety, and
their frequent meetings, schemes for settlement, and other preparatory
business, occasioned many charges. In some few towns, houses were built and
some part of the lands cleared. In a short time, a new line being determined
for the northern boundary of the Massachusetts colony, many of these townships
were found to be without it. The government of New Hampshire, for the crown,
laid claim to some of them, and certain persons, calling themselves proprietors
under Mason, to others, and the Massachusetts people, after a further expense in
contesting their title, either wholly lost the lands, or made such composition
as the new claimers thought fit to agree to.

He (...) at (...) July 18th.
was received with unusual pomp. Besides a committee of the general court, many
private gentlemen went as far as Bristol to wait upon him, and, besides the
continual addition that was making in the journey, there went out of Boston to
meet him at a small distance, such a multitude of horses and carriages that he
entered the town with a greater cavalcade than had ever been seen before or
since. Like one of his predecessors, lord Dellamonr, he urged this grand
appearance, in his first speech to the assembly, as a proof of their ability
very honorably to support his majesty's government and, at the same time,
acquainted them with the king's instruction to him to insist upon an
established salary, and his intention firmly to adhere to it. "It is not easy
to express the pleasure I have had in coming among you. The commission with
which his majesty has honored me (however unequal to it) has been received in
so respectful and noble a manner, and the plenty and wealth of this great
province has appeared to me in such a strong light, as will not suffer me to
doubt of your supporting his majesty's government by an ample, honorable and
lasting settlement. The wisdom of parliament has made it an established custom
to grant the civil list to the king for life, and, as I am confident the
representatives of the people here would be unwilling to own themselves outdone
in duty to his majesty by any of his subjects. I have reason to hope then they
will not think such an example has any thing in it which they are not ready to
imitate. I shall lay before you his majesty's instruction to me upon this
subject, which, as it shall be an inviolable rule for my conduct, will, without
question, have it is due weight with you." Gov. speech 24 July 1728.
He had asked the opinion of a New England gentleman, who was then the minister
of the presbyterian church at New York, whether the assembly would comply with
his instruction, and received a discouraging answer which caused him to reply,
that he would not engage in a quarrel, or to that effect; but he either
received different advice upon his arrival, or for some other reason altered
his mind. The assembly seemed, from the beginning, determined to withstand him.
To do it with better grace and a more reasonable prospect of success the
quantum of the salary, it was agreed, was not worth disputing. It bore no
proportion to the privilege and right of granting it for such time as they
thought proper. The same persons, therefore, who six or seven years before
refused to make governor Shute and, perhaps, the government easy by granting
not more than five hundred pounds sterling a year, now readily voted for a
thousand or a sum which was intended to be equal to it. As Soon as addresses
from the council and house, the usual compliments upon the first arrival of a
governor, had passed, the house made a grant of L.1700 toward his support and
to defrey the charge of his journey. In a day or two, the governor let them
know he was utterly unable to give his consent to it, being inconsistent with
his instruction. After a week's deliberation, a grant was made of three hundred
pounds for the charge of his journey, which he accepted, and another of
fourteen hundred pounds toward his support, which was accompained with a joint
message from the council and house, prepared by a committee, wherein they
assert their undoubted right as Englishmen and their privilege by the charter
to raise and apply moneys for the support of government and their readiness to
give the governor an ample and honorable support, but they apprehended it would
be most for his majesty's service, and'c. to do it without establishing a fixed
salary. August 7th.
The governor was always very quick in his replies and once, when a committee
came to him with a message, having privately obtained a copy of it, gave the
same committee an answer in writing to carry back. The same day this message
was delivered, he observed to them, in answer, "that the right of Englishmen
could never entitle them to do wrong, that their privilege of raising money by
charter was expressed to be 'by wholesome and reasonable laws and directions,'
consequently not such as were hurtful to the constitution and the ends of
government; that in their way of giving a support to the governor could not be
honorable, for it deprived him of the undoubted right of an Englishman, viz. to
act his judgment, or obliged him to remain without support and he appealed to
their own consciences, whether they did not formerly kept back their governor's
allowance until other bills were passed, and whether they had not sometimes
made the salary depend upon the consent to such bills; that if they really
intended from time to time to grant an honorable support they could have no
just objection to making their purposes effectual by fixing his salary, for he
would never accept of a grant of the kind they had then made." We shall be
convinced that Mr. Burnet was not a person who could be easily moved from a
resolution he had once taken up.

UPON the receipt of this message and the peremptory declaration of the
governor, the house found this was like to be a serious affair, and that they
should not so easily get rid of it as they had done of the like demands made by
Dudley and Shute, and again appointed a committee to join with a committee of
council to consider of this message. The exclusive right of the house in
originating grants they have often so far given up as to join with the council
by committees to consider and report the expediency of them, the reports,
generally, being sent to the house, there to be first acted upon. The report of
this committee was accepted in council and sent to the house, but there
rejected and, not being able to unite in an answer, the house tried the council
with a resolve, sent to them for concurrence, the purport of which was, that
fixing a salary on the governor or commander in chief for the time being would
be dangerous to the inhabitants and contrary to the design of the charter in
giving power to make wholesome and reasonable orders and laws for the welfare
of the province. This vote, in so general terms, the council did not think
proper to concur, and declared that, although they were of opinion it might
prove of ill consequence to settle a salary upon the governor for the time
being, yet they apprehended a salary might be granted for a certain time, to
the present governor, without danger to the (...) or being contrary to the
design of the charter, (...)

THIS occasioned a conference, without (...) houses adhering to their own
votes, and from Aug. 19th
time the house were left to manage the controversy themselves. They sent a
message to the governor to desire the court might rise. 28th.
He told them, that if he should comply with their desire he should put it out
of their power to pay an immediate regard to the king's instruction and he
would not grant them a recess until they had finished the business for which
the court was then sitting. They then, in a message to him, declared that, in
faithfulness to the people of the province, they could not come into an act for
establishing a salary on the governor or commander in chief for the time being,
and therefore they renewed their request that the court might rise. August 29th.


BOTH the governor and the house seem to have some reserve in their
declarations. Perhaps a salary during his administration would have satisfied
him, although he demanded it for the commander in chief for the time being; and
the house do not yet say, that they will not settle a salary for a limited
time. Each desired that the other would make some concessions. Both declined,
and both by long altercation were irritated and, at length, which is often the
case, instead of closing, as seemed probable at first, widened the breach until
they fixed at the opposite extremes. The major part of the council and about a
sixth part of the house were willing to settle a salary upon Mr. Burnet for a
term not exceeding three years, possibly even some who were finally the most
zealous in the opposition would have submitted to this if they could have been
sure of its being accepted, and they had been at liberty to act their judgment.
Mr. Cook had experienced the ill success of the controversy with governor
Shute and seemed desirous of being upon terms with his successor who, upon his
first arrival and until the province house could be repaired, lodged at Mr.
Cooke's house, but a friendship could not long continue between two persons of
so different opinions upon civil government. The language of the governor's
messages was thought too dictatorial by the people and particularly, by the
inhabitants of Boston, and he had been some what free in his jokes upon some of
the shopkeepers and principal tradesmen who were, then, the directors of the
counsels of the town and very much influenced those of the house, An intimation
in the governor's next message August 29th.
that, if they did not comply with the instruction, the legislature of
Great Britain would take into consideration the support of the government and,
perhaps, something besides, meaning the charter, increased the prejudices
against him. The house, now thought themselves obliged to be more particular
than they had yet been fully to assert their rights, August 31st.
This was what the governor desired and, without any delay Sept. 3d.
he sent then an answer. As these two messages seem to begin, in earnest, the
argument on each side of the question, we shall insert them in the margin.
August 31st, 1728. The house of representatives sent the following message to
his excellency the governor. "May it please your excellency, The
representatives in general court assembled, before they proceed to make reply
to what they received from you on thursday last, respecting their answer of
that morning to your message of the 28th current, beg leave to recur to what
the council and representatives, the 7th instant, in great truth and sincerity
among other things, laid before your excellency viz. they humbly appreheud that
his majesty's service in the necessary defense and support of the government
and the protection and preservation of the inhabitants thereof, the two great
ends proposed in the power granted to this court for the raising tares would be
best answered without establishing a salary. Your excellency was pleased to let
us know, that the answer of the house contained no reasons that appeared to you
sufficient why his majesty's 23d instruction might not be complied with, since
the same methods that are found no ways to prejudice the rights and liberties
of the people of Great Britain nor of other colonies, cannot prejudice those of
the province. -- If the method practiced in Great Britain is not prejudicial to
the rights and liberties of the people there, it does not therefore follow that
fixing a salary will not prejudice the people of this province. The British
constitution differing from ours in many respects; and other colonies coming
into are particular method, are not ^^owing the motives inducing them thereto,
not the several constitutions of government they are put under, ought not to
influence or prom^t us to imitate them May it please your excellency, The
house, being heartily desirous to cultivate a good agreement and harmony with
your excellency, take this opportunity to assure (...) that we have, once and
again, deliberately considered your message for fixing a salary, and do h^moly
conceive that it is against the good design of the powers vested and reposed in
us by the royal charter, to pass acts pursuant to the instructions laid before
us, for as much as passing such acts, as we apprehend, has a direct tendency to
weaken our happy constitution; for that their late majesty's King William and
Queen Mary, of glorious memory, were graciously pleased to gratify the
inhabitants here and did grant to them certain powers privileges and franchises
to be used and employed for the benefit of the people and, in the same grant,
reserved other powers to be used and exercised by the crown or the governors
sent by them, agreeable to the directions and instructions contained in said
grant and their commissions, having reference for their better guidance and
directions to the several powers and authorities mentioned in the said charter;
if therefore the general assembly should at any time come into any act that
might tend to infringe the prerogative or disserve the crown, his majesty's
governor's have a negative voice on all such acts; furthermore, should any
governor incautiously give his consent to such acts, his majesty has reserved
to himself a power to disallow the same, but the use and exercise of the other
powers and privileges lodged in the general assembly, his majesty justly
expects they will never make use of them in prejudice of the rights and
liberties of the people, but at all times exert themselves in defense thereof.
If we resemble the British constitution, as your excellency has done us the
honor to declare, we humbly apprehend that no part of the legislature here
should be entirely independent, as your excellency has very justly denoted to
us, that the there distinct branches of the legislature, preserved in a due
balance, forms the excellency of the British constitution and if any of those
branches should become less able to support its own dignity and freedom, the
whole must inevitably suffer by the alteration. Your excellency is pleased to
say that a support given as has been usual here cannot be honorable because
that implies no sort of confidence in the government. To which we humbly offer,
that if you ^^cellency would take notice of our grants, you would see that the
very method itself is founded on nothing else, inasmuch as they always look
forward and are given to enable the governor to go on and manage the public
affairs. Thus, in this out first session at your excellency's (...) and welcome
(...) the assembly made a grant of L. 1400 -- to enable your excellency to
manage the affairs of this province, fully confiding in your conduct. If your
excellency intends that we do not put so much confidence in you as the
parliament do in our most gracious sovereign, to whom the civil list is granted
for life (which God long preserve) we freely acknowledge it. Is it reasonable
or possible that we should confide in any governor whatsoever so much as in our
gracious king, the common father of all his people, who is known to delight in
nothing so much as in their happiness and whose interest and glory and that of
his royal progeny are inseparable from the prosperity and welfare of his
people, whereas it is most obvious that neither the prosperity nor adversity of
a people affect a governor's interest at all when he has once left them. Your
Excellency goes on and declares that the support of the government in this
manner visibly depends on an entire compliance with the other parts of the
legislature. Had the governor no authority nor checks upon them we must
acknowledge this to be the case, but as both the other parts have a great
dependence upon the governor's discretionary power, the council (as the
practice usually is) for their very being and both they and the representatives
for every law and proper act of government and for every penny put into and
drawn out of the treasury, for their whole defense and security in every case
of danger, as he is their captain general, besides other obvious particulars
needless and too numerous to be named, that if in this single instance the
governor should have dependence on the assembly, as to his support, according
as they shall see the province able, the other things that they depend upon him
for are so vastly more than a counterbalance that it cannot be thought that the
commander in chief can be hereby prevented acting according to his judgment or
remain without support. We assure your excellency that it is not any exception
to your person or administration (which we hope other parts of our conduct have
made evident) that determines us against fixing a salary s prescribed. May it
please your excellency, Since we have so many times heretofore and do now in
the most solemn manner and after the most strict serutiny we are able to make
in this important affair manifest that in faithfulness to our country we cannot
think it adv^eable for this (...) to be concerned in passing an act for fixing
a salary as prescribed, we do therefore most (...) move your excellency, that
you would permit us to repair to our several homes, and not keep us sitting
here in order to our acting contrary to our native freedom and declared
judgment and so betraying the greattrust and confidence out principals have
reposed in (...). Sept. 3d 1728. The secretary carried down to the house the
following message from his excellency the governor. Gentleman of the house of
representatives. It is not at all agreeable to my inclination to enter into
disputes with your house and, for that reason, I have endeavored hitherto to
be as short as the importance of the matters which I have recommended to you
will allow me. But since you have thought fit to lay such stress on the reasons
offered in your reply of Saturday, I cannot avoid, once more for all, entering
into a particular examination of them, that not only yourselves but those whom
you represent may be enabled to judge of the controversy between us. -- You
begin with reminding me that the council and representatives apprehended 'that
his majesty's service, in the necessary defense and support of the government
and the protection and preservation of the inhabitents thereof, the two great
ends proposed in the power granted to this court, would be best answered
without established a fixed salary.' It ought not to be forgotten, at the same
time, that the council had altered the words would be best into may be well
though you prevailed with them to recede from the amendment, and that they made
this addition, 'We esteem it a great unhappiness that his majesty should think
our method of supporting the governors of this province a design of making them
dependant on the people,' to which you agreed, though nothing to that effect
had been inserted in your own draught. By these instances, the council appear,
from the first to have very different apprehensions from you of the regard to
be paid to his majesty's instruction and of the weight of his displeasure,
which last consideration (though the greatest part of my message) was not, it
seems, thought by you to deserve any room at all in so long a reply. But
supposing the council and you were agreed, that is to say, that two branches of
the legislature thought it best to keep the third entirely dependent on them,
(which would be a manifest piece of partiality and injustice) is this any
reason why the third should be of the same opini^^. Or rather, does it not
confirm the too just suspicion his majesty has of a design so dangerous to his
won authority? Two branches of legislature can bring nothing to effect without
the third and, consequently, if what seems best to them only cannot be
consented to by the other, it becomes their duty then to consider what next
best thing can be done, in which all three can concur, for it does not follow
that if what some imagine best cannot be done, therefore nothing should be done
at all -- And so much for what you have said before you proceed to make reply.
You may perceive from what I have already expressed, upon how many accounts the
reasons of the house can never appear sufficient to me why his majesty's 23d
instruction should not be complied with, and I am far from thinking that you
give any answer to my former reasons. You say 'that if the method practiced in
Great Britain is not prejudicial to the rights and liberties of the people
there, it does not therefore follow that fixing a salary would not prejudice
the people of this province.' Rights and liberties are words that have,
naturally, the same meaning in all countries and, unless you can show me
wherein the British rights and liberties are defective, (which you have not
done) I may conclude that they are not so and, in that case, it is a natural
consequence that the methods under which they have been so long safe and
flourishing are most likely to produce the same effects. But you say 'the
British constitution differs from yours in many respects.' I take the chief
difference to have been in the use made of the constitution which has been no
ways to your advantage, for by Great-Britain's keeping up to their constitution
public credit still continues at the height, notwithstanding the vast charges
and debts of the nation, but with you credit has fallen lower and lower in an
amazing manner, and this has proceeded plainly from the want of a sufficient
check in the other branches of the legislature to the sudden and unadvised
measures of former assemblies; so that if ever you come near the happiness of
Great Britain it must be by supporting those parts of the legislature which of
late have been too much depressed, but are in themselves necessary to guard the
liberties and properties of the inhabitants as well as the house of
representatives. At to the case of other plantations, I shall only say; if you
enjoy larger privileges by the favor of the crown than they and, by
consequence, have more to lose by his majesty's displeasure, the arguments both
of gratitude and interest plead stronger with you for a compliance with an
instruction in itself so just and reasonable. I cannot see why you apprehend
that passing acts pursuant to the instruction has a direct tendency to weaken
your happy constitution, especially since you now acknowledge what I had
formerely observed, "that each branch of the legislature and consequently the
governor ought to be enabled to support its own dignity and freedom," which is
all that is intended by the instruction. I had observed, "that the usual way of
supporting the government implied no fort of confidence in the governor." You
offer 'that if I would take notice of your grants I should see that the very
method itself is founded upon nothing else, inasmuch as they always look
forward and are given to enable the governor to go on and manage the public
affairs.' I can scarce believe that this is intended for a serious argument,
since a time no longer ago than last winter session affords a plain proof to
the contrary. The lieutenant governor informed the house in answer to their
message expressing their desire of an adjournment, 'that he had consented to
all the acts and votes passed the two houses except the bill for emitting bills
of credit which he would have signed were it consistent with his majesty's
instruction which it was not, in the opinion of the council.' And he concludes
with reminding them, 'that the proper and usual season, for granting salaries
is already outrun, and that he expects they will provide for the honorable
support of the government before they rise.' The house entered into the
consideration of the above message, and after some debate had thereon the
question was put, whether the house will now come to the consideration of
allowances, it passed in the negative. Then the question was put, whether the
consideration of allowances shall be referred to the next session of this
court; resolved in the affirmative. In this manner was this method of grants
'that always look forward' brought to look directly upon the present business
in order to compel a compliance or, if you like that better to look backward by
way of punishment for a denial; and so the public affairs were left to manage
themselves for any care that was taken of them. Your next observation is not
one jot a juster representation of the case before you. Yon say you are not for
fixing a salary 'because it is not reasonable or possible you should confide in
any governor whatsoever so much as in our most gracious king.' As if this
instruction to demand a salary cause from a governor and not from his majesty
himself, and as if the salary was to be given directly to the governor and not
to his majesty for the use of his governor or commander in chief, or as if upon
just complaint his majesty could not or would not remove an ill governor and,
in short, as if your doing the thing would not be altogether upon confidence in
his majesty and not in any governor whatsoever. The words of respect here used
to his majesty come with a very ill grace and have not that gravity in them
which would be more becoming, since in the same breath you are disregarding his
own demand and undervaluing his favor and making light of his declaration 'that
if you do not pay an immediate regard to his instruction he will look upon it
as a manifest mark of your undutiful behavior to himself.' You carry on the
same kind of reasoning to the end of your paper, which seems much better
adapted to amuse than to prove any thing. In the first place, you make a very
pompous representation of the governor's authority and of the great dependence
the other parts of the general court have on his discretionary power and call
his support the single instance in which he has some dependence on the
assembly, and, just after, you give an odious aspersion on a^ undoubted branch
of the power lodged in the governor which is 'to keep the general court
together as long as he thinks the public affairs require it.' I am at a loss to
know whether your insinuation, that I keep you here in order to compel you to
act contrary to your native freedom and declared judgment, be more injurious
to me or yourselves. You seem to allow the governor's powers only so far as the
uses them according to your pleasure, but, in using your own powers, to take it
very ill to be directed by any body. You said, before, 'that the other things
which the house depends on a governor for are so vastly more than a
counterbalance to his support (you might have said subsistence and then the
irony would have appeared more openly) that it cannot be thought that the
commander in chief can be thereby prevented acting according to his judgment
or remain without support.' As if you were ignorant of the aforementioned
proceedings of the last winter; and yet you are very ready to think that to
keep you fitting here is a compulsion to you to act contrary to your native
freedom and declared judgment and so betray the great trust your principals
have reposed in you. But I persuade myself that your faithfulness to your
country put you above any such temptation. And, as I am still of opinion that
you have acted upon mistakes notions, I cannot give over the hopes of your
coming of see things in that true light in which (I flatter myself) I have
stated the point in question and, as I am disposed to gratify you as far as is
consistent with my duty and my honor, I hope you will consider what advances
you can make toward a compliance, that so the present session may not be a
needless burden to the people but still have a great issue to his majesty's and
the country's service. W. Burnet. General court records.
Not long after the house, instead of any advances toward a compliance, which
the governor wished to obtain, came to resolutions upon two questions which
showed still more fully their sense of the point in controversy. The first
question was, whether the house will take under consideration the settling a
temporary salary upon the governor or commander in chief for the time being.
This passed is the negative. Then this question was put; whether the house can
with safety to the people come into any other method for supporting the
governor or commander in chief for the time being, than what has been
heretofore practiced. This also passed in the negative and was the first
instance of the house's declaring they would make no advances, for in their
message last preceding they only say they do not think it advisable to pass an
act for fixing a salary as prescribed. These votes caused the governor to put
them in mind of a letter from their agent in the year 1722, wherein he mentions
that lord Carteret, in conversation, desired him to write to the assembly not
to provoke the government in England to bring their charter before the
parliament, for if they did, it was his opinion, it would be dissolved without
opposition, and the governor advised them to take care their proceedings did
not bring their charter into danger at that time. This caution did not prevent
the house from preparing a state of the controversy between the governor and
them, concerning his salary, to transmit to their several towns, in the
conclusion of which they say that they dare neither come into a fixed salary on
the governor for ever nor for a limited time, for the following reasons.

"1st. BECAUSE it is an untrodden path, which neither they nor their
predecessors have gone in, and they cannot certainly foresee the many dangers
that may be in it, nor can they depart from that way which has been found safe
and comfortable.

"2dly. BECAUSE it is the undoubted right of all Englishmen, by magna charta,
to raise and dispose of money for the public service, of their own free accord,
without compulsion.

"3dly. BECAUSE it must necessarily lessen the dignity and freedom of the house
of representatives in making acts and raising and applying taxes, etc. and,
consequently, cannot be thought a proper method to preserve that balance in the
three branches of the legislature which seems necessary to form, maintain and
uphold the constitution.

"4thly. BECAUSE the charter fully impowers the general assembly to make such
laws and orders as they shall judge for the good and welfare of the inhabitants
and, if they or any part of them judge this not to be for their good, they
neither ought nor could come into it, for, as to act beyond or without the
powers granted in the charter might justly incur the king's displeasure, so not
to act up and agreeable to those powers might justly be deemed a betraying the
rights and privileges therein granted, and, if they should give up this right,
they would open a door to many other inconveniences."

THIS representation was prepared to be carried home by the several members,
upon the rising of the court, in order to their towns giving their
instructions, but, the house being kept fitting, it was printed and sent
through the province. The governor sent a message to the house, a few days
after, in which he takes their representation to pieces and, in the close of
his message, appeals to them whether he had not answered all their objections
except "the unknown inconveniences to which a door would be opened," which
could not be answered until they could tell what they were, and charges them
with calling for help from what they had not mentioned, from a sense of the
impersection of what they had, and with sending to their several towns for
advice and declaring, at the same time, they did not dare follow it.

IT would be tedious to recite at length the several messages, which passed
during the remainder of the controversy, from the chair to the house and from
the house to the chair, which followed quick one upon the back of another, the
sum of the argument, upon the part of the governor, was as follows, that it was
highly reasonable he should enjoy the free exercise of his judgment in the
administration of government, but the grants, made for a short time only by the
house, were thus limited for no other reason than to keep the governor in a
state of dependence, and with design to withhold from him the necessary means
of subsistence, unless he would comply with their acts and resolves, however
unreasonable they might appear to him; that in fact they had treated governor
Shute in this manner and, no longer since than the last year, the house had
refused to make the usual grants and allowances, not only to the lieut,
governor but to other officers, until they had compelled him to give his
consent to a loan of sixty thousand pounds in bills of credit; that a
constitution which, in name and appearance, consisted of three branches was, in
fact, reduced to one; that it was a professed principle, in the constitution of
Great Britain, to preserve a freedom in each of the three branches of the
legislature, and it was a great favor shown the province, when king William
and queen Mary established, by the royal charter, a form of government so
analogous to the government of Great Britain; a principle of gratitude and
loyalty, therefore, ought to induce them to establish a salary for the governor
of this province, in order to his supporting his dignity and freedom, in like
manner as the parliament always granted to the king what was called the civil
list, not once in six months or from year to year, but for life; that this was
no more than other provinces which had no charters had done for their
governors; that there was nothing in the province charter to exempt, them from
the same obligation which other his majesty's colonies were under to support
the government; to be, sure, they had no pretense to greater privileges by
charter than the people of England enjoyed from magha charta, and yet no clause
of that was ever urged as an objection against granting to the king a revenue
for life; and a power by charter to grant moneys could not be a reason against
granting them either for a limited or unlimited time.

ON the part of the house, the substance of their defense against the
governor's demand and his reasons in support of it was, that an obligation upon
an assembly in the plantations could not be inferred from the practice of the
house of commons in Great Britain; the king was the common father of all his
subjects and their interests were inseparably united, whereas a plantation
governor was affected neither by the adversity nor prosperity of a colony when
he had once left it, no wonder then a colony could not place the same
confidence in the governor which the nation placed in the king; however, the
grants to the governor always looked forward and were made, not for services
done, but, to be done. It must be admitted, the governor is in some measure
dependent upon the assembly for his salary, but he is dependent in this
instance only, whereas he has a check and control upon every grant to any
person in the government and upon all laws and acts of government whatsoever;
nor can an exact parallel be drawn between the constitution of Britain and that
of the province, for the council are dependent upon the governor for their very
being, once every year, whereas the house of lords cannot be displaced unless
they have criminally forfeited the rights of peers; the house were not to be
governed by the practice of assemblies in some of the other colonies, nor were
they to be dictated to and required to raise a certain sum for a certain time
and certain purposes; this would destroy the freedom which the house
apprehended they had a right to in all their acts and resolves and would
deprive them of the powers given to them, by charter, to raise money and apply
it when and how they thought proper. The governor had repeatedly urged against
them their compelling lieutenant governor Dummer to sign a bill for issuing
L.60,000 against his instruction and against his judgment, which they had
passed over without any notice, at length, they tell him "we doubt not but the
true state of the case is this, that though his honor, in the beginning of the
session, thought his majesty's instruction for bad him coming into it, yet,
upon deliberation and advice of the assembly, his great council, he was
otherwise minded." The governor, in answer, asks them why he may not, with
exactly the same reason, say "that I doubt not but the true state of the
present case is this, that thought the assembly, in the beginning of this
session, thought that their charter for bad them coming into a salary for the
governor, yet, upon deliberation and advice of his majesty, their most gracious
king, by his instruction, they will be otherwise minded."
Different judgments will undoubtedly be formed upon the weight of these
reasons on the one side and the other.

THE messages of the house, at first, were short, supposed to have been drawn
by Mr. Cook, who never used many words in his speeches in the house, which
generally discovered something manly and open, though sometimes severe and
bitter, and often inaccurate. In the latter part of the controversy they were
generally drawn by Mr. Wells, another member from Boston, the second year of
his coming to the house. These were, generally more prolix, and necessarily so
from the length of the messages to which they were an answer. The house had
justice done them by their committees who managed this controversy, and they
were then willing to allow that the governor maintained a bad cause with as
plausible reasons as could be.

THE contending parties, for a little while, endeavored to be moderated and to
preserve decorum, but it was impossible to continue this temper.

ON the 4th of September, the house repeated to the governor, the request they
had formerly made to rise, but he refused to grant it and told them, that
unless his majesty's pleasure had it due weight with them their desires should
have very little weight with him.

THE council, who had been for some time out of the question, now interposed
and passed a vote "that it is expedient for the court to ascertain a sum as a
salary for his excellency's support as also the term of time for its
continuance," This was sent to the house for concurrence. The council seem to
have gone a little out of their line, but the house took no other notice of the
vote than to nonconcur it. The house, being kept fitting against their will,
employed part of their time in drawing up the state of the controversy which we
have mentioned.

THIS was not occasioned by any doubt they had themselves, but to convince the
governor that the people throughout the province were generally of the same
mind with the house, and for this purpose they thought it necessary to obtain
from their towns an express approbation of their conduct. It was well known,
that not a town in the province would then have instructed their
representatives to six a salary upon the governor for the time being.

ONE of the king's governments (Barbados) was at this time warmly contending
with its governor against fixing a salary. The assembly of that island, some
years before, had settled a very large salary upon a governor against whom they
afterward made heavy complaints charging him with rapaciousness and grievous
oppressions and, his successor having demanded the like settlement upon him,
they resolved to withstand the demand, and the spirit seemed to be as high
there as in Massachusets-bay.

THIS had no small tendency to strengthen and confirm the resolution of the
people here, who supposed their charter rather an additional privilege and
security against this demand. The assembly of Barbados, after long struggle,
submitted, but lessened the sum which had been settled before.
There was a minor part, however, very desirous of an accommodation. The ill
success of the controversy with governor Shute was fresh is their minds. Many
amiable qualities in Mr. Burnet caused them to wish he might continue their
governor and employ those powers and that attention which were now wholly
engaged in this single point, in promoting the general welfare and prosperity
of the province.

ABOUT a third part of the house of representative and a major part of the
council would have been content to have granted a salary for two or, perhaps,
three years. If we are to judge by his declarations, this would not have
satisfied him and it was far short of his instructions, but his friends were of
opinion, that such a partial compliance would have produced a relaxation of the
instruction and issued in lasting agreement and harmony.

THE house made what they would have the governor think a small advance toward
it. Instead of a grant for the salary, supposed, though not expressed, for half
a year, they made a grant (Sept. 20th) of three thousand pounds, equal to one
thousand sterling in order to enable him to manage the affairs of the province
and, although it was not expressly mentioned, it was generally understood to be
for a year. This was concurred by the council, but he let it lie without
signing his consent, which caused the house to make at least, a seeming farther
advance, for on the 24th of October they by a message entreated him to accept
the grant and added "we cannot doubt but that succeeding assemblies according
to the ability of the province will be very ready to grant as ample a support,
and if they should not, your excellency will then have the opportunity of
showing your resentment." Still this had no effect, the governor knew how
natural it would be for a future assembly to refuse being governed by the
opinion of a former, besides the reserve "according to the ability of the
province" left sufficient room for a further reason for reducing the sum
whenever a future assembly should think it proper.

A little before this message from the house, the governor had informed them
that he was of opinion the act, which passed the last year issuing fixty
thousand pounds in bills of credit by way of loan, would be disallowed, the
lieutenant governor having given his consent to it directly contrary to a royal
instruction, and recommended to them, as the most likely way to obtain his
majesty's approbation, to apply the interest of the money arising from the loan
toward the governor's salary. This was one of those acts which have their
operation so far, before they are laid before his majesty, that great confusion
may arise from their disallowance. The house therefore, had no great fears
concerning it, but it would have been a sufficient reason to prevent their
complying with the proposal, that it would be a fixing the salary so long as
the loans continued and for this reason they refused it.

THE country in general, as we have observed, was averse to a compliance with
the king's instruction, but no part more so than the town of Boston. Generally,
in the colonies, where there is a trading capital town, the inhabitants of it
are the most zealous part of the colony in asserting their liberties when an
opinion prevails that they are attacked. They follow the example of London the
capital of the nation. The governor had frequently said, that the members of
the house could not act with freedom, being influenced by the inhabitants of
the town. Besides, the town, at a general meeting of the inhabitants for that
purpose, had passed a vote, which was called the unanimous declaration of the
inhabitants of the town of Boston against fixing a salary upon the governor,
and this vote they ordered to be printed. The governor was in great wrath and
called it "an unnecessary forwardness, an attempt to give law to the country."
This seems to have determined him to remove the court out of town and, on the
24th of October, he caused it to be adjourned to the 31st, then to meet at
Salem in the country of Essex "where prejudice had not taken root and where of
consequence his majesty's service would in all probability be better answered."
Iocosely, he said there might be a charm in the names of places and that he was
at a loss whether to carry them there or to Concord.

THE house thought their being kept so long sitting at Boston a great
grievance. In one of their messages they ask the governor "whether it has been
customary that the Knights, Burgesses and other freemen of the land should be
told that they are met to grant money in such a peculiar way and manner and so
they should be kept till they had done it, and this in order to gain their good
will and assent." In his reply he tells them he would consider their question
in all its parts 1st, "Whether freemen etc. should be told they are met to
grant money. I answer, the crown always tells them so. 2d. "In such a
particular way and manner?" I answer. If you mean the way and means of raising
money, the crown leaves that to the commons, but if you mean the purpose for
which it is to be granted, the crown always tells them what that is, whether it
is for an honorable support, the defense of the kingdom, carrying on a war or
the like 3dly. "And so they should be kept till they had done it." The crown
never tells the parliament so, that I know of, nor have I told you any thing
like this as an (...) to get the thing done. I have given you a very different
reason for not agreeing to a recess, altogether for your own sakes, left I
should thereby make your immediate regard to his majesty's pleasure impossible
etc.

THE house could not easily be persuaded they were kept so long together merely
for their own sakes and thought this part of the governor's answer evasive of
the true reason and considered themselves as under duresse, whilst at Boston,
and their removal to Salem to be a further hardship and an earnest of what was
still further to come, a removal from place to place until they were harrassed
into a compliance. I remember the conversation of the members of the general
court, (...) the measures which had driven away governor Shute who would have
been easy with a salary of about L.500 sterling granted from year to year. The
same persons, by whose influence his salary was reduced, were now pressing Mr.
Burnet to accept L.1000 in the same way and could not prevail.

THE house met, according to the adjournment, but immediately complained of
their removal from Boston as illegal or unconstitutional and a great grievance.
The same, and the only, reason which was now given had been given before in the
controversy with governor Shute. The form of the writ for calling an assembly,
directed by the province law, mentions its being to be held at the townhouse
in Boston, but this had been determined by the king in council to be, as no
doubt it was, mere matter of form or example only, and that it did not limit
the power which the crown before had of summoning and holding assemblee at any
other place. They prayed the governor however, to adjourn them back to Boston,
but without success.

THEY endeavored to prevail upon the council to join with them, but the
council declared they were of a different opinion and urged the house to
proceed upon business, which occasioned repeated messages upon the subject; but
the whole stress of the argument on the part of the house lay upon the form of
the writ for calling the assembly, which the board answered by saying the house
might as well insist that all precepts to the towns should go from the sheriff
of Suffolk`because the form of the precept in the law has Suffolk ^^.

THE alteration of place had no effect upon the members of the house. Votes and
messages passed, but no new arguments, the subject had been exhausted, nothing
remained but a determined resolution on both sides to abide by their
principles, and the house met and adjourned, day after day, without doing any
business. The governor was the principal sufferer, not being allowed by the
king to receive any thing toward his support, except in a way in which the
assembly would not give it. The members of the court, in general, were as well
accommodated at Salem as Boston, and the members of Boston, who had not been
used to the expense and other inconvenience of absence from home, received a
compensation from their town, over and above the ordinary wages of
representatives. It was a time of peace without, and a cessation of public
business, for that reason, was less felt.

THE house, from an apprehension that their cause was just and therefore that
they were entitled to relief, resolved to make their humble application to his
majesty. Francis Wilks, a New England merchant in London, who had been friendly
to Mr. Cook in his agency and who was universally esteemed for his great
probity as well as his humane obliging disposition, was pitched upon for their
agent.

MR. Belcher, who had been several years of the council, always closely
attached to governor Shute and, in general, what was called a prerogative man,
by some accident or other became, on a sudden, the favorite of the house and he
was thought the properest person to join with Mr. Wilks. At the last election
he had been left out of the council, by what was called the country party, but
now declared against the governor's measures and became intimate with Mr. Cook
and other leading members of the house. Such instantaneous conversions are not
uncommon. A grant was made by the house to desrey the charges of the agency,
but this was nonconcurred by the council, because it was for the use of agents
in whose appointment they had no voice. The want of money threatened a stop to
the proceedings, but the public spirit of the town of Boston was displayed upon
this occasion and, by a subscription of merchants and other principal
inhabitants, a sum was raised which was thought sufficient for the purpose, the
house voting them thanks and promising their utmost endeavors that the sums
advanced should be repaid in convenient time. The governor desired a copy of
their address to the king, but they refused it.

THE only argument or reason in the king's instruction for fixing a salary is
"that former assemblies have, from time to time, made such allowances and in
such proportion as they themselves thought the governor deserved, in order to
make him more dependent upon them." The house, in the first part of their
memorial or address, declare they cannot in faithfulness settle or fix a salary
because, after that is done, the governor's particular interest will be very
little affected by serving or dissercying the interest of the people. This was
showing, that they apprehended the reason given by his majesty for settling a
salary was insufficient, and that the governor ought to be paid, according to
his services in the judgment of those who paid him, but in the close of the
address they say "we doubt not succeeding assemblies, according to the ability
of the province, will come into as ample and honorable a support, from time to
time, and should they not, we acknowledge, your majesty will have just reason
to show your displeasure with them." It was remarked that, in order to make the
last clause consist with the first, the ample and honorable support must be
understood in proportion to the services of the governor in the judgment of the
house but, in this sense, it was saying nothing and trissing with majesty; for
no case could happen, at any time, in which his majesty would have just reason
to show his displeasure. It would always be enough to say that the house, in
faithfulness to the people, had withheld part of the governor's support
because, in their judgment, he had neglected their interest and his duty. It
having been suggested that the people of the Massachusetts were arthing at
independency, the following remark was made in the brief drawn up previous to
the hearing before the committee of council, "From the universal loyalty of the
people, even beyond any other part of his majesty's dominions, it is assured to
imagine they can have thoughts of independency and, to show the reverse, it is
the custom for all persons coming from thence for London, though they and their
fathers and grandfathers were born in New England, to say and always deem it
coming 'home' as naturally as if born in London, so that it may be said,
without being Indireous, that it would not be more absured to place two of his
majesty's beef-eaters to watch a child in the cradle, that it do not rise and
cut his father's throat; than to guard these insant colonies to prevent their
shaking off the British yoke. Besides, they are so distinct from one another in
their forms of government, in their religious rites, in their emulation of
trade and, consequently, in their affections, that they can never be supposed
to unite in so dangerous an enterprise." The repeated opposition to
instructions from the crown had raised a jealousy in the minds of some, that
there was danger of the colonies setting up for themselves. Col. Bladen, in
particular, for many years one of the board of trade, often expressed, to the
agents and other persons who appeared for New England, his apprehensions of
such designs. It is, nevertheless, certain, that such a scheme appeared to the
whole country to be altogether as wild and extravagant as the foregoing remark
represents it. But a paragraph in the report of the lords of trade to the lords
committee of council was the more immediate occasion of this remark. "The
inhabitants, far from making suitable returns to his majesty for the
extraordinary privileges they enjoy, are daily endeavoring to wrest the (...)
remains of power out of the hands of the crown and to become independent of the
mother kingdom. The nature of the soil and product are much the same with those
of Great Britain, the inhabitants upwards of 94,000 and their militis, (...) of
16 regiments of foot and 15 troops of horse, in the year 1718, 15,000 men, and,
by a medium taken from the naval officers accounts for three years, from the
24th of June 1714 to the 24th of June 1717, for the ports of Boston and salem
only, it appears that the trade of this country employs continually no less
than 3493 sailors, and 492 ships making 25406 tons. Hence your excellencies
will be apprized of what important it is to his majesty's service, that so
powerful a colony should be restrained within due bounds of obedience to the
crown and more firmly attached to the interests of Great Britain than they now
seem to be, which we conceive cannot effectually be done without the
interposition of the British legislators wherein, in our humble opinion, no
time should be lost."


WHETHER this remark was just or not, the house had great encouragement given
them, by Mr. Wilks, In his letter of March 24th 1728.9.
that their address would obtain for them the wished for relief. He had been
heard by council, Mr. Fazakerley, and Doctor Says, before the board of trade,
Mr. Belcher not being them arrived; but soon after they received letters Dated
April 25th 1729.
from their joint agents, enclosing the report of the board of trade, highly
disapproving the conduct of the house, and their agents let them know it was
their opinion that, if the house should persist in their (...) to comply with
the king's instruction, the affair might be carried before the parliament but,
if this should be the case, they thought it better a salary should be fixed by
the supreme legislature, than by the legislature of the province, better the
liberties of the people should be taken away from them, than given up by their
own act. The governor likewise communicated to the house his letters from the
lords of trade approving his conduct. All hopes of success from the agents
seemed to be over, and their business in England would have been very short if
the governor had not given occasion for further application. His administration
for many months, except, in this affair of the salary, had been
unexceptionable. Indeed the members of the house thought themselves aggrieved,
that he would not sign a warrant upon the (...) for their pay and his reason
for refusing it, (...) that one branch of the legislature might as well go
(...) their wages as another, they thought insufficient. (...) drove to
straits, and obliged to his friends to assist (...) in the support of his
family, he thought he might (...) in establishing a fee and perquisite which
had (...) been known in the province before. At NewYork, all vessels took from
the governor a let pass for which there was no law, but the owners of vessels
submitted to it, and it was said, Volenti non fit injuria, Lord Coke, perhaps,
would not have thought even this justification. "K. Edward 3d entered into a new
device to get money, viz. that by agreement and consent of the merchants the
king was to have 40s. of a sack of wool, etc. but the commons (that in truth
were to bear the burden, for the merchants will not be the losers) complained
in parliament for that the grant of the merchants did not bind the commons, and
that the custom might be taken according to the old order, which in the end was
granted, and that no grant should be made but by parliament." Co. 2 d Inst. p.
60.


THE governor required all masters to take the line passes here, against their
will, and demanded 6^. or 1^. sterling. for every vessel bound a foreign voyage
and 4^. for coasters. The stated fee, by law, for registers was of but, the
bills having depreciated more than one half in value since the law was made, he
required 12^. This was a very different case from the other, and I do not know
that it was exceptionable, but they were alike complained of as grievous and
oppressive, and the governor's enemies were not displeased with the advantage
he had given them against him and, upon a representation made by the agents,
notwithstanding the hardship of being restrained from receiving a salary in any
way except such as the assembly would not give it in, yet such was the regard
to law and justice, that his conduct, so far as related to the let passes, was
immediately disapproved. Non potest rex subditum renitentem one rare
impositionibus.(...).
There were other matters, besides that of the salary, to be settled before Mr.
Burnet could be easy in his government, but this grand affair caused the lesser
to be kept off as much as possible. One was the appointment of an attorney
general. By the charter the election of the civil officers, except such as
belong to the council and courts of justice, is in the general assembly. Until
after governor Dudley's time it had generally been allowed that the attorney
general was an officer of the courts of justice and included in the exception,
but lieutenant governor Tailer, in the year 1716, consented to an election made
by the two houses and the choice had been annually made and approved ever
since, not without notice from Mr. Shute of the irregularity of it, but he had
so many other affairs upon his hands that he waved this. Governor Dudley
brought with him a commission from the queen to his son Paul for attorney
general, with powers to appoint clerks and other officers, take fees, etc. I do
not know that it was published. He was attorney general many years, but, I
suppose, with a commission from the governor by advice of council.


MR. Burnet was determined not to part with the right of nomination and the
council were of the opinion he ought not and refused to join with the house in
the election. There was some altercation between the two houses upon it and
both adhered to their principles.

ANOTHER affair of more extensive influence would have been more strenuously
insisted upon.

IN governor Shute's administration, the house, after long disputes with the
governor and with the council, carried the point as to the form of supply of
the treasury, which differing, as we have already observed, from the former
practice and, as both governor and council insisted, from the rule prescribed
by the charter, Mr. Burnet had determined to return to the first practice. The
house determined to return to the first practice. The house passed a vote for
supplying the treasury with twenty thousand pounds which the council concurred,
the practice having been the same for eight or nine years together, but the
governor refused his consent and assured them that he would agree to no supply
of the treasury but such as was in practice before the year 1721. This
declaration was made not long before his death. The settlement of the point in
controversy remained for his successor.



THE new assembly for the election of counselors, was held at the same place:
There was a general expectation that a new set of counselors would be chosen.
The council, of the last year, had been of very different opinion from the
house, in many points. They had no doubt of the governor's power to call,
adjourn or prorogue the assembly to any part of the province he thought proper
and, although they were not for a fixed salary according to the instruction,
yet they would have willingly consented to settle it for longer term than a
year and, some of them, during Mr. Burnet's administration, but the house were
most offended with the non-concurrence of their grant of money "April 10. 1729.
In the house of representatives, Resolved, That the treasurer be directed to
furnish and supply Francis Wilks, Esquire and Jonathan Belcher, Esquire with the sum of
three hundred pounds sterling, in the best manner that may be, to serve the
interest of this province in the affair of the humble address of the house
which has been presented to the king's most excellent majesty, the said
gentlemen to be accountable for the expense of the said money." "April 11. In
council, read and nonconcurred."In council, Ordered, that a message be sent
down to the hon, house of representatives to acquaint them that the board had
nonconcurred a resolve of the house, passed the 10th current, for supplying
Francis Wilks and Jonathan Belcher, Esq's with the sum of L.300 sterling. to
enable them to serve the interest of this province in the affair of the humble
address of the house, etc. and, as they apprehend, for very good reasons. It is
well known that Mr. Wilks was chosen agent for the house of representatives by
a vote of the house only and was, accordingly, to observe such instructions as
he should receive from them, and this was one of the reasons given by the
council for nonconcurring a vote for allowing one hundred pounds sterling. to
Francis Wilks, Esquire passed the last session, viz. December the 20th, and it may
be of ill consequence, as the council judge, for them to join in supporting any
other agency that affects this province than such as they are consulted with
and have consented to from the beginning: Besides which, the board look upon it
as a very extraordinary practice in the hon. house to send up a vote, for
supplying Messi'rs Wilks and Belcher to serve the interest of this province in
the affair of an humble address, etc. for concurrence, when the never allowed
the board a sight of said address till several months after the same was
transmitted to Great Britain and actually presented to his majesty in council."
to their agents. After all, only four new counselors were elected. Jonathan
Belcher, william Dudley, Peter Thacher, and Isaac Little, in the room of
Nathanael Byfield, John Cushing, Symonds Epes, and John Stoddard. The governor
negatived Belcher and Little. Col. Byfield was now in favor and appointed judge
of admiralty after Meinzie's death, Mr. Auchmuty having first officiated a few
months.
Immediately after the council was settled, the court was prorogued to the 25th
of June and, having sat unto the 10th of July, he prorogued them again unto the
20th of August, having made no speech at either of the sessions, or taken any
notice of any business he thought proper for them to do. The reason of this
omission appeared at the session in August. He had waited the final
determination of his majesty in council, upon the report of the lords
committee. This he now communicated to the house, whereby they perceived that
his conduct was approved, that of the house condemned, and his majesty advised
to lay the case before the parliament. At the court at Kensington, the 22d day
of May, 1729. Present, the queen's most excellent majesty, guardian of the
kingdom of Great Britain and his majesty's lieutenant within the same, in
council, His royal highness the prince of Wales, Archb' of Canterbury Lord
Chancellor Lord Privy Seal Lord Steward Lord Chamberlain Duke of Somerset Duke
of Bolton Duke of Rutland Duke of Argyle Duke of Monstross Duke of Kent Duke of
Ancaster Duke of Newcastle Earl of Westmorland Earl of Scarborough Earl of
Conventry Earl of Grandham Earl of Godolphin Earl of Finlater Earl of Marchmont
Earl of llay Earl of Uxbridge Earl of Suffex Earl of Londsdale Viscount
Falmouth Lord Wilmington Mr. Speaker Mr.Chancellor of the exchequer Master of
the Rolls Sir Paul Methnon Henry Pelham, Esquire Upon reading this day at the board
a report to his majesty from the lords of the committee of his majesty's most
honorable privy council, dated the 22d of the last month, in the words
following, viz. Your majesty having been pleased, by your order in council of
the first of February, to refer unto this committee an address from the house
of representatives of the province of the Massachusetts bay, offering the reason
and grounds of their proceedings and conclusions against settling a fixed
salary of one thousand pounds per annum on the governor of that province for
the time being, according to your majesty's instructions to the present
governor, and complaining against the governor for having adjourned the general
court from Boston to Salem; the lords of the committee did, in obedience to
your majesty's said order, proceed, the same day, to take the said address into
their consideration, but being informed that the lords commissioners for trade
and plantations had under their examination several letters from William
Burnet, Esquire your majesty's governor of that province, relating to the behavior
of the said assembly in this affair, the lords of the committee did thereupon
send a copy of the said address to the said lords commissioners, that they
might have the whole matter before them, and directed them to report their
opinion thereupon to this committee. And the said lords commissioners having
accorddingly considered the said several papers and heard Mr. attorney and
solicitor general in support of your majesty's said instructions and also
council in behalf of the said assembly, have reported, upon the whole, That
they seemed entirely averse to settle a certain salary upon the present
governor and those which shall succeed him, yet the said lords commissioners
judge it absolutely necessary that the assembly should settle a fixed salary of
L.1000 sterling per annum, at least, upon the governor, during the whole time
of his government, it being absolutely necessary for your majesty's service
that the independency of the governor upon the assembly should be preserved:
And that as to the complaint against the governor for removing the assembly
from (...) to Salem, his majesty in council, upon a former complaint of (...)
is nature against Col. Shute, had determined that point in (...) of the
governor and, therefore, the lords commissioners were of opinion the present
governor had acted in this matter agreeable to that determination -- The lords
of the committee hereupon o^g leave to acquaint your, majesty that,
notwithstanding the said lords commissioners for trade had fully heard all the
reasons that were offered in behalf of the said assembly, yet, the agents of
the said assembly petitioned this committee the 19th instant, praying that they
might be admitted to be heard before their lordships, who thought it proper to
know upon what terms they would insist, that your majesty's attorney and
solicitor general might be prepared to answer the same, and they desiring to
be heard upon the reasons they had to offer why the said assembly should not
settle a fixed salary upon his majesty's governor of that provined during the
whole time of his government, their lordship, appointed this day for hearing
them thereupon; they having accordingly attended with their council, they
lordships heard all that was offered on their behalf against settling such a
fixed salary, and also heard Mr. attorney and solicitor general in support of
your majesty's said instructions recommending it to them: And do thereupon
agree humbly to report to your majesty, That by the charter granted to the
Massachusets-bay the legislative power is vested in a governor, council and
assembly, of whom the governor alone is nominated by your majesty; that the
assembly is chosen annually by the people, and that the council is likewise
chosen annually by the assembly in conjunction with the members of the council;
that by the reasons insisted on by the council for the assembly in refusing to
(...) a fixed salary, it appeared, the point contended for was to bring the
governor appointed by your majesty over them into a dependence on their good
will for his subsistence, which would manifestly tend to a lessening of his
authority and, consequently, of that dependence which this colony ought to have
upon the crown of Great Britain, by bringing the whole legislative power into
the hands of the people. The power of raising taxes being by the charter
granted to the general assembly, it was from thence argued that they ought to
be left at liberty for the doing or omitting it as they shall think proper, but
the words of the charter show the intent of granting them this power to be that
they should use it for the service of the crown, in the nescessary defense and
support of your majesty's government of the said province and the protection
and preservation of the inhabitants; and that, therefore, the refusing or
neglecting to make due provision for the support of your majesty's governor,
who is so essential a part of the government, must be looked upon as acting
contray to the terms of the said charter and inconsistent with the trust
reposed in them thereby, That, besides the instruction given to the present
governor by your majesty for this purpose, instructions have always been given
by your majesty's predecessors to former governors to recommend to the assembly
the establishing a salary suitable to the dignity of that post; notwithstanding
which the assembly have hitherto refused to comply therewith, although they
have by act of assembly settled a fixed salary or allowance of six shillings a
day on themselves and ten shillings a day on the council. The present assembly
have indeed offered your majesty's governor a salary equal to what was
recommended by your majesty's instructions, for the time he has been with them,
but it is apprehended this was done only to tempt him to give up your majesty's
instructions for settling it for the whole time of his government, And here
their lordships cannot, in justice to Mr. Burnet, omit taking notice that, by
his steady pursuit of your majesty's instructions and rejecting the temptations
offered by the assembly, he has acted with the utmost duty to your majesty and
a just regard to the trust reposed in him as governor of that province. Upon a
due consideration of all that has been offered on the part of the assembly in
justification of their refusing to comply with your majesty's instructions, the
lords of the committee cannot but agree in opinion with the lords commissioners
for trade and plantations, that it is absolutely necessary for your majesty's
service and for preserving that dependency which this colony ought to have upon
Great Britain and better securing a due execution of the laws for trade and
navigation, that a salary of L.1000 sterling per annum should be settled upon
the governor during the whole time of his government, and considering that the
assembly of the province have shown so little regard to your majesty's
instructions or to those of your royal predecessors in this behalf, which the
governors, from time to time, have been directed to lay before them, the lords
of the committee do advise your majesty to lay the whole matter before the
parliament of Great Britain. Her majesty, this day, took the said report into
consideration and was pleased, with the advice of his majesty's privy council,
to approve thereof and to order, as is hereby ordered, that one of his
majesty's principal secretaries of state should receive the pleasure of the
crown thereupon. A true copy, Massachusetts general court records. Temple
Stanyas.
The house received a letter, at the same time, from their agents who, it
seems, had altered their opinions and now intimated to the house that,
notwithstanding the determination or advice of the privy council, it was not
likely the affair would ever be brought before the parliament. This letter the
house ordered to be printed. The governor in one of his messages calls it "an
undeniable proof of their endeavors to keep the people in ignorance of the
true state of their affairs." It seems to be preferring a present temporary
convenience, in keeping up the spirit of the people and dissusing a favorable
opinion of their representatives, to the future real advantage of the cause,
for such a measure must weaken the hands of the agents in England and send to
bring the matter before the parliament when, otherwise, it might have been
avoided.

THE governor having held several sessions at Salem, without any success he
adjourned the court, to meet the 21st of August at Cambridge. This widened the
breach, and the house grew warmer in their votes and messages, and complained
that they were to be compelled to measures against their judgment, by being
harrassed and drove from one part of the province to another. The governor's
friends observed the effect the controversy had upon his spirits. In a few
days, he fell sick of a fever and died at Boston the 7th of September. Some
attributed his illness to his taking cold, his carriage oversetting upon the
causeway at Cambridge, the tide being high and he falling into the water. The
resentment which had been raised ceased with people in general, upon his death.
Many amiable parts of his character revived in their minds. He had been steady
and inflexible in his adherence to his instructions, but discovered nothing of
a grasping avaritious mind, it was the mode, more than the quantum, of his
salary upon which he insisted. The naval office had generally been a post for
some relation or favorite of the governor, but Col. Tailer having been
lieutenant governor and in circumstances far from affluent, he generously gave
the post to him, without any reserve of the issues or profits. The only
instance of his undue exacting money, by some, was thought to be palliated by
the established custom of the government he had quitted. This did not justify
it. In his disposal of public offices, he gave the preference to such as were
disposed to favor his cause, and displaced some for not favoring it, and, in
some instances, he went further than good policy would allow. He did not know
the temper of the people of New England. They have a strong sense of liberty
and are more easily drawn than driven. He disobliged many of his friends by
removing from his posts Mr. Lynde, a gentleman of the house, esteemed by both
sides for his integrity and other valuable qualities, and he acknowledged that
he could assign no other reason except that the gentleman had not voted for a
compliance with the instruction. However, an immoral or unfair character was a
bar to office and he gave his negative to an election of a councellor, in one
instance, upon that principle only. His superior talents and free and easy
manner of communicating his sentiments made him the delight of men of sense and
learning. His right of precedence in all companies facilitated the exercise of
his natural disposition to a great share in the conversation and at the same
time caused it to appear more excusable. His own account of his genius was,
that it was late before it budded, and that, until he was near twenty years of
age, his father despaired of his ever making any figure in life. This, perhaps,
might proceed from the exact severe discipline of the bishop's family, not
calculated for every temper alike, and might damp and discourage his. To long
and frequent religious services at home, in his youth, he would sometimes
pleasantly attribute his indisposition to a very scrupulous exact attendance
upon public worship, but this, might, really, be owing to an abhorrence of
oftentation and mere formality in religion, to avoid which, as most of the
grave serious people of the province thought, he approached too near the other
extreme. A little more caution and conformity to the different ages, manners,
customs and even prejudices of different companies, would have been more
politic, but his open undisguised mind could not submit to it. Being asked to
dine with an old charter senator who retained the custom of saying grace
sitting, the gave gentleman desired to know which would be more agreeable to
his excellency, that grace should be said standing or sitting, the governor
replied, standing or sitting, any way or no way, just as you please. He
sometimes wore a cloth coat lined with velvet. It was said to be expressive of
his character. He was a firm believer of the truth of revealed religion, but a
bigot to no particular profession among christians and laid little stress upon
modes and forms. By a clause in his last will, he ordered his body to be
buried, if he died at New York, by his wife, if in any other part of the world,
in the nearest churchyard or burying ground, all places being alike to God's
a^^eeing eye.

THE assembly ordered a very honorable funeral at the public charge. A motion,
at another time, was made in the house for a grant to a governor to bear the
expense of his lady's funeral, a dry old representative objected to a grant for
a governor's lady, had the motion been for a grant to bury the governor, he
should have thought the money well laid out.

MR. Dummer reassumed the administration. He did not intend to enter into the
controversy about the salary; no advantage could arise from it, no new
arguments could be used, the king's instructions were to be his rule, and he
would not depart from them by accepting any grant as lieutenant governor; but
the affair having been under consideration before his majesty in council and
further proceedings expected, he would wait for further intelligence and
directions. The house were not willing to admit that the instruction had any
respect to the salary of a lieutenant governor, but if it had, they had given
sufficient reasons against it, and were determined to come into no act for
fixing a salary. Having continued the session at Cambridge until the 26th of
September, he ordered an adjournment to the 29th of November, at Boston, which
was a further indication that he did not intend to press the instruction;
however, at their first coming together, he recommended to them a compliance
with it and, upon their assuring him, by a message, that, although they could
not settle a salary, yet they were ready to give him an ample and honorable
support, he desired them to lose no time about it, for he would accept of no
support unless it should be exactly conformable to his majesty's instruction.
The house, notwithstanding, made a grant of L.750, to enable him to manage the
affairs of government. The council concurred with an amendment adding 'for the
half year currant' but, this being fixing a salary for half a year, the house
refused it.

UPON the news of Mr. Burnet's death, Mr. Belcher applied with all his powers
to obtain the commission for the government. Governor Shute might have
returned, but he declined it and generously gave his interest to Mr. Belcher
who, fourteen years before, had given L.500 sterling, which was never repaid,
to faclitate Col. Shute's appointment. The controversy, which it was supposed a
governor must be engaged in, caused fewer competitors, and the ministry were
the more concerned to find a proper person. Lord Townshend asked Mr. Wilks, who
had much of his confidence. Whether he thought Mr. Belcher would be able to
influence the people to a compliance with the king's instructions, he replied
that he thought no man more likely. Their choosing him agent was a mark of their
confidence in him, but it seemed natural to expect that they would be under
stronger prejudices against him than against a person who had never engaged in
their favor. Mr. Belcher's appointment engaged the removal of Mr. Dummer from
the place of lieutenant governor. A young gentleman, with whose family Mr.
Wilks was connected, (Mr. Thornton) Mr. Belcher had engaged to provide for, and
he had no post in his gift, worth accepting, besides the naval office. To make
a vacancy there, Col. Tailer was appointed lieutenant governor. The pleasure,
if there was any, in superseding Mr. Dummer, who had superseded him before,
could be no equivalent for the difference between a post of naked honor, and a
post of profit which gave him a comfortable living. Mr. Dummer's administration
has been, justly, well spoken of. His general aim was to do public service. He
was compelled to some compliances which appeared to him the least of two evils.
It lessened him in Mr. Burner's esteem who thought the should have shown more
fortitude; but he retired with honor, and, after some years, was elected into
the council, where, from respect to his former commission, he took the place of
president, but being thought too favorable to the prerogative, after two or
three years, he was left out. He seemed to lay this flight more to heart than
the loss of his commission, and aimed at nothing more, the rest of his life,
than otium cum dignitat^, selecting for his friends and acquaintance men of
sense, virtue and religion and, enjoyed in life, for many years, that same
which, for insinitely wise reasons, the great creator has implanted in every
generous breast a desire of, even after death.

COL. Tailer's commission was received and published before Mr. Belcher's
arrival and it gave him an opportunity of doing a generous thing for Mr.
Dummer. A vote had passed the two houses granting him nine hundred pounds,
which, from a regard to his instructions, he had not signed, nor had he
expressly refused it, and the court having been adjourned only, not prorogued,
the next meeting was considered as the same session and Colonel Tailer ventured
to sign it, not being a grant to himself and not against the letter of his
instructions, and it was really saving money to Mr. Dummer, the grant, being
intended for ervices to come as well as past, would not have been renewed, or
in part only.

CHAP. IV.
From the arrival of Governor Belcher, in 1730, to the reimbursement of the
charge of the expedition against Cape-Breton and the abolition of paper money,
in 1749.


No governor had been received with a show of greater joy. Both parties
supposed they had an interest in him. For men to alter their principles and
practice, according to their interest, was no new thing. A sketch of Mr.
Belcher's life and character will in some measure account for his obtaining the
government, for the principal events in his administration and for the loss of
his commission.

BEING the only son of a wealthy father, he had high views from the beginning
of life. After an accademical education in his own country, he traveled to
Europe, was twice at Hanover, and was introduced to the court there, at the
time when the princess Sophia was the presumptive heiress to the British crown.
The novelty of a British American, added to the gracefulness of his person,
caused distinguishing notice to be taken of him, which tended to increase that
aspiring turn of mind which was very natural to him. Some years after, he made
another voyage to England, being then engaged in mercantile affairs, which,
after his return home, proved, in the general course of them, rather
unsuccessful, and seem to have suppressed or abated the ruling passion, but,
being chosen agent for the house of representatives, it revived and was
gratified to the utmost, by his appointment to the government of
Massachusets-bay and New Hampshire, and discovered itself in every part of his
administration. Before he was governor, except in one instance, he had always
been a favorer of the prerogative, and afterward he did not fail of acting up
to his principles. A man of high principles cannot be too jealous of himself,
upon a sudden advancement to a place of power. The council never enjoyed less
freedom than in his time. He proposed matters for the sake of their sanction
rather than advice, rarely failing of a majority to approve of his sentiments.

HE lived elegantly in his family, was hospitable, made great show in dress,
equipage, etc. and although by the depreciation of the currency he was
curtailed of his salary, yet he disdained any unwarrantable or mean ways of
obtaining money to supply his expenses. By great freedom in conversation and an
unreserved censure of persons whose principles or conduct he disapproved, he
made himself many enemies. In a private person, this may often pass with little
notice, but from a governor it is very hardly forgot, and some never ceased
pursuing revenge until they saw him displaced.

THE general court met the 9th of September. At Cambridge, the small pox being
in Boston.
The people waited with impatience the governor's first speech, Many slattered
themselves that the instruction for a fixed salary was withdrawn, others that,
if it was continued, he would treat it rather as Dudley and Shute had done than
as his immediate predecessor, others who did not expect a relaxation were, from
curiosity, wishing to know how he would acquit himself with the people, who
sent him to England to oppose the instruction. After premising, that the honor
of the crown and interest of Great Britain are very compatible with the
privileges and liberties of the plantations, he tells the two houses that he
had it in command from his royal master to communicate to them his 27th
instruction, respecting the governor's support, that whilst he was in England
he did every thing consistent with reason and justice for preserving and
lengthening out the peace and welfare of the province, that they were no
strangers to the steps taken by his majesty with respect to the unhappy dispute
between the late governor and them and, he hoped, after such a struggle, they
would think it for the true interest of the province to do what might be
perfectly acceptable; that nothing prevented this controversy, and several
other matters of dangerous consequence, being laid before the parliament, but
his majesty's great lenity and goodness, which inclined him to give them one
opportunity more of paying a due regard to what in his royal wisdom he thinks
so just and reasonable. Had he stopped here, perhaps, less could not have been
expected from him; but he unfortunately attempted to show a similitude between
the ease of Cato Shut up in (...), and the Massachusets-bay under the restraint
of the royal instruction, commended the Wisdom of Cato in making so brave a
stand for the liberties of his country, but condemned his putting an end to his
life, when affairs, became desperate, rather than submit to a power he could no
longer resist; which instance he brought as some illustration of the late
controversy, though he would not allow it to run parrallel, Caesar being a
tyrant and the king the protector of the liberties of his subjects.

IT was said, upon this occasion, that the governor must allow that the
Massachusetts assembly had done wisely hitherto in defending their liberties,
for, otherwise, he had brought an instance of a case in no one respect similar
to theirs; and, if they had done so, it was because the instruction was a mere
exertion of power, and then the parallel would run farther than he was willing
to allow.

THE instruction was conceived in much stronger terms than that to governor
Burnet, and it is declared that in case the assembly refuses to conform to it
"his majesty will find himself under a necessity of laying the undutiful
behavior of the province before the legislature of Great Britain not only in
this single instance but in many others of the same nature and tendency,
whereby it manifestly appears that this assembly, for some years last past,
have attempted by unwarrantable practices to weaken if not cast off the
obedience they owe to the crown and the dependence which all colonies ought to
have on their mother country." And in the close of the instruction his majesty
expects. "that they do forthwith comply with this proposal as the last
signification of our royal pleasure to them upon this subject, and if the said
assembly shall not think fit to comply therewith, it is our will and pleasure
and you are required immediately to come over to this kingdom of Great Britain,
in order to give us an exact account of all that shall have passed upon this
subject, that we may lay the same before our parliament."

THE house proceeded just as they had done with governor Burnet. They made a
grant to Mr. Belcher of L.1000 currency for desreying the expense of his voyage
to New England and as a gratuity for services while in England; Five hundred
pounds was also granted to the governor for his services in England, as agent
for the house of representatives, and the sum of L.1503 Is. Id. which had been
advanced by merchants in Boston and others and supplied the agents, was also
granted to be paid out of the public treasury, and to the several persons
respectively. The honor of the governor who had spent the money, as well as
that of the house, was concerned. The council, although in general the same
persons who had refused to consent to any grant of money for the use of an
agent in the choice of whom they had no share, were prevailed upon by the
governor and the influence of a great number of the principal merchants of
Boston who had advanced the money, to consent to a grant for the re-payment of
it. The house expecting the like difficulty might arise upon a like occasion in
future time, took this favorable opportunity of passing a vote for the taking
the sum of five hundred pounds sterling out of the province treasury and
depositing it in the bank of England for the use of the house. To this vote the
council gave their concurrence and the governor his consent. He repented of it
afterward, when he found the agent employed by the house and supported with
this money, was the principal promoter of the complaints against him which
caused his removal from the government.
and, some time after, they voted him a sum equal to a thousand pounds
sterling, to enable him to manage the public affairs, etc. but would fix no
time. The council concurred it with an amendment, viz. "and that the same sum
be annually allowed for the governor's support." This, without a fund for the
payment of it, was doing little more than the house had repeatedly done by
their declarations that they doubted not future assemblies would make the like
honorable provision for the support governor's according to the ability of the
province; the amendment, notwithstanding, was not agreed to, and the house
adhered to their own vote. This produced a second amendment, viz. "that the
same sum should be annually paid during his excellency's continuance in the
government and residence here;" but this also was nonconcurred. The two houses
then conferred upon the subject, This was a matter of money which the house
sometimes refuse to confer upon, but they have been unsteady in this respect.
the governor being present, It is unusual for governors to be present at a
conference, between the two houses. Mr. Shirley being desirous of acquainting
himself with the arguments on both sides in some affair in controversy between
the two houses, intimated to the council his inclination to be present. When
the house came up the speaker, Mr. Cushing, seeing the governor in the chair,
started back and remaining at the door of the council chamber, expressed his
surprise at seeing his excellency in the chair, the conference being intended
between the two houses only, but if his excellency intended to remain in the
chair, only to hear the arguments, he imagined the house would have no
objection to conferring in his presence. This the governor consented to
declaring he would not interfere.
and before they parted he made a long speech, expressing the great pleasure
the council had given him in the part they had taken and his concern and
surprise at the conduct of the house, in running the resque of the consequences
of their refusal to comply with the instruction, reminded them of the vast
expense which their former unsuccessful disputes with their governors had
occasioned to the province, but used no arguments to convince them of the
reasonableness of the demand and its compatibillty with their rights and
privileges.

THE smallpox being in the town of Cambridge, where the court sat, the house
desired to rise, but the governor let them know he would meet them in any other
town and, the same day, ordered an adjournment to Roxbury, where a bill passed
both houses for the support of the governor, but, not coming up to the
instruction, the governor could not consent to it. The country party in the
house, as much a soloecism as it is, were the most zealous for the prerogative,
and, except a few prerogative men who were always willing to fix the salary,
none went so great a length, at this time, toward fixing it as those who
opposed any one step toward it, under Mr. Burnet.

THE people, in general, were well pleased with the governor. It is not
improbable that he would have obtained the settlement of a salary during his
administration, if it had not been, in effect, a settlement for his successors
also, for such a precedent could not easily have been resisted. The two parties
which had long subsisted in the government were vying, each with the other, in
measures for an expedient or accommodation. The prerogative men were Mr.
Delcher's old friends, who were pretty well satisfied that his going over to
the other side was not from any real affection to the cause, and that he must,
sooner or later, differ with those who adhered to it, and for this event they
waited patiently. The other party, by whose interest he had been sent to
England, adhered to him, expecting their reward. Accordingly, Mr. Cook was
soon appointed a justice of the common pleas for the county of Suffolk. To make
way for him and another favorite, Col. Byfield, to whom Mr. Belcher was allied,
two gentlemen, Col. Hutchinson and Col. Dudley, were displaced. They were both
in principle steady friends to government, and the first of them was a fast
friend to the governor. Mr. Belcher would not have been able to advance so many
of his friends as he did, if he had not persuaded the council that, upon the
appointment of a new governor, it was necessary to renew all civil commissions.
Having obtained this point, he took the most convenient time to settle the
several counties. Before he settled the county of York, he recommended to the
judges a person for clerk of the court. This officer the province law impowers
the judges to appoint. Some of them sent their excuse, being well satisfied
with the clerk they had, who was a faithful well approved officer, but the
governor let the judges know, if he could not appoint a clerk he could a judge,
and accordingly removed those who were not for his purpose and appointed others
in their stead. It was said that when Mr. Belcher, some years after, was
ordered by the king to remove his son in law, Mr. Lyde, from the naval office,
the power of appointment to which office is, by act of parliament, given to the
governor, he was advised to make an excuse, Mr. Lyde being an officer who gave
general satisfaction; but Mr. Belcher replied, that although the king could not
make a naval officer yet he could make a governor, and he was forced to give up
his son in law. Nec lex est justior ulla -- This was the first instance of an
appointment made by the crown immediately to this office and, I think, to any
office in the province the nomination to which is by the charter and royal
commission left to the judgment and discretion of the governor.
There was an inconsistency, in delaying appointments, with the principles he
advanced. If new commissions were necessary, they were necessary immediately,
and they might as well be delayed seven years as one. The commissions to civil
officers being in the king's name and tested by the governor, the renewal of
such commissions upon the appointment of a governor has not been practiced
since Mr. Belcher's time. It was proposed in council by his successor, but Mr.
Read, a very eminent lawyer and, which is more, a person of great integrity and
firmness of mind, being then a member of the council, brought such arguments
against the practice that the majority of the board refused to consent to it.
Besides this general new appointment, Mr. Belcher, in the course of his
administration. made more frequent removals of persons from office than any
governor before or since. This was owing to the pusillanimity of the council.
No appointment can be made without their advice. The governor, it is true, can
refuse his consent, every year, to their election, but the emoluments of a
Massachusetts councellor are very small and can cause no great temptation to
sacrifice virtue. It is said that one of the judges of the superior court
expecting to tbe removed, in the latter part of Mr. Belcher's administration,
applied by a friend in England to lord chief justice Wills, who signified his
resolution that if any judge should be removed, without good reason assigned,
he would himself complain to his majesty against the governor. The freedom and
independence of the judges of England is always enumerated among the
excellencies of the constitution. The Massachusetts judges are far from
independent. In Mr. Belcher's administration they were peculiarly dependent
upon the governor. Before and (...) they have been dependent upon the assembly
for their salary, granted annually, which sometimes has been delayed, sometimes
(...) and rarely escapes being a subject of debate and (...).


Esquire to be the governor, who was a native of the country, whose fortune was
here, who, when a member of the council, as well as when in a private station,
has always consulted the true interest of his country as well as the honor and
dignity of the crown, therefore, it is most solemnly promised and engaged to
his most excellent majesty that there shall be granted the like sum for the
like purpose at the beginning of the sessions in May every year during the
governor's continuance in the administration and residence within the province,
provided, this act shall not be pleaded as a precedent or binding on any future
assembly for fixing a salary on any succeeding governor. The bill is in Mr.
Cooke's hand writing and it is minuted at the bottom that the governor approved
of it. The governor could not imagine so evasive a thing could be approved in
England. He might hope to improve it as being a further advance than had been
before made, and, by using this argument, that it would be much more rational
for the house to do what they now had fully in their power to do, than to make
a solemn promise that another house should do the same thing, the performance
of which promise they would not have in their own power. The scheme failed, the
bill did not pass and from that time Mr. Belcher, despairing of carrying his
point, turned his thought to obtaining a relaxation of his instruction. Instead
of applying himself, he advised to an address from the house, not for the
withdraw of the instruction but that the governor might have leave to receive
the sum granted. This was allowed, but it was to be understood that, he was to
insist upon a compliance with his instruction as much as ever. Leave for
consent to particular grants was obtained two or three years and, at length, a
general order of leave to receive such sums as should be granted. This was the
issue of the controversy about a fixed salary. Until Mr. Belcher's arrival, Mr.
Cook had differed from most who, from time to time, have been recorded in
history for popular men. Generally, to preserve the favor of the people, they
must change with the popular air, and when we survey a course of action it will
not appear altogether consistent. He had the art of keeping the people steady
in the applause of his measures. To be careful never to depart from the
appearance of maintaining or enlarging rights, liberties and privileges was all
he found necessary. As Soon as he was defective in this respect and tried to
secure his interest both with the governor and town of Boston he had like to
have lost both. In the election of representatives for Boston, in 1733 or 1734
the governor's party appeared against him, he had lost many of the other party
by what they called too great a compliance and he had a majority, after several
trials, of one or two votes only in six or seven hundred.



MR. Belcher had another instruction not to consent to the issuing any bills of
credit for a longer term than those were to remain current which had before
been issued, none of which extended beyond the year 1741. It would have been
but a small burden upon the inhabitants to have paid the charges of every year
and the debt which lay upon such year besides, but, instead of that wise
measure, they suffered one year after another to pass with light taxes and laid
heavy burdens upon distant years, and the last year, 1741, had more laid upon
it than any four or five preceding years, and although even this was far short
of what has been paid in some succeeding years, yet it was deemed an
insupportable burden and it was generally supposed the promises made by the
acts of government to draw in the bills in that year would by some means or
other be evaded or openly violated. Mr. Belcher seemed determined to adhere to
his instruction and there was an expectation of some great convulsion which,
was prevented by his being superseded before that period arrived.

THE project we have taken notice of, p. 173, for settling the eastern country,
Captain Coram pursued until he procured an order or instruction to Col.
Phillips, the governor of Nova Scotia, in 1730, to take possession of the land
between St. Croix and Kennebeck, and 30 men with an officer were sent to the
fort at Pemaquid, built by the Massachusetts. Col. Dunbar, a gentleman out of
employ, came over about the same time, took the command of the fort and assumed
the government of that part of the province. Mr. Belcher was applied to by the
proprietors of the lands there, and the house of representatives asserted the
right of the province. The governor with advice of council issued a
proclamation requiring the inhabitants to remain in their obedience and due
subjection to the laws and government of the province. This seems to have been
all that in prudence he could do. Some were for taking further measures to
remove Dunbar which, as he had a royal commission, however liable to
exceptions, Mr. Belcher thought by no means warrantable. The minds of the
people were inflamed and when Dunbar came up to Boston he persisted in his
claim to the country which, with reports of some not very decent expressions of
the governor, raised the resentment of many. Persons of ill design perhaps
might have been able to have caused a tumult. The lands indeed were claimed by
a few particular persons, but it was spread abroad that when this country
should be detached from the rest of the province the supplies of fuel to the
seaport towns would cease or be burdened with heavy duties and the poor
oppressed. It happened that Mr. Samuel Waldo, a gentleman of good capacity and
who would not easily relinquish his right, undertook for the proprietors of the
principal tract of the country claimed and, upon representation to his majesty
in council the order to Phillips and the authority to Dunbar were revoked in
1732, and the government of the province afterward thought it proper to place
a garrison in their own pay at Fort Frederick, the name given by Dunbar to the
fort at Pemaquid.

I shall take notice of two or three only and those the most remarkable events
during the rest of Mr. Belcher's administration.

for, I think, 20 years to their own inhabitants, who would immediately have it
in their power to add L.100,000 to their trading stock from the horses, sheep,
lumber, fish, etc. of the Massachusetts inhabitants. The merchants of Boston
therefore consederated and mutually promised and engaged not to receive any
bills of this new emission, but, to provide a currency, a large number formed
themselves into a company entered into covenants, chose directors, etc. and
issued L.110,000 redeemable in 10 years, in silver at 19 s. per oz. the then
current rate, or gold in proportion, a tenth part annually. About the same time
the Massachusetts treasury, which had been long shut was opened, and the debts
of two or three years were all paid at one time in bills of credit; to this was
added the ordinary emissions of bills from New Hampshire and Connecticut, and
some of the Boston merchants, tempted by an opportunity of selling their
English goods, having broke through their engagements and received the
Rhode Island bills, all the rest soon followed the example. All these emissions
made a flood of money, silver rose from 19 s. to 27 s. the oz. and exchange
with all other countries consequently rose also, and every creditor was
defrauded of about one third of his just dues. As Soon as silver rose to 27 s.
the notes issued by the merchants payable at 19 s, were hoarded up and no
longer answered the purposes of money. Although the currency was lessened by
taking away the notes, yet what remained never increased in value, silver
continuing several years about the same rate, until it took another large jump.
Thus very great injustice was caused by this wretched paper currency and no
relief of any fort obtained; for, by this sinking in value, though the nominal
sum was higher than it had ever been before, yet the currency would produce no
more sterling money than it would have done before the late emissions were
made. William Tailer, Esquire the lieut. governor, dying in 1732, in 1733 Spencer
Phips, Esquire nephew by the sister and adopted son to Sire William Phips,
succeeded. Mr. Belcher used his interest for Adam Winthrop, Esquire Both Winthrop
and Phips had been several years members of the council.


This swallowed up all New Hampshire and the greatest part of the province of
Main. At a hearing before the king in council in 1677 the agents for
Massachusetts, by advice, disclaimed all right of jurisdiction beyond the three
miles north of the river according to the course, and it was determined they
had a right as far as the river extended, but how far the river did extend was
not then expressly mentioned. It seems however not to have been doubted, for
although at the time of the grant of the first charter it does not appear that
the course was known any great distance from the sea yet, soon after the
government was transferred from Old England to New, it was as well known by the
name of Merrimack as far as Penicook as it is at this day, and the tribe of
Indians which dwelt there had a correspondence with the English, and in 1639
persons were employed by the government of Massachusetts to explore that part of
the country and there are still preserved the testimonies of diverse persons
declaring that they before that time always understood the river to be called
by the same name, from the crotch to the mouth. If the first charter of the
Massachusetts had continued it is not probable any different construction would
ever have been started; but in the new charter the boundary is thus expressed,
"extending from the great river commonly called Monomack alias Merrimack on the
north part and from three miles northward of the said river to the atlantic or
western sea or ocean on the south part, etc. The whole, however of the old
colony being included in the new province, many years passed without any
thought of a different construction of bounds in the two charters and the
disputes between New Hampshire and the Massachusetts have been, principally,
concerning the towns of Salisbury and Haverhill which, when first granted by
the Massachusetts, were made to extend more than three miles from the river and
the part beyond the three miles remained under the jurisdiction by which they
had been granted, which New Hampshire complained of. A new line, to begin three
miles north of the mouth of Merrimack and so run west to the south sea, is a
modern construction. Some hints had been given of such a line, before or about
the year 1726, and it was supposed by New Hampshire that the Massachusetts were
induced thereby to make grants of townships between Merrimack and Connecticut
river, in order to strengthen their title by possession. Still there was a
prospect of accommodation and, in the year 1731, the committees from the
assemblies of the two provinces differed only upon the point of equivalents,
the Massachusetts desiring to retain under their jurisdiction the whole of those
towns which lay upon the river and to give other lands as an equivalent for the
property; but about the same time the gentlemen of New Hampshire who had for
many years before been at the helm thinking, and perhaps justly, that they were
not well treated by Mr. Belcher, determined to exert themselves to obtain a
governor for that province and to remain no longer under the same governor with
the Massachusetts. They had but little chance for this unless they could enlarge
their bounds. The very proposal of a distinct government as it increased the
number of officers of the crown they thought would be a favorable circumstance
in settling the controversy with Massachusetts.

THE house of representatives of New Hampshire, Oct. 7, 1731, by a vote
appointed John Rindge, Esquire a merchant there who was bound to England, their
agent to solicit the settlement of the boundaries. But their main dependence
was upon Mr. Thomlinson, a gentleman who had been in New Hampshire, and was
then a merchant of note in London, and perhaps was as capable of conducting
their cause as any person they could have pitched upon. He had the friendship
of Col. Bladen who at that day had great weight in the board of trade and had
conceived very unfavorable sentiments of the Massachusetts in general and did
not like Mr. Belcher the governor. He employed a solicitor, Ferdinando Paris,
one of the first rate and who had a peculiar talent at slurring the characters
of his antagonists. Many of his briefs which I have seen, abound in this way.
The first step in consequence of Mr. Rindge's petition was a question sent by
the lords of trade to the attorney and solicitor general for their opinion,
"From what part of Merrimack river the three miles from whence the dividing
line between the province of New Hampshire and the province of the Massachusetts
bay is to begin, ought to be taken according to the intent of the charter of
William and Mary." This was a plain intimation that if the point where to begin
could be settled, nothing more was necessary, the west line claimed by
New Hampshire was to follow of course. The Massachusetts agent (Mr. Wilks) by
his council would say nothing upon the question, because it would not determine
the matters in dispute. Report was made, however, that it ought to begin three
miles north of the mouth of Merrimack river. It was then proposed that
commissioners should be appointed to settle this controversy. This the
Massachusetts were averse to, unless they knew who they were to be. They were at
the same time afraid of it is being determined in England, exparte, if they
should refuse to consent. A committee of the general court reported that the
agent should be instructed that the province would agree to commissioners to be
appointed, to settle the controversy, here. This report was accepted, the house
intending the commissioners should be agreed upon by the two governments, some
of the committee intending the agent should understand his instructions, to
consent to the appointment of commissioners provided they sat here or in one of
the two governments. A comma after the word appointed and after the word
controversy would give the sense of the house, the last comma left out it might
be taken in the sense of the committee, but as it is most probable the letter
had no regular pointing their meaning was to be guessed at.

THIS was treating the agent ill, and he was censured by the house for not
observing his instructions. I have heard this account of the affair from some
of the committee, who excused themselves for this equivocal report as being
necessary for the public service, the house not being willing to consent to an
explicit submission. It was made a condition of the submission that private
property should not be affected. The ministry in later instances have not
waited for an express submission but have appointed commissioners upon
application from one party only.

THE commissioners were all such as the New Hampshire agent proposed, five
counselors from each of the governments of New York, Rhode Island and
NovaScotia. With the two former governments the Massachusetts were then in
controversy about lines. The latter it was said was disaffected to charter
government. Connecticut, proposed by Massachusetts, was rejected because of a
bias from their trade, religion, etc. which New Hampshire was afraid of. The
place for the meeting of commissioners was Hampton in New Hampshire, the first
of August.

THE commissioners from Nova Scotia, with some of Rhode Island, met at the time
appointed and were afterward joined by Mr. Livingstone from New York, who
presided. After many weeks spent in hearing the parties and examining their
evidence, the only doubt in the commissioners minds was, whether the
Massachusetts new charter comprehended the whole of the old colony. Not being
able to satisfy themselves, and perhaps not being unwilling to avoid the
determination, they agreed to make a special judgment or decree, the substance
of which was, that, if the charter of William and Mary grants to the
Massachusets-bay all the lands granted by the charter of Charles the first,
they then adjudge a curve line to begin three miles north of the mouth of the
river and to keep the same distance from the river as far as the crotch or
parting at Pemigewasset and Winepesiaukee and then to run west toward the
south sea until it meets with his majesty's other governments, but if the
charter of William and Mary did not contain etc. then they adjudge a west line
to begin at the same place three miles north of the mouth and to run to the
south sea. This point in doubt they submitted to his majesty's royal pleasure.

THE Massachusetts were sure of their cause. It was impossible, they thought,
consistent with common sense, that the point in doubt should be determined
against them. They thought it fasest however to send to England a special
agent, Edmund Quincy, Esquire one of the council, who had been one of the court's
agents before the commissioners. He was joined with Mr. Wilks, and Mr. Belcher
by his interest prevailed upon the assembly to add a third, his wife's brother,
Richard Partridge. Exceptions, called an appeal, were offered to the judgment
of the commissioners. Mr. Quincy died of the small pox by inoculation, soon
after his arrival in London, the other two knew little or nothing of the
controversy. The commissioners, however, had rendered it as difficult to
determine a line against the Massachusetts as if they had given a general
judgment in their favor. The New Hampshire agent and solicitor thought of no
expedient. In their brief, they pray the lords committee to report "that all
the lands lying to the northward of Merrimack river which were granted by the
charter of king Charles the first to the late colony of the Massachusets-bay
are not granted to the present province of the Massachusets-bay by the charter
of king William and queen Mary." This never could have been done. At the
hearing, it was thought proper to lay aside all regard to the judgment of the
commissioners and to proceed upon an entirely new plan. No doubt was made, that
the old colony was all included in the new province. The question was, what
were the northern bounds of the colony of Massachusets-bay, which the council
of Plymouth when they fold the territory to the patentees, and the king when he
granted the jurisdiction, had in contemplation. This, it was said, must be a
line three miles north of a river not fully explored, but whose general course
was supposed to be east and west. So far therefore as it afterward appeared
that the river kept this course, so far it was equitable the line should
continue, but, as on the one hand, if the river had altared its course and
turned to the south, it would have been inequitable to have reduced the grant
to a very small tract, so on the other hand, when it appeared to turn to the
north it was inequitable to extend the grant and make a very large territory
and therefore defeat other grants made about the same time. The grant to Sir
Henry Roswell and others was March 19th 1627. That to Mason was November 7th
1629, and was to extend 60 miles from the sea. But the river Merrimack turning
to the north after about 30 miles from the sea if the Massachusetts bounds had
continued three miles distant from the river to the crotch it would comprehend
more than half of Mason's grant.
It was therefore determined that the northern boundaries of Massachusetts bay
should be a line three miles from the river as far as Pantucket-falls, then to
run W. 10 degrees. N. until it meets New York line.

THE Massachusetts thought themselves aggrieved. They submitted the controversy
to commissioners to be appointed by the crown, and had been fully heard. The
whole proceedings of the commissioners were set aside and, without any notice
to the government, the controversy was determined by a committee of council
upon a new point on which their agent had never been instructed. And, however
there might be the appearance of equity in the principle upon which their
lordships proceeded, yet the Massachusetts supposed, if their possession for one
hundred years, together with the determination of the king in council in 1677
and the acquiescence of all parties in this determination for about fifty years
had been urged and duly weighed, the balance upon the sole principle of equity
would have been in their favor. It increased their mortification to find that
they had lost by this new line several hundred thousand acres more than the
utmost claim ever made by New Hampshire; for Merrimack river from the mouth to
Pantucket-falls tending to the south, it made a difference of 4 or 5 miles in
breadth, the whole length of the line, between a line to run west from
Pantucket falls and a line west from the black rocks.

THE dispute about the bounds of the province of Main, which lies on the other
side New Hampshire, was upon the construction of the word Northwestward. The
Massachusetts urged that it was the evident design of the grantors of the
province of Main to describe a territory about 120 miles square. At that day
this was probably the reputed distance from Newichawannock or Piscataqua river
to Kennebeck, along the sea coast, the general course of which was northeast
and southwest, after going up the two rivers to the heads the lines were to run
northwestward until 120 miles were finished and then a line back parallel to
the line upon the sea. The agents for New Hampshire, at the court of
commissioners, insisted that every body understood northwestward to be north a
little, perhaps less than a quarter of a point, west. It not being possible to
think of any reason for a line to run upon this course, the Massachusetts could
scarce suppose the New Hampshire agents to be serious, and imagined the
commissioners would need no other reply than that every body understood a line
running westward to be a line from east to west and by the same rule of
construction they supposed northwestward to be from southeast to northwest;
that northeastward being explained in the same grant to be as the coast lay,
proved in fact to be from southwest to northeast. They were, however, surprised
with the determination of the commissioners that northwestward intended north
two degrees west. Why not one degree or three degrees as well as two? From this
part of the judgment the Massachusetts appealed. The agents in England obtained
the celebrated Doctor Halley's opinion, in writing under his hand, that in the
language and understanding of Mathematicians a line to run northwestward is a
line to run northwest, but this opinion did not prevail and the judgment of the
commissioners upon this point was confirmed by his majesty in council.

IT behoved Mr. Belcher, the governor of both provinces, to carry an even hand.
It happened that the general court of the Massachusetts, whilst it sat at
Salisbury on the occasion of this controversy, made him a grant of L.800
currency, in consideration of the deficiency of their former grants, for his
salary and his extraordinary expense and trouble in attending the court at a
distance from his house and family. Soon after this grant, he adjourned the
general courts of both provinces, in order to their determining whether to
abide by the result of the commissioners or to appeal from it, but the court of
New Hampshire was adjourned to a day or two after the Massachusetts court, and
it was said they were prevented entering the appeal within the time limited. He
did not care that either assembly should do any business when he was absent,
and therefore intended first to finish the Massachusetts business and
immediately after proceed to New Hampshire.

THIS afforded matter of complaint from that province, which Mr. Belcher was
called upon to answer, and it was determined the complaint was well founded,
and it being urged that the L.800 was intended as a bribe to influence him to
this measure, the Massachusetts thought their own honor concerned and joined
with him in his defense, which perhaps increased the suspicion of guilt and
hastened his removal. That I may finish what relates to the controversy between
the two provinces, I must take notice of the conduct of the Massachusetts upon
the receiving his majesty's order in council. The lines, by the order, were e to
be run by two surveyors, one on the part of each province, but if either
province refused, the other was to proceed ex part. NewHampshire whose highest
expectations were exceeded proposed to join but were refused by the
Massachusetts, and thereupon appointed surveyors to run the lines of the
Massachusetts and province of Main ex part. Both lines were complained of as
being run favorably for New Hampshire; that of the province of Main is a
subject of new controversy it having been suggested that the surveyor mistook
the main branch of the river Newichewanock, which if he had pursued would have
made 5 or 6 miles in breadth to the advantage of Massachusetts. This refusal to
join proceeded from the feeble irresolute state of the minds of the house of
representatives. Unwilling by any act of their own to express their submission
to what they called an unequal decree, they ran the risque of its being carried
into execution still more unequally, and yet succeeding houses, by a subsequent
long continued passive submission, as effectually subjected the province as if
it had been explicitly acknowledged at first. I may not omit mentioning the
death of Thomas Hutchinson, Esquire December 3d 1739, who had been of the council
except two years from 1714. I wish that many of his posterity may so justly
deserve the character of true friends to their country. Regardless of the
frowns of a governor or the threats of the people he spoke and voted according
to his judgment, attaching himself to no party any further than he found their
measures tended to promote the public interest.


AFTER the controversy about the governor's salary and the supply of the
treasury was finished, there seemed to be a general disposition to rest, and we
hear little of a party in opposition to the governor for several years
together. Whilst the controversy with New Hampshire was depending all of every
party engaged in defense of the right of the province. Besides, Mr. Cook, who
had been many years at the head of the popular party, was worn out with service
and having been some time in a declining state, died in the fall of 1737, and
the town of Boston, were so far from an apprehension of danger to their
liberties that they chose in his stead Mr. Wheelwright, the commissary general,
who depended upon the governor every year for his approbation after being
elected by the council and house, and in 1738 three of the representatives of
the town had the character of friends to government, but toward the end of the
year a great clamor arose against the governor for adhering to his instruction
about paper money and, against the three representatives for their pernicious
principles upon the subject of paper money, and at the town election for 1739
three others were chosen in their stead, two James Allen and Christopher Kilby.
of them professedly disaffected to the governor and promoters of popular
measures, the third, Edward (...).
although of great integrity, and for that reason desirous of a fixed currency,
yet in his judgment against reducing the paper money and a favorer of schemes
for preventing its depreciation. Many country towns followed the example of
Boston and it appeared that a majority of the house were of the same principles
with the town members. After Mr. Belcher's arrival, the house, as we have
observed, had passed a vote for depositing 500 L. sterling in the bank of
England to be used as they or their successors should think proper. This was
concurred in council and confented to by the governor. This money it was said
could not be better applied than in soliciting a relaxation of the governor's
instruction concerning paper money, and Mr. Kilby one of the Boston
representatives was chosen agent for the house and a petition was by him
presented from the house to his majesty in council but it had no effect.

of credit for 8 or 10 years annually for charges of government, and being
willing to ease each present year they had put off the redemption of the bills
as far as they could, but the governor being restrained by his instruction from
going beyond the year 1741, that year was unreasonably loaded with 30 or 40
thousand pounds sterling taxes, which according to the general opinion of the
people it was impossible to levy, not only on account of the large sum, but
because all the bills in the province were but just sufficient to pay it, and
there was very little silver or gold, which by an act of government was allowed
to be paid for taxes as equivalent to the bills. A scheme was laid before the
general court by the author of this history, then one of the representatives of
Boston, in which it was proposed to borrow in England upon interest and to
import into the province a sum in silver equal to all the bills then extant,
and therewith to redeem them from possessors and furnish a currency for the
inhabitants, and to repay the silver at distant periods which would render the
burden of taxes tolerable by an equal division on a number of future years, and
would prevent the distress of trade by the loss of the only instrument, the
bills of credit, without another provided in its place. But this proposal was
rejected. One great frailty of human nature, an inability or indisposition to
compare a distant, though certain inconvenience or distress with a present
convenience or delight is said by some strangers, who come among us from
Europe, to be prevalent in Americans so as to make it one of their
distinguishing characteristicks. Be that as it may, it is certain that at this
time a great number of private persons alleging that the preceding general
court having suffered the province to be brought into distress from which it
was not in the power of their successors to afford relief, the royal
instruction being a bar to any future emissions of bills until all that were
then extant should be redeemed, resolved to interpose. Royal instructions were
not bar in the proceedings of private persons. The project of a bank in the
year 1714 was revived. The projector of that bank now put himself at the head
of 7 or 800 persons, some few of rank and good estate, but generally of low
condition among the plebeians and of small estate, and many of them perhaps
insolvent. This no^able company were to give credit to L.150,000 lawful money,
to be issued in bills, each person being to mortgage a real estate in
proportion to the sums he subscribed and took out, or to give bond with two
sureties, but personal security was not to be taken for more than 100 L. from
any one person. Ten directors and a treasurer were to be chosen by the company.
Every subscriber or partner was to pay 3 per cent. interest for the sum taken
out, and 5 per cent. of the principal, and he that did not pay bills might pay
the produce and manufacture of the province at such rates as the directors from
time to time should set, and they should commonly pass in lawful money. The
pretense was that, by thus furnishing a medium and instrument of trade, not
only the inhabitants in general would be better able to procure the province
bills of credit for their taxes, but trade, foreign and inland, would revive
and flourish. The fate of the project was thought to depend upon the opinion
which the general court should form of it. It was necessary therefore to have a
house of representatives well disposed. Besides the 800 persons subscribers,
the needy part of the province in general favored the scheme. One of their
votes will go as far in popular elections as one of the most opulent. The
former are most numerous and it appeared that by far the majority of the
representatives for 1740 were subscribers to or favorers of the scheme, and
they have ever since been distinguished by the name of the land bank house.

currency, and many small traders gave credit to the bills. The directors, it
was said, by a vote of the company, became traders and issued just what bills
they thought proper without any fund or security for their ever being redeemed.
They purchased every fort of commodity, ever so much a drug, for the sake of
pushing off their bills and by one means or other a large sum, perhaps fifty or
sixty thousand pounds, was abroad. To lessen the temptation to receive the
bills, a company of merchants agreed to issue their notes, or bills redeemable
by silver and gold at distant periods, much like the scheme in 1733, and
attended with no better effect. The governor exerted himself to blast this
fraudulent undertaking, the land bank. Not only such civil and military
officers as were directors or partners, but all who received and paid any of
the bills were displaced. The governor negatived the person chosen speaker of
the house, being a director of the bank, and afterward negatived 13 of the new
elected counselors who were directors or partners in or reputed favorers of
the scheme. But all was insufficient to suppress it. Perhaps the major part, in
number, of the inhabitants of the province openly or secretly were well wishers
to it. One of the directors afterward acknowledged to me that although he entered
into the company with a view to the public interest yet when he found what
power and influence they had in all public concerns, he was convinced it was
more than belonged to them, more than they could make a good use of and
therefore unwarrantable. Many of the most sensible discrete persons in the
province saw a general confusion at hand. The authority of parliament to
control all public and private persons and proceedings in the colonies was, in
that day, questioned by no body. Application was therefore made to parliament
for an act to suppress the company, which notwithstanding the opposition made
by their agent was very easily obtained, and therein it was declared that the
act of the 6th of King George the first, chapter the eighteenth, did, does and
shall extend to the colonies and plantations in America. It was said the act of
George the first, when it passed, had no relation to America, but another act
20 years after gave it a force even from the passing it which it never could
have had without. This was said to be an instance of the transcendent power of
parliament. Although the company was dissolved, yet the act of parliament gave
the possessors of the bills a right of action against every partner or director
for the sums expressed with interest. The company were in a maze. At a general
meeting some, it was said, were for running all hazards although the act
subjected them to a praemunire, but the directors had more prudence and advised
them to declare that they considered themselves dissolved and met only to
consult upon some method of redeeming their bills from the possessors, which
every man engaged to endeavor in proportion to his interest, and to pay in to
the directors or some of them to burn or destory. Had the company issued their
bills at the value expressed in the face of them, they would have had no reason
to complain of being obliged to redeem them at the same rate, but as this was
not the case in general, and many of the possessors of the bills had acquired
them for half their value, as expressed, equity could not be done, and so far
as respected the company perhaps the parliament was not very anxious, the loss
they sustained being but a just penalty for their unwarrantable undertaking if
it had been properly applied. Had not the parliament interposed, the province
would have been in the utmost confusion and the authority of government
entirely in the land bank company.

WHILST Mr. Belcher, by his vigorous opposition to the land bank, was rendering
himself obnoxious to one half the people of the province, measures were
pursuing in England for his removal from the government. Besides the attempts
which we have mentioned from New Hampshire which had never been laid aside,
there had always been a disaffected party in Massachusetts who had been using
what interest they had in England against him. Lord Wilmington president of the
council, the speaker of the house of commons and Sir Charles Wager, first Lord
of the admiralty, all had a favorable opinion of Mr. Belcher, so had Mr. Holden
who was at the head of the dissenters in England, and all upon one occasion or
another had appeared for him.

THE most unfair and indirect measures were used with each of these persons to
render Mr. Belcher (...) and odious to them. The first instance was several
years before this time. A letter was sent to Sir Charles Wager in the name of
five persons whose hands were counterfeited, with an insinuation that Mr.
Belcher encouraged the destruction of the pine trees reserved for masts for the
navy and suffered them to be cut into logs for boards. Forgeries of this fort
strike us with more horror than false insinuations in conversation, and perhaps
are equally mischievous in their effects. The latter may appear the less
criminal because abundantly more common.

AN anonymous letter was sent to Mr. Holden, but the contents of it declared
that it was the letter of many of the principal ministers of New England who
were afraid to publish their names lest Mr. Belcher should ruin them. The
charge against him was a secret undermining the congregational interest in
concert with Commissary Price and Doctor Cutler, whilst at the same time he
pretended to Mr. Holden and the other dissenters in England to have it much at
heart. To remove suspicion of fraud the letter was superscribed in writing
either in imitation of Doctor Colman's hand, a correspondent of Mr. Holden, or
which is more probable a cover of one of his genuine letters had been taken off
by a person, of not an unblemished character, to whose care it was committed,
and made use of to enclose the spurious one. Truth and right are more
frequently, in a high degree, violated in political contests and animosities
than upon any other occasion. It was well known that nothing would more readily
induce a person of so great virtue as the speaker to give up Mr. Belcher than
an instance of corruption and bribery. The New Hampshire agents therefore
furnished him with the votes of the Massachusetts assembly containing the grant
of L.800 and evidence of the adjournment of New Hampshire assembly, alleged to
be done in consequence, nor was he undeceived until it was too late.

MR. Wilks, the Massachusetts agent, who was in great esteem with Lord
Wilmington, and was really a person of a fair upright mind, had prevented any
impressions to Mr. Belcher's prejudice, but it unluckily happened that the land
bank company employed Richard Partridge, brother by marriage to Mr. Belcher, as
their agent. He had been many years agent for his brother, which fact was well
known to his lordship, but, from an expectation of obtaining the sole agency of
the province by the interest of the prevailing party there, engaged zealously
in opposing the petitioners to the house of commons, and gave out bills at the
door of the house. It was said that all Mr. Belcher's opposition to the scheme,
in the province, was mere pretense; had he been in earnest, his agent in
England would never venture to appear in support of it, and this was improved
with Lord Wilmington to induce him to give up Mr. Belcher and it succeeded.
Still the removal was delayed one week after another, two gentlemen from the
Massachusetts continually soliciting. At length, it being known that Lord
Euston's election for Coventry was dubious, one of these gentlemen undertook to
the Duke of Grafton to secure the election, provided Mr. Belcher might
immediately be removed, and, to accomplish his design, he represented to Mr.
Maltby, a large dealer in Coventry stuffs and a zealous dissenter, that Mr.
Belcher was, with the episcopal clergy, conspiring the ruin of the
congregational interest in New England, and unless he was immediately removed
it would be irrecoverably lost, that the Duke of Grafton had promised, if Lord
Euston's election could be secured, it should be done, that letters to his
friends in Coventry would insallibly secure it, that he could not better employ
his interest than in the cause of God and of religion. Maltby swallowed the
bait, used all his interest for lord Euston, the two gentlemen spent three
weeks at Coventry, and having succeeded, agreeable to the Duke's promise Mr.
Belcher was removed a day or two after their return. This account I received
from Mr. Maltby himself, who lamented that he had suffered himself to be so
easily imposed on.

A few weeks longer delay would have baffled all the schemes. The news arrived
of his negativing 13 counselors and displacing a great number of officers
concerned in the land bank, and his zeal and fortitude were highly applauded
when it was too late. Being in London at this time, I had opportunity of fully
informing myself of these facts. Certainly, in public employments no man ought
to be condemned from the reports or accusations of a party without a sufficient
opportunity given him to exculpate himself, a plantation governor especially,
who, be he without guile, or a consummate politician, will insallibly have a
greater or lesser number disaffected to him.

Mr. SHIRLEY, successor to Mr. Belcher, was a gentleman of Sussex, bred in the
law and had been in office in the city, but having prospect of a numerous
offspring, was advised to remove to Boston in the Massachusetts, where he had
resided six or eight years and acquired a general esteem, and if there must be
a change it was said to be as acceptable to have it in his favor as any person
whosoever. His lady was then in London and had obtained the promise of the
collector's place for the port of Boston and would have preferred it to the
government, but a strong interest being made for Mr. Frankland, since Sir Henry
Frankland, there was no way of providing for both, except by giving the
government to Mr. Shirley.

THE news came to Boston the first week in July. Mr. Shirley was at Providence
in Rhode Island government, council for the Massachusetts before a court of
commissioners appointed to settle the line between the two governments. As I
was not then in America and the records of that line are burnt, I cannot give
so particular an account of the proceedings of those commissioners as otherwise
I should have done. It is certain, that for diverse years past the only part in
controversy between the two governments was a small gore of land between
Attleborough in Massachusetts and the old township of Providence. A great part
of the Massachusetts assembly wished it might be ceded to Rhode Island, but a
few tenacious men, who do not always regard consequences, influenced a majority
against it. Besides a settlement made by commissioners in 1664 or 65, another
settlement had been made or the old one confirmed in 1708, but Rhode Island,
encouraged by the ill success of the Massachusetts in the controversy with
New Hampshire, applied to his majesty to appoint commissioners to settle the
line between the two governments. The consent or submission of the Massachusetts
to such appointment was not thought necessary and, if they would not appear,
the commissioners were to proceed ex part. The Massachusetts assembly thought
proper to appear by their committee, having no apprehensions the controversy
would turn, in the judgment of the commissioners, upon a point never before
relied upon, viz. that the colony of New Plymouth having no charter from the
crown, Rhode Island charter must be the sole rule of determining the boundary,
although the patent from the council of Plymouth to Bradford and associates was
prior to it. The colony of New Plymouth was a government de facto and
considered by King Charles as such in his letters and orders to them before and
after the grant of Rhode Island charter and, when the incorporation was made of
New Plymouth with Massachusetts, etc. the natural and legal construction of the
province charter seems to be that it should have relation to the time when the
several governments incorporated respectively, in fact, became governments. A
gentleman of the council of New York had great influence at the board of
commissioners. The argument which had been made use of in former controversies,
that Massachusetts was too extensive and the other governments they were
contending with, of which New York was one, was too contracted, was now
revived. To the surprise of Massachusetts, a line was determined which not only
took from them the gore formerly in dispute, but the towns of Bristol, Tiverton
and Little-Compton, and great part of Swanzey and Barrington. All this country
was conquered by Massachusetts and Plymouth from Philip and, to prevent dispute,
was expressly granted to Plymouth by Charles the second.
An appeal was claimed and allowed to his majesty in council, where, after
lying four or five years, the decree of the court of commissioners was
confirmed. In the prosecution and defense of this title, it has been said, that
some material evidence was never produced which would have supported the
Massachusetts claim.

of one thousand pounds sterling per annum. This had been most unjustifiably
evaded all the latter part of Mr. Belcher's administration, by granting a sum
in bills of credit without a due regard to their depreciation. Mr. Kilby, who
had been very active for Mr. Shirley's interest and against Mr. Belcher, in
England, was chosen agent for the province in England, and Mr. Wilks, who had
been agent the whole of the last administration, was laid aside. Mr. Auchmuty,
who had been one of the land bank directors, was joined with Mr. Kilby in the
affair of the Rhode Island line. A grant of about L.200 sterling. was made to John
Sharp, Esquire for his account of charge in defending Mr. Belcher against
New-Hampshire's complaint (...) he king in council. This had been repeatedly
refused in Mr. Belcher's time, which gave great offense to Mr. Sharp. It was
thought extraordinary that Mr. Shirley should make it a point with the land
bankers that this debt for his predecessor should be paid, but to take Mr.
Sharp off from Mr. Belcher and engage him for Mr. Shirley, the friends and
sollicitors for the latter in England had engaged that if he was appointed
governor Mr. Sharpe's account should be paid.

BUT the grand affair to settle was that of the bills of credit. The
instruction was express not to consent to any act which should continue the
bills beyond the time fixed for their being brought in. If this was complied
with, a tax must have been made for the whole sum extant in that year 1741.
This it was said would be a burden that the people would never bear. Mr.
Shirley was sensible that the intent of his instruction was the, prevention of
a depreciating currency. No matter how large a sum in bills was current if
their value could be secured. If the spirit of the instruction could be
preserved, an exact conformity to the letter would not be required. Every
scheme for fixing the value of the bills had failed. A new project was reported
by a committee of the house and accepted and afterward concurred by the
council and consented to by the governor. This was a scheme to establish an
ideal measure in all trade and dealings, let the instrument be what it would.
The act which passed the court declared that all contracts should be understood
payable in silver at s.8 d. the ounce or gold in proportion. Bills of a new
form were issued, 20 s. of which expressed in the face of the bill three ounces
of silver and they were to be received accordingly in all public and private
payments, with this saving that, if they should depreciate in their value, an
addition should be made to all debts as much as the depreciation from the time
of contract to the time of payment. How to ascertain the depreciation from time
to time was the great difficulty in framing the act. To leave it to a common
jury would never do. There was some doubt whether a house of representatives
would be wholly unbiassed. At length it was agreed that the eldest counselor
in each county should meet once a year and ascertain the depreciation. This is
said to have been the scheme of Col. Stoddard of Northampton, a gentleman of
good sense and great virtue, who probably saw the defects, but hoped to
substitute a lesser evil in the place of a greater.

THIS at best must have been a very partial cure. It did not prevent the loss
from the depreciation of the bills in those persons hands through which they
were continually passing. All debts, which were contracted and paid between the
periods when the value of the bills were fixed annually, could not be affected
by such fixing, and unless in debts of long standing, which the debtor could
not pay without an action at law, demand was not ordinarily made for
depreciation, and what rendered it of little effect in all other cases, the
counselors appointed to estimate the depreciation never had firmness enough in
any instance to make the full allowance, but when silver and exchange had rose
20 per cent. or more, an addition was made of 4 or 5 only. The popular cry was
against it, and one year when Nathaniel Hubbard, Esquire the eldest councellor for
the county of Bristol, a gentleman of amiable character and who filled the
several posts he sustained with applause, endeavored to approach nearer to a
just allowance than had been made in former years, he felt the resentment of
the house who left him out of the council the next election. In short the act
neither prevented the depreciation of the bills nor afforded relief in case of
it, and was of no other service than to serve as a warning, when an act passed
for the establishing a fixed currency a few years after, to leave nothing to be
done by any person or bodies of men, or even future legislatures to give the
act its designed effect, but in the act itself to make full provision for its
execution in every part.

EVEN this act which, with its fair appearance, justified Mr. Shirley in
departing from his instruction, and afforded a supply of the treasury for the
payment of debts and future support of government could not have been obtained
if he had not prevailed with the land bank party, contrary to the inclinations
of many of them, to join in promoting it.

HE made them return, by consenting to any new elections that were made of any
of them into the council, by restoring now and then one and another to the
posts they had been deprived of, which, though it was done by degrees, caused
many who conderaned the land bank and all who were concerned in it, to be very
free in their censures upon him.

BUT the great favor they expected was relief from the severity of the act of
parliament. This was to be touched with great tenderness and delicacy. Every
person concerned was liable to the demands of the possessors of the bills. If
large demands should be made upon any particular persons it seemed but just
that the rest should contribute their proportion; but no demand was given by
the act to one partner against another in such case. A bill was therefore
prepared with a professed design to carry the act of parliament equitably into
execution. Three commissioners were appointed by the bill with power to tax all
who had been concerned in the scheme in proportion to their interest in it, and
with the moneys thus raised to redeem the companies bills from the possessors,
and after the redemption of the bills to make an equitable adjustment between
the members and the company. Great care was taken to avoid all opposition to
the act of parliament; Mr. Shirley however did not think proper to sign the
bill until he had sent a copy of it to England and received directions
concerning it. After it had passed both houses, to oblige the principal land
bankers, he continued the session of the court by long repeated adjournments
many months, and before the expiration of the year gave his consent to the
bill. Having thus secured a considerable party in the government without losing
those who had been in opposition to them, he rendered his administration easy,
and generally obtained from the assembly such matters as he recommended to them.

FROM the Spanish war in 1740, a French war was expected every year to follow.
Castle William, the key of the province, was not only effectually repaired but
a new battery of twenty 42-pounders, which takes the name of Shirley battery,
was added to the works, with a larger magazine than any before, and a large
supply of powder, all at the expense of the province. The cannon, mortars, shot
and other stores were the bounty of the crown. The forts upon the frontiers
were also put into good order, and upon a representation from Mr. Mascarene,
commander in chief at Annapolis in Nova Scotia of the defenseless state of that
prevince and the danger they were in from the enemy, Mr. Shirley, in 1744,
prevailed upon the Massachusetts assembly to vote pay, etc. for 200 men which
were sent there and who were the probable means of saving that country from
falling into the enemy's hands.

May 13. 1744.
before the war with France was known at Boston. June 2d war proclaimed at
Boston.
With another party, Duvivier made an attempt the same summer upon Annapolis,
but was disappointed. Many of our vessels had been taken by the French men of
war and privateers and carried into Louisburgh. The fishermen had no intention
to go upon their voyages the next summer, and every branch of trade, it was
supposed, must be carried on by vessels under convoy. It was the general voice,
in the fall of the year, that Louisburgh must be taken, but no body supposed
that the united force of the colonies could take it; application must be made
to his majesty for sea and land forces sufficient for the purpose. As winter
approached, it began to be suggested that it was not improbable the place might
be surprised or taken by a coup du main, the inhabitants and garrison being
shut up within the walls. Some of the garrison of Canso, who had been prisoners
and who professed to be well acquainted with the fortifications and garrison at
Louisburgh favored this opinion and declared that in winter the snow often lay
in drifts or banks against a particular part of the wall, where there were no
embrazures nor any cannon mounted, that the crust would bear a man's weight
and, in that part at least, the walls might be scaled and perhaps by the help
of ladders it would not be difficult in other parts, that the grand battery,
intended for defense in case of an attack by sea, would not be capable of long
resisting if attacked by land. Mr. Vaughan, Mr. Vaughan was called the
projector of the expedition. It is probable he said before the governor a
proposal for it and it is certain he took great pains to induce the people to
think favorably of it.
who had been a trader at Louisburgh, was very sanguine also that the place
might be taken by surprise, and it was generally agreed that if they should be
mistaken yet it would not be possible for the enemy, who were scant of
provisions, to stand a siege until the time the supplies usually arrived to
them from France; and, to prevent any chance vessels from entering, a sufficient
naval force might. be provided to cruize before the harbor. Whilst this was
the conversation abroad, Mr. Shirley was diligently enquiring of those persons
who had been traders and of others who had been prisoners there, into the
condition of the place, the usual time for the arrival of supplies from Europe,
the practicability of cruizing off the harbor, etc. He had before wrote to the
ministry and represented the necessity of a naval force early in the spring for
the preservation of Annapolis. If this should arrive, he might be able to
prevail with the commander to cover our forces with it. Commodore Warren was
with several ships at the Leeward Islands. It was possible, when he was
acquainted with the expedition, he would come with or send part of his force to
strengthen it. These were the only chances for a naval strength sufficient to
cope with a single capital French ship that night be bound to Louisburgh in the
spring. The ministry, indeed, would by express be immediately acquainted with
the expedition, if engaged in, but Europe was at too great distance to expect
timely aid from thence. The plan of the expedition was, a land force of 4000
men in small transports to proceed to Canso, and the first favorable
opportunity to land at Chapeaurouge bay, with cannon, mortars, ammunition and
warlike stores, and all other necessaries for carrying on a siege and, to
prevent a supply of provision and stores to the enemy, several vessels were to
cruize off the harbor of Louisbourg, as soon as the season of the year would
permit. An estimate was made of all the naval force which could be procured in
this and the neighboring colonies, the largest vessel not exceeding 20 guns.
With this land and sea force, it was said there was a good chance for success,
and if the men of war should arrive, which there was good reason to hope for,
there was all imaginable grounds to depend upon the reduction of the place. The
general court being sitting the beginning of January, the governor sent a
message to the two houses to let them know he had something to communicate to
them of very great importance, but of such a nature that the publishing it,
before they should come to any resolution upon it, might wholly defeat the
design, he therefore desired they would lay themselves under an oath of secrecy
for such time as each house should think proper. This they did, although it was
the first instance in the house of representatives, without any scruple, and
then he communicated to them his proposed plan of the expedition. Many of the
members who had heard little or nothing of the conversation upon the subject,
were struck with amazement at the proposal. The undertaking they thought to be
vastly too great, if there was a rational prospect of success. However, in
deference to the recommendation of the governor, a committee of the two houses
were appointed to consider the proposal. Here, the proposal was for several
days deliberated and weighed. Louisburgh, if left in the hands of the French,
would infallibly prove the Dunkirk of New England; their trade had always been
inconsiderable, their fishery was upon the decline, and for several years past
they had bought fish of the English at Canso cheaper than they could catch and
cure it themselves, both trade and fishery they might well lay aside, and by
privateering enrich themselves with the spoils of New England; and to all these
dangers was added that of losing Nova Scotia, which would cause an increase of
six or eight thousand enemies in an instant. The garrison of (...) was
disaffected, provisions were scant, the works mouldering and decayed, the
governor an old man unskilled in the art of war; this therefore was the only
time for success, another year the place would be impregnable. We had nothing
to fear from the forces at Louisburgh, before additional strength could arrive
from France they would be forced to surrender. We had, it must be owned, no
ships of strength sufficient to match the French men of war, unless, perhaps, a
single ship should fall in by herself, and in that case five or six of ours
might be a match for her; but there was no probability of men of war so early
and it was very probable English men of war from Europe or the West Indies
would arrive before them. There was always uncertainty in war, a risque must be
run, if we failed we should be able to grapple with the disappointment,
although we should bear the whole expense, but if we succeeded, not only the
coasts of New England would be free from molestation, but so glorious an
acquisition would be of the greatest importance to Great Britain and might give
peace to Europe, and we might depend upon a reimbursement of the whole charge
we had been at.

and the army upon Cape-Breton obliged to submit to the mercy of the French,
that we should be condemned in England for engaging in such an affair without
their direction or approbation, and we should be no where pitied, our
misfortunes proceeding from our own rash and wild measures. To these arguments
were added the uncertainty of raising a sufficient number of men, or of being
able to procure provisions, warlike stores and transports, discouragement from
the season of the year when, frequently, for many days together no business
could be done out of doors. Money indeed could be furnished, or bills of credit
in lieu of it, but the infallible consequence would be the sinking the value of
the whole currency, to what degree no man could determine but, probably, in
proportion to the sum issued, and finally, if we should succeed, a general
national benefit would be the consequence, in which we should be but small
sharers and far short of the vast expense of treasure and perhaps of lives in
obtaining it, and if we failed, such a shock would be given to the province
that half a century would not recover us to our present state. After mature
deliberation, a majority of the committee disapproved the proposal and their
report was accepted and, for a few days, all thoughts of the expedition with
the members of the court were laid aside. In the mean time, the governor, who
wished his proposal had been agreed to, but did not think it proper to press it
any further by message or by privately urging the members, either directed or
encouraged the carrying about a petition which was signed by many of the
merchants in the town of Boston, but principally by those of Salem and
Marblehead, directed to the house of representatives, or to the two houses,
praying, for reasons set forth, among others the saving the fisher from ruin,
they would reconsider their vote and agree to the governor's proposal of an
expedition against Louisburgh. A second committee, appointed upon this
petition, reported in favor of it It was accompanied with a message from the
governor recommending it and desiring they would hear the persons from whom he
had received his intelligence.
and, the 26th of January, their report came before the house, who spent the
day in debating it and, at night, a vote was carried in favor of it by a
majority of one voice only. Never was any affair deliberated upon with greater
calmness and moderation, the governor indeed laid the affair before the court,
but left the members free to act their judgment without any solicitation, and
there appeared no other division than what was caused by a real difference in
opinion upon the true interest of the province.

THE point once settled, there was immediately a union of both parties in the
necessary measures for carrying the design into execution, those who had
opposed it before being employed upon committees and exerting themselves with
zeal equal to that of the principal promoters. An embargo was laid upon every
harbor in the province and messengers were immediately dispatched to the
several governments, as far as Pennsylvania, to entreat an embargo on their
ports and that they would join in the expedition. All excused themselves from
any share in the adventure, except Connecticut, who agreed to raise 500 men,
New Hampshire 300, and Rhode Island 300. Connecticut and Rhode Island also
consented their colony sloops should be employed as cruizers. A small privateer
ship, about 200 tons, and a snow of less burden, belonging to Newport, were
hired there by the Massachusetts, a new snow Capt. Rouse, a ship Capt. Snelling,
were taken into the service at Boston, which, with a snow Capt. Smethurst, and
a bring, Capt. Fletcher, three sloops, Capts. Sanders, Donahew and Bosch, and a
ship of 20 guns, purchased on the stocks, Capt. Tyng the commodore, made the
whole naval force.

FROM the day the vote passed until the place was reduced, a series of
favorable incidents contributed to our success. They will be obvious enough in
the course of the narrative and will not require being specially remarked. The
time for preparing was short. The winter proved so favorable that all sorts of
out-door business was carried on as well and with as great dispatch as at any
other season of the year. In the appointment of a general officer one
qualification was considered as essential, that he should be acceptable to the
body of the people, the inlistment depended upon this circumstance. It was not
easy to find a person, thus qualified, willing to accept the trust. Col.
Pepperell, having the offer from the governor, was rather pressed into the
service than voluntarily engaged. Besides a very great landed interest, he was
largely concerned in mercantile affairs, which must necessarily suffer by his
absence, and this being generally known had no small influence, from the
example, with inferior officers and even private soldiers, to quit their lesser
affairs, for a season, for the service of their country. Many of the private
soldiers were freeholders and many more sons of wealthy farmers, who could have
no other views in consenting to the inlistment of their children than the
public interest.

MR. Shirley had set his heart so much upon the expedition that many points
were conceded by him which he would not have given up at any other time, and
the people of the province submitted to compulsory measures from the government
which, at another time, would have been grievous and not very patiently borne.
Such officers were nominated by the governor as the people proposed or called
for, because they were most likely to insist men. Instead of a commissary
general, an officer appointed by the governor, a committee of war was chosen by
the two houses out of their own members. Nothing further was heard of the royal
instruction against bills of credit. Such sums as the service called for and to
be redeemed at such periods as the house thought proper were consented to by
the governor. It soon appeared that these sums would vastly exceed what had
been computed, and many declared that had a right estimate been made they
should never have voted for the expedition, but it was now too late to go back.
It was found also, that transports and vessels of war could not be engaged
unless the government would become insurers, which although it occasioned no
additional expense at first yet, in case of ill success, would greatly increase
the public debt and distress. The committee of war were likewise convinced that
a sufficiency of provisions, clothing and warlike stores could not be procured
within the province. Whosoever was possessed of any of these articles, by an
act or order of government his property was subjected to the committee, who set
such price as they judged equitable, and upon refusal to deliver, entered
warehouses, cellars, etc. by a warrant for that purpose to the sheriff, and
took possession. In the course of the preparation many vessels unexpectedly
arrived with more or less of each of these articles and after all, the army was
poorly enough provided. Ten cannon, 18 pounders, were obtained upon loan, not
without difficulty, from New York, otherwise Mr. Shirley himself seemed to
doubt whether we could proceed. Some dependence was placed upon cannon from the
grand battery but this was too manifest a disposal of the skin before the bear
was caught. By force of a general excertion in all orders of men, the armament
was ready and the general, on board the Shirley snow, Captain Rouse, with the
transports under her convoy, failed from Nantalket the 24th of March and
arrived at Canso the 4th of April. The Massachusetts land forces consisted of
3250 men, exclusive of commission officers. The New Hampshire forces, 304,
including officers, arrived four days before. Connecticut, being 516,
inclusive, did not arrived until the 25th. The deputy governor of the colony,
Roger Wolcot, Esquire had the command and was the second officer in the army.
Rhode Island waited until a better judgment could be made of the event, their
300 not arriving until after the place had surrendered. The 23d of March, an
express boat sent to Commodore Warren in the West Indies returned to Boston. As
this was a provincial expedition, without orders from England, and as his small
squadron had been weakened by the loss of the Weymouth, Mr. Warren excused
himself from any concern in the affair. This answer must necessarily strike a
damp into the governor as well as the general and brigadier Waldo, then next in
command, who were the only persons in the army made privy to it before the
fleet failed. Several of the cruizing vessels had sailed the middle of March,
but they could be no protection to the army against two capital ships; if they
intercepted small vessels it was the most that was expected. A blockhouse with
eight cannon was built at Canso. Whether some good reason would not have been
given for proceeding no further than Canso, if there had been a disappointment
in the expected junction of men of war from the several quarters to which
notice of the expedition had been sent may well enough be made a question. Mr.
Shirley hoped, if the reduction of Louisburgh was not effected, at least Canso
would be regained, Nova Scotia preserved, the French fishery broke up and the
New England and Newfoundland fisheries restored. But on the 23d of April, to
the great joy of the army, arrived at Canso the Eltham of 40 guns, from
New England, by order from Mr. Warren, and on the 23d the commodore himself, in
the Superb of 60 guns, with the Launceston and Mermaid of 40 each, arrived
also. This gave great spirits to all who had the success of the expedition at
heart, for although this was not a naval force to enter the harbor or annoy
the forts, yet it was a cover to the army and equal to any expected force from
France. It seems that, in two or three days after the express sailed from the
West Indies for Boston, the Hind sloop brought orders to Mr. Warren to repair
to Boston, with what ships could be spared, and to concert measures with Mr.
Shirley for his Majesty's general service in North America, Upon the passage
April 12th.
to Boston, the commodore received intelligence that the fleet had sailed for
Canso, and meeting with a schooner at sea An excellent pilot, who had escaped
for fear of being pressed into the service happened to be on board this
schooner. The Commodore took him out, and it is said would not have adventured
without him. The Vigilant must then have got into Louisbourg and perhaps have
defeated the whole design.
he sent her to Boston, to acquaint Mr. Shirley that he would proceed to Canso
and, at the same time, sent orders to any ships which might be in these seas to
join him. The Eiltham was actually under sail with the mast fleet when an
express sent from Boston with the commodore's orders arrived at Portsmouth in
New Hampshire, but being followed and overtaken by a boat, the captain ordered
his convoy into port again and sailed for Canso. After a short consultation
with the general, the men of war sailed to cruize before Louisburgh. The
cruizers, before this, had intercepted several small vessels bound in there
with West India goods and provisions and had engaged the Renommee, April 18th.
a French ship of 36 guns sent from France with dispatches and who kept a
running fight with our vessels for some time, being able with ease to outsail
them, and, after two or three attempts to enter the harbor, went back to
France, to give an account of what she had met with. She fell in with the
Connecticut troops, under convoy of their own and the Rhode Island colony
sloops, both which she had strength enough to have carried, but, after some
damage to the Rhode Island sloop, she went her way. The forces landed at
Chapeaurouge bay the 30th of April. The transports were discovered, early in
the morning, from the town, which was the first knowledge of any design against
them. The cruizers had been seen every fair day before the harbor, but these
were supposed to be privateers in search after their trading and fishing
vessels. The night before, it is said, there was a grand ball at the fort and
the company had scarce been asleep when they were called up by an alarm.
Bouladire, a French officer, was sent with 150 men to oppose the landing, but
the general making a seint of landing at one place, drew the detachment there,
and this opportunity was taken for landing 100 men at another place without
opposition, although they were soon after attacked by the detachment, six of
which were killed on the spot and about as many more, with Bouladrie their
leader, were taken prisoners, the rest fled to the town, or they would soon
have fallen into the hands of our men, who were landing fast one upon the back
of another.

THE next morning after they landed, 400 men marched round to the north-east
harbor, behind the hills, setting fire to all the houses and storehouses,
until they came within a mile of the grand battery. Some of the storehouses
having in them pitch, tar, and other combustible stuff, caused such a thick
smoke, that the garrison were unable to discover an enemy, though but a few
rods distant, and, expecting the body of the army upon them, they deserted the
fort, having thrown their powder into a well, but leaving the cannon and shot
for the service of the English. A small party, of less than 20 English, first
came up to the battery and, discovering no signs of men, suspected a plot and
were afraid to enter, at length, it is said, a Cape-Cod Indian went in alone
and discovered the state of it to the rest of the party, just as some of the
French were relanding in order to regain the possession of it.

THE army found they had near two miles to transport their cannon, mortars,
shot, etc. through a morass. This must be done by mere dint of labor. Such of
the men as had been used to drawing pine trees for masts and those who had the
hardiest and strongest bodies were employed in this service. Horses and oxen
would have been buried in mud and were of no use. Brigadier Waldo had the
command of the grand battery. The French kept firing upon the battery from the
town as well as from the island battery, but to little purpose, the town being
near 2000 yards distant and the island about 1600. A constant fire was kept
from the grand battery upon the town with the 42 pounders, This greatly damaged
the houses, but caused so great an expense of powder that it was thought
advisable to stop and reserve it for the sascine batteries. Five of these were
erected, the last the 20th of May called tidcomb's Major Tidcomb's readiness to
engage in the most hazardous part of the service was acknowledged and
applauded. He forvived the siege, was colonel of a regiment when general
Johnson was attacked by Dieskau and then lost his life in the service of his
country.
battery with five 42 pounders which did as great execution as any. Our men
knew nothing of regular approaches, they took the advantage of the night, and
when they heard Mr. Bastide's proposals for zigzags and epaulements they made
merry with the terms and went on, void of art, in their own natural way. Capt.
Pierce, a brave officer, standing at one of these batteries had his bowels shot
away by a cannon ball and lived just long enough to say its hard to die.

WHILST our people were thus busy ashore, the men of war and other vessels were
cruizing off the harbor whenever the weather would permit and, the 18th of
May, the Vigilant, a French man of war of 64 guns, haring 560 men on board and
stores of all sorts for the garrison, was met with by the Mermaid, whom she
attacked, (...) Capt. Douglass the commander, being of unequal force, suffered
himself to be chased by her until he drew her under the command of the
commodore and the other ships cruizing with him, to whom or, as some say, to
the Mermaid she struck because she had first met with her. This capture gave
great joy to the army, not so much for the addition made to our naval force, as
for the disappointment to the enemy. A proposal had been made, a few days
before, that the men of war should anchor in Chapeaurouge bay, and that the men
of war should anchor in Chapeaurouge bay, arines and as many sailors as could
be spared should land and join the army. The Vigilant would then have got in
and we should have given over the siege. Affairs were now in such a state, that
our anxiety at Boston was much lessened. We hoped the army might retreat with
safety, whenever it should be determined to give over the siege, for Bouladrie,
who belonged to the town of Louisburgh, and the Marquis de la Maison forte,
commander of the Vigilant, who was well acquainted with the state of the place,
when they came to Boston, were fanguine that it would hold out longer than our
men and, soon after, we had the news of a fruitless and perhaps a rash attempt
upon the island battery by 400 men, 60 of whom were killed and 116 taken
prisoners. The Caesar, Snelling, one of the ships in the provincial service,
arrived at Boston with letters from the general and an application for more men
and a further supply of powder. The Massachusetts agreed and actually did raise
400 men and sent all the powder that could be purchased, and Connecticut raised
200 men, but there were neither men nor powder arrived when the siege was
finished.

THE Princess Mary of 60 and the Hector of 40 guns, unexpectedly, had arrived
at Boston from England and were immediately sent to join the commodore,
pursuant to his general orders, and arrived before (...) the 22d of May. This
increase of naval force occasioned conjectures, some being of opinion that,
rather than the siege should be raised, the ships would attempt to go in, but
it was generally supposed the hazard would be too great. It was commonly
reported that Col. More of the New Hampshire regiment offered to go on board
the Vigilant with his whole regiment and to lead the van, if, in case of
success, he might be confirmed in the command of the ship. He had been an
experienced sea captain and had a very good character. It is certain, an
attempt with the ships was not then thought advisable. A new battery, about
this time, was erected upon the light-house point, which being well attended by
Lt, Col. Gridley of the artillery, did great execution upon the island battery,
silenced many of the guns and it was expected it would not be long tenable.
Soon after, viz. June 10th, arrived before Louisburgh the Chester, a 50 gun
ship, in consequence of the dispatches from Mr. Shirley with an account of the
expedition. The Canterbury and Sunderland, two 60 gun ships, sailed with her
and arrived the 12th. Here was now a fleet of 11 ships The Superb, Princess
Mary, Canterbury and Sunderland of 60 guns, the Chester of 50, Launceston,
Mermaid, Hector, (...) and Lark of 40, with the French prize the Vigilant of 64.
and it is said to have been determined the ships should make an attack by sea,
the 18th, while the army did the same by land. It is not certain that when the
day should come some sufficient reason would not have been found for a further
delay. Those who give the most favorable accounts of the siege say "the west
gate was entirely beat down, the wall adjoining very much battered and a breach
made, ten feet from the bottom, the circular battery of 16 cannon and the
principal one against ships almost ruined, the north-east battery of 17 cannon
damaged and the men drove from the guns, and the west flank of the king's
bastion almost demolished." Others say, "the west gate was defaced and the
adjoining curtain with the flank of the king's bastion were much hurt, but no
practicable breach." Whether a general storm was really intended upon the 18th
or not, it seems, the French expected it from the preparations on board the men
of war, and did not incline to stand it, and on the 15th sent a flag of truce
to the general desiring a cessation, that they might consider of articles to be
proposed for a capitulation. Time was allowed for this purpose until the next
morning, when such articles were offered as were rejected by the general and
commodore and others offered to the enemy in their stead, which they accepted
of and hostages were exchanged and, the next day, the 17th, the city was
delivered up.

MANY of our men had taken colds and many fallen into dysenteries, so that 1500
were taken off from duty at one time, but the weather proving remarkably fine
during the 49 days siege they generally recovered. The day after the surrender
the rains began and continued ten days incessantly, which must have been faral
to many, they having nothing better than the wet ground to lodge on, and their
tents, in general, being insufficient to secure them against a single shower,
All the ticklenburgh and small canvas in the province was purchased by the
committee of war, but for a great part of the tents they were forced to buy
common oznabrigs.
but in the city they found barracks to shelter them. Capt. Bennet, in a
schooner, was sent immediately to Boston and arrived with the great news the 3d
of July, about one in the morning. The bells of the town were ringing by break
of day and the day and night following were spent in rejoicing. The news flew
through the continent. The colonies which declined any share in the expense and
hazard were sensible they were greatly interested in the success. It was
allowed every where that if there had been no signal proof of bravery and
courage in time of action, there having been only one fally from the town and a
few skirmishes with French and Indians from the woods, in all which our men
behaved well, yet here was the strongest evidence of a generous noble public
spirit, which first induced to the undertaking, and so steadiness and firmness
of mind in the prosecution of it, the labor, fatigue and other hardships of
the stege being without parallel in all proceeding American affairs. A shade was
thrown over the imprudence at first charged upon the New-Englanders.
Considerate persons among themselves could not, however, avoid gratefully
admiring the favor of divine providence in so great a number of remarkable
incidents which contributed to this success. The best use to be made by
posterity seems to be not to depend upon special interpositions of providence
because their ancestors have experienced them, but to avoid the like imminent
dangers and to weigh the probability and improbability of succeeding in the
ordinary course of events.

THE commodore was willing to carry away a full share of the glory of this
action. It was made a question whether the keys of the town should be delivered
to him or to the general and whether the sea or land forces should first enter.
The officers of the army say they prevailed. The marines took possession of one
or more of the batteries and sometimes the commodore took the keys of the city
gates. The command however until orders should arrive from England was to be
joint and a dispute about precedence to be avoided as much as could be. The
commodore dispatched Mr. Montague in the Mermaid to England with intelligence,
and the general, the day after, sent the Shirley Galley Capt. Rouse. The
Mermaid arrived first.

IT was very happy that disputes arose to no height between the sea and land
forces during the siege. This has often proved fatal. This expedition having
been began and carried on under a commission from a provincial governor seems
to be distinguished from ordinary cases and to leave less room for dispute.
Whether the land or sea force had the greatest share in the acquisition may be
judged from the relation of facts. Neither would have succeeded alone. The
army, with infinite labor and fatigue to themselves, harrassed and distressed
the enemy and, with perseverance a few weeks or days longer, must have
compelled a surrender. It is very doubtful whether the ships could have lain
long enough before the walls to have carried the place by storm, or whether,
notwithstanding the appearance of a design to do it, they would have thought it
advisable to attempt it; it is certain they prevented the arrival of the
Vigilant, took away all hopes of further supply and succor, and it is very
probable the fears of a storm might accelerate the capitulation. From the
following deposition of the Commodore in the high court of admiralty, one would
imagine the place had been taken by the ships alone. "Extracted from the
registry of the high court of admiralt of England 29th September 1747.
The loss by the enemy and sickness did not exceed 101 men. The loss of the
Snow Prince of Orange, belonging to the province, and supposed to be overset,
was a heavy blow upon the town of Marblehead, the captain and most of the crew
belonging to that town, and it is a rare thing for a Marblehead man to die
without leaving a widow and a number of children surviving.

As it was a time of year to expect French vessels from all parts to Louisburg,
the French flag was kept flying to decoy them in. Two East India and one South
Sea ship, supposed to be all together of the value of L.600,000 sterling, were
taken by the squadron at the mouth of the harbor, into which they would
undoubtedly have entered. The army, at first, supposed they had acquired a
right to the island of Cape Breton and its dependencies, and, until they were
undeceived by Mr. Shirley, were for dividing the territory among the officers
and men. With greater color they might have claimed a share with the men of
war in these rich prizes. Some of the officers expected a claim would have been
laid in, but means were found to divert it, nor was any part decreed to the
vessels of war in the province service, except a small sum to the Brig Boston
Packet, Capt. Fletcher, who being chased by the south sea ship, led her
directly under the command of the guns of one of the men of war. It seemed to
be conceded that, as this acquisition was made under the commission of the
governor of Massachusets-bay, the exercise of government there appertained to
him, until his majesty's pleasure should be known. I know of no precedent in
the colonies except that of the conquest of Nova Scotia in 1690. It was
necessary, then, to admit this principle, the acquisition could not otherwise
have been retained. Mr. Shirley made a voyage to Louisburgh, took the
government upon him, prevailed upon a great part of the army to consent to
remain in garrison over the winter, or until regiments which were expected
arrived, engaged that their pay should be increased and clothing provided, and
settled other matters to general satisfaction. Pensylvania contributed L.4000.
New York L.3000. and New-Iersey, I think, L.2000. some in money others in
provisions for support of the trcops.


DUVIVIER had been sent to France the winter of 1744, to solicit a force, not
to defend Cape Breton, but to conquer Nova Scotia, and accordingly sailed the
beginning of July, with 7 ships of war for that purpose, who were to stop at
Louisburgh. This fleet took a prize bound from Boston to London, on board which
was lieutenant governor Clark of New York, and by this means they were informed
of the conquest of Louisburgh, and the strong squadron there, otherwise some or
all of them would also have probably fallen into the hands of the English. Upon
this intelligence they went back to France. Thus Nova Scotia no doubt was saved
by the Massachusetts expedition. There would not have been men of war in these
seas sufficient to match this squadron.

It caused very grand plans of American measures for the next year with both
powers. Great Britain had in view the reduction of Canada and the extirpation
of the French from the northern continent. France intended the recovery of
Louisburgh, the conquest of Nova Scotia and the destruction of the English sea
coast from Nova Scotia to Georgia. Upon the English plan, eight battalions of
regular troops with the provincial forces to be raised in the four New England
governments, were to rendezvous at Louisburgh and, with a squadron under
admiral Warren, were to go up the river Saint Lawrence to Quebec, other
provincials from Virginia and the colonies northward, including New York, were
to rendezvous at Albany and go across the country to Montreal; the land forces
to be under General St. Clair. No province had a certain number assigned, it
was expected there should be at least 5000 The colonies voted to raise men in
very unequal proportions. New Hampshire 500. Massaclinsets 3500. Rhode Island
300. Connecticut 1000 New York 1600. New-Iesties 500. Maryland 300. Virginia
100 Pensylvania raised 400. though not by an act of government. The whole
number 8200.
in the whole. The Massachusetts forces were ready to embard by the middle of
July, about six weeks from the first notice. The preparations making at Breast
for America, were well known in England, and a squadron was ordered to block up
that harbor. Notwithstanding all the caution used, the Breast squadron slipped
out, and failed to the westward, and it is certain no English squadron
followed. Whilst we were impatiently waiting for news of the arrival of the
fleet at Louisburgh, a fisherman comes in, some time in August, with an account
of his being brought to by four French capital ships not far from Chibuscto,
that he was required to pilot them there, that as he lay under the stern of one
of them he read the word le Terrible, but a fog suddenly rising he made his
escape. After that some days had passed without any further account, the
fisherman's news was generally discredited. It appeared some months after, that
these were four ships under M. Conflans, who had escaped Some say the English
escaped from them.
an English squadron from Iamaica, and were bound to Chibucto in order to join
the Breast fleet, but after cruizing some time and meeting with storms and fogs,
upon a coast they were unacquainted with, they returned to France.

THE beginning of September, vessels arrived at Boston from Hull and Liverpool
with advice that the Breast fleet had failed, and it was supposed for North
America, and from the middle to the latter end of the month frequent accounts
were brought of a great fleet seen to the westward of Newfoundland, which we
flattered ourselves might be English as likely as French, but on the 28th an
express arrived from Louisburgh with certain advice these ships were the French
fleet, which it was affirmed consisted of 70 fail, 14 of which were capital
ships, and that there were 20 smaller men of war, and the rest fire ships,
bombs, tenders and transports for eight thousand troops. The same day a vessel
from Iamaica arrived with advice that the four men of war who had engaged with
commodore Mitchell, were intended to join the fleet, and it was now no longer
doubted that these were the ships seen by the fishermen, and it was supposed
soon after got into Chibucto. England was not more alarmed with the Spanish
armada in 1588, than Boston and the other North American sea ports were with
the arrival of this fleet in their neighborhood. The firmest mind will bend
upon the first advice of imminent danger to its country. Even the great De Wirt
swooned when he first opened a letter giving intelligence of England's
consederating with France to inslave the Dutch, though the next moment he
recovered his natural courage and vivacity.

EVERY practicable measure for defense was immediately pursued by the authority
of the Massachusetts province, but our main dependence, under God, was upon a
squadron from England sufficient in conjunction with the ships then at
Louisburgh to overcome the French. It was impossible the ministry should be
ignorant of the sailing of this fleet, and unless they were willing the
colonies should be exposed to the ravages of the enemy, it was impossible an
English squadron should not be soon after them. It was said admiral Lestock put
out no less than seven times, but could not get to the westward. Others
supposed that an apprehension of French sinesse, pretending an expedition to
America when an invasion of Britain was really intended, occasioned orders for
the detention of Lestock's fleet until it was thought too late to prevent the
mischief. and the ships were then employed in an unsuccessful descent upon
France. The indifference of the people in England in general upon this occasion
was wondered at by the colonists. Letters from merchants, who had debts due in
the colonies equal to their whole fortunes and which they must have wholly lost
if the French plan had been executed, spoke of the sailing of this fleet as an
ordinary piece of news which would be followed with no remarkable consequences.
This was the general voice. But this dependence failed. However, as the
probability of the arrival of our squadron was from day to day lessened, our
apprehensions of danger from the enemy lessened in some proportion. At length,
we had such authentic account of the distresses of the French that it was not
only agreed that admiral Townsend's ships at Louisburgh were more than a match
for them, and we were every day expecting to hear they had sailed for Chebucto,
but if that should prove otherwise, the utmost they would be able to effect by
their grand plan would be the conquest of Annapolis and the whole province of
Nova Scotia. If the winter did not prevent a farther progress, we flattered
ourselves their strength was not sufficient for an attempt upon Boston.

THE misfortunes of this grand armament are really very remarkable. The loss of
Cape Breton filled the French with a spirit of revenge against the British
colonies. The duke d'Anville, a French nobleman in whose courage and conduct
great confidence was placed, was appointed to the command of the expedition. As
early as the beginning of May the fleet was ready to sail, but detained by
contrary winds until the 22d of June, when it left Rochelle, and then consisted
of 11 ships of the line, 30 smaller vessels from 10 to 30 guns, and transport
ships with 3130 land forces commanded by Monsieur Pommerit, a brigadier
general. The French of Nova Scotia, it was expected, would join them, and
Ramsay, a French officer, with 1700 Canadians and Indians were actually in arms
there ready for their arrival. To this force Conflans with the four ships from
the West Indies were to be added. It was the 3d of August before the fleet had
passed the Western Islands. The 24th they were 300 leagues distant from
Nova Scotia, and one of their ships complained so much that they burnt her. The
1st of September, in a violent storm, the Mars, a 64 gun ship, was so damaged
in her masts and so leaky that she bore away for the West Indies She went back
for France and was taken in October by the Nottingham, Capt. Saumarez, off Cape
Clear.
and the Alcide, of 64 guns, which had also lost her topmast, was sent to
accompany her. The 15th, the Ardent, of 64 guns, most of her crew being sick,
put back for Breast.

THE duke d'Anville, in the Northumberland, arrived at Chibucto the 12th of
September, with only one ship of the line, the Renommee and three or four of
the transports. There he found only one of the fleet, which had been in three
days, and after waiting three days and finding that only three more, and those
transports, had arrived, the 16th in the morning he died, the French said of an
apoplexy, the English that he poisoned himself. In the afternoon the vice
admiral, d'Estournelle, with three or four more of the line came in. Mons. de
la Ionquiere, governor of Canada, was aboard the Northumberland and had been
declared a chef d'escadre, after the fleet left France and, by this means, was
next in command to the vice admiral. In a council of war, the 18th, the vice
admiral proposed returning to France. Four of the capital ships, the Ardent,
Caribou, Mars and Alcide and the Argonaute fireship they were deprived of,
there was news of Conflans and his ships, so that only seven Some make the
number 8, and the Perfait, to be one of them, and burnt there; but in the
French list the (...) it is a fire ship and the (...) said to have been burnt.
ships of importance remained, more or less of the land forces were on board
each of the missing ships and what remained were in a very sickly condition.
This motion was opposed for 7 or 8 hours by Ionquiere and others of the
council, who supposed that, at least, they were in a condition to recover
Annapolis and Nova Scotia, after which they might either winter securely at
Casco-bay or, at worst then return to France: The sick men, by the constant
supply of (...) from the Acadians, were daily recovering and would soon be fit
for service. The motion not prevailing, the vice admiral's spirits were
agigated to such a degree as to throw him into a sever attended with a
delitium, in which he imagined himself among the English and ran himself
through the body. Ionquiere succeeded, who was a man experienced in war and,
although above 60, still more active than either of his predecessors, and the
^^ectations of the fleet and army were much raised. From this time Annapolis
seems to have been their chief object. An account, supposed to be authentic,
having been received at Boston of the failing of admiral Lestock, Mr. Shirley
sent an express to Louisburgh to carry the intelligence. The packet boat was
taken and carried into Chibucto, October. 11.
which accelerated the failing of the fleet. Most of the sick had died at
Chibucto and but about one half their number remained alive. They failed the
13th of October and the 15th, being near Cape Sables, they met with a violent
cold storm which, after some intermission, increased the 16th and 17th and
separated the fleet, two of which only, a 50 and a 36 gun ship, were discovered
from the fort at Annapolis, where the Chester man of war, Capt. Spry, then lay
with the Shirley frigate and a small vessel in the service of the board of
ordnance, who being discovered by the French to be under fail they made off and
this was the last of the expedition. The news of the beginning of the
misfortunes of the French having reached France by some of the returned
vessels, two men of war were sent immediately with orders, at all events, to
take Annapolis, but the fleet had failed three or four days before they arrived.

(...) men saw the immediate hand of divine providence in the protection or
rather rescue of the British colonies this year, as they had done in the
miraculous success of the Cape-Breton expedition the former year.

WHEN the summer had so far passed as to render it too late to prosecute the
expedition against Canada, if the fleet had arrived, Mr. Shirley's enterprizing
genius led him to project an attempt upon the French fort at Crown point, with
part of the Massachusetts forces in conjunction with those of the other
colonies, but the alarm of the French fleet prevented until it was judged, by
some concerned, to be too late. Fifteen hundred of the Massachusetts men were
intended for Nova Scotia, upon the news of Ramsay's appearing there, and 400
actually went there, covoyed by the Chester, and late in the fall an additional
number were sent thither. Those posted at Minas were surprised, the first day
of January, by a body of French and Indians commanded by Le Corn, a French
officer, and after having 160 of their number killed, wounded and taken
prisoners, the rest capitulated engaging not to bear arms against the French in
Nova Scotia for the term of one year. De Ramsay with his troops soon after
returned to Canada. Thomas Cushing, Esquire speaker of the house died April 12.
1746. universally lamented.


THE troops raised for the Canada expedition continued in pay until September
the next year 1747. Some of them served for defense of the frontiers, the rest
were inactive. The inactive prosecution of the war in Europe on both sides
indicated peace to be near which the next year was effected.

WAR had been declared in 1744 against the Cape Sable and Sr. John's Indians
and in 1745 against the Penobscots and Norridgewocks. The frontiers did not
molestation. They suffered less than in any former wars. The Indians were
lessened in number and having withdrawn to the French frontiers were sometimes
detained for their defense upon an apprehended invasion, and at other times
engaged to be in readiness to join in the great designs against the English.
The peace with the Indians was not settled until October 1749, when a treaty
was held at Falmouth by commissioners, Thomas Hutchinson, John Choate, Israel
Williams and James Otis of the Massachusetts, and Theodore Atkinson and John
Downing of New Hampshire, when the last treaty in Mr. Dummer's time with some
additions was renewed. June 19th 1748, John Stoddard, Esquire of Northampton, and
at that time a member of the house of representatives, died at Boston. He had
been several years member of the council, but being in favor of the
prerogative, generally met with great opposition, and having been diverse times
left out he at length declined being any longer the subject of contention, and
chose a seat in the house, his town thinking it a favor that he would represent
them. There have been but few men among us who have been more generally
esteemed. His enemies would charge him with unconstitutional principles, but at
the same time allow he had an upright heart. He shined only in affairs of
importance, lesser matters would frequently be carried against his mind by the
little arts and crafts of minute politicians, which he disdained to defeat by
counterworking. He was very early employed in public affairs. In 1713 he went
as a commissary to Quebec for the redemption of captives, and the several
governors to the time of his death entrusted to his direction the military
affairs of the country of Hampshire, which in time of war was peculiarly
exposed. Nor was his authority less in civil matters. Both military and civil
authority he used with great discretion. In this latter, in one instance, he
rather exceeded, extending it to the ecclesiastical affairs of the town of
Springfield farther than he could well justify. Our best men have sometimes
exceeded in their zeal for particular systems, and have endeavored to promote
religion by invading natural and civil rights.


had deserted. Deserters generally flee to some of the neighboring ports where
they are out of danger of discovery. The commodore thought it reasonable that
Boston should supply him with as many men as he had lost, and sent his boats up
to town early in the morning, and surprised not only as many seamen as could be
found on board any of the ships, outward bound as well as others, but swept the
wharfs also, taking some ship carpenters apprentices and laboring land men.
However tolerable such a surprise might have been in London it could not be
born here. The people had not been used to it and men of all orders resented
it, but the lower class were beyond measure engaged and soon assembled with
sticks, clubs, pitchmops, etc. They first seized an innocent lieutenant who
happened to be ashore upon other business. They had then formed no scheme, and
the speaker The Author.
of the house passing by and assuring them that he knew that the lieutenant had
no hand in the press they suffered him to be led off to a place of safety. The
mob increasing and having received intelligence that several of the commanders
were at the governor's house, it was agreed to go and demand satisfaction. The
house was soon surrounded and the court, or yard before the house, filled, but
many persons of discretion inserted themselves and prevailed so far as to
prevent the mob from entering. Several of the officers had planted themselves
at the head of the stair way with loaded carbines and seemed determined to
preserve their liberty or lose their lives. A deputy sheriff attempting to
exercise his authority, was seized by the mob and carried away in triumph and
set in the stocks, which afforded them diversion and tended to abate their vage
and disposed them to separate and go to dinner.

AS SOON as it was dusk, several thousand people assembled in king street, below
the town house where the general court was sitting. Stones and brickbatts were
thrown through the glass into the council chamber. The governor, however, with
several gentle men of the council and house ventured into the council and house
ventured into the balcony and, after silence was obtained, the governor in a
well judged speech expressed his great disapprobation of the impress and
promised his utmost endeavors to obtain the discharge of every one of the
inhabitants, and at the same time gently reproved the irregular proceedings
both of the forenoon and evening. Other gentlemen also attempted to persuade
the people to disperse and wait to see what steps the general court would take.
All was to no purpose. The seizure and restraint of the commanders and other
officers who were in town was insisted upon as the only effectual method to
procure the release of the inhabitants aboard the ships.

IT was thought advisable for the governor to withdraw to his house, many of
the officers of the militia and other gentlemen attending him. A report was
raised that a barge from one of the ships was come to a wharf in the town. The
mob flew to seize it, but by mistake took a boat belonging to a Scotch ship and
dragged it, with as much seeming ease through the streets as if it had been in
the water, to the governor's house and prepared to burn it before the house,
but from a consideration of the danger of setting the town on fire were
diverted and the boat was burnt in a place of less hazard. The next day the
governor ordered that the military officers of Boston should cause their
companies to be mustered and to appear in arms, and that a military watch
should be kept the succeeding night, but the drummers were interrupted and the
militia refused to appear. The governor did not think it for his honor to
remain in town another night and privately withdrew to the castle. A number of
gentlemen who had some intimation of his design, sent a message to him by Col.
Hutchinson, assuring him they would stand by him in maintaining the authority
of government and restoring peace and order, but he did not think this
sufficient.

THE governor wrote to Mr. Knowles representing the confusions occasioned by
this extravagant act of his officers, but he refused all terms of accommodation
until the commanders and other officers on shore were suffered to go on board
their ships, and he threatened to bring up his ships and bombard the town, and
some of them coming to fail, caused different conjectures of his real
intention. Capt. Erskine of the Canterbury had been seized at the house of Col.
Brinley in Roxbury and given his parole not to go abroad, and diverse inferior
officers had been secured.

THE 17th, 18th and part of the 19th, the council and house of representatives,
sitting in the town, went on with their ordinary business, not willing to
interpose left they should encourage other commanders of the navy to future
acts of the like nature, but toward noon of the 19th some of the principal
members of the house began to think more seriously of the dangerous consequence
of leaving the governor without support when there was not the least ground of
exception to his conduct. Some high spirits in the town began to question
whether his retiring should be deemed a desertion or abdication. It was moved
to appoint a committee of the two houses to consider what was proper to be
done. This would take time and was excepted to, and the speaker was desired to
draw up such resolves as it was thought necessary the house should immediately
agree to, and they were passed by a considerable majority and made public.

"In the house of representatives, Nov 19th, 1747.

RESOLVED, that there has been and still continues, a tumultuous riotous
assembling of armed seamen, servants, negroes and others in the town of Boston,
tending to the destruction of all government and order.

RESOLVED, that it is incumbent on the civil and military officers in the
province to exert themselves to the utmost, to discourage and suppress all such
(...) riotous proceedings whenever they may happend.

RESOLVED, that this house will stand by and support with their lives and
estates his excellency the governor and the executive part of the government in
all endeavors for this purpose.

RESOLVED, that this house will exert themselves by all ways and means possible
in redressing such grievances as his majesty's subjects are and have been
under, which may have been the cause of the aforesaid tumultuous disorderly
assembling together.

T. Hutchinson, Speaker."

THE council passed a vote ordering that Captain Erskine and all other officers
belonging to his majesty's ships should be forthwith set at liberty and
protected by the government, which was concurred by the house. As Soon as these
votes were known, the tumultuous spirit began to subside. The inhabitants of
the town of Boston assembled in town meeting in the afternoon, having been
notified to consider, in general, what was proper for them to do upon this
occasion, and notwithstanding it was urged by many that all measures to
suppress the present spirit in the people would tend to encourage the like
oppressive acts for the future, yet the contrary party prevailed and the town,
although they expressed their sense of the great insult and injury by the
impross, condemned the tumultuous riotous acts of such as had insulted the
governor and the other branches of the legislature and committed many other
heinous offenses.

THE governor, not expecting so favorable a turn, had wrote to the secretary to
prepare orders for the colonels of the regiments of Cambridge, Roxbury and
Milton and the regiment of horse to have their officers and men ready to march
at an hour's warning to such place of rendezvous as he should direct, but the
next day there was an uncommon appearance of the militia of the town of Boston,
many persons taking their muskets who never carried one upon any other
occasion, and the governor was conducted to his house with as great parade as
when he first assumed the government.

THE commodore dismissed most, if not all, of the inhabitants who had been
impressed, and the squadron failed to the joy of the rest of the town.

BY the expedition to Louisburgh, the preparations for the reduction of Canada,
and the several supplies of men for Nova Scotia the province had issued an
immense sum in bills of credit, between two and three millions, according to
their denomination in the currency. The greatest part of this sum had been
issued when between five and six hundred pounds was equal to one hundred pounds
sterling, and perhaps the real consideration the government received from the
inhabitants who gave credit to them was near four hundred thousand pounds
sterling; but by thus multiplying the bills they had so much depreciated that,
at the end of the war, eleven or twelve hundred pounds was not equal to more
than an hundred pounds sterling, and the whole debt of the province did not
much exceed two hundred thousand pounds sterling. Thus the people had paid two
hundred thousand pounds sterling. in two or three years, besides a large sum
raised by taxes each year, as much as it was supposed the people were able to
pay; but to pay by the depreciation of the bills, although infinitely unequal,
yet, as they were shifting hands every day, it was almost insensible, a
possessor of a large sum for a few days not perceiving the difference in their
value between the time when he received them and the time when he parted with
them. The apprehension of their depreciation tended to increase it, and
occasioned a quick circulation and for some time, even for English goods, which
ordinarily fell for the longest credit, no body pretended to ask credit. They
were constantly, however, dying in some body's hand, though no body kept them
long by them. Business was brisk, men in trade increased their figures but were
sinking the real value of their stock and, what is worse, by endeavors to shift
the loss attending such a pernicious currency from one to another, fraudulent
dispositions and habits are acquired and the morals of the people depreciate
with the currency.

THE government was soliciting for the reimbursement of the charge in taking
and securing Cape Breton, and by the address, assiduity and fidelity of William
Bollan, Esquire who was one of the agents of the province for that purpose, there
was a hopeful prospect that the full sum, about L.180,000 sterling, would be
obtained.

SOME of the ministry thought it sufficient to grant such sum as would redeem
the bills issued for the expedition, etc. at their depreciated value, and Mr.
Kilby, the other agent, seemed to despair of obtaining more, but Mr. Bollan,
who had an intimate knowledge of our public affairs, set the injustice of this
proposal in a clear light and made it evident that the depreciation of the
bills was as effectually a charge born by the people as if the same proportion
of bills had been drawn in by taxes, and refused all proposals of
accommodation, insisting upon the full value of the bills when issued. He
certainly has great merit for this and other services.

MR. Hutchinson, who was then speaker of the house of representatives, imagined
this to be a most favorable opportunity for abolishing bills of credit, the
source of so much iniquity and for establishing a stable currency of silver and
gold for the future. About two million two hundred thousand pounds would be
outstanding in bills in the year 1749. One hundred and eighty thousand pounds
sterling at eleven for one which was the lowest rate of exchange with London
for a year or two before, and perhaps the difference was really twelve for one,
would redeem nineteen hundred and eighty thousand pounds, which would leave but
two hundred and twenty thousand pounds outstanding, it was therefore proposed
that the sum granted by parliament should be shipped to the province in Spanish
milled dollars and applied for the redemption of the bills as far it would
serve for that purpose, and that the remainder of the bills should be drawn in
by a tax on the year 1749. This would finish the bills. For the future, silver
of sterling alloy at 6s. 8d. the ounce, if payment should be made in bullion,
or otherwise milled dollars at 6s. each should be the lawful money of the
province and no person should receive or pay within the province, bills of
credit of any of the other governments of New England. This proposal being made
to the governor he approved of it as founded in justice and tending to promote
the real interest of the province, but he knew the attachment of the people to
paper money and supposed it impracticable. The speaker, however, laid the
proposal before the house, where it was received with a smile and generally
thought to be an Utopian project and, rather out of deference to the speaker,
than from an apprehension of any effect, the house appointed a committee to
consider of it. The committee treated it in the same manner but reported that
the speaker should be desired to bring in a bill for the consideration of the
house. When this came to be known abroad, exceptions were taken and a clamor
was raised from every quarter. The major part of the people, in number, were no
sufferers by a depreciating currency, the number of debtors is always more than
the number of creditors, and although debts on specialties had allowance made
in judgments of court for depreciation of the bills, yet on simple contracts,
of which there were ten to one specialty, no allowance was made. Those who were
for a fixed currency were divided. Some supposed the bills might be reduced to
so small a quantity as to be fixed and stable and, therefore, were for
redeeming as many by bills of exchange as should be thought supersluous; others
were for putting an end to the bills, but in a gradual way, otherwise it was
said a fatal shock would be given to trade. This last was the objection of many
men of good sense. Douglass, who had wrote well upon the paper currency and had
been the oracle of the anti-paper party, was among them and, as his manner was
with all who differed from him, discovered as much rancor against the author
and promoters of this new project as he had done against the fraudulent
contrivers of paper (...) emissions.

THE bills it was said had sunk gradually in their value from 6 s. 10 d. to 60
s. the ounce, by this means creditors had been defrauded, it was but reasonable
they should rise gradually that justice might be done. But the creditors and
debtors would not be the same in one instance in a thousand, and where this was
not the case the injury was the same, to oblige any one to pay more as to
receive less than was justly due. Others were for exchanging the bills at a
lower rate than the then current price of silver. The inhabitants had given
credit to the government, when silver was at 30 s. the ounce, and ought to be
paid accordingly. Two of the representatives of Boston urged their being
exchanged at 30 s. which would have given a most unreasonable profit to the
present possessor who had taken them at 55 or 60 s. To draw over some of this
party, concessions were made and the bills were exchanged at 50 s. the ounce
instead of 55 as was at first proposed.

SOME of the directors and principal promoters of the land bank scheme, John
Choate and Robert Hale.
being at this time members of the general court, unexpectedly joined with the
party who were for finishing paper money, but the opposition was so great, that
after many weeks spent in debating and settling the several parts of the bill
and a whole day's debate at last in a committee of the whole house upon the
expediency of passing the bill, as thus settled, it was rejected and the report
of the committee accepted.

THE house, although upon some occasions exceptions are taken to motions and
proceedings which come before them as not being in parliamentary form, yet are
not strict in conforming to some of the most useful rules of parliament. A bill
or motion is not only referred from one session to another, but a bill, after
rejecting upon a second or third reading, is sometimes taken up and passed
suddenly the same session. They have an order of the house, that when any
affair has been considered, it shall not be brought before the house again the
same session unless there be as full a house as when it was passed upon. This,
if observed, would still be liable to inconvenience as any designing person
might take an opportunity upon a change of faces, the number being as great as
before, suddenly to carry any point, but even this rule, like many other of
what are called standing orders, is too frequently by votes, on particular
occasions, dispensed with, which lessens the dignity of the house.

IT seems to be of no consequence to the prerogative whether the currency of a
colony be silver or paper, but the royal instructions from time to time for
preventing a depreciating currency, caused merely by a gracious regard to the
interest of the people, had generally engaged what was called the country party
in opposition to them and in favor of paper. It was the case at this time.
However, the next morning, two of the members of the house Joseph Livermore the
representative of Weston, and Samuel Wit representative of Marlborough.
zealous adherers to this party and who had been strong opposers of the bill,
came early to the house to wait the coming of the speaker and, in the lobby let
him know, that although they were not satisfied with several parts of the bill
yet they were alarmed with the danger to the province from the schemes of those
persons who were for a gradual reduction of the bills and, by that means, for
raising the value of the currency without any provision for the relief of
debtors and, therefore, they had changed their minds and, if the bill could be
brought forward again, they would give their voice for it, and others who had
opposed it would do the same. The speaker, who had looked upon any further
attempt to be to no purpose, acquainted them that he did not think it proper to
desire any of the favorers of the bill to move for a reconsideration of it,
inasmuch as it had been understood and agreed in the house the day before, that
if upon a full debate had, the bill should be rejected, no further motion
should be made about it. As Soon as the house met, upon a motion by one of these
members seconded by the other, the bill was again brought under consideration
and passed the house as it afterward did the council and had the governor's
consent.

shock to trade proved groundless; the bills being dispersed through every part
of the province, the silver took place instead of them, a good currency was
insensibly substituted in the room of a bad one, and every branch of business
was carried on to greater advantage than before. The other governments,
especially Connecticut and Rhode Island, who refused, upon being invited, to
conform their currency to the Maffachufets, felt a shock in their trade which
they have not yet recovered. The latter had been the importers, for the
Massachusetts, of West India goods for many years, which ceased at once.
New Hampshire, after some years, revived its business and increased their trade
in English goods, which formerly they had been supplied with from the
Massachusetts. Perhaps, they have (...) exceeded.

WE shall finish this second part of our history with a few remarks upon the
trade of the province at this day, compared with its trade in 1692.

THE other governments of New England, sixty or seventy years ago, imported no
English goods, or next to none, directly from England, they were supplied by
the Massachusetts trader. Now although our trade with Great Britain, upon the
whole, is supposed to cause no addition to our wealth, yet, at least so far as
we are the channel for conveying supplies of goods to the other colonies for
their consumption, a benefit undoubtedly accrues. New Hampshire, by their
convenient situation were induced to become their own importers in a great
measure some years before the alteration of our currency. They made their
returns by shipping lumber, etc. easier than we did. At present, they probably
import English goods equal to their consumption. Connecticut, until we
abolished our bills of credit and theirs with them, continued their trade with
us for English goods, but soon after turned great part of their trade to
New York, and some persons became importers from England. They soon discovered
their error. The produce of New York is so much the same with that of
Connecticut that the Massachusetts market will always be the best. The importer
finds it more difficult to make his returns to England from Connecticut than
from the Massachusetts. Connecticut trade therefore soon returned to the state
it had formerly been in.

RHODE ISLAND, in part, became their own importers also, which they still
continue.

FOR the other colonies on the continent. Between South Carolina and the
Massachusetts, there never has been any considerable trade. The chief benefit
from that colony has been the affording freights for our ships in the European
trade.

North Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, the Ierseys and Pensylvania, until within
20 or 30 years, used to furnish us with provisions for which we paid them in
West India and sometimes English goods and with our own produce and
manufactures. Philadelphia of late is become the mart for the grain of great
part of Maryland, which they manufacture into flour and supply the
Massachusetts, Rhode Island and New Hampshire, and take little or no pay in
return but money and bills of exchange. It seems agreed that the southern
colonies as far as Virginia are designed by nature for grain countries. It
behaves us therefore, either like the Dutch for the other nations in Europe, to
become carriers for them with our shipping, or to contrive some articles of
produce or manufacture for barter or exchange with them, rather than in vain to
attempt raising to more advantage than they do, what nature has peculiarly
formed them for.

OUR trade with the West India islands was much more profitable to us, from the
beginning of king William's to the end of Queen Anne's war with France, than at
any time since. Ever since the peace of Utrecht it has been continually growing
worse. Barbados required, then, more northern produce than it does now. The
other islands, except Iamaica, have very little increased their demand. From
the growth of the northern colonies and the new methods of living, the produce
of the islands is more than double the price it used to be. Perhaps tea and
coffee, alone, cause as great consumption of sugar as all other uses, to which
it was applied, did formerly. The produce of the northern colonies is as low in
the islands as ever it was. Formerly their demand for northern produce not only
afforded us in return, rum, sugar and Molasses sufficient for our own
consumption, but left a surplus which, in war time especially, every year gave
freight to ships from Boston to England, and paid our debts there or procured a
supply of goods from thence, whereas, at this day, the whole supply of northern
produce to the British islands will not pay for one half the West India goods
consumed or used in the northern colonies. The trade to the Dutch colonies, it
is true, is since increased and our goods from time to time find their way into
the French islands, sometimes through the Dutch, at other times, when French
necessity calls for them, by permission or other contrivances, and by this
means we are able to procure the West India goods we want for our consumption
over and above what we can obtain in pay for our produce from our own islands.
Britain herself suffers, with her northern colonies, and pays dearly by the
advanced price of sugar, rum, etc. The Westindians, notwithstanding, are
continually endeavoring to restrain our trade with the foreign islands and
colonies. If they could take of our produce as much as we have occasion for of
theirs it would appear less unreasonable, or if, by our trade with the foreign
colonies, the price of the produce of our own islands had fallen below the
former rates they might have color for complaint; but when the vent for
northern produce by means of the great increase of the northern colonies, bears
no proportion, from any one of them, to what it did formerly, and yet the
produce of the islands is double the price it was formerly and their estates
raised to more than five times the value, it must be unreasonable to burden not
only the inhabitants of the northern colonies but of Great Britain also with a
still further advanced price of West India goods, and all to aggrandize the
West India planters. Such a burden would infallibly be the effect of a rigid
execution of the laws restraining or incumbering our trade with the French and
Dutch colonies. But this is not all. If our trade with the foreign colonies be
suppressed and our supplies of West India goods are confined to our own
islands, the balance above what they require of our produce, must be paid them
in silver and gold or exchange upon England, either of which must lessen our
returns to England and will probably lessen our consumption of their
manufactures. Charlevoix says the French of Canada live well if they can get
fine clothes, if not they retrench from the table to adorn the person. I think
the English colonists would rather abate from their dress than from their
punch, tea, coffee, etc.

IF the question be, which is most for the interest of the British dominions in
general, to restrain the French American trade or to give it all possible
encouragement, it must be given in favor of encouragement. The speedy
settlement of this vast continent is generally supposed to be advantageous to
Great Britain. Every new house, new farm and new subject adds to the
consumption of British manufactures. Nothing more contributes to this speedy
settlement than a vent for the lumber, a great help in clearing the lands near
the sea and upon navigable rivers, and for provisions the produce of
settlements when made. But, on the other hand, admit that raising the price of
West India produce tends to increase the number of plantations in the islands,
yet, those plantations, although more valuable, will never bear any proportion
in number to the plantations and settlements upon the continent, and the
increase of white subjects will be still less in proportion. Blacks eat and
drink nothing and wear next to nothing of British manufacture.

THERE has been a great alteration in our trade with Great Britain. At the
beginning of this period and until within 30 or 40 years past, merchants and
manufacturers in England shipped goods upon their own accounts, which were sold
here upon commission, and although there was appearance of profit from the
sales, yet by the loss upon returns, most adventurers in a course of years were
great losers. Discerning persons in London when they saw a man, going deep into
trade to the colonies would pronounce him short lived.

THE trade is now upon a more certain footing for the people of England. Few
goods are sent to be sold upon commission. The manufacturer depends upon the
merchant in England for his pay. The merchant receives his commission and
generally agrees with his correspondent, for whom he is in advance, in the
colonies that after 6 or 9 months credit, if payment be not made, interest
shall be allowed. Bad debts must be expected more or less in all extensive
trade. Perhaps they are not more frequent in the colonies than among the like
number of traders in England.

THE cod and whale fishery are in a more flourishing state than formerly. The
vessels employed in cod fishing have been more numerous, but they were small
shallops and one of the schooners now employed in that fishery take as much
fish in a season as two shallops used to do. The fashion of the rigging and
fails of a schooner is challenged as a New England invention, the first is said
to have been built at Cape Ann, about the year 1714, by Capt. Andrew Robinson.


THE French are supposed to maintain a fisherman at less expense than the
English. Be it so, the English catch and make their fish at less expense than
the French notwithstanding. Five or six well fed Marblehead or Cape Ann men
catch as much fish as 10 or 12 meagre French men in the same time. The French
find their account in taking what they call their muid or mud fish when the
English cannot. This is owing to the vent which the French markets afford for
that sort of fish. In what they call a fedentaire and we a shore fishery we
shall always outdo them, unless the ports of the other nations in Europe as
well as those of the French should be shut against us. If every family in
Britain should make one dinner in a week upon New England cod fish it would
cause an amazing increase of the consumption of British manufactures.

IT is certain that before the war of 1744 the French fishery declined. They
used to go from Louisburgh to Canso and buy the English fish for the French
European markets, because it came cheaper to them than they could catch and
make it.

THE increase of the consumption of oil by lamps as well as by diverse
manufacturers in Europe has been no small encouragement to our whale fishery.
The flourishing state of the island of Nantucket must be attributed to it. The
cod and whale fishery, being the principal source of our returns to
Great Britain, are therefore worthy not only of provincial but national
attention.

FORMERLY the trade to Newfoundland was valuable. The increase of the northern
colonies has carried from us great part of the supplies we used to make. Our
late began commerce with Nova Scotia is valuable but will not compensate for
this loss.

THE manufacture of pot-ash promises great benefit to the colonies. It is to be
wished, they may meet with no discouragement. Frauds in package and
adulteration cannot be of any long continuance. The least that can be done by
every government, where it is manufactured, is a law to compel every person to
set his name and the name of the town where he lives upon the cask in which he
packs his pot-ash. This will go a great way toward preventing fraud. Should
the Russia traders combine to undersell those who import from America, yet it
will be considered that the Russia trade is drawing every year from the nation
a large balance in bullion, whereas the increase of imports from the colonies
only tends to an increase of national exports, and the body of the nation will
combine against the Russia traders.

I remember one advantage from paper money. Upon the depreciation, from time to
time, the wages of seamen and the rate at which coasting vessels and others
were hired did not immediately rise in proportion to the rise of silver and
exchange with London and other parts of the world. We were thus led to employ
our vessels as carriers to and from many parts of the continent, the
West Indies and Europe because we let them upon cheaper freight and hire than
any other colony would do. The war in 1744 gave a turn to this part of
business, but we may learn from what happened then, without any premeditated
plan or design, what we are capable of, viz. navigating our vessels, especially
if further improvements be made in the construction of them, with so little
expense as, like the Dutch in Europe, to become carriers for America. The
advantage, in this particular instance, of the reduction of the price of labor
shows us what improvements might be made in other branches of trade and
manufacture if ever it should be reduced in proportion to the price in Europe,
compared with the price of the necessaries of life.

IT was hard parting with a free open trade to all parts of the world which the
Massachusetts carried on before the present charter. The principal acts of
parliament were made many years before, but there was no customhouse
established in the colony nor any authority anxious for carrying those acts
into execution. It was several years after the new charter, before they were
generally observed. If we are under no other obligations, we certainly enjoy
and cannot subsist without the protection of our mother country, over our trade
at sea, our personal estate ashore, the territory itself, our liberties and
lives. It is owing, in a great measure, to the taxes, duties and excises, the
consequences of an enormous load of debt, that the manufactures of England come
dearer to us than those of other countries. Great part of this debt was
incurred by our immediate protection. Shall we think much of sharing in the
burden when we have been so great sharers in the benefit? There is no way in
which we can more effectually contribute to the national relief than by
submitting to regulations and restraints upon our trade, and yet no way in
which we should be so little sensible of it.

IT has been the general voice that our trade to Great Britain should be
contracted and that our inhabitants should be employed in the same kind of
manufactures we import from thence, the materials for most of which we have or
may have within ourselves.

THE great creator of the universe in infinite wisdom has so formed the earth
that different parts of it, from the soil, climate, andC. are adapted to
different produce, and he so orders and disposes the genius, temper, numbers
and other circumstances relative to the inhabitants as to render some
employments peculiarly proper for one country, and others for another, and by
this provision a mutual intercourse is kept up between the different parts of
the globe. It would be folly in a Virginian to attempt a plantation of rice for
the sake of having all he consumes from the produce of his own labor, when
South Carolina, by nature, is peculiarly designed for rice, and capable of
supplying one half the world. Old countries, stocked with people, are
ordinarily best adapted to manufactures. Would it be the interest of New
England, whilst thin of people, to turn their attention from the whale, cod,
mackarel and herring fishery, their lumber trade and ship building, which
require but few hands compared with many other sorts of business, to such
manufactures as are now imported from Great Britain, or to take their sons from
clearing the land and turning an uncultivated wilderness into pleasant and
profitable fields, and set them to spinning, weaving and the like employments?
I do not mean to discourage any persons who cannot improve their time to
greater advantage from employing themselves and families, in any branch of
manufacture whatsoever. Idleness is the certain parent of vice. Industry,
introduced, will ordinarily tend to produce a change of manners. A general
philanthropy will induce us to delight in and contribute to the happiness of
every part of the human race, by which we our selves are no sufferers; the
state from whence we sprang and upon which we still depend for protection, may
justly expect to be distinguished by us, and that we should delight in and
contribute to its prosperity, beyond all other parts of the globe.

APPENDIX.
NUMBER I.
A Summary of the affairs of the colony of New Plymouth, from the first
settlement until the incorporation with Massachusets-Bay, etc. in one province.
THE first settlers of New Plymouth, as we have observed in our history of the
Massachusetts colony, went, in the beginning of the 17th century, from England
to Holland. Their removal to Holland was attended with no small difficulty and
hazard. One of the company Bradford.
gives this account of it. There was a large company of them proposed to get
passage at Boston in Lincolnshire and, for that end, had hired a ship wholly to
themselves, and made agreement with the master to be ready at a certain day,
and take them and their goods in at a convenient place, where accordingly they
would all attend in readiness. So after long waiting and large expense, tho he
kept not day with them, yet he came at length and took them in, in the night.
But when he had them and their goods aboard he betrayed them, having before
hand complotted with the searchers and other officers so to do, who took them
and put them into open boats and then rifled and ransacked them, searching them
to their shirts for money, yea even the women, further then became modesty, and
then carried them back into the town, and made them a spectacle and wonder to
the multitude, which came flocking on all sides to behold them. Being thus,
first by the catch-poles, rifled and stripped of their money, books and much
other goods, they were presented to the magistrates, and messengers sent to
inform the lords of the council of them, and so they were committed to ward.
Indeed the magistrates used them courteously and showed them what favor they
could, but could not deliver them till order came from the council table, but
the issue was that, after a month's imprisonment, the greatest part were
dismissed and sent to the places from whence they came, but seven of the
principal men were still kept in prison and bound over to the assizes. The next
spring after there was another attempt made, by some of these and others, to
get over at another place. And so it fell out that they light of a dutchman at
Hull, having a ship of his own belonging to Zealand. They made agreement with
him and acquainted him with their condition, hoping to find more faithfulness
in him than in the former of their own nation. He had them not fear, for he
would do well enough. He was by appointment, to take them in between Grimstone
and Hull, where was a large common a good way distant from any town. Now
against the prefixed time, the women and children, with the goods, were sent to
the place in a small bark, which they had hired for that end, and the men were
to meet them by land, but it so fell out that they were there a day before the
ship came and, the sea being rough and the women very sick, prevailed with the
seamen to put into a creek hard by, where they lay on ground at low water. The
next morning the ship came, but they were fast and could not stir till about
noon. In the mean time, the ship master, perceiving how the matter was, sent
his boat to get the men aboard whom he saw ready, walking about the shore, but
after the first boat full was got aboard and she was ready to go for more, the
master espied a great company both horse and foot, with bills and guns and
other weapons, for the country was raised to take them. The dutchman, seeing
that, swore his country oath sacrament and, having the wind fair, weighed
anchor, hoisted sails and away. -- After enduring a fearful storm at sea for 14
days or more, 7 whereof they never saw sun moon nor stars, and being driven
near the coast of Norway, they arrived at their desired haven, where the people
came flocking, admiring their deliverance, the storm having been so long and
sore, in which much hurt had been done, as the master's friends related to him
in their congratulations. The rest of the men that were in greatest danger made
a shift to escape away before the troop could surprise them, those only staying
that best might be assisting unto the women. But pitiful it was to see the
heavy case of these poor women in distress; what weeping and crying on every
side, some for their husbands that were carried away in the ship, others not
knowing what should become of them and their little ones, crying for fear and
quaking with cold. Being apprehended, they were hurried from one place to
another till, in the end, they knew not what to do with them; for, to imprison
so many women with their innocent children for no other cause, many of them,
but that they would go with their husbands, seemed to be unreasonable and all
would cry out of them, and to send them home again was as difficult, for they
alleged, as the truth was, they had no homes to go to, for they had either
fold or otherwise disposed of their houses and livings: To be short, after they
had been thus turmoiled a good while and conveyed from one constable to
another, they were glad to be rid of them in the end upon any terms though, in
the mean time, they poor souls endured misery enough.

AFTER eleven or twelve years residence in Holland, in which time they had
contention among themselves and divided and became two churches or
congregations, one of the congregations, whose minister was Mr. John Robinson,
determined to remove to America. There were many obstacles in their way and it
took up several years of their pilgrimage I think I may with singular propriety
call their lives a pilgrimage. Most of them left England about the year 1609,
after the truce with the Spaniards, young men between 20 and 30 years of age:
They spent near 12 years, strangers among the Dutch, first, at Amsterdam,
afterward, at Leyden. After having arrived to the meridian of life, the
delining part was to be spent in another world, among savages, of whom every
European must have received a most unfavorable if not formidable idea. Tantum
religio potuit suadere.
to make the necessary preparations for such an undertaking. At length, in the
year 1620, about one half the congregation embarked first from Holland to
England, where two ships were ready to receive them and they actually failed at
a very seasonable time, but meeting with contrary winds and one of the ships
proving leaky, they put back and were obliged to leave her with part of their
company behind, the other ship proceeding upon her voyage late in the year, so
that it was about the 8th or 9th of November before they made the coast of
America, and falling more to the northward than they intended they made another
attempt to fail further southward, but meeting with contrary winds and
hazardous shoals they were glad to put into the harbor of Cape Cot, November
10th. Cape Cod was the name which Gosnold gave it in 1692. Smith afterward
called it Cape James, but the first name having obtained among seamen the other
could not prevail against it. Both French and Dutch called it Malebar for a
long time, their writers do so perhaps to this day, from a shipwreck there.
determined to winter in the most convenient place they could find. This
disappointment was grievous to them but, before spring, they considered it as a
favorable providence. They were so reduced in the winter by sickness and death
that they supposed they must have fallen a sacrifice to the Indians upon
Hudson's river, where they proposed to begin a colony. The master, or pilot, it
is said, bribed by the Dutch West India company, had engaged, at al events, not
to land them at Hudson's river, but they were determined upon it and earlier in
the year he would have found it very difficult to have diverted them.

THE ship lay five weeks in Cape Cod harbor. They could not expect to find a
better harbor, but the land was of no value. The passengers were employed,
some times traveling by land sometimes by water, in search of some other
harbor where there was better land, but could find none capable of receiving
vessels of any burden. At length, December 6th, they resolved upon one attempt
more and, after coasting many leagues, a violent storm arose and their pilot
made for the first harbor which he supposed to be Sagaquabe, where he was well
acquainted, but soon found himself in a cove Since called the Gurnet's nose.
full of breakers, and crying out, my eyes never saw this place before, would
have run the shallop ashore before the wind, if a stout seaman who was at the
helm had not called to the oars men, about with her if you are men, and by this
means he saved their lives, for he discovered an opening or found ahead and, in
a short time, run the boat under the lee of an island now well known by the
name of Clark's island. Here they rode out the storm and in the morning went
ashore, kindled a fire and rested, it being the first day of the week. The next
day they founded many parts of the harbor and found good water for ships and
were pleased with the land, and judged it the best place they had seen, and the
Indian cornfields round the harbor encouraged them that they should be able
also to raise bread for their support. Upon their return to the ship with this
good news, they weighed anchor and the whole company arrived the 16th of
December. The whole number exclusive of the mariners, amounted to 101, about
one fourth part heads of families, the rest wives, children and servants. They
supposed some at least of the company which they left behind in England, and
most of the congregation in Leyden, with Mr. Robinson the minister, Thirty five
did arrive the 9th of November the next year, but their minister never came. He
encouraged them from year to year and seems to have been prevented by
disappointments from those in England, who undertook to provide for the passage
of him and his congregation, until the year 1625, when he died and his
congregation dispersed, although some found their way to their brethren before
and some after his death. He was at first a thorough seperatist, and Mr.
Hubbard says was transported with their principles so far as to publish his
opinions against hearing any of the preachers of the church of England were
they never so learned and pious, but afterward acknowledged his error in a
judicious and godly discourse etc. He is said to have been a man of good
learning and of a benevolent disposition. Mr. Bradford relates an anecdote
which shows him, as well as their congregation in general, to have been in no
small esteem among the dutch.:The magistrates of the city about the time of
their coming away, or a little before, in the public place of justice, gave
this commendable testimony of them in the reproof of the Walloons who were of
the French church in the city. These English, said they, have lived among us
now these 12 years and yet we never had any suit or accusation come against any
of them, but your strifes and quarrels are continual etc.. -- In these times
also were great troubles raised by the Arminians, who, as they greatly molested
the whole state, so this city, in which was the chief university, in
particular, and the two professors or divinity readers themselves were divided
in their opinions, the one teaching for it and the other against it. --
Episcopius, the Arminian professor, put forth his best strength and set forth
sundry theses which by public dispute he would defend against all men. Now
Poliander, the other professor, and the chief preachers of the city, desired
Mr. Robinson to dispute against him, but he was loath being a stranger, yet the
other did importune him and told him that such was the abilities and nimbleness
of the adversary that the truth would suffer if he did not help them, so that
he condescended and prepared himself against the time, and when the day came
the Lord did so help him to defend the truth and foil his adversary as he put
him to an apparent nonplus in this great and public audience, and so he did a
second and a third time upon such like occasions, which procured him much honor
and respect, etc. -- and so far were they from being weary of him and his
people, or desiring their absence, as was said by some, of no small note, that,
were it not for giving offense to the state of England, they would have
preferred him, and allowed them some public saver.
would follow; and this seems to have been the whole number expected, upon
their plan, for completing the colony.

THEY had obtained a grant of part of the continent near Hudson's river, before
the year 1620, and expected to be under the government of the colony in
Virginia, but before they embarked they heard that the lands within their grant
were made part of a new patent to the council of Plymouth in Devon, so that
they were going into a part of the world where there was no government
subsisting by authority from any European state, nor did they carry other
powers or authority with them than what each of them brought into the world.

THEY were convinced, upon their passage, that they could not long subsist
without government. Some of the inferior class among them muttered that, when
they should get ashore, one man would be as good as another, and they would do
what seemed good in their own eyes. This led the graver fort to consider how to
prevent it, and, for this purpose, they prepared the following instrument for
every man to sign before he landed.

IN the name of God amen. We whose names are underwritten, the loyal subjects
of our dread sovereign lord king James, by the grace of God of GreatBritain,
France and Ireland, king, defender of the faith etc. Having undertaken for the
glory of God and advancement of the christian faith, and honor of our king and
country, a voyage to plant the first colony in the northern parts of Virginia,
do by these presents, solemnly and mutually in the presence of God and one of
another, covenant and combine ourselves together into a civil body politic for
our better ordering and preservation and furtherance of the ends aforesaid, and
by virtue hereof to enact, constitute and frame such just and equal laws and
ordinances, acts, constitutions and offices, from time to time, as shall be
thought most meet and convenient for the general good of the colonie, unto
which we promise all due subjection and obedience. In witness whereof we have
hereunto subscribed our names at Cape Cod the 11th of November, in the year of
the reign of our sovereign lord King James of England, France and Ireland the
18th, and of Scotland the 54th, Anno Dom. 1620. Signed by John Carver, Wm.
Bradford, Edw. Winslow, Wm. Brewster, Isaac Allerton, Miles Standish, John
Alden, Sam. Fuller, Christopher Martin, Wm. Mullins, Wm. White, Richard Warren,
John Howland, Stephen Hopkins, Edw. Tilley, John Tilley, Francis Cook, Thomas
Rogers, Thomas Tinker, John Ridgsdale, Edw. Fuller, John Turner, FrancisEaton,
James Chilton, John Croxton, John Billington, Ioses Fletcher, John Goodman,
Digory Priest, Thomas Williams, Gilbert Winslow, Edw. Margeson, Peter Brown,
Richard Bitteridge, George Soul, Richard Clarke, Richard Gardner, John
Allerton, Thomas English, Edw. Doten, Edw. Liester. These I suppose to have
been all the males, of age, in the company, twenty one of whom died before the
end of March, of the seurvey and other sickness, caused by bad lodging and bad
diet and the hardships of the winter. About the same proportion of the women
and children died also, 50 being the whole number then surviving. In 1650 there
were 30 remaining alive, in 1679 only 12, in 1694 only 2, and Mary Cushman
only, daughter of Isaac Allerton, was alive in School. I will give a brief
account of several of these persons. John Carver had been deacon of their
church in Holland, was esteemed for his discrete discharge of that office and
being a grave judicious man, their eyes were upon him for their chief ruler
before they embarked. He lived but a short time. His grandson died about 10 or
12 years since, at Marshfield at the age of 102. Not long before his death this
grandson with his son, his grandson and great grandson were all at work
together without doors, and the great grandson was in the house at the same
time. This is not common. William Bradford was one of the younger men of the
company. Douglass says he was a man of no family and no learning. His
manuscripts show that he was a plain sensible man and in his public trust he
was esteemed as a discrete, upright and faithful officer, and he deserves a
better character than many of superior birth and education. His son was deputy
governor after his death, his grand son and two of his great grandsons, one of
them now living have been of the council for the province. Edward Winslow was
of a very reputable family and of a very active genius which fitted him for
employment abroad, and in a great measure prevented a competition between
Bradford and him for the governor's place. He was concerned in managing their
treaties with the Indians, and with the neighboring colonies, made several
voyages to the eastward and to Connecticut river, as well as four or five
voyages to England in the service of the colony first and, afterward, of the
Massachusetts and so established himself in the favor of the then supreme
authority in England as to be employed in some very important services. In
1651, he was one of the commissioners of Haberdasners-hall, as they were called
from the place of meeting and in 1655 was one of the three superintendents in
Cromwell's West India expedition. In one of his embassies, viz. in 1635 he had
hard measure in England, the particular circumstances his friend Bradford has
preserved from oblivion, It came to pass that having occasion to answer some
complaint made against the country at council board, chiefly concerning his
neighbors in the bay, the which he did to great effect, and further
prosecuting such things as might tend to the good of the whole as well
themselves as others about the wrongs and encroachments that the French and
other strangers both had done and were like further to do unto them if not
prevented, he preferred the petition following to their honors that were
deputed commissioners for the plantations. To the right honorable the Lords
Commissioners for the plantations in America. The humble petition of Edward
Winslow on behalf of the plantations in New England humbly shows unto your
Lordships, that whereas your petitioners have planted themselves in New England
under his majesty's most gracious protection, now so it is, right honorable,
that the French and Dutch do endeavor to divide the land between them, for
which purpose the French have upon the east side entered and seized upon one of
our houses and carried away the goods, flew two of the men in another place and
took the rest prisoners with their goods: and the Dutch in the west have also
made entry upon Connecticut river within the limits of his majesty's letters
patents, where they have raised a fort and threaten to expel your petitioners
thence who are also planted upon the same river, maintaining possession for his
majesty to their great charge and hazard both of lives and goods. In tender
consideration hereof your petitioners humbly pray, that your lordships will
either procure their peace with those foreign states or else give special
warrant unto your petitioners and the English colonies to right and defend
themselves against all foreign enemies. And your petitioners shall ever pray,
etc. This petition found good acceptance with most of them, and Mr. Winslow
was heard sundry times by them, and appointed further to attend for an answer
from their lordships, especially having upon conference with them laid down a
way how this might be done without any other charge or trouble to the state,
only by furnishing some of the chief of the country here with authority, who
would undertake it at their own charge, and in such a way as should be without
any public disturbance. But this crossed both Sir Ferdinando Gorges and Capt.
Mason's design, and that of the archbishop of Canterbury by them, for Sir F.
Gorges, by the archbishop's favor, was to have been sent over general governor
into the country and to have had means from the state for that end, and was now
upon dispatch and conclusion of the business. And the archbishop's intent was
by his means and some he should send with him (to be furnished with episcopal
power) to disturb the peace of the churches here, and to overthrow their
proceedings and prevent their further growth, which was the thing he aimed at.
But it so fell out, by God's providence, that though he in the end crossed this
petition from taking any further effect in this kind, yet by this as a chief
means the plot and whole business of his and Sir Ferdinando's fell to the
ground and came to nothing. When Mr. Winslow should have had his suit granted,
as indeed, upon the point it was, and should have been confirmed, the
archbishop put a stop upon it, and Mr. Winslow thinking to get it free, went to
the board again, but the bishop, Sir Ferdinando and Capt. Mason had, as it
seems, procured Morton to complain, to whose complaints Mr. Winslow made answer
to the good satisfaction of the board who checked Morton and rebuked him
sharply, and also blamed Sir Ferdinando Gorges and Mason for countenancing him,
but the bishop had further and use of his presence, for he now began to
question Mr. Winslow of many things, as of teaching in the church publicly, of
which Morton accused him and gave evidence that he had seen and heard him do
it, to which Mr. Winslow answered that sometimes, wanting a minister, he did
exercise his gift to help the edification of his brethren when they wanted
better means, which was not often. Then about marriage, the which he also
confessed, that having been called to place of magistracy he had sometimes
married some; and further told their lordships that marriage was a civil thing
and he found no where in the word of God that it was tied to a minister, again,
they were necessitated so to do, having for a long time together at first no
minister, besides, it were no new thing, for he had been so married himself in
Holland by the magistrates in their state house. But, in the end, to be short,
by these things, the bishop by vehement importunity got the board at last to
consent to his commitment, so he was carried to the fleet and lay there 17
weeks or thereabouts before he could get to be released. The other design by
this business and other things concurring, was frustrated, which was no small
blessing to the people here. Mr. Winslow settled at Marshfield upon a valuable
tract of land which now belongs to his eldest male descendant. A rare instance
among us. To his estate he gave the name of Careswell, and from thence dated
many of his letters to governor Winthrop, with whom he was very intimate, and
frequently came from thence to Boston to visit him, sometimes, perhaps, by
water but often by land, not as governors travel at this day in a chariot or
post chaise, but for some of the first years at least, upon his feet. In the
same manner governor Endicot traveled from Salem to Boston. I was pleased with
this paragraph of a letter from him to his successor, governor Winthrop, Salem,
12th of April 1631, Right worshipful, I did hope to have been with you in
person at the court, end to that end I put to sea yesterday and was driven back
again, the wind being stiff against us and, there being no canoe or boat at
Sawgus (Lyn) I must have been constrained to go to Mistick and thence about to
Charleston which, at this time I durst not be so bold, my body being at present
in an ill condition to wade or take cold and therefore I desire you to pardon
me. I cannot help revering our good forefathers who cheerfully exposed
themselves to these hardships. Mr. Winslow's son was first an assistant, then
governor of the colony, his grandson one of the council for the province, and
many years at the head of the county of Plymouth, one of his great grandsons
lost his life fighting for his country, (p. 307) and two others are now living
in repute, and in offices of honor and trust, and there are many reputable
branches of the name and family in different parts of the province. William
Brewster was highly esteemed by the whole company, was their ruling elder in
Holland, which seems to have been the ba^ to his being their governor, civil
and ecclesiastical office in the same person being then deemed incompatible.
Mr. Bradford gives this account of him. After he had attained the knowledged of
the latin tongue and some insight into the greek, and spent some small time at
Cambridge; and then, being first seasoned with the seeds of grace and virtue,
he went to the court and served that religious and godly gentleman Mr. Davison
diverse years, when he was secretary of state, who found him so discrete and
faithful, that he trusted him above all other that were about him, and only
employed him in all matters of greatest truth and secrecy. He esteemed him
rather as a son than a servant, and for his wisdom and godliness, in private,
he would converse with him more like a friend and familiar than a master. He
attended his master, when he was sent in embassage by the queen into the low
countries, in the earl of Leicester's time. -- He afterward remained with him
till his trouble, when he was put from his place about the death of the queen
of Scots, and some time after, doing him many faithful offices of service in
the time of his troubles. Afterward he went and lived in the country in good
esteem among his friends and the gentlemen of those parts, especially the godly
and religious -- He was the chief of those that were taken at Boston and
suffered the greatest loss. -- After he came into Holland he suffered much
hardship, having spent most of his means, having a great charge and many
children, and in regard of his former breeding and course of life not so fit
for many employments as others were, especially such as were toilsome and
laborious. In the latter part of the time spent in Holland, his outward
condition was mended. -- He fell into a way, by reason he had the late in
tongue, to teach many students who had a desire to learn the English tongue,
for he drew rules to learn it after the late in manner, and many gentlemen both
Danes and Germans, resorted to him, as they had time from their other studies,
some of them being great men's sons. -- Removing into this country these things
were laid aside, and a new course of living must be submitted to, in which he
was no way unwilling to take his part and to bear his burden with the rest,
living many times without bread or corn many months together, many times having
nothing but fish, and often wanting that also, and drank nothing but water for
many years together, yea till within five or six years of his death, and yet he
lived by the blessing of God in health till very old age, etc. He lived until
1643, and then died at the age of 84. His grandson, William Brewster, was
deacon of the church at Duxbury. Many of his posterity, I am informed, are
living in that colony. Isaac Allerton or Alderton, the first assistant, was
employed several times to negociate matters in England, relative to their
trade, and at length left them and settled there. His male posterity settled in
Maryland. If they be extinct, point Alderton, which took his name, will
probably preserve it many ages. Miles Standish is said, by Morton, to have been
a gentleman of Lancashire, heir to a great estate, surreptitiously detained
from him, his great grandfather being a second or younger brother of the house
of Standish, had been a soldier in the low countries, and was thought, although
of remarkably small stature, the most proper person for their chief military
officer as long as he lived. Many things are said of his notable strength and
courage. When the news of the first Indians being killed, by him, came to Mr.
Robinson in Holland, he writes to his church to consider the disposition of
their captain, who it seems was of a warm temper, and he hoped the Lord had
sent him among them for good; if they used him right, out Mr. Robinson doubted
whether there was not wanting that tenderness of the life of man, made after
God's image, which was meet, and he thought it would have been a happy thing if
they had converted some before they had killed any. It seems Standish was not
of their church, at first, and Mr. Hubbard says he had more of his education in
the school of Mars than in the school of Christ. He acquired however the esteem
to the whole colony, and died in 1656, much lamented. His farmin Duxbury
retains the name of Captain's hill to this day, and some part of it yet remains
in the possession of one of his posterity. William White was remarkable for
being the father of the first born child, Peregrine White, who lived until
1704. (p. 198.) Stephen Hopkins was one of the assistants, and seems to have
been much employed in their public affairs. Purchase mentions one Stephen
Hopkins, one of Sir George Somers's company at Bermudas, as being disaffected
to their civil and ecclesiastical regulations and a promoter of separation, and
not unlikely to be the same person. He was the ancestor of Mr. Hopkins of
Providence, the present governor of Rhode Island. Richard Warren is mentioned
by Bradford as a most useful man among them the short time he lived, dying in
1628; his son, grandson and great grandson have been since employed in public
posts in the colony and province. John Alden was many years an assistant, and
several of his descendants have sustained public offices and some of them are
now living: So are the descendants of John Howland. I can give no account of
the rest of this company. Timothy Hatherly was a merchant in London, engaged
with them from the beginning, and came over two or three years after the first.
He was the principal founder of the town of Situate, and was an assistant: So
was Thomas Willett who came from London in 1629, and was a principal trader
with the Dutch at Manhados, and in such esteem with them that they chose him a
referree to settle their controverted boundary with the colony of Newhaven. He
lived many years after, and died at Swanzey. His son was one of the first
settlers of the Naraganset country in the beginning of this century, and his
grandson Francis Willett, Esquire is a person of distinguished character in that
colony. William Thomas, Edmund Freeman, James Cudworth, Thomas Southworth, were
all assistants, and their families still remain in the colony. I may not omit
taking notice of Richard Bourne, an early settler, and a most zealous and
indefatigable promoter of the gospel among the Indians, and though I do not
find him named in the magistracy himself, yet two of his descendants have been
of the council for the province, and several more are now living of very
reputable characters, and distinguished by posts of honor and trust. These were
the founders of the colony of New Plymouth. The settlement of this colony
occasioned the settlement of Massachusets-bay, which was the source of all the
other colonies of New England. Virginia was in a dying state and seemed to
revive and flourish from the example of New England. I am not preserving from
oblivion the names of heroes whose chief merit is the overthrow of cities,
provinces and empires, but the names of the founders of a flourishing town and
colony if not of the whole British empire in America.


BY this instrument they formed themselves into a proper democracy, and if they
had gone no further perhaps they would have done but little toward preserving
order. But one great reason of this covenant seems to have been of a meet moral
nature, that they might remove all scruples of inflicting necessary
punishments, even capital ones, seeing all had voluntarily subjected themselves
to them. By common consent they agreed upon Mr. John Carver to be their first
governor, considing in his prudence that he would not adventure upon any matter
of moment without consent of the rest or, at least, advice of such as were
known to be the wisest among them. (Hubbard.) They seem cautiously to have
reserved as much of their natural liberty as could be consistent with the
maintenance of government and order This was rational and every thinking man
when he first quitted the state of nature would do the same. Lord chief justice
Holt said, in the case of Blankald v.Galdy, that in case of an uninhabited
country newly found out by English subjects, all laws in force in England are
in force there, and the court agreed with him. Until they should agree upon
laws suited to their peculiar circumstances, our Plimotheans resolved to make
the laws of England their rule of government, which, Mr. Hubbard says, they
were willing to be subject unto, although in a foreign land, and it seems they
differed much in this respect from the Massachusetts colonists, and never
established any distinct code or body of laws, but added some particular
municipal laws of their own, suitable to their constitution, in such cases
where the common law and the statutes of England could not well reach and
afford them help in emergent difficulties, following the advice of Pecuvius to
his neighbors of Capua, not to cashier their old magistrates till they could
agree upon better to place in their room. Cartwright, who had a chief hand in
reducing puritanism to a system, held, that the magistrate was bound to adhere
to the judicial law of Moses and might not punish nor pardon otherwise than
they prescribed, and him the Massachusetts people followed, It must be allowed
that, in some instances, the Plimotheans run into the same errors with the
Massachusetts and established penalties disproportioned to the offenses. A young
factor, who came from Virginia, was captivated with the charms of an Indian
girl and the effects of a criminal conversation soon appeared. He found
suspicions rising against him, and had not other way to avoid whipping but to
leave the colony. Accordingly he privately departed to the colony from whence
he came, where I suppose his offense would not have been thought very heinous.
If he had forged a deed he might have escaped with a moderate fine. I would not
be understood to intend that fornication should pass with impunity but,
certainly, forgery requires a more infamous punishment. But this was not all.
It was thought by one, Bradford.
at least, among themselves, that some enormous sodomitical crimes committed by
prosligate persons who had mixed among them were owing to the server penalties
annexed to lascivious acts which, though less criminal, were more suspected and
more likely to be discovered by their consequences. We do not condemn the laws
for restraining human passions and natural propensities, but they will
sometimes, like waters close dammed or pent up, seek vent and break through
with greater violence. They thought the magistrates, being God's ministers,
were bound to punish all offenses in their courts in the same proportion as the
supreme judge would punish them in the court of heaven.

THEY had no scruples of their authority by virtue of their combination to
inflict corporal punishment for lesser offenses. They had been ten years
combined before any capital offense was committed. In 1630, John Billington,
who had slipped in among them when they were at London, not being one of their
church, lay in wait for his companion with whom he was offended and wounded him
so that he died presently after. They were in doubt of their authority to pass
sentence of death. They had just obtained their patent from the council of
Plymouth, which gave all the powers which they had authority to give, but if
the council, by their patent, had no authority to inflict capital punishment
themselves it might well be enquired how they could give this power to their
substitutes. Their chief reliance, therefore, seems to have been upon the
voluntary submission of this offender among the rest to the laws and orders of
the whole body. This, from a mere moral consideration, might induce them to
proceed to trial and punishment, but as they were within the dominions of
Great Britain and had no constitutional authority to erect courts of justice
scruples of the legality still remained. They therefore applied to their
neighbors in the Massachusetts and prayed their advice. Mr. Winthrop, having
consulted with "the ablest gentlemen there," concurred with the opinion at
Plymouth, that the man ought to die and "the land be purged from blood." This
was founded upon the divine command, "Whosoever sheddeth man's blood," etc.
which was not in any case to be dispensed with. Although they were not clothed
with legal authority they observed, nevertheless, the forms of law, and both
grand jury and petty jury were impannelled, and, after indictment, verdict and
sentence, the criminal was executed. I find no scruple, afterward, of as full
authority in all cases whatsoever as any of the charter governments or any
government by royal commission, until after the restoration of King Charles the
second.

MR. Carver, the first governor, died suddenly a few months after their
arrival. They chose William Bradford to succeed him and Isaac Allerton his
assistant, but gave this reason for choosing an assistant, that Mr. Bradford was
upon recovery from a sit of sickness and unable to bear the whole burden;
however, it served for a precedent and the same persons were annually elected
governor and assistant until 1624 when they added four persons more for
assistants and gave the governor a double voice, and in 1633 two more, after
which they kept to the number of seven assistants until they submitted to king
James the second his commission to Andros. In 70 years they had no more than
six different persons governors. In popular governments, where the elections
are frequent and changes rare, it is, ordinarily, a proof of a spirit of virtue
and a presumption arises that they have pitched upon persons well qualified,
and, on the contrary, frequent shifting from one person to another and from one
set of officers to another, with continual animosities, contentions and
struggles between the two parties, which we have seen instances of in the
colonies, is a proof that this spirit is not predominant.

BRADFORD, who succeeded Carver, was chosen annually from 1621 until he died in
1657, except in 1633, 1636 and 1644, when Edward Winslow was chosen and 1634
when Thomas Prince was chosen, who also succeeded Bradford and was annually
elected, until his death in 1673, when Josias Winslow succeeded and continued
until he died in 1680 and was succeeded by Thomas Hinkley, who held the place,
except in the interruption by Andros, until the junction with the Massachusetts
in 1692.

I do not find when they first chose a deputy governor or gave an assistant the
name of deputy governor, for I know of no peculiar share of power, but in the
latter part of the patent, William Bradford, son to the first governor, is
named deputy governor. The charters of the three New England charter
governments mentioning such an officer probably led them to a conformity. They
had no house of representatives until the year 1639. At the general court held
the 4th of June 1639, committees or deputies sent from each town, 4 from
Plymouth, 2 from Duxborough, 2 from Situate, 2 from Sandwich, 2 from Cohannet
(Taunton) 2 from Yarmouth, 2 from Barnstable, Colony records. In June 1617 it
was ordered that plymouth should send only 2.
There seems to have been no occasion for one before. Their number was small,
the election of governor and assistants annual; they were to all intents and
purposes the representatives of the people and, indeed when the colony
increased, the increasing the number of assistants might have answered all the
purposes of choosing the same number with another name. The Massachusetts had
some special reasons which Plymouth had not. They were limited by charter to
eighteen assistants. The people were not satisfied that the whole powers of
government should be in so few hands. They could have a remedy in no other way
than by creating a distinct body of men to share with the governor and
assistants in acts of government. The Massachusetts, from the beginning
endeavored to preserve two distinct ranks or orders of men, gentry and
commonalty. Vol. I p. 490.
There was a general disposition to elect the governor, etc. from the former
rank; their ministers preached it as a christian and moral duty. That the
commonalty or, as they expressed themselves, the generality might come in for a
share, they formed a new body by the name of representatives although their
charter knew nothing of it.

WHILST they were few in number so that the whole body could assemble in one
place, the whole were frequently convened to determine upon matters executive
as well as legislative. At a general court held the 27th of March 1634 it was
ordered that all actions either of debt or trespass under 40 s. be tried by the
governor and assistants without the trouble of the whole body. Colony records.
When they were increased and were divided into towns remote from the center,
this became imp^^cticable. They then seem to have followed the model of the
Massachusetts, the governor and assistants being the supreme judiciary power and
sole in judging high offenses, lesser offenses being cognizable before inferior
courts and single magistrates and in civil matters appeals also lay from
inferior jurisdictions to the supreme.

I shall briefly touch upon their ecclesiastical affairs. I suppose this people
were the first who took or received the name of Independents which, in a few
years after, was the name given to a body of men in England who assumed the
government there. When they first went to Holland they were known by the name
of Brownists. Some of the characteristicks of Brownism they afterward
disclaimed and, at the same time, disclaimed the name, which was generally
odious, the character of the founder of the sect being, at best, problematical.
Besides, he renounced his principles and returned to episcopacy. The puritans
they could not conform to and, therefore, considered themselves as a distinct
church or by themselves independent of all other. Cardinal Bentivoglio makes
them a distinct sect in Holland by the name of Puritans, though he was
unacquainted with their inducement to leave England and supposes it commerce
and not religion. I Puritani ancora vi son tolerati, che sono i piu puri e i
piu rigidi Calvinisti, i quali non vogliono riconoscere autorita alcuna ne'
magistrati politici sopra il governo de' loro ministri heretici, e sono quasi
tutti de' Puritani d'Inghilterra, che per occasion di commercio frequentan
I'Ollanda, e le altro Provincie Unite. Della relatione delle Provincie, etc.
The Massachusetts people refined and took the name of congregationalists,
although it will perhaps be difficult, at this day, to show any material
difference between the churches of the two colonies, for although Plymouth
never established by act of government the Massachusetts platform, yet in
practice they seem generally to have conformed to it.

WHILST they expected their minister from Holland they were without the
sacraments, they had constant public worship, their pious elder generally
praying and preaching, or as they then termed it prophesying, and sometimes one
or other of the brethren best gifted or qualified. After their minister's
death, they made trial of four or five, but some were of bad morals, others of
principles not approved and others met with better offers, so that they had no
minister settled to their satisfaction until Mr. John Reyner came among them in
the year 1636. The whole colony made but one church until the year 1633, when
those brethren who lived on the side of the bay opposite to the town, where
Duxbury now is, broke from the rest because of the difficulty of travel and
became a distinct society. Perhaps their being so long without a minister at
first, might be the reason why they were less anxious to be furnished with
ministers, immediately upon their spreading and forming new towns and
settlements, than their neighbors in Massachusetts and Connecticut.

CONSIDERING the rapid increase of the Massachusetts and Connecticut it may not
be amiss to give the reasons of the very slow growth of Plymouth, for in 13 or
14 years the whole colony was not become too numerous for one middling town.
They had pitched upon some of the poorest land in New England and had frequent
thoughts of quitting it. In 1623, their brethren write from Leyden and desire
that seeing by God's providence that place fell to their lot, they would not
leave it not languish after other places though they had discovered more rivers
and more fertile places than where they were but in 1633, they took possession
of Connecticut river and built and fortified a house for trade, where Hartford
now is and, afterward, when the Massachusetts dispossessed them they urged,
among other reasons for holding possession, that "they lived upon a barren
place where they were by necessity cast, and neither they nor theirs could long
continue upon the same, and why should they be deprived of that which they had
provided and intended to remove to as soon as they were able. Mr. Bradford among
the proceedings of the year 1633 places their possession of Connecticut river.
"Having had formerly converse and familiarity with the Dutch, as is before
remembered, they seeing them seated here in a barren quarter told them of a
river called by them the fresh river, but now is known by the name of
Conighticute river, which they often commended to them for a fine place both
for plantation and trade and wished them to make use of it, but their hands
being full otherwise they let it pass; but, afterward, there coming a company
of banished Indians into these parts that were driven out from thence by the
potency of the Pequods, they often solicited them to go thither and they
should have much trade, especially if they would keep a house there, and they
began to send that way for discovery and trade with the natives. They found it
to be a fine place but no great store of trade, but the Indians excused it by
reason of the fear they were in of their enemies. They tried diverse times and
not without profit, but saw the most certainty would be by keeping a house
there to receive the trade when it came down out of the inland. The Indians,
seeing they were not very forward to build there, solicited them of the
Massachusetts in like fort (for their end was to be restored to their country
again) but they in the bay being lately come were not sit for the same, and
some of their chiefs made a motion to join with the partners here to trade
jointly in that river, which they were willing to embrace and so they would
have built and put in equal stock together. A time of meeting was appointed at
the Massachusetts and some of the chief here were appointed to treat with them
and went accordingly, but they cast many fears of danger and loss and the like,
which were Perceived to be the main obstacles, though they were not provided of
trading goods, but those here offered to put in sufficient for both, provided
they would become engaged for the half and prepare against the next year. They
confessed more could not be offered, but thanked them and sold them they had no
mind to it. They then said they hoped it would be no offense if they went on
without them. They find there was no reason they should, and thus the treaty
broke off. Those here took convenient time to make a beginning there, and were
the first English who both discovered that place and built in the same. But the
Dutch began now to repent, and hearing of their purpose and preparation
endeavored to prevent them, and got in a little before them, and made a slight
fort, and planted two pieces of ordnance, threatening to stop their passage;
but they having made a small frame of a house ready, having a great new bark
they showed their frame in her hold and boards to cover and finish it, having
nails, etc. fitting for their use, this they did the rather that they might
have a present defense against the Indians, who were much offended that they
brought home and restored the right sachem of that place, called Natuwannute;
so that they were to encounter with a double danger in this attempt both the
Dutch and the Indians. When they came up the river, the Dutch demanded what
they intended and whither they would go, they answered up the river to trade,
now their order was to go and seat above them; they bid them strike and stay or
else they would shoot them and stood by their ordnance ready sitted. They
answered they had commission from the governor of Plymouth to go up the river
to such a place and it they did shoot they must obey their order and proceed,
they would not molest them but would go on. So they passed along and though the
Dutch threatened them hard yet they shot not. Coming to their place they clapped
up their house quickly and landed their provisions and left the company
appointed and sent the bark home, and afterward pallisadoed their house about
and fortified themselves better. They did the Catch no wrong, for the took not
a foot of any land they bought, but went to the place above them and bought
that tract of land which belonged to those Indians which they carried with them
and their friends, with whom the Dutch had nothing to do." Bradford MS. I
cannot let this extract pass without an observation relative to the
Massachusetts. IN the controversy between New York and the two governments of
Massachusetts and Connecticut, the charters to which give them a territory west
to the S. sea, except such parts as were possessed by any prince or state, the
government of New York claims to Connecticut river because the Dutch were in
possession and it was part of the exception and therefore the grant of it
afterward to the Duke of York was good. This manuscript of Bradford is the
most ancient memorial relative to this part of the country which is now extant
and it appears from it that until diverse years after the date of the
Massachusetts charter the Dutch had no fort of possession in the fresh or
Connecticut river nor any intention of settling there, but encouraged the
people of New Plymouth, with whom they had begun a correspondence and trade, to
quit their settlement and remove thither and thereupon the Plimotheans, several
times before the year 1633, went up the river and had began a trade there; but
the Dutch, probably alarmed by the formidable appearance of the Massachusetts
colony, then repented of the advice they had given, purchased a tract in the
lower part of the river and would have prevented the English from passing but
failed in the attempt, and they were, soon after, obliged to quit the river
themselves and, in 1650, formally relinquished all claim or pretense to
jurisdiction there.


IN the next place, the plan they set out upon was not to make a great colony
in a little time, but to preserve a pure and distinct congregation, they
neither desired any people of a different persuasion to mix with them nor did
any such incline to go among them. When one of their number was hanged ten
years after the settlement began it was remarked that he had been a profane
person and guilty of other miscarriages before that for which he suffered and
that by means of some of his friends in London he had been shuffled in among
them. If all in England, who called themselves Brownists and Independents, at
that day, had come over with them they would scarcely have made one
considerable town. Indeed, a few years after, most of those who had before been
called Puritans, were willing enough to own the same principles with them,
though they did not like the name.

WE may add one cause more, viz. that their views when they left England, were
rather to establish a factory than a colony. They had no notion of cultivating
any more ground than would afford their own necessary provisions, but proposed
that their chief secular employment should be commerce with the natives, and
they entered into contract with a company of 20 or more merchants and others,
many of them belonging to Bristol, who were to furnish them with goods, and at
the end of seven years the profits were to be divided equally between the
merchants in England and the colonists, all the houses and improved land to be
valued in the joint stock. This last circumstance was a sufficient bat to any
extraordinary improvement of the lands. Here I cannot help remarking that they
had a fine opportunity of making fortunes, having few or no rivals, and the
Indians were charmed with European goods, as well to adorn as to cloth
themselves, and goods sold at great advance and the surrs came cheap, but a
variety of misfortunes and losses by sea for several years together kept the
balance against them. They were but little acquainted with trade and, perhaps,
our forefathers were not so worldly minded as their posterity have since been.
At first they made every man a partner. Every man's person was valued at ten
pounds interest in the stock, and his whole time was to be employed for the
common benefit. He that had L.90 in the general stock, with the addition of
L.10 for his person, was to share ten times as much as he who had no substance
at all. This was a hard bargain for the poor, and I should not wonder if
persons who could bring no money to put in the stock were discouraged from
settling among them. After the expiration of the seven years, and a settlement
with their partners in England, the principal persons were obliged to become
bound for the balance which remained in the hands of the colony or factory, and
from that time took the trade into their own hands, exclusive of the poorer
fort, who had spent seven years in labor and toil, and had received substance
only, and that oftentimes seant enough.

THEY had for eight or ten years almost the whole supply of the Indians who
were near neighbors to them, but their greatest expectations were from the
eastern Indians, and they set up a truck house at Penobscot and another upon
Kennebeck river. The latter they found most advantageous and sought for a grant
of a convenient tract from the council of Plymouth which they obtained in the
year 1628, but it was "so strait and ill bounded" that the next year, 1629,
when a grant was made of the lands intended for the whole colony, the trace of
country at Kennebeck was granted anew, and the limits enlarged. They met with
some opposition in 1634 from persons employed by Lord Say and Lord Brook who
claimed a right of trading at the same place with the Plymouth people, I
suppose by a grant from Gorges, and a fray happened in which one was killed on
each side. Lord Says company were Puritans and those of Plymouth Independents.
The enemies of both reproached both for making religion the professed motive to
colonizing and so soon after killing one another for the sake of beaver. Nollem
vi et cade pro evangelio ccrtari.
This grant upon Kennebeck, within twelve or fifteen years past, from a
different construction of the words which describe the limits, has been the
cause of great contention. Perhaps the relation of this action by governor
Bradford may afford some light in the controversy. I shall therefore cause it
to be inferred in the margin exactly as I find the words and points in his
manuscript. "I am now to enter upon one of the saddest things that befell them
since they come. But before I begin it will be needful to premise such part of
their patente as gives them right and privilege at Kenebeck. As follows. The
said counsel has further given, granted, bargained, sold, infeossed,
allotted, assigned and set over, and by these presents, do clearly and
absoutely give, grante, bargane, sell, alliance, enffeose, a^ote, assign and
confirm unto the said William Bradford, his heirs, associates, and assigns,
All that tracte of land or part of New England in America afforesaid, which
lies within or between


For two or three years after their arrival all things were in common, no man
having any property but what was put into the common stock and every person
furnished with clothing and provisions out of this stock. A certain quantity
of land in the beginning of the year was assigned for planting, and every man
had such a proportion of the labor assigned him. Mr. Bradford remarks, upon
this occasion, that the ill success of this community of goods even among godly
and sober men fully evinced the vanity of that conceit of Plato, that the
taking away property and bringing in community into a common wealth would make
them happy and flourishing, and in fact they raised so little provisions that
once, at least, they were in danger of starving, and before their crops were
fully ripe, great part would be stolen out of the fields to satisfy hungry
bellies, and severe whipping of the offenders would not deter others in the
like circumstances from committing the like offense, besides, it occasioned
constant discontent and murmuring, the young men, most capable of labor, who
had no families, thought much of laboring for other men's wives and children,
those in their full strength complained that it was unjust to allow them no
more in the division of victuals and clothing than them who were weak and
could not do a quarter part of the labor; the aged and grave men thought it an
indignity and disrespect to be upon a level, as in labor so in victuals and
clothes, with the younger, and in other respects inferior fort. Husbands could
not brook it that their wives should be commanded to do services, dressing
meat, washing clothes, etc. for other men; all being to do and all to receive
alike, it was inferred that in all other respects they ought to be alike, and
one man was to all intents and purposes as good as another, and no
subordination no civil distinction could be preserved. After three years, they
found it absolutely necessary to come into some new measures and began with
assigning to each family a certain quantity of land sufficient to raise corn
enough for their support, but in all other respects to continue in the general
way until the seven years for which they had contracted with their partners in
England for the profits of their labor were expired. There was immediately a
new face upon their affairs, much more corn was planted than the governor, by
the exertion of all his authority, could ever cause them to plant in any year
before, women and children, who were weak and unable before, went cheerfully
with their husbands and parents to plant corn, and every family had enough for
their support, and many of them some to spare. An emulation was created and
increased every year to exceed in quantity, and in a few years they were able
to raise sufficient to make it a valuable article in their Indian trade, being
then worth fix shillings sterling a bushel; the Indians in a great measure left
off raising it, the hunting life being more agreeable to them, when they found
with their surrs they could purchase what they wanted.

THE colony had struggled for seven or eight years, and had made but small
improvements in cultivating the ground, and were not numerous enough to think
of dividing and extending to the inland parts of the country when Mr. Endicot
arrived at Salem to prepare the way for the grand undertaking of settling the
Massachusetts. This must have given fresh spirits to the Plimotheans. Without
this, I think, there is great reason to question whether the plantation would
not in a few years have been deserted and the settlers have removed to some
more fertile part of America or, which is more probable, have returned to
England where, from the change of times, they might have enjoyed civil and
religious liberty, for the sake of which they first quitted it, in as great a
latitude as their hearts could wish.

IN a small colony it cannot be expected that we should meet with many events
of moment after they had grappled with the hardships which attended their first
settlement. Mr. Bradford remarks, that the Spaniards were thought by Peter
Martyr to have suffered hardships which none but a Spaniard could endure, when
they were obliged to live for five days together upon the parched grain of
maize only, and that not to faturitie, whereas the Plimotheans the first two or
three years thought a meal of their maize as good as a feast and, sometimes,
not for five days only, but for two or three months together, were destitute of
that and all other corn or bread of any kind, but with their miseries, he says,
they opened a way to these new lands, for other men to come afterward with
ease and inhabit them. The 4th year after their arrival, they were threatened
with the total destruction of their crop, and absolute famine. From about the
middle of May to the middle of July, they had not one shower of rain, and the
extreme heat of the fun upon their sandy soil had so dried up their corn, that
they were almost in despair of its ever being restored, but in the evening
after a day of fasting and prayer, it began to rain and, by repeated showers,
their corn recovered its verdure and they had a plentiful harvest. They
afterward found by experience that such droughts are frequent in this climate,
but the infinitely wife and good creator has so ordered the seasons, that these
droughts have always been followed, before the end of the summer, with
refreshing rains, and although the fruits of the earth have been much
diminished, yet harvest bath never failed, men and beasts have been supported
and, ordinarily, in the next succeeding year, there has been a remarkable
plenty.

THE terror which fire arms struck into the Indians, prevented them from
destroying this small company. There were not above seven men capable of
bearing arms in the time of sickness the first winter. Soon after, the potent
nation of Naraganset sent to the English a bundle of arrows tied with a snake's
skin as a defiance and denunciation of war. The English filled the skin with
bullets, and sent it back with this answer, that they had done them no wrong,
did not sear them and were provided for them, come when they would. The
Naragansets would not suffer the bullets to come near them, and they were moved
about from place to place, till they found their way back to the English again,
and the Indians remained quiet. As the Indians learned the use of fire arms,
the English increased in number, and until the year 1675 there was no open
rupture, except the short offensive war with the Pequots in their own country
which ended in their destruction.

HOWEVER rigid the New Plymouth colonists may have been at their first
separation from the church of England, yet they never discovered that
persecuting spirit which we have seen in the Massachusetts. When Mrs. Hutchinson
and her adherents were banished from that colony, they applied to the colony of
Plymouth, for leave to settle upon Aquidnick or Rhode Island, which was then
acknowledged to be within Plymouth patent, and it was readily granted, although
their tenets were no more approved by Plymouth than by the Massachusetts. Some
of the Quakers also fled to Plymouth bounds, and probably saved their lives,
for although they made laws severe enough against erroneous opinions, yet in no
case capital, and the baptists were still more favorably received, the town of
Swanzey being principally settled by baptist refugees from the Massachusetts
colony, and when one of their ministers settled in the church of Plymouth, they
were content that he should baptize by immersion or dipping any who desired it,
provided he took no exception to the other minister's sprinkling such for whom
immersion was not judged necessary.

UNTIL 1629, they were in doubt about their title to their lands. They were
constantly soliciting a grant or, as they term it, an assurance from the
council of Plymouth. In 1624, they employed one John Pierce, who procured a
grant to himself for about fifty pounds, but he kept it in his own hands, and
refused to assign it for less than five hundred pounds. This they justly
complained of as a great breach of trust, and attribute to it several losses
and disappointments he met with in his intended voyage, which frightened him
and made him also look upon them as the punishment of his persidy and to
relinquish his claim. I do not find that those who employed him reaped any
benefit from the grant. After they had their patent in 1629, they were easy
until the restoration, but when Connecticut and Rhode Island who held their
lands, or most of them, under patents from the council of Plymouth, thought it
necessary to solicit and had obtained a royal confirmation and charter, giving
authority to govern, New Plymouth solicited also, but they were rather too
late. The court began to be jealous of the colonists. Such sort of charters as
had been granted left them, it was said, too much to themselves, and although
they were not peremptorily refused, they were put off from time to time, and
told that the only difficulty was to settle such a form of government as should
secure their dependence as a colony, and should nevertheless afford to them
liberties and privileges to their satisfaction.

THIS was no easy matter for both sides to agree upon. This state of suspense
made the colony more pliable and obsequious than their neighbors of
Massachusetts, and particularly, when the commissioners from king Charles came
to New England in 1664, Plymouth submitted to their determination a controversy
between that colony and Rhode Island about bounds, and gave satisfactory
answers to the several queries proposed to them. Vol. I. p. 233.
They received a very gracious letter from the king, but all ended in bona
verba. We can easily conceive of a parent state growing every day more and more
popular in its government, and nevertheless at the same time restraining the
liberties of its colonies for the sake of continuing the connection, but when
there is a scheme of establishing absolute power in the parent state how can it
be expected that popular governments should be established in the colonies?
However, no advantage was ever taken of their want of authority, and their
proceedings were connived at until the general shipwreck of charters in 1684,
when an arbitrary government was established in the other colonies, and they
could not expect to escape. All their hopes being at an end, they made as loud
complaints of oppression, under Andros, as any people of his government, and
perhaps with as much reason, and when the Massachusetts imprisoned him and
reassumed their charter, Plymouth assumed their old form of government also.
Now it was that they first sensibly found the want of a charter. Connecticut
and Rhode Island, who had resigned their charters, were justified, by the
example of the corporations in England, in assuming them again, but Plymouth
had none to assume. Their first attempt was to procure a charter and to
continue a distinct government. In this they could not succeed. Perhaps, if it
had been solicited in the best manner, they might have succeeded, but interior
divisions prevented any proper measures being pursed. Mr. Hinkley, their
governor, wrote to Mr. Mather, the Massachusetts agent, to desire him to
solicit in their behalf, but the people refused to advance any money, and so
small a sum as two hundred pounds sterling could not be raised. The inhabitants
of some of the principal towns subscribed, upon condition the whole sum should
be raised, and some of the towns refusing, the whole subscription failed. Such
was the effect of their divisions that neither party would acknowledge the
authority of the government when any act passed which they did not approve of.
Mr. Wiswall, one of their ministers, by advice of some gentlemen in Boston,
went to England, but having no commission and, which is more fatal to those who
have affairs at court, no money, he never could make a public appearance, and
served only to give offense to the ministry by offering exceptions to the
proposal of joining Plymouth to the Massachusetts and occasioned their being
annexed to New York. It is said they were taken out of Slaughter's commission
by Mr. Mather's interest. Slaughter arrived at New York the year before Phips
arrived in the Massachusetts and sent his orders, copy of which I have seen, to
Little Compton, in Plymouth colony, in terms as high and authoritative as if he
had been their governor or depended upon being such, so that their junction
with New York seemed rather suspended than superseded until they were actually
included in the Massachusetts.

WE certainly are not in a proper temper when, because we cannot obtain all
which we think of right belongs to us, we are indifferent whether we retain any
part of it. I dare say there is not a man in the colony of Plymouth, at this
day, who does not think it a most happy circumstance that they were annexed to
Massachusetts rather than to New York. And although, at first, there might be
jealousies of unequal distinctions, upon some occasions, in favor of the
Massachusetts, yet they have long since been at an end and, the customs, manners
and religious opinions of the two colonies being much the same, they mutually
consider themselves as having one joint general interest as fully in all
respects as if they had been one colony from the beginning,

NUMBER II.
November 1637.
The Examination of Mrs. Ann Hutchinson at the court at Newtown.
Mr. Winthrop governor. MRS. Hutchinson, you are called here as one of those
that have troubled the peace of the commonwealth and the churches here; you are
known to be a woman that has had a great share in the promoting and divulging
of those opinions that are causes of this trouble, and to be nearly joined not
only in affinity and affection with some of those the court has taken notice
of and passed censure upon, but you have spoken diverse things as we have been
informed very prejudicial to the honor of the churches and ministers thereof,
and you have maintained a meeting and an assembly in your house that has been
condemned by the general assembly as a thing not tolerable nor comely in the
fight of God nor sitting for your sex, and notwithstanding that was cried down
you have continued the same, therefore we have thought good to send for you to
understand how things are, that if you be in an erroneous way we may reduce you
that so you may become a profitable member here among us, otherwise of you be
obstinate in your course that then the court may take such course that you may
trouble us no further, therefore I would I^treat yon to express whether you do
not hold and assent in practice to those opinions and factions that have been
handled in court already, that is to say ^^hether you do not justify Mr.
Wheelwright's sermon and the petition.


Mrs. Hutchinson. I am called here to answer before you but I hear no things
said to my charge.


Gov. I have told you some already and more I can tell you. (Mrs. H.) Name one
Sir.


Gov. Have I not named some already?


Mrs. H. What have I said or done?


Gov. Why for your doings, this you did harbor and countenance those that are
parties in this faction that you have heard of. (Mrs.H.) That Is matter of
conscience, Sir.


Gov. Your conscience you must keep or it must be kept for you.


Mrs. H. Must not I then entertain the saints because I must keep my conscience.


Gov. Say that one brother should commit felony or treason and come to his
other brother's house, if he knows him guilty and conceals him he is guilty of
the same. It is his conscience to entertain him, but if his conscience comes
into act in giving countenance and entertainment to him that has broken the
law he is guilty too. So if you do countenance those that are transgressors of
the law you are in the same fact.


Mrs. H. What law do they transgress?


Gov. The law of God and of the state.


Mrs. H. In what particular?


Gov. Why in this among the rest, whereas the Lord does say honor thy father
and thy mother.


Mrs. H. Ey Sir in the Lord. (Gov) This honor you have broke in giving
countenance to them.


Mrs. H. entertaining those did I entertain them against any act (for there is
the thing) or what God has appointed?


Gov. You knew that Mr. Wheelwright did preach this sermon and those that
countenance him in this do break a law.


0Mrs. H. What law have I broken?


Gov. Why the fifth commandment.


Mrs. H. I deny that for he faith in the Lord.


Gov. You have joined with them in the faction.


Mrs. H. In what faction have I joined with them?


Gov. In presenting the petition.


Mrs. H. Suppose I had set my hand to the petition what then? (Gov.) You saw
that case tried before.


Mrs. H. But I had not my hand to the petition.


Gov. You have councelled them. (Mrs. H.) Wherein?


Gov. Why in entertaining them.


Mrs. H. What breach of law is that Sir?


Gov. Why dishonouring of parents.


Mrs. H. But put the case Sir that I do fear the Lord and my parents, may not I
entertain them that fear the Lord because my parents will not give me leave?


Gov. If they be the fathers of the commonwealth, and they of another religion,
if you entertain them then you dishonor your parents and are justly punishable.


Mrs. H. If I entertain them, as they have dishonored their parents I do.


Gov. No but you by countenancing them above others put honor upon them.


Mrs. H. I may put honor upon them as the children of God and as they do honor
the Lord.


Gov. We do not mean to discourse with those of your sex but only this; you do
adhere unto them and do endeavor to set forward this faction and so you do
dishonor us.


Mrs. H. I do acknowledge no such thing neither do I think that I ever put any
dishonor upon you.


Gov. Why do you keep such a meeting at your house as you do every week upon a
set day?


Mrs. H. It is lawful for me so to do, as it is all your practices and can you
find a warrant for yourself and condemn me for the same thing? The ground of my
taking it up was, when I first came to this land because I did not go to such
meetings as those were, it was presently reported that I did not allow of such
meetings but held then unlawful and therefore in that regard they said I was
proud and did despite all ordinances, upon that a friend came unto me and told
me of it and I to prevent such aspersions took it up, but it was in practice
before I came therefore I was not the first.


Gov. For this, that you appeal to our practice you need no confutation. If
your meeting had answered to the former it had not been offensive, but I will
say that there was no meeting of women alone, but your meeting is of another
fort for there are sometimes men among you.


Mrs. H. There was never any man with us.


Gov. Well, admit there was no man at your meeting and that you was sorry for
it, there is no warrant for your doings, and by what warrant do you continue
such a course?


Mrs. H. I conceive there lies a clear rule in Titus, that the elder women
should instruct the younger and then I must have a time wherein I must do it.


Gov. All this I grant you, I grant you a time for it, but what is this to the
purpose that you Mrs. Hutchinson must call a company together from their
callings to come to be taught of you?


Mrs. H. Will it please you to answer me this and to give me a rule for then I
will willingly submit to any truth. If any come to my house to be instructed in
the ways of God what rule have I to put them away?


Gov. But suppose that a hundred men come unto you to be instructed will you
forbear to instruct them?


Mrs. H. As far as I conceive I cross a rule in it.


Gov. Very well and do you not so here?


Mrs. H. No Sir for my ground is they are men.


Gov. Men and Women all is one for that, but suppose that a man should come and
say Mrs. Hutchinson I hear that you are a woman that God bath given his grace
unto and you have knowledge in the word of God I pray instruct me a little,
ought you not to instruct this men?


Mrs. H. I think I may -- Do you think it not lawful for me to teach women and
why do you call me to teach the court?


Gov. We do not call you to teach the court but to lay open yourself.


Mrs. H. I desire you that you would then set me down a rule by which I may put
them away that come unto me and so have peace in so doing.


Gov. You must show your rule to receive them.


Mrs. H. I have done it.


Gov. I deny it because I have brought more arguments than you have.


Mrs. H. I say, to me it is a rule.


Mr. Endicot. You say there are some rules unto you. I think there is a
contradiction in your own words. What rule for your practice do you bring, only
a custom in Boston.


Mrs. H. No Sir that was no rule to me but if you look upon the rule in Titus
it is a rule to me. If you convince me that it is no rule I shall yield.


Gov. You know that there is no rule that crosses another, but this rule
crosses that in the Corinthians. But you must take it in this sense that elder
women must instruct the younger about their business and to love their husbands
and not make them to clash.


Mrs. H. I do not conceive but that it is meant for some public times.


Gov. Well, have you no more to say but this?


Mrs. H. I have said sufficient for my practice.


Gov. Your course is not to be suffered for, besides that we find such a course
as this to be greatly prejudicial to the state, besides the occasion that it is
to seduce many honest persons that are called to those meetings and your
opinions being known to be different from the word of God may seduce many
simple souls that resort unto you, besides that the occasion which has come of
late has come from none but such as have frequented your meetings, so that now
they are flown off from magistrates and ministers and this since they have come
to you, and besides that it will not well stand with the commonwealth that
families should be neglected for so many neighbors and dames and so much time
spent, we see no rule of God for this, we see not that any should have
authority to set up any other exercises besides what authority has already set
up and so what hurt comes of this you will be guilty of and we for suffering
you.


Mrs. H. Sir I do not believe that to be so.


Gov. Well, we see how it is we must therefore put it away from you or restrain
you from maintaining this course.


Mrs. H. If you have a rule for it from God's word you may.


Gov. We are your judges, and not you ours and we must compel you to it.


Mrs. H. If it please you by authority to put it down I will freely let you for
I am subject to your authority.


Mr. Bradstreet. One of the assistants.
I would ask this question of Mrs. Hutchinson, whether you do think this is
lawful? for then this will follow that all other women that do not are in a sin.


Mrs. H. I conceive this is a free will offering.


Bradst. If it be a free will offering you ought to forbear it because it gives
offense.


Mrs. H. Sir, in regard of myself I could, but for others I do not yet see
light but shall further consider of it.


Bradst. I am not against all women's meetings but do think them to be lawful.


Mr. Dudley. dep. gov. Here has been much spoken concerning Mrs. Hutchinson's
meetings and among other answers she faith that men come not there, I would ask
you this one question then, whether never any man was at your meeting?


Gov. There are two meetings kept at their house.


Dep. gov. How; is there two meetings?


Mrs. H. Ey Sir, I shall not equivocate, there is a meeting of men and women
and there is a meeting only for women.


Dep. gov. Are they both constant?


Mrs. H. No, but upon occasions they are deferred.


Mr. Endicot. One of the assistants.
Who teaches in the men's meetings none but men, do not women sometimes?


Mrs. H. Never as I heard, not one.


Dep. gov. I would go a little higher with Mrs. Hutchinson. About three years
ago we were all in peace. Mrs. Hutchinson from that time she came has made a
disturbance, and some that came over with her in the ship did inform me what
she was as soon as she was landed. I being then in place dealt with the pastor
and teacher of Boston and desired them to enquire of her, and then I was
satisfied that she held nothing different from us, but within half a year
after, she had vented diverse of her strange opinions and had made parties in
the country, and at length it comes that Mr. Cotton and Mr. Vane were of her
judgment, but Mr. Cotton has cleared himself that he was not of that mind, but
now it appears by this woman's meeting that Mrs. Hutchinson has so forestalled
the minds of many by their resort to her meeting that now she has a potent
party in the country. Now if all these things have endangered us as from that
foundation and if she in particular has disparaged all our ministers in the
land that they have preached a covenant of works, and only Mr. Cotton a
covenant of grace, why this is not to be suffered, and therefore being driven
to the foundation and it being found that Mrs. Hutchinson is she that has
depraved all the ministers and has been the cause of what is fallen out, why
we must take away the foundation and the building will fall.


Mrs. H. I pray Sir prove it that I said they preached nothing but a covenant
of works.


Dep. Gov. Nothing but a covenant of works, why a Jesuit may preach truth
sometimes.


Mrs. H. Did I every say they preached a covenant of works then?


Dep. Gov. If they do not preach a covenant of grace clearly, then they preach
a covenant of works.


Mrs. H. No Sir, one may preach a covenant of grace more clearly than another,
so I said.


D. Gov. We are not upon that now but upon position.


Mrs. H. Prove this then Sir that you say I said.


D. Gov. When they do preach a covenant of works do they preach truth?


Mrs. H. Yes Sir, but when they preach a covenant of works for salvation, that
is not truth.


D. Gov. I do but ask you this, when the ministers do preach a covenant of
works do they preach a way of salvation?


Mrs. H. I did not come hither to answer to questions of that fort.


D. Gov. Because you will deny the thing.


Mrs. H. Ey but that is to be proved first.


D. Gov. I will make it plain that you did say that the ministers did preach a
covenant of works.


Mrs. H. I deny that.


D. Gov. And that you said they were not able ministers of the new testament,
but Mr. Cotton only.


Mrs. H. If ever I speak that I proved it by God's word, Court. Very well,
very well.


Mrs. H. If one shall come unto me in private, and desire me seriously to tell
them what I thought of such an one. I must either speak false or true in my
answer.


D. Gov. Likewise I will prove this that you said the gospel in the letter and
words holds forth nothing but a covenant of works and that all that do not hold
as you do are in a covenant of works.


Mrs. H. I deny this for if I should so say I should speak against my own
judgment.


Mr. Endicot. I desire to speak seeing Mrs. Hutchinson seems to lay something
against them that are to witness against her.


Gover. Only I would add this. It is well discerned to the court that Mrs.
Hutchinson can tell when to speak and when to hold her tongue. Upon the
answering of a question which we desire her to tell her thoughts of the desires
to be pardoned.


Mrs. H. It is one thing for me to come before a public magistracy and there to
speak what they would have me to speak and another when a man comes to me in a
way of friendship privately there is difference in that.


Gov. What if the matter be all one?


Mr. Hugh Peter's. Minister of Salem, afterward famous in England.
That which concerns us to speak unto as yet we are sparing in unless the court
command us to speak, then we shall answer to Mrs. Hutchinson notwithstanding
our brethren are very unwilling to answer.


Govern. This speech was not spoken in a corner but in a public assembly, and
though things were spoken in private yet now coming to us, we are to deal with
them as public.


Mr. Peter's. We shall give you a fair account of what was said and desire that
we may not be thought to come as informers against the gentlewoman, but as it
may be serviceable for the country and our posterity to give you a brief
account. This gentlewoman went under suspicion not only from her landing, that
she was a woman not only difficult in her opinions, but also of an intemperate
spirit. What was done at her landing I do not well remember, but as soon as Mr.
Vane and our selves came this controversy began yet it did reflect upon Mrs,
Hutchinson and some of our brethren had dealt with her, and it so fell out that
some of our ministry does suffer as if it were not according to the gospel and
as if we taught a convenant of works instead of a convenant of grace. Upon
these and the like we did address ourselves to the teacher of that church, and
the court then assembled being sensible of these things, and this gentlewoman
being as we understood a chief agent, our desire to the teacher was to tell us
wherein the difference lay between him and us, for the spring did then arise as
we did conceive from this gentlewoman, and so we told him. He said that he
thought it not according to God to commend this to the magistrates but to take
some other course, and so going on in the discourse we thought it good to send
for this gentlewoman, and she willingly came, and at the very first we gave her
notice that such reports there were that she did conceive our ministry to be
different from the ministry of the gospel, and that we taught a convenant of
works, etc. and this was her table talk and therefore we desired her to clear
herself and deal plainly. She was very tender at the first. Some of our
brethren did desire to put this upon proof, and then her words upon that were.
The fear of man is a snare why should I be afraid. These were her words. I did
then take upon me to ask her this question. What difference do you conceive to
be between your teacher and us? She did not request us that we should preserve
her from danger or that we should be silent. Briefly, she told me there was a
wide and a broad difference between our brother Mr. Cotton and our selves. I
desired to know the difference. She answered that he preaches the convenant of
grace and you the convenant of works, and that you are not able ministers of
the new testament and know no more than the apostles did before the
resurrection of Christ. I did then put it to her, What do you conceive of such
a brother? She answered he had not the seal of the spirit. And other things we
asked her but generally the frame of her course was this, that she did conceive
that we were not able ministers of the gospel. And that day being past our
brother Cotton was sorry that she should lay us under a convenant of works, and
could have wished she had not done so. The elders being there present we did
charge them with her, and the teacher of the place said they would speak
further with her, and after some time she answered that we were gone as far as
the apostles were before Christ's ascension. And since that we have gone with
tears some of us to her.


Mrs. H. If our pastor would show his writings you should see what I said, and
that many things are not so as is reported.


Mr. Wilson. Pastor or one of the ministers of Boston.
Sister Hutchinson, for the writings you speak of I have them not, and this I
must say I did not write down all that was said and did pass betwixt one and
another, yet I say what is written I will avouch.


Dep. Gov. I desire that the other elders will say what Mr. Peter's has said.


Mr. Weld. Minister of Roxbury. He wrote the history of antinomianism.
Being desired by the honored court, that which our brother Peter's has spoken
was the truth and things were spoken as he has related and the occasion of
calling this sister and the passages that were there among us. And myself
asking why she did cast such aspersions upon the ministers of the country
though we were poor sinful men and for our selves we cared not but for the
precious doctrine we held forth we could not but grieve to hear that so
blasphemed. She at that time was spring in her speech. I need not repeat the
things they have been truly related. She said the fear of man is a snare and
therefore I will speak freely and she spoke her judgment and mind freely as was
before related, that Mr. Cotton did preach a covenant of grace and we a
covenant of works. And this I remember she said we could not preach a covenant
of grace because we were not sealed, and we were not able ministers of the new
testament no more than were the disciples before the resurrection of Christ.


Mr. Phillips, Minister of Watertown.
For my own part I have had little to do in these things only at that time I
was there and yet not being privy to the ground of that which our brother.
Peter's has mentioned but they procuring me to go along with them telling me
that they were to deal with her; at first she was unwilling to answer but at
length she said there was a great deal of difference between Mr. Cotton and we.
Upon this Mr. Cotton did say that he could have wished that she had not put
that in. Being asked of particulars she did instance in Mr. Shephard that he
did not preach a covenant of grace clearly and she instanced our brother Weld.
Then I asked her of myself (being she spoke rashly of them all) because she
never heard me at all. She likewise said that we were not able ministers of the
new testament and her reason was because we were not sealed.


Mr. Simmes. Minister of Charlestown.
For my own part being called to speak in this case to discharge the relation
wherein I stand to the commonwealth and that which I stand in unto God, I shall
speak briesly. For my acquaintance with this person I had none in our native
country, only I had occasion to be in her company once or twice before I came,
where I did perceive that she did slight the ministers of the word of God. But
I came along with her in the ship, and it so fell out that we were in the great
cabin together and therein did agree with the labors of Mr. Lothrop and
myself, only there was a secret opposition to things delivered. The main thing
that was then in hand was about the evidencing of a good estate, and among the
rest about that place in John concerning the love of the brethren. That which I
took notice of was the corrupmess and narrowness of her opinions, which I doubt
not but I may call them so, but she said, whom she came to Boston there would
be something more seen than I said, for such speeches were cast about and
abused as that of our savior, I have many things to say but you cannot bear
them now. And being come and she desiring to be admitted a member, I was
desired to be there, and then Mr. Cotton did give me full satisfaction in the
things then in question. And for things which have been here spoken, as far as
I can remember they are the truth, and when I asked her what she thought of me,
she said alas you know my mind long ago, yet I do not think myself disparaged
by her testimony and I would not trouble the court, only this one thing I shall
put in, that Mr. Dudley and Mr. Haines were not wanting in the cause after I
had given notice of her.


Mr. Wilson. I desire you would give me leave to speak this word because of
what has been said concerning her entrauce into the church. There was some
difficulty made, but in her answers she gave full satisfaction to our teacher
and myself, and for point of evidencing justification by sanctisication she did
not deny, but only justification must be first. Our teacher told her then that
if she was of that mind she would take away the scruple; for we thought that
matter, for point of order we did not greatly stand upon, because we hoped she
would hold with us in that truth as well as the other.


Mr. Shephard. Minister of Cambridge.
I am loath to speak in this assembly concerning this gentlewoman in question,
but I can do no less than speak what my conscience speaks unto me. For personal
reproaches I take it a man's wisdom to conceal. Concerning the reproaches of
the ministry of our's there bath been many in the country, and this bath been
my thoughts of that. Let men speak what they will not only against persons but
against ministry, let that pass, but let us strive to speak to the consciences
of men, knowing that if we had the truth with us we shall not need to approve
our words by our practice and our minstry to the hearts of the people, and they
should speak for us and therefore I have satified myself and the brethren with
that. Now for that which concerns this gentlewoman at this time I do not well
remember every particular, only this I do remember that the end of our meeting
was to satisfy ourselves in some points. Among the rest Mrs. Hutchinson was
desired to speak her thoughts concerning the ministers of the Bay. Now I
remember that she said that we were not able ministers of the new testament. I
followed her with particulars, she instanced myself as being at the lecture and
hearing me preach when as I gave some means whereby a christian might come to
the assurance of God's love. She instanced that I was not sealed. I said why
did she say so. She said because you put love for an evidence. Now I am sure
she was in an error in this speech for if assurance be an holy estate then I am
sure there are not graces wanting to evidence it.


Mr. Eliot. Minister or Roxbury.
I am loath to spend time therefore I shall consent to what bath been said. Our
brethren did entreat us to write and a few things I did write the substance of
which bath been here spoken and I have it in writing therefore I do avouch it.


Mr. Shephard. I desire to speak this word, it may be but a slip of her tongue,
and I hope she will be sorry for it, and then we shall be glad of it.


Dep. Gov. I called these witnesses and you deny them. You see they have proved
this and you deny this, but it is clear. You said they preached a convenant of
world and that they were not able ministers of the new testament; now there are
two other things that you did affirm which were that the scriptures in the
letter of them held forth nothing but a covenant of works and likewise that
those that were under a covenant of works cannot be saved.


Mrs. H. Prove that I said so. (Gov.) Did you say so?


Mrs. H. No Sir it is your conclusion.


D. Gov. What do I do charging of you if you deny what is so fully proved.


Gov. Here are fix undeniable ministers who say it is true and yet you deny
that you did say that they did preach a covenant of works and that they were
not able ministers of the gospel, and it appears plainly that you have spoken
it, and whereas you say that it was drawn from you in a way of friendship, you
did prosess then that it was out of conscience that you spoke and said The fear
of man is a snare wherefore should I be afraid, I will speak plainly and freely.


Mrs. H. That I absolutely deny, for the first question was thus answered by me
to them. They thought that I did conceive there was a difference between them
and Mr. Cotton. At the first I was somewhat reserved, then said Mr. Peter's I
pray answer the question directly as fully and as plainly as you desire we
should tell you our minds. Mrs. Hutchinson we come for plain dealing and
telling you our hearts. Then I said I would deal as plainly as I could, and
whereas they say I said they were under a covenant of works and in the state of
the apostles why these two speeches cross one another. I might say they might
preach a covenant of works as did the apostles, but, to preach a covenant of
works and to be under a covenant of works is another business.


Dep. Gov. There have been fix witnesses to prove this and yet you deny it.


Mrs. H. I deny that these were the first words that were spoken.


Gov. You make the case worse, for you clearly show that the ground of your
opening your mind was not to satisfy them but to satisfy your own conscience.


Mr. Peter's. We do not desire to be so narrow to the court and the gentlewoman
about times and seasons, whether first or after, but said it was.


Dep. Gov. For that other thing I mentioned for the letter of the scripture
that it held forth nothing but a covenant of works, and for the latter that we
are in a state of damnation, being under a covenant of works, or to that
effect, these two things you also deny. Now the case stands thus. About three
quarters of a year ago I heard of it, and speaking of it there came one to me
who is not here, but will affirm it if need be, as he did to me that he did
hear you say in so many words. He set it down under his hand and I can bring it
forth when the court pleases. His name is subscribed to both these things, and
upon my peril be it if I bring you not in the paper and bring the minister
(meaning Mr. Ward) to be deposed.


Gov. What say you to this, though nothing be directly proved yet you hear it
may be.


Mrs. H. I acknowledge using the words of the apostle to the Corinthians unto
him, that they that were ministers of the letter and not the spirit did preach
a covenant of works. Upon his saying there was no such Scripture, then I
setched the bible and showed him this place 2 Cor. iii. 6, He said that was the
letter of the law. No said I it is the letter of the gospel.


Gov. You have spoken this more than once then.


Mrs. H. Then upon further discourse about proving a good estate and holding it
out by the manifestation of the spirit he did acknowledge that to be the
nearest way, but yet said he, will you not acknowledge that which, we hold
forth to be a way too wherein we may have hope; no truly if that be a way it is
a way to held.


Gov. Mrs. Hutchinson, the court you see bath labored to bring you to
acknowledge the error of your way that so you might be reduced, the time now
grows late, we shall therefore give you a little more time to consider of it
and therefore desire that you attend the court again in the morning.


The next morning. Gov. We proceeded the last night as far as we could in
hearing of this cause of Mrs. Hutchinson. There were diverse things laid to her
charge, her ordinary meetings about religious exercises, her speeches in
derogation of the ministers among us, and the weakening of the hands and hearts
of the people toward them. Here was sufficient proof made of that which she
was accused of in that point concerning the ministers and their ministry, as
that they did preach a covenant of works when others did preach a covenant of
grace, and that they were not able ministers of the new testament, and that
they had not the seal of the spirit, and this was spoken not as was pretended
out of private conference, but out of conscience and warrant from scripture
alleged the fear of man is a snare and seeing God had given her a calling to
it she would freely speak. Some other speeches she used, as that the letter of
the scripture held forth a covenant of works, and this is offered to be proved
by probable grounds. If there be any thing else that the court bath to say they
may speak.


Mrs. H. The ministers come in their own cause. Now the Lord bath said that an
oath is the end of all controversy; though there be a sufficient number of
witnesses yet they are not according to the word, therefore I desire they may
speak upon oath.


Gov. Well, it is in the liberty of the court whether they will have an oath or
no and it is not in this case as in case of a jury. If they be satisfied they
have sufficient matter to proceed.


Mrs. H. I have since I went home perused some notes out of what Mr. Wilson did
then write and I find things not to be as has been alleged.


Gov. Where are the writings?


Mrs. H. I have them not, it may be Mr. Wilson has.


Gov. What are the instructions that you can give, Mr. Wilson?


Mr. Wilson. I do say that Mr. Vane desired me to write the discourse out and
whether it be in his own hands or in some body's else I know not. For my own
copy it is somewhat imperfect, but I could make it perfect with a little pains.


Gov. For that which you allege as an exception against the elders it is vain
and untrue, for they are no prosecutors in this cause but are called to witness
in the cause.


Mr. H. But they are witnesses of their own cause.


Gov. It is not their cause but the cause of the whole country and they were
unwilling that it should come forth, but that it was the glory and honor of
God.


Mrs. H. But it being the Lord's ordinance that an oath should be the end of
all strife, therefore they are to deliver what they do upon oath.


Mr. Bradstreet. Mrs. Hutchinson, these are but circumstances and adjuncts to
the cause, admit they should mistake you in your speeches you would make them
to sin if you urge them to swear.


Mrs. H. That is not the thing. If they accuse me I desire it may be upon oath.


Gov. If the court be not satisfied they may have an oath.


Mr. Nowel. An assistant.
I should think it convenient that the country also should be satisfied because
that I do hear it affirmed, that things which were spoken in private are
carried abroad to the public and thereupon they do undervalue the ministers of
congregations.


Mr. Brown. A deputy for Watertown and a ruling elder there.
I desire to speak. If I mistake not an oath is of a high nature, and it is not
to be taken but in a controversy, and for my part I am afraid of an oath and
fear that we shall take God's name in vain, for we may take the witness of
these men without an oath.


Mr. Endicot. I think the ministers are so well known unto us, that we need not
take an oath of them, but indeed an oath is the end of all strife.


Mrs. H. There are some that will take their oaths to the contrary.


Mr. Endicot. Then it shall go under the name of a controversy, therefore we
desire to see the notes and those also that will swear.


Gov. Let those that are not satisfied in the court speak.


Many say. -- We are not satisfied.


Gov. I would speak this to Mrs. Hutchinson. If the ministers shall take an
oath will you sit down satisfied?


Mrs. H. I cannot be notwithstanding oaths satisfied against my own conscience.


Mr. Stoughton. An assistant.
I am fully satisfied with this that the ministers do speak the truth but now
in regard of censure I dare not hold up my hand to that, because it is a course
of justice, and I cannot satisfy myself to proceed so far in a way of justice,
and therefore I should desire an oath in this as in all other things. I do but
speak to prevent offense if I should not hold up my hand at the censure unless
there be an oath given.


Mr. Peter's. We are ready to swear if we see a way of God in it.

Here was a parley between the deputy governor and Mr. Stoughton about the oath.


Mr. Endicot. If they will not be satisfied with a testimony an oath will be in
vain.


Mr. Stoughton. I am persuaded that Mrs. Hutchinson and many other godly-minded
people will be satisfied without an oath.


Mrs. H. An oath Sir is an end of all strife and it is God's ordinance.


Mr. Endicot. A sign it is what respect she has to their words, and further,
pray see your argument, you will have the words that were written and yet Mr.
Wilson faith he writ not all, and now you will not believe all these godly
ministers without an oath.


Mrs. H. Mr. Wilson did affirm that which he gave in to the governor that then
was to be true. (Some reply) But not all the truth.


Mr. Wilson. I did say so far as I did take them they were true.


Mr. Harlakenden. An assistant.
I would have the spectators take notice that the court does not suspect the
evidence that is given in, though we see that whatever evidence is brought in
will not satisfy, for they are resolved upon the thing and therefore I think
you will not be unwilling to give your oaths.


Gov. I see no necessity of an oath in this thing seeing it is true and the
substance of the matter confirmed by diverse, yet that all may be satisfied, if
the elders will take an oath they shall have it given them.


Dep. Gov. Let us join the things together that Mrs. Hutchinson may see what
they have their oaths for.


Mrs. H. I will prove by what Mr. Wilson bath written that they never heard me
say such a thing.


Mr. Sims. We desire to have the paper and have it read.


Mr. Harlakenden. I am persuaded that is the truth that the elders do say and
therefore I do not see it necessary now to call them to oath.


Gov. We cannot charge any thing of untruth upon them.


Mr. Harlakenden. Besides, Mrs. Hutchinson does say that they are not able
ministers of the new testament.


Mrs. H. They need not swear to that.


Dep. Gov. Will you consess it then.


Mrs. H. I will not deny it not say it.


Dep. Gov. You must do one.


Mrs. H. After that they have taken an oath, I will make good what I say.


Gov. Let us state the case and then we may know what to do. That which is laid
to Mrs. Hutchinson's charge is this, that she bath traduced the magistrates and
ministers of this jurisdiction, that she bath said the ministers preached a
covenant of works and Mr. Cotton a covenant of grace, and that they were not
able ministers of the gospel, and she excuses it that she made it a private
conference and with a promise of secrecy, etc. now this is charged upon her,
and they therefore sent for her seeing she made it her table talk, and then she
said the fear of man was a snare and therefore she would not be affeared of
them.


Mrs. H. This that your self bath spoken, I desire that they may take their
oath upon.


Gov. That that we should put the reverend elders unto is this that they would
deliver upon oath that which they can remember themselves.


Mr. Shepard, I know no reason of the oath but the importunity of this
gentlewoman.


Mr. Endicot. You lifted up your eyes as if you took God to witness that you
came to entrap none and yet you will have them swear.


Mr. Harlakenden. Put any passage unto them and see what they say.


Mrs. H. They say I said the fear of man is a snare, why should I be afraid.
When I came unto them, they urging many things unto me and I being backward to
answer at first, at length this scripture came into my mind 29th Prove. 15. The
fear of man brings a snare, but whose puts his trust in the Lord shall be
safe.


Mr. Harlakenden. This is not an essential thing.


Gov. I remember his testimony was this.


Mrs. H. Ey, that was the thing that I do deny for they were my words and they
were not spoken at the first as they do allege.


Mr. Peter's, We cannot tell what was first or last, we suppose that an oath is
an end of all strife and we are tender of it, yet this is the main thing
against her that she charged us to be unable ministers of the gospel and to
preach a covenant of works.


Gover, You do understand the thing, that to hec^urt is clear for we are all
satisfied that it is truth but because we would take away all seruples, we
desire that you would satisfy the spectators by your oath.


Mr. Bishop. One of the deputies or representatives.
I desire to know before they be put to oath whether their testimony be of
validity.


Dep. Gov. What do you mean to trouble the court with such question. Mark that
a flourish Mrs. Hutchinson puts upon the business that she had witnesses to
disprove what was said and here is no man to bear witness.


Mrs. H. If you will not call them in that is nothing to me.


Mr. Eliot. We desire to know of her and her witnesses what they deny and then
we shall speak upon oath.

I know nothing we have spoken of but we may swear to.


Mr. Sims. Ey, and more than we have spoken to.


Mr. Stoughton. I would gladly that an oath should be given that so the person
to be condemned should be satisfied in her conscience and I would say the same
for my own conscience if I should join in the censure -- Two or three lines in
the Ms are defaced and not legible.


Mr. Coggeshall. (...) if the (...) set Boston.
I desire to speak a word -- It is desired that the elders would conser with
Mr. Cotton before they swear.


Govern. Shall we not believe so many godly elders in a cause wherein we know
the mind of the party without their testimony?


Mr. Endicot to Mr. Coggeshall. I will tell you what I say. I think that this
carriage of yours tends to further casting dirt upon the face of the judges.


Mr. Harlakenden. Her carriage does the same for the does not object any
essential thing, but the goes upon circumstances and yet would have them sworn.


Mrs. H. This I would say unto them. Forasmuch as it was affirmed by the deputy
that he would bring proof of these things, and the elders they bring proof in
their own cause, therefore I desire that particular witnesses be for these
things that they do speak.


Gov. The elders do know what an oath is and as it is an ordinace of God so it
should be used.


Mrs. H. That is the thing I desire and because the deputy spoke of witnesses I
have them here present.


Mr. Colborn. A deputy for Boston and a ruling elder in the church.
We desire that our teacher may be called to hear what is said. -- Upon this
Mr. Cotton came and sat down by Mrs. Hutchinson.


Mr. Endicot. This would cast some blame upon the ministers -- Well, but
whatsoever he will or can say we will believe the ministers.


Mr. Eliot. Mr. Shepard. We desire to see light why we should take an oath.


Mr. Stoughton. Why it is an end of all strife and I think you ought to swear
and put an end to the matter,


Mr. Peter's. Our oath is not to satisfy Mrs. Hutchinson but the court.


Mr. Endicot. the assembly will be satisfied by it.


Dep. Gov. If the country will not be satisfied you must swear.


Mr. Shepard. I conceive the country does not require it.


Dep. Gov. Let her witnesses be called.


Gov. Who be they?


Mrs. H. Mr. Leveret and our teacher and Mr. Coggeshall.


Gov. Mr. Coggeshall was not present.


Mr. Coggeshall. Yes but I was, only I desired to be silent till I should be
called.


Gov. Will you Mr. Coggeshall say that she did not say se?


Mr. Coggeshall. Yes I dare say that she did not say all that which they lay
against her.


Mr. Peter's. How dare you look into the court to say such a word?


Mr. Coggeshall. Mr. Peter's takes upon him to forbid me. I shall be silent.


Mr. Stoughton. Ey, but she intended this that they say.


Gov. Well, Mr. Leveret, what were the words?. I pray speak.


Mr. Leveret. A ruling elder in Boston church.
To my best remembrance when the elders did send for her, Mr. Peter's did with
much vehemence and entreaty urge her to tell what difference there was between
Mr. Cotton and them, and upon his urging of her she said. The fear of man is a
snare, but they that trust upon the Lord shall be safe. And being asked wherein
the difference was, she answered that they did not preach a covenant of grace
so clearly as Mr. Cotton did, and she gave this reason of it because that as
the apostles were for a time without the spirit so until they had received the
witness of the spirit they could not preach a covenant of grace so clearly.


Gov. Don't you remember that she said they were not able ministers of the new
testament?


Mrs. H. Mr. Weld and I had an hour's discourse at the window and then I spoke
that, if I spoke it.


Mr. Weld. Will you affirm that in the court? Did not I say unto you, Mrs.
Hutchinson, before the elders. When I produced the thing, you then called for
proof. Was not my answer to you, leave it there, and if I cannot prove it you
shall be blameless?


Mrs. H. This I remember I spoke, but do not you remember that I came
afterward to the window when you was writing and there spoke unto you.


Mr. Weld. No truly. (Mrs. H.) But I do very well.


Gov. Mr. Cotton, the court desires that you declare what you do remember of
the conference which was at that time and is now in question.


Mr. Cotton. Teacher of Boston church.
I did not think I should be called to bear witness in this cause and therefore
did not labor to call to remembrance what was done; but the greatest passage
that took impression upon me was to this purpose The elders spoke that they had
heard that she had spoken some condemning words of their ministry, and among
other things they did first pray her to answer wherein she thought their
ministry did differ from mine, how the comparison sprang I am ignorant, but
sorry I was that any comparison should be between me and my brethren and
uncomfortable it was, she told them to this purpose that they did not hold
forth a covenant of grace as I did, but where in did we differ? why she said
that they did not hold forth the seal of the spirit as he does. Where is the
difference there? say they, why faith she speaking to one or other of them, I
know not to whom. You preach of the seal of the spirit upon a work and he upon
free grace without a work or without respect to a work, he preaches the seal of
the spirit upon free grace and you upon a work. I told her I was very sorry
that she put comparisons between my ministry and their's, for she had said more
than I could myself, and rather I had that she had put us in fellowship with
them and not have made that discrepancy. She said, she found the difference.
Upon that there grew some speeches upon the thing and I do remember I instanced
to them the story of Thomas Bilncy in the book of martyrs how freely the spirit
witnessed unto him without any respect unto a work as himself professes. Now
upon this other speeches did grow. If you put me in mind of any thing I shall
speak it, but this was the sum of the difference, not did it seem to be so ill
taken as it is and our brethren did say also that they would not so easily
believe reports as they had done and with all mentioned that they would speak
no more of it, some of them did; and afterward some of them did say they were
less satisfied than before. And I must say that I did not find her saying they
were under a covenant of works, not that she said they did preach a covenant of
works.


Gov. You say you do not remember, but can you say she did not speak so -- Here
two lines again defaced.


Mr. Cotton. I do remember that she looked at them as the apostles before the
ascension.


Mr. Peter's. I humbly desire to remember our reverend teacher. May it please
you to remember how this came in. Whether do you not remember that she said we
were not sealed with the spirit of grace, therefore could not preach a covenant
of grace, and she said further you may do it in your judgment but not in
experience, but she spoke plump that we were not sealed.


Mr. Cotton. You do put me in remembrance that it was asked her why cannot we
preach a covenant of grace? Why, faith she, because you can preach no more than
you know, or to that purpose, she spoke. Now that she said you could not preach
a covenant of grace I do not remember such a thing. I remember well that she
said you were not sealed with the seal of the spirit.


Mr. Peter's. There was a double seal found out that day which never was.


Mr. Cotton. I know very well that she took the seal of the spirit in that
sense for the full assurance of God's favor by the holy ghost, and now that
place in the Ephesians does hold out that seal.


Mr. Peter's. So that was the ground of our discourse concerning the great seal
and the little seal.


Mr. Cotton. To that purpose I remember somebody speaking of the difference of
the witness of the spirit and the seal of the spirit, some to put a distinction
called it the broad seal and the little seal. Our brother Wheel-wright answered
if you will have it so be it so.


Mrs. H. Mr. Ward said that.

Some three or four of the ministers. Mr. Wheel-wright said it.


Mr. Cotton. No, it was not brother Wheelwright's speech but one of your own
expressions, and as I remember it was Mr. Ward.


Mr. Peter's. - - - -


Mr. Cotton. Under favor I do not remember that.


Mr. Peter's. Therefore her answer clears it in your judgment but not in your
experience.


Mrs. H. My name is precious and you do affirm a thing which I utterly deny.


D. Gov. You should have brought the book with you.


Mr. Nowell. The witnesses do not answer that which you require.


Gov. I do not see that we need their testimony any further. Mr. Cotton has
expressed what he remembered, and what took impression upon him, and so I think
the other elders also did remember that which took impression upon them.


Mr. Weld. I then said to Mrs. Hutchinson when it was come to this issue, why
did you let us go thus long and never tell us of it?


Gov. I should wonder why the elders should move the elders of our congregation
to have dealt with her if they saw not some cause.


Mr. Cotton. Brother Weld and brother Shepard, I did then clear myself unto you
that I understood her speech in expressing herself to you that you did hold
forth some matter in your preaching that was not pertinent to the seat of the
spirit -- Two lines defaced.


Dep. Gov. They affirm that Mrs. Hutchinson did say they were not able
ministers of the new testament.


Mr. Cotton. I do not remember it.


Mrs. H. If you please to give me leave I shall give you the ground of what I
know to be true. Being much troubled to see the falseness of the constitution
of the church of England, I had like to have turned separatist; whereupon I
kept a day of solemn humiliation and pondering of the thing; this scripture was
brought unto me -- he that denies Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh is
antichrist -- this I considered of and in considering found that the papists
did not deny him to be come in the flesh, nor we did not deny him -- who then
was antichrist? Was the Turk antichrist only? The Lord knows that I could not
open scripture; he must by his prophetical office open it unto me. So after
that being unsatisfied in the thing, the Lord was pleased to bring this
scripture out of the Hebrews. He that denies the restament denies the restator,
and in this did open unto me and give me to see that those which did not teach
the new covenant had the spirit of antichrist, and upon this he did discover
the ministry unto me and ever since. I bless the Lord, he has let me see which
was the clear ministry and which the wrong. Since that time I confess I have
been more choice and he has let me to distinguish between the voice of my
beloved and the voice of Mores, the voice of John Baptist and the voice of
antichrist, for all those voices are spoken of in scripture. Now if you do
condemn me for speaking what in my conscience I know to be truth I must commit
myself unto the Lord.


Mr. Nowell. How do you know that that was the spirit?


Mrs. H. How did Abraham know that it was God that bid him offer his son, being
a breach of the sixth commandment?


Dep. Gov. By an immediate voice.


Mrs. H. So to me by an immediate revelation.


Dep. Gov. How! an immediate revelation.


Mrs. H. By the voice of his own spirit to my soul. I will give you another
scripture, Ier. 46. 27, 28 -- out of which the Lord showed me what he would do
for me and the rest of his servants. -- But after he was pleased to reveal
himself to me I did presently like Abraham run to Hagar. And after that he did
let me see the atheism of my own heart, for which I begged of the Lord that it
might not remain in my heart, and being thus, he did show me this (a
twelvemonth after) which I told you of before. Ever since that time I have been
confident of what he has revealed unto me.


Obliterated. another place out of Daniel chap. 7. and he and for us all,
wherein he showed me the sitting of the judgment and the standing of all high
and low before the Lord and how thrones and kingdoms were cast down before him.
When our teacher came to New England it was a great trouble unto me, my brother
Wheelwright being put by also. I was then much troubled concerning the ministry
under which I lived, and then that place in the 30th of Isaiah was brought to
my mind. Though the Lord give thee bread of adversity and water of affliction
yet shall not thy teachers be removed into corners any more, but thin eyes
shall see thy teachers. The Lord giving me this promise and they being gone
there was none then left that I was able to hear, and I could not be at rest
but I must come hither. Yet that place of Isaiah did much follow me, though the
Lord give thee the bread of adversity and water of affliction. This place lying
I say upon me then this place in Daniel was brought unto me and did show me
that though I should meet with affliction yet I am the same God that delivered
Daniel out of the lion's den, I will also deliver thee. -- Therefore I desire
you to look to it, for you see this scripture fulfilled this day and therefore
I desire you that as you tender the Lord and the church and commonwealth to
consider and look what you do. You have power over my body but the Lord Jesus
has power over my body and soul, and assure yourselves thus much, you do as
much as in you lies to put the Lord Jesus Christ from you, and if you go on in
this course you begin you will bring a curse upon you and your posterity, and
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.


Dep. Gov. What is the scripture she brings?


Mr. Stroughton. Behold I turn away from you.


Mrs. H. But now having seen him which is invisible I fear not what man can do
unto me.


Gov. Daniel was delivered by miracle do you think to be delivered so too?


Mrs. H. I do here speak it before the court. I look that the Lord should
deliver me by his providence.


Mr. Harlakenden. I may read scripture and the most glorious hypocrite may read
them and yet go down to hell.


Mrs. H. It may be so.


Mr. Bartholomew. deputy I suppose for Salem.
I would remember one word to Mrs. Hutchinson among many others. She knowing
that I did know her opinions, being she was at my house at London, she was
afraid I conceive or loath to impart herself unto me, but when she came within
sight of Boston and looking upon the meanness of the place, I conceive, she
uttered these words, if the had not a sure word that England should be
destroyed her heart would shake. Now it seemed to me at that time very strange
that she should say so.


Mrs. H. I do not remember that I looked upon the meanness of the place nor did
it discourage me, because I knew the bounds of my habitation were determined,
etc.


Mr. Bartholomew. I speak as a member of the court. I fear that her revelations
will deceive.


Gov. Have you heard of any of her revelations?


Mr. Barthol. For my own part I am sorry to see her now here and I have nothing
against her but what I said was to discover what manner of spirit Mrs.
Hutchinson is of; only I remember as we were once going through Paul's church
yard she then was very inquisitive after revelations and said that she had
never had any great thing done about her but it was revealed to her beforehand.
(Mrs. H.) I say the same thing again.


Mr. Bartholomew. And also that she said that she was come to New England but
for Mr. Cotton's sake. As for Mr. Hooker (as I remember) she said the liked not
his spirit, only she speak of a sermon of his in the low countries wherein he
said thus -- it was revealed to me yesterday that England should be destroyed.
She took notice of that passage and it was very acceptable with her.


Mr. Cotton. One thing let me entreat you to remember, Mr. Bartholomew, that
you never spoke any thing to me.


Mr. Barth. No Sir, I never spoke of it to you and therefore I desire to clear
Mr. Cotton.


Gov. There needs no more of that.


Mr. Barth. Only I remember her eldest daughter said in the ship that she had a
revelation that a young man in the ship should be saved, but he must walk in
the ways of her mother.


Mr. Sims. I could say something to that purpose, for she said -- then what
would you say if we should be at New England within these three weeks, and I
reproved her vehemently for it.


Mr. Eliot. That speech of Mr. Hooker's which they allege is against his mind
and judgment. Mr. Eliot was mistaken. The passage from his sermon, is in print
and Mr. Hooker avowed it afterward at Hartford. Magn. B. ^. P.^.



Mr. Sims. I would entreat Mrs. Hutchinson to remember, that the humble he will
teach -- I have spoken before of it and therefore I will leave the place with
her and do desire her to consider of many expressions that she has spoken to
her husband, but I will not enlarge myself.


Mr. Endicot. I would have a word or two with leave of that which has thus far
been revealed to the court. I have heard of many revelations of Mr.
Hutchinson's, but they were reports, but Mrs. Hutchinson I see does maintain
some by this discourse, and I think it is a special providence of God to hear
what she has said. Now there is a revelation you see which she does expect as
a miracle. She faith show now suffers and let us do what we will she shall be
delivered by a miracle. I hope the court takes notice of the vanity of it and
heat of her spirit. Now because her reverend teacher is here I should desire
that he would please to speak freely whether he does condescend to such
speeches or revelations as have been here spoken of, and he will give a great
deal of content.


Mr. Cotton. May it please you Sir. There are two forts of revelations, there
are (defaced) or against the word besides scripture both which (defaced)
tastical and tending to danger more ways than one -- there is another sort
which the, apostle prays the believing Ephesians may be made partakers of, and
those are such as are breathed by the spirit of God and are never dispensed but
in a word of God and according to a word of God, and though the word revelation
be rare in common speech and we make it uncouth in our ordinary expressions,
yet notwithstanding, being understood in the scripture sense I think they are
not only lawful but such as christians may receive and God bear witness to it
in his word, and usually he does express it in the ministry of the word and
does accompany it by his spirit, or else it is in the reading of the word in
some chapter or verse and whenever it comes it comes flying upon the wings of
the spirit.


Mr. Endicot. You give me satisfaction in the thing and therefore I desire you
to give your judgment of Mrs. Hutchinson; what she has said you hear and all
the circumstances thereof.


Mr. Cotton. I would demand whether by a miracle she does mean a work above
nature or by some wonderful providence for that is called a miracle often in
the psalms.


Mrs. H. I desire to speak to our teacher. You know Sir what he does declare
though he does not know himself [something wanting.] now either of these ways
or at this present time it shall be done, yet I would not have the court so to
understand me that he will deliver me now even at this present time.


Dep. Gov. I desire Mr. Cotton to tell us whether you do approve of Mrs.
Hutchinson's revelations as she has laid them down.


Mr. Cotton. I know not whether I do understand her, but this I say, if she
does expect a deliverance in a way of providence -- then I cannot deny it.


Dep. Gov. No Sir we did not speak of that.


Mr. Cotton. If it be by way of miracle then I would suspect it.


Dep. Gov. Do you believe that her revelations are true?


Mr. Cotton. That she may have some special providence of God to help her is a
thing that I cannot bear witness against.


Dep. Gov. Good Sir I do ask whether this revelation be of God or no?


Mr. Cotton. I should desire to know whether the sentence of the court will
bring her to any calamity, and then I would know of her whether she expects to
be delivered from that calamity by a miracle or a providence of God.


Mrs. H. By a providence of God I say I expect to be delivered from some
calamity that shall come to me.


Gover. The case is altered and will not stand with us now, but I see a
mavelous providence of God to bring things to this pass that they are. We
have been hearkening about the trial of this thing and now the mercy of God by
a providence has answered our desires and made her to lay open her self and
the ground of all these disturbances to be by revelations, for we receive no
such (...) made out of the ministry of the word (...) and so one scripture
after another, but all this while there is no use of the ministry of the word
nor of any clear call of God by his word, but the ground work of her
revelations is the immediate revelation of the spirit and not by the ministry
of the word, and that is the means by which she has very much abused the
country that they shall look for revelations and are not bound to the ministry
of the word, but God will teach them by immediate revelations and this has
been the ground of all these tumults and troubles, and I would that those were
all cut off from us that trouble us, for this is the thing that has been the
root of all the mischief.


Court. We all consent with you.


Gov. Ey it is the most desperate enthusiasm in the world, for nothing but a
word comes to her mind and then an application is made which is nothing to the
purpose, and this is her revelations when as it is impossible but that the word
and spirit should speak the same thing.


Mr. Endicot. I speak in reference to Mr. Cotton. I am tender of you Sir and
there lies much upon you in this particular, for the answer of Mr. Cotton does
not free him from that way which his last answer did bring upon him, therefore
I beseech you that you would be pleased to speak a word to that which Mrs.
Hutchinson has spoken of her revelations as you have heard the manner of it.
Whether do you witness for her or against her.


Mr. Cotton. This is that I said Sir, and my answer is plain that if she does
look for deliverance from the hand of God by his providence, and the revelation
be in a word or according to a word, that I cannot deny.


Mr. Endicot. You give me satisfaction.


Dep. Gov. No, no, he gives me none at all.


Mr. Cotton. But if it be in a way of miracle or a revelation without the word
that I do not assent to, but look at it as a delusion, and I think so does she
too as I understand her.


Dep. Gov. Sir, you weary me and do not satisfy me.


Mr. Cotton. I pray Sir give me leave to express my self. In that sense that
she speaks I dare not bear witness against it.


Mr. Nowell. I think it is a devilish delusion.


Gover. Of all the revelations that ever I read of I never read the like ground
laid as is for this. The Enthusiasts and Anabaptists had never the like.


Mr. Cotton. You know Sir, that their revelations broach new matters of faith
and doctrine.


Gover. So do these and what may they breed more if they be let alone. I do
acknowledge that there are such revelations as do concur with the word but
there has not been any of this nature.


Dep. Gov. I never saw such revelations as these among the Anabaptists,
therefore am sorry that Mr. Cotton should stand to justify her.


Mr. Peter's. I can say the same and this runs to enthusiasm, and I think that
is very disputable which our brother Cotton hath-spoken [wanting] an immediate
promise that he will deliver them [wanting] in a day of trouble.


Gover. It overthrows all.


Dep. Gov. These disturbances that have come among the Germans have been all
grounded upon revelations, and so they that have vented them have stirred up
their hearers to take up arms against their prince and to cut the throats one
of another, and these have been the fruits of them, and whether the devil may
inspire the same into their hearts here I know not, for I am fully persuaded
that Mrs. Hutchinson is deluded by the devil, because the spirit of God speaks
truth in all his servants.


Gov. I am persuaded that the revelation she brings forth is delusion.

All the court but some two or three ministers cry out we all believe it -- we
all believe it.


Mr. Endicot. I suppose all the world may see where the foundation of all these
troubles among us lies.


Mr. Eliot. I say there is an expectation of things promised, but to have a
particular revelation of things that shall fall out, there is no such things in
the scripture.


Gov. We will not limit the word of God.


Mr. Collicut. A deputy, I know not for what town, but I take him to be an
inhabitant of Boston and a principal merchant.
It is a great burden to us that we differ from Mr. Cotton and that he should
justify these revelations. I would entreat him to answer concerning that about
the destruction of England.


Gov. Mr.Cottonis not called to answer to any thing but we are to deal with the
party here standing before us.


Mr. Bartholomew. My wife has said that Mr. Wheelwright was not acquainted
with this way until that she imparted it unto him.


Mr. Brown. Inasmuch as I am called to speak, I would therefore speak the mind
of our brethren. Though we had sufficient ground for the censure before, yet
now she having vented herself and I find such flat contradiction to the
scripture in what she faith, as to that in the first to the Hebrews -- God at
sundry times speak to our father -- For my part I understand that scripture and
other scriptures of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the apostle writing to Timothy
faith that the scripture is able to make one perfect -- therefore I say the
mind of the brethren -- I think the deserves no less a censure than has been
already past but rather something more, for this is the foundation of all
mischief and of all those bastardly things which have been overthrowing by that
great meeting. They have all come out from this cursed fountain.


Gov. Seeing the court has thus declared itself and hearing what has been
laid to the charge of Mrs. Hutchinson and especially what she by the providence
of God has declared freely without being asked, if therefore it be the mind of
the court, looking at her as the principal cause of all our trouble, that they
would now consider what is to be done to her. --


Mr. Coddington. I do think that you are going to censure therefore I desire to
speak a word.


Gov. I pray you speak.


Mr. Coddington. There is one thing objected against the meetings. What if she
designed to edify her own family in her own meetings may none else be present?


Gov. If you have nothing else to say but that, it is pity Mr. Coddington that
you should interrupt us in proceeding to censure.


Mr. Coddington. I would say more Sir, another thing you lay to her charge is
her speech to the elders. Now I do not see any clear witness against her, and
you know it is a rule of the court that no man may be a judge and an accuser
too. I do not speak to disparage our elders and their callings, but I do not
see any thing that they accuse her of witnessed against her, and therefore I do
not see how she should be censured for that. And (...) the other thing which
has fallen from her occasionally by the spirit of God, you know the spirit of
God witnesses with our spirits, and there is no truth in scripture but God
bears witness to it by his spirit, therefore I would entreat you to consider
whether those things you have alleged against her deserve such censure as you
are about to pass, be it to banishment or imprisonment. And again here is
nothing proved about the elders, only that she said they did not teach a
covenant of grace so clearly as Mr. Cotton did, and that they were in the state
of the apostles before the ascension. Why I hope this may not be offensive nor
any wrong to them.


Gov. Pass by all that has been said formerly and her own speeches have been
ground enough for us to proceed upon.


Mr. Coddington. I beseech you do not speak so to force things along, for I do
not for my own part see any equity in the court in all your proceedings. Here
is no law of God that she has broken nor any law of the country that she has
broke, and therefore deserves no censure, and if she say that the elders preach
as the apostles did, why they preached a covenant of grace and what wrong is
that to them, for it is without question that the apostles did preach a
covenant of grace, though not with that power, till they received the
manifestation of the spirit, therefore I pray consider what you do, for here is
no law of God or man broken.


Mr. Harlakenden. Things thus spoken will stick. I would therefore that the
assembly take notice that here is none that condemns the meeting of christian
women; but in such a way and for such an end that it is to be detested. And
then though the matter of the elders be taken away yet there is enough besides to
condemn her, but I shall speak no further.


Dep. Gov. We shall be all sick with fasting.


Mr. Colburn. I dissent from censure of banishment.


Mr. Stoughton. The censure which the court is about to pass in my conscience
is as much as she deserves, but because she desires witness and there is none
in way of witness therefore I shall desire that no offense be taken if I do not
formally condemn her because she has not been formally convicted as others are
by witnesses upon oath.


Mr. Coddington. That is a scruple to me also, because Solomon faith, every man
is partial in his own cause, and here is none that accuses her but the elders,
and she spoke nothing to them but in private, and I do not know what rule they
had to make the thing public, secret things ought to be spoken in secret and
public things in public, therefore I think they have broken the rules of
God's word.


Gov. What was spoken in the presence of many is not to be made secret.


Mr. Coddington. But that was spoken but to a few and in private.


Gov. In regard Mr. Stoughton is not satisfied to the end all scruples may be
removed we shall desire the elders to take their oaths.

Here now was a great whispering among the ministers, some drew back others
were animated on.


Mr. Eliot. If the court calls us out to swear we will swear.


Gov. Any two of you will serve.


Mr. Stoughton. There are two things that I would look to discharge my
conscience of, 1st to hear what they testify upon oath and 2dly to --


Gov. It is required of you Mr. Weld and Mr. Eliot.


Mr. Weld. Mr. Eliot. We shall be willing.


Gov. We'll give them their oaths. You shall swear to the truth and nothing but
the truth as far as you know. So help you God. What you do remember of her
speak, pray speak.


Mr. Peter's held up his hand also. Mr. Eliot. I do remember and I have it
written, that which she spoke first was, the fear of man is a snare, why should
she be afraid but would speak freely. The question being asked whether there
was a difference between Mr. Cotton and us, she said there was a broad
difference. I would not stick upon words -- the thing she said -- and that Mr.
Cotton did preach a covenant of grace and we of works and she gave this reason
-- to put a work in point of evidence is a revealing upon a work. We did labor
then to convince her that our doctrine was the same with Mr. Cotton's: She said
no, for we were not sealed. That is all I shall say.


Gov. What say you Mr. Weld?


Mr. Weld. I will speak to the things themselves -- these two things I am fully
clear in -- she did make a difference in three things, the first I was not so
clear in, but that she said this I am fully sure of, that we were not able
ministers of the new testament and that we were not clear in our experience
because we were not sealed.


Mr. Eliot. I do further remember this also, that she said we were not able
ministers of the gospel because we were but like the apostles before the
ascension.


Mr. Coddington. This was I hope no disparagement to you.


Gov. Well, we see in the court that she does continually say and unsay things.


Mr. Peter's. I was much grieved that she should say that our ministry was
legal. Upon which we had a meeting as you know and this was the same she told
us that there was a broad difference between Mr. Cotton and us. Now if Mr.
Cotton do hold forth things more clearly than we, it was our grief we did not
hold it so clearly as he did, and upon those grounds that you have heard.


Mr. Coddington. What wrong was that to say that you were not able ministers of
the new restament of that you were like the apostles -- methinks the comparison
is very good.


Gov. Well, you remember that she said but now that she should be delivered
from this calamity.


Mr. Cotton. I remember she said she should be delivered by God's providence,
whether now or at another time she knew not.


Mr. Peter's. I profess I thought Mr. Cotton would never have took her part.


Mr. Stoughton. I say now this testimony does convince me in the thing, and I
am fully satisfied the words were pernicious, and the frame of her spirit does
hold forth the same.


Gov. The court has already declared themselves satisfied concerning the
things you hear, and concerning the troublesomness of her spirit and the danger
of her course among us, which is not to be suffered. Therefore if it be the
mind of the court that Mrs. Hutchinson for these things that appear before us
is unfit for our society, and if it be the mind of the court that she shall be
banished out of our liberties and imprisoned till she be sent away, let them
hold up their hands.

All but three.

Those that are contrary minded hold up yours.

Mr. Coddington and Mr. Colborn, only.


Mr. Iennison. A deputy I suppose of Ipswich.
I cannot hold up my hand one way or the other, and I shall give my reason if
the court require it.


Gov. Mrs. Hutchinson, the sentence of the court you hear is that you are
banished from out of our jurisdiction as being a woman not fit for our society,
and are to be imprisoned till the court shall send you away.


Mrs. H. I desire to know wherefore I am banished?


Gov. Say no more, the court knows wherefore and is satisfied.


INDEX.
A.
ACADIANS, their sufferings, p. 146. vol. ii. p. 97. Acadie, bickering with the
French there, 127. Acts of Parliament, how far allowed to be obligatory, 322.
Acts of trade, not observed, 269. Addington Isaac, secretary, 414. His death,
ii. 212.
Address to K. Charles the second, moved for without success, 210. Agreed to,
211. To K. Charles the first, 507. To the parliament, 516. To Oliver Cromwell,
523. To K. Charles the second, 537.
Admiralty, judge of, first appointed, ii. 80. Adultery, female, not male,
capital, 441. On either part ground for divorce a vinculo, 445.
Agawam, Indian name of Ipswich, 28. Of Springfield, 98.
Agents, Weld, Peter's and Hibbins, 98. Edward Winslow, 149. John Leveret, 190.
Bradstreet and Norton, 219. Stoughton and Bulkley, 312. Dudley and Richards,
334. Mather, 366. Ashurst, Cook, Mather and Oaks, 392. Constantine Phips, ii.
85. Wait Winthrop, ii. 129. Sir Wm. Ashurst, ii. 186. Jeremiah Dummer, ii. 187.
Anthony Sanderson, ii. 292. E. Cook, ii. 302. Francis Wilks, ii. 353. Jonathan
Belcher, ii. 354. Christopher Kilby, ii. 392. William Bollan, ii. 436. Remarks
upom the agency, ii. 132.
Alden, Capt. John, accused of witchcraft and imprisoned, ii. 48. Alexander,
Sir William, sells Nova Scotia to the French, 28. Allen, secretary of
Connecticut, ii. 60. Andover, troubles there, ii. 42, 48. Andros, Sir Edmund,
governor of New York, 324. Of Massachusetts, and his arrival and mild beginning
of administration, 353. Grows more arbitrary, 354. List of his council, 354.
suspected without grounds of being a papist, 355. Other groundless jealousies,
370. A kind general, 371. Governor from Delaware to Nova Scotia, 371. Seized
and confined, 373. Demands his release, 387. Ordered to England, 391. Escapes
from the castle and retaken, 392. Made governor of Virginia, 395. Death, ii.
208.
Anglesey, Lord, his letter to governor Leverett, 309. Antinomianism, rise and
progress, 55 to 75. Appleton, Mr. an assistant, imprisoned by Sir Ed. Andros,
365. Articles of war for New England forces, 207. Ashurst family, friends to
New England, 389. Sir Henry appears for the colony, 389. His death, ii. 132.
Sir William chosen agent, ii. 186.
Assembly of divines at Westminster invite Mr. Cotton, etc. to sit with them,
115. Assistants contend with deputies, 35, 143. Vote to surrender the charter,
338.

B.
BANK, private, ii. 206, 392. Baptists persecuted, 226 to 228. Baxter, George,
and arbitrator between English and Dutch, 159. Belcher, Jonathan, agent, ii.
354. Governor, 367. Arrives, 369. Removed, judged and retaliated, 375. Opposes
the land bank, 396. Falsely charged, 397. Displaced, 399.
Bellamont, Lord, governor, ii. 87. Arrives at New York, 108. At Boston, 112.
His character, 112 to 116. Death, 121.
Bellingham, Richard, arrives, 41. Deputy governor, 43. Governor, 97. Ordered
to England to answer, 253. Governor, 258, 269. Dies, 269
Bermudas charter vacated, 336. Bigotry in England settled America, 3. Prevails
in N. England, 189.
Bills of credit first issued, 402. Increased, ii. 208, 245, 335, 380, 403.
Abolished, 436.
Blaxton, Mr. an episcopalian, 20. Bollan, William, his great services, ii.
436. Bornazeen, a noted Indian chief, ii. 87, 164. Killed, 311.
Borland, John, his trial, ii. 154. Boston first called Trimontaine, 21.
Inhabitants favor Mr. Vane and slight Mr. Winthrop, 62. Sixty of them disarmed,
74. Empowered to try causes, 175. Great tumult there, ii. 430. Bounds of the
first charter, 8. Of the second, ii. 10.
Boil, Robert, governor of corporation for propagating gospel, 165. Dies, 363.
Boylstone, Zabdiel, promotes inoculation in Boston, ii. 273. Bradford,
William, governor of Plymouth, his death, 206. Bradford, Major, account of
Indian fight, 300. Bradstreet, Simon, 18. Agent to England, 219. Governor, 323.
Of the moderate party, 331. Refuses to act under Dudley, 351. Vindicates the
titles to lands, 360. Governor or president, 382. Resigns to Phips, ii. 13.
Death and character, 105.
Brenton, Iahleel, controversy with Sir Wm. Phips, ii. 75. Brereton, Sir
William, of the New England company, 18. Bridges, Robert, an assistant, 149.
Bridges, John, surveyor of woods, ii. 223. Brown, John and Samuel, churchmen,
and therefore sent back to England, 12. Brook, Lord, 42. Bulkley, Peter, agent,
312. Bullivant, one of Andros's justices, seized, 374. His reply to lord
Bellamont, ii. 113.
Burgess, William, first secretary, 10. Burnet, William, governor, ii. 325.
Arrives, 332. Controversy with the house, 333 to 366. Death, 364.
Burrill, John, his character, ii. 234.
C.
CAMBRIDGE petition to the King, 367. Canada expedition proposed, 256, 271. --
ii, 100. Unsuccessful, 190 to 198. 398 to 401.
Canonicus, Naraganset sachem, 138. Candy, a negro witch, ii. 33. Cape Ann,
fishery there in 1624, 7. Cape Breton expedition, ii. 405 to 423. Cape Fear,
contribution for, 260. Carr, Sir Robert, commissioner, 230. Indiscrete, 249.
Carrier, Sarah, a witch child, ii. 44. Cartwright, George, commissioner, 230.
Carry, Mrs. imprisoned and escapes, ii. 47. Casco fort taken, 397. Castine,
Baron, 364. ii. 93. Cattle, number in 1640, 93. Charles II. news of his
restoration, 210. Motion to address him fails, id. Proclaimed in Boston, 217.
No man to drink his health, 219. Grants his pardon and confirms the charter,
221. A present made him, 257. Letter to Plymouth, 546. To Massachusetts, 547.
Charlestown church settled, 22. Charter first passes the seals, 9. Removed to
New England, 13. Process against it, 86 to 89. Saved by change of times in
England, 88. Assistants vote to surrender it, 338. Judgment or decree against
it, 340. Purchased, ii. 1.
Charter second, drawn by Blaithwait, 411. Charlevoix, erroneous, ii. 73, 82,
88, 261, 309. Chauncy, Charles, president, 174. Death, 259.
Cheever, Ezekiel, his death, ii. 175. Child, Doctor, concerned in a faction,
145. Christianity preached to Indians, 161 to 169. Church, Benjamin, fortunate,
306. His actions in eastern parts, ii. 69. Expedition to Chignecto, 95.
Superseded and offended, 99. Expedition, 144. His Death, 223.
Church of England first set up, 355. Church government, sum of it, 419. Chubb,
Capt. surrenders Pemaquid, ii, 93. Cruelty, 94. Killed, 106.
Civil subjection, notions upon it, 251. Clark, Thomas, proprietor of Kenebec,
346. Clark, Nathaniel, a time server, 360. Seized and secured, 383.
Clark, John, speaker, ii. 249. Clams received by the first planters with pious
gratitude, 23. Coin of New England in 1652, 177, 178. Coddington, William, 18,
61. Collectors of customs first established ii. 80. College, Harvard, 110, 171,
175. Colonies form their own legislature, 95. Colonies, state of in Cromwell's
time, 194. Commerce free, proposed from Canada, 166. Commerce, flourishing
state of, 189. Commissioners from King Charles, 230 to 256. Commission, 535.
Commissioners of united colonies, 133, 138, 153, 165, 169, 180, 185. Comet,
remarkable, 226, 348. Connecticut their first combination, 99. Controversy
about duties, 153 to 156. Forces successful, 305, 306. Surrender their charter,
339. Revolution there, 384. Re-assuming their charter, 406. Line settled, ii.
202.
Convers, Captain, ii. 67, 73. Cook, George, a Massachusetts captain,
afterward a colonel in Ireland, 120. Cook, Elisha, zealous for liberty, 331.
Assistant, 341. Agent, 393. For old charter or none, 408. Negatived, ii. 70.
Death, 211.
Cook, Elisha, begins the controversy with governor Shute, ii. 221. Chosen
speaker and negatived, 233. Agent, 302. Proceedings in England, 319 to 321.
Returns, 324.
Conant, Roger, at Cape Ann, 7. Salem, 8.
Coram, Thomas, projector, ii. 224. Corn, Indian, 10s. sterling the bushel, 24.
Mean distasteful diet to Europeans, 26.
Cornbury, Lord, persecutes dissenters, ii. 123. Corporation for propagating
gospel, 160, 164. Inquired into by A. Sancroft, 363. Cory, Giles, pressed to
death, ii. 59. Council for safety of the people, 381. Covenant, Scotch,
proposed, 146. Counties first made, 117. Council under Dudley, 350. Andros, 354.
Council of Plymouth constituted, 5. Make a grant to Weston, 5. To Robert
Gorges, 6. Divide New England in 12 provinces, 50.
Council of Massachusetts province, their powers by charter, ii. 8, 9. Nominate
civil officers, 13. The first counselors, 14. The first election, 70. Assume
government, 125, 210.
Court of assistants at Charlestown, 25. General, 25. Course of judicial
proceedings, 449.
Cranfield, governor of New Hampshire, 337. Cotton, John, arrives, 34. Engaged
in controversy, 55 to 75. Invited to the assembly of divines, 115. Death, 179.
Cows, milch, L.25 per head, 27. Cradock, Matthew, first governor, 9. Account
of him, 18. Intended to settle at Medford, 22.
Cromwell, Oliver, designed for New England, 42. Writes to Massachusetts to join
against the Dutch, 182. To remove to Ireland, 100. Urges their removal to
Iamaica, 191. His conversation with Wheel wright, 193. Sees the importance of
the colonies, 195.
Cromwell, Richard, not proclaimed when ordered, 209. Crown law taken from
Moses, 439. Culpeper, Lord, at Boston, 332.
D.
DEANE, Francis, accused of witchcraft, and escapes, ii. 38. D'Anville, Duke
of, his expedition, ii. 424. Danforth, Thomas, assistant, 189. Deputy governor,
323. President of Main, 329. Zealous, 331. In terror, 380. Treats with the
Indians, 404.
Davenport, John, comes over, 82. Invited to Westminster assembly, 115.
Conceals Whaley and Goffe, 215. Death, 260.
Davenport, Captain, killed at the castle, 253. D'Aulney, a French governor at
Penobscot, bickerings with him, 128 to 134. Davis Silvanus, action at Kenebeck,
346. Councellor, ii. 14.
Deeds registered, 455. Deerfield destroyed by the French, ii. 137. Denision,
George, great success, 305. Deputies and assistants contention, 35, 143.
Dixwell, Colonel, one of King Charles's judges, known by the ^^me of I. Davies,
217. Dod, John, charges New England puritans with separation, 81. Douglass,
erroneous, 208, 314, 355, 358, 474. ii. 25, 5^, 80. (...) Sir George,
anecdotes, 111. Dudley, Thomas, 12. Account of him, 14. Deputy governor, 17. No
friend to toleration, 75. Governor, 35, 144. Death and character, 183.
Dudley, Joseph, member for Roxbury, 287. His account of Narraganset fight,
302. Agent, 334. President, 340. Seized and imprisoned, 374. Suffers much, 391.
Sent to England, 393. Chief justice of New York, 395. Sollicits for the
government, ii. 85. Member of parliament, 86. Governor, 124. Negatives five
counselors, 136. Severely censured, 146, 147, 152, 157, 162. In danger in a
storm, 148. Gains friends, 188. Superseded by the council, 210. By Col. Tailer,
212. Character, 213.
Dudley, Panl, offends the house, ii. 256. Dummer, Richard, first arrives, 41.
Assistant, 43. Left out, 61.
Dummer, Shubael, killed at York, 405. Dummer, Jeremiah, Agent, ii. 187. Raises
a bubble in 1720, 244. Slighted by the house, 255.
Dummer, William, lieut. governor, ii. 291. Reprimanded, 322. Retires and his
character, 368.
Dunstan, Hannah, an heroine, ii. 106. Dunstar, Henry, college president, 174.
Dutch bribe English pilot to go to Cape-Cod. 5. Settle bounds with New Haven,
157. Suspected of plot against the English, 175 to 185. Surrender Manhados, 231.

E.
EARTHQUAKE, memorable, 90. ii. 326. Eaton, Nath, first master of Harvard
college, 90. Displaced 91.
Eaton, Theophilus, account of him, 17. Comes to N. England, 82.
Elders consulted by general court, 181. 223. 253. 311. 337. Jealous of power
of the magistrate, 270 to 274. Prophecy in sackcloth, 274. Concerned in all
matters of moment, 424.
Election contentious, 61. 97. Eliot, John, Indian apostle, 162 to 169. Recants
his opinions against monarchy, 212.
Eliot, John, capt. gallant action, 295. Elizabeth islands, so called by
Gosnold, 1. Embarkation, first, for Massachusets-Bay, 9. Second, 10. Third and
principal with the chartar, 19.
Endicot, John, a patentee, 8. Goes to Naumkeak or Salem, subgovernor, 9. His
character, 17. Cuts the cross out of the king's colors and censured, 38. Sent
against the Pequots without success and reflected on, 58. Governor, 134, 151,
172, 188. His death, 235.
Errors condemned in the synod, 75. Essex county in 1643, 117. Excommunication
established, 423. Expedition, French, designed against Boston, 102. ii. 424.
Against Canada, ii. 190. 398. Against Louisburgh, ii. 405.
Expense of first transportation computed L.192,000 sterling. 93.
F.
Faction suppressed, 145 to 149. Fast turned to thanksgiving, 23, 142. Fenwick,
George, agent for Lord Say, Brook, etc. 100. Leaves a legacy to New England,
101.
Fire of London, collection in the colony for sufferers, 257. In Boston in 1676
and 1679, 34. In 1711, ii. 200.
Flint, Thomas, assistant, 110. Foster, John, an active revolutioner, 377. His
death, ii. 190.
Foxcroft, justice, imprisons Winslow, 373. Frarey, deacon, fined, 356.
Freemen, none admitted, except church members, 26. French drove from Acadie,
28. Drive the English from Penobscot, 30. Immediately after peace, take
measures for war, ii. 110.
French protestants ask leave to settle, 224. Frontenac, governor of Canada,
appointed to command forces against New England, ii, 101.
G.
Gardner, Sir Christopher, knight of the Sepulcher, a great enemy to the
colony, 25. General court first consisting of house representatives etc. 35.
Offended with Boston and meet at Cambridge, 60. Pass an order of neutrality in
the war between king and parliament, 136. Restrain churches in choice of
ministers, 188. Their proceedings with commissioners from King Charles the
second, 250, to 255. Amplify their jurisdiction, 260.
General court interpose in the disputes of Boston church 270. Acknowledge
their error 273. Message upon dissolution of the government 342. Declaration of
right, 529.
George, captain of a king's ship seized 374. George the first proclaimed with
unusual marks of joy, ii. 209. Gibbons, Major general of forces, 137.
Assistant, 160. Anecdote, 160.
Goffe, colonel, one of king Charles judges, 213, to 219. Letter from his wife,
532.
Goffe, Thomas, first deputy governor, 9. Goodwin, John, his children
bewitched, ii. 18. Gookius, Daniel, arrives, 136. Zealous, 331.
Gerges, Robert, his grant from colony of Plymouth, 6. Sells it to Sir William
Brierton, 6.
Gorges, Sir Ferdinando, spent L.20,000 settling colonies, 3. A most active
member of the council of Plymouth, 5. Ioins with Mason in endeavors to hurt
the Massachusetts, 48.
Gorges, Thomas, mayor of Acamenticus alias York, 176. Gorton, Samuel, founder
of a sect, 117. A brief history of him, to 124. His defense, 549.
Gosnold Bartholomew first discovered New England, 1. Governor expected from
England 31, 48, 225. Old chartergovernor prays in public upon a fast day, 295.

H.
HADLEY men headed by Goffe the regicide, 219. Hair, long, association against
it, 151. Ranked among the sins of the land, 320.
Hale, Sir Matthew's, witch trials, a precedent for N. England, ii. 22. Hale,
John, his wife accused, etc. ii. 60. Hampden, John, intended for New England,
42. Hampden, Mr. anecdote, 332. Hamond, major, taken prisoner, ii. 89. Hampton
settled, 69. Hampshire county established, 225. Harlakenden, Mr. arrives, 41.
Dies, 91.
Harley, Mr. tradition of him, ii. 122. Harvard college founded, 90, 91, 110,
171. Growth, 171 to 175.
Harman, Capt. expedition, ii. 309. Hasterigg, Sir Arthur, intended for
New England, 42. Haverill destroyed, ii. 173. Haugh, Mr. assistant, 43.
Slighted, 61.
Hawthorne, John, examines witches, ii. 30. Hawthorne, William, speaker, 160.
Sent for to answer in England, 253.
Haynes, John, arrives, 34. Assistant, 35. Governor, 43. Goes to Connecticut,
53.
Hereditary honors, plan for them, 490. Higginson, Francis, first minister of
Salem, 10. Higginson, John, ordained, 325. Death, ii. 176.
Higginson, Nathanael, ii. 160. High treason, first law against it, 323.
Hiacoomes, an Indian convert, 161. Hibbins, William, agent, 98. Assistant, 127.
Hibbins, Ann, executed, 187. Hinkley, Thomas, governor of Plymouth, petitions
K. James, 368. Death, ii. 154.
Hoar, Leonard, president, 174. Hobby, Sir Charles, sollicits for the
government, ii. 153. Death, 271.
Holyoke, Edward, president, 175. Hook, counselor, his opinion upon the
Massachusetts charter, 410. Hooker, Thomas, arrives, 34. Coldness between Mr.
Cotton and him, 43. Removes to Hartford, 45. Invited to the assembly at
Westminster, 115.
Hopkins, governor of Connecticut, 82. Hudibras, the author ridicules the pious
New-Englanders for the deeds of a profligate crew, 6. House of commons vote the
surrender of plantation charters illegal, etc. 389. Bill passed to restore N.
England charters, 390.
House of representatives offended with governor Shute for negativing their
speaker, ii. 242. Insert themselves in dispute about pine trees, 246. Withold
part of the governor's salary, 213. Adjourn for six days, 257. Take the
direction of the war, 269. Remarks upon their conduct, 288. Order lieutenant
governor's seal to be defaced, 298. Accept an explanatory charter, 321.
Hubbard, William, ii. 147. Hubbard, Nathaniel, ii. 147, 403. Hutchinson,
William, comes to New England, 55. Hutchinson, Ann, comes from Alford to
New England, 55. Treated with great respect, but watched by Mr. Winthrop, id.
The principal women attend her lectures, 56. She condemns the ministers for
being under a covenant of works, id. Mr. Cotton countenances her opinions, 57.
The colony in a flame by reason of them, id. Lost her support when Mr. Vane
removed, 6^. Called to trial, forsaken by Mr. Cotton, and her tragical fate, 70
to 73.
Hutchinson, Edward, banished, 73. Sent to treat with Nipmug Indians, 291.
Ambushed and killed, 292.
Hutchinson, Elisha, a zealous member, 331. Assistant, 341. Ioins with Mather
in a remonstrance, 367. Treats with Indians, 404. Commander in chief of forces,
ii. 67, 168. Dies, 223.
Hutchinson, Eliakim, his death, ii. 223. Hutchinson, William, his character,
ii. 249. Hutchinson, Tho. arrests Kidd, ii. 119. Death and character, 391.

I.
JACOBS, Margaret, accuses herself and grandfather of witchcraft and then
recants, ii. 38. James the first grants all the continent from 34 to 45
degrees, 2. Refuses to grant liberty of commerce, 4.
James the second proclaimed in Boston, 340. Janson, Sir Bryant, assistant, 16.
Iberville takes the Newport, Capt. Paxton, ii. 92. The fort at Pemaquid, ii. 93.
Idolatry, Indian, learnt from the French, 472. Jermayne, Sir Thomas, speaks in
favor of the colony, 33. Increase of the colonies, remarks, ii. 201. Indians,
no idea of what the English intend by subjects, 276. Their way of fighting must
succeed when they exceed greatly in numbers, 295. Hardly used, 296. Captives
made slaves, 307. Their number in Plymouth colony, 349. The several nations,
456. The mohawks or cannibals, 457 Customs, manners, language, etc. 461 to 479.
The French made them idolaters, 472. Said to call the seven stars the bear,
478. Alarm the colonies, ii. 120. Destroy Deerfield, 137. Haverhill, 173.
Treacherous, 178. Attempts to gospelize them, 161. Their towns, 167, 168.
Indians, Pequods, threaten war, 27, 58. War with them, 76 to 81.
Indians, Naragansets, come to Boston, 28. Treaty with them, 59. Plot against
the English, 112. At war with Mohegins, 136.
Indians, Wompanoags, or Philip's Indians, war with them, etc. 275 to 310.
Their first subjection to King James, 273.
Indians, Eastern, assault Ipswich Indians, 27. Begin war, 307. Hostilities,
346 to 348, 364, 395, 404. Treaty of peace, ii. 73, 109, 201, 218, 317, 318.
Hostilities, ii. 277, 30^ to 305, 306 to 316.
Inoculation in Boston, ii. 273. Invasion, French, threatened, ii. 101. Jocelyn,
his voyage to New England, 267. Johnson, Isaac, an assistant, 10. Resolves to
become a planter, 12. His family, estate, etc. 16. His lady daughter of Earl of
Lincoln, 20. His death greatly lamented, 20.
Jones, Margaret, executed, 150. Ipswich men fined and imprisoned by Sir Edmund
Andros, 365. Ireland claim an exemption from British acts of parliament, 322.
Judges dependent, ii. 376. Judicial proceedings, course of, 449.
K.
KENEBECK river, first entered by Europeans, 2. Indian spoils there, 346.
Kiest, a Dutch governor at Manhadoes, 158. Kidd, the famous bucaneer, seized
at Boston, ii. 119. Kilby Christopher, representative, ii. 392. Agent, id.
Kirk, Colonel, appointed governor of New England, 341. Knowles, Admiral,
impress made by him at Boston, ii. 430.
L.
LACONIA, an ideal province, 104. The province of Main so called, 267.
Lancaster burnt by the enemy, 302. Land bank, ii. 206, 392. Lake, Capt.
Thomas, killed, 346. La Tour, French governor, 127 to 134. Laud, archbishop,
jealous of New England, 86. Employs Burdett to give intelligence, id First
commissioner for regulating plantations, 502.
Laws framed from the judicial of Moses, 439. Provincial, ii. 63 to 66.
Lawson, Roger, tried for supplying the French and Indian enemies, ii. 154.
Lechford, Thomas, a fractious attorney, 451. Ledea, William, a quaker, hanged,
202. Leete, William, deputy governor of Connecticut, favors Whaley and Goffe,
216. Legislature in general formed by the colonies, 95. Leigh, Lord,
accompanies Mr. Vane to England, 63. Leverett, Thomas, ruling elder, 34.
Leverett, John, sent to Naragansets to treat, 112. Commissioner from Oliver
Cromwell, 183. Deputy governor, 269. Governor, 270. His death, 323.
Leverett, John, college president, 175. Leyden, puritans or seperatists there,
3. Lieutenant governor considered as a councellor though not elected, ii. 70.
Long Island in New York, first peopled from Lyn in Massachusetts, 89. Lothrop,
Capt. and company defeated, 294. Lovewell, Capt. ii. 314. Louisburgh,
expedition against it, ii. 405 to 423 Ludlow, Roger, deputy governor, 35.
Removes to Connecticut, 43, 98.
Lyford, a minister of New Plymouth, 7. Lyman, Caleb, his exploit, ii. 146.
M.
MAIN, province of, deserted by Gorges the proprietor, the people put
themselves under the Massachusetts, 176. Made a county, id. Purchased, 326. Made
part of Massachusetts province, ii. 5.
Manhados (New York) surrenders to Col. Nichols, etc. 231. Maquas and the rest
of the 5 nations treaty, 348. Marblehead, rage of women there, 307. Martha's
vineyard first so called, 1. Mason, Capt. John, spent 20,000 ^, settling
colonies, 3. Molests the Massachusetts, 48. His several alleged grants, 313.
Mason, John, commands Connecticut forces against Pequods, 76. Chief share in
Pequod war, 77, 78.
Massasoit, Indian chief, chooses King James for his sovereign rather than his
ally, 275. An enemy to christianity, 276.
Masts for royal navy, ii. 253. Mather, Richard, arrives, 41. His death, 259.
Mather, Increase, college president, 174. Sued by Randolph for defamation,
366. Goes secretly to England to solicit for the colony, 366. A faithful
agent, 389. Saves New Plymouth from being annexed to New York, 406. Not
satisfied with the new charter, 409. Has the sole nomination of the first
governor and council, 413. Arrives at Boston, 416. His death, ii. 305.
Mather, Cotton, drew the manifesto upon the New England revolution, 381.
Intercedes with his father for governor Stoughton, 414. The first mover in
favor of inoculation, ii. 273.
Matthews, a minister, fined for preaching without license, 423. Maverick,
Samuel, at Noddles Island, 21. Obnoxious for stirring up a faction, 145.
Commissioner from King Charles II. 230. Delivers a letter from King Charles to
the colony. 253.
Mavoshen, the Indian name for the eastern country, 1. Mayhew, Thomas,
instructs the Indians, 161. Purchase of Martha's vineyard, Nantucket and
Elizabeth islands, 161.
Medfield burnt, 303. Miantinomo, Naraganset chief, comes to Boston, 28. Plots
against the English, 112, 113. Taken prisoner, 137. Put to death, 138.
Middlesex county, 117. Militia in the year 1665, 244. Ministry, poorly
supported, 274. Mitchel, Jonathan, friend to Whaley and Goffe, 218. Opposes the
sending over the magistrates upon King Charles's order, 253. A licenser of the
press, 259. Death, 260.
Money granted by parliament brought over, ii. 177, 178. Mortality among
Indians, 35. Morton, an attorney at Mount Wollaston, 8. Seized and sent to
England, id. Complaints of the colony, 31. Fined L.100. 32.
Mount Hope and the country round granted to N. Plymouth, 345. Moulton, Col.
behaves well at Norridgewock, ii. 309.
N.
NANTASKET first began, 7. Naraganset Indians, treaty, 59. Plotting, 112. At
war with the Mohegins, 136. Further quarrels, 155. 186. Treaty, 289. Break
their treaty, 297. Famous fight, 299.
Naumkeak (Salem) settlement began there, 9. Nelson, John, a revolutioner, 376.
His friendly intelligence, 378.
New England discovered, 1. First so called, 2. First colony there, ^. Division
into 12 provinces, ^0.
Newfoundland taken by the French, ii. 100. New Hampshire settled, 102 to 110.
Three distinct governments, 108. Swallowed up by Massachusetts, 110. Of the same
disposition with Massachusetts, 268. Grateful return, 328. Controversy about it,
312 to 318. Boundary line settled, ii. 382.
New Haven first planted, 82 to 86. Settle bounds with the Dutch, 157. Apply to
Cromwell, 182.
New Plymouth colony begins, 5. Trade at Penobscot, 28. Brief state of affairs,
206 to 208. Boundary line settled, 208. 229. Conduct approved by King Charles
the second's commissioners, 233. Desirous of chastising the Indians, 286.
Further state of affairs there, 343 to 346. Revolution there, 383. Annexed to
New York, 405. Recalled and annexed to Massachusetts, 406. A summary of their
affairs, ii. 449 to 481.
New-Somersetshire, the same with the province of Main, 267. New York,
revolution there, 384. Neutrality with French, ii. 140. Nichols, K. Charles's
commissioner, 230. Discreet behavior, 250.
Nicholson, Francis, 384. ii. 176. 178, 180. 190. Nocale, for Nuichicke, Indian
food, 465. Norfolk county, 117. Norridgewock, successful expedition there, ii.
309. Norton, John, arrives, 41. Disapproves Mrs. Hibbins's excontion, 188. In
favor of address to K. Charles the second, 210. Agent to England, 219. His
death and quakers remark, 223.
Notaries public, first chosen, ii. 238. Nova Scotia made part of the
Massachusetts province, ii. 5. Affairs there, 127 to 134. ii. 90, 97. 180 to 186.
Nowell, Increase, his character, 17. Settles at Charlestown, 22.
Nowell, Samuel, joins with Mather in England, 367. Noyes, Oliver, his death,
ii. 249.
O.
OAKS, Thomas, agent, 393. Assistant, id.
Oaks, Urian, president of the college, 174. Oldham, John, stirs up a faction
in New Plymouth, 7. A grantee from the council of Plymouth, 7.
Osgood, Mary, examination, ii. 31. Recantation, 41. Testimonial, 42.
Owen, John, invited to New England, 226.
P.
PAPER money first made, 402. Parliament, memorable act or ordinance, 114.
Parris, Samuel, witchcraft begins in his family, ii. 25. Too officious in
prosecutions, 26.
Parsons, Hugh, tried for witchcraft, 179. Passengers the first ten years,
21200. 93. Patrick, Captain in Pequod war, 76. Patch, Eliz. her death, ii. 216.
Paxton, Capt. taken in the Newport man of wat, ii, 92. Pierce, Capt, and 50 men
killed, 304. Pelham, Herbert, assistant, 144. Commissioner, 145. In England,
163.
Pemaquid, a fort there, ii. 68. Taken 92. Possessed by Dunbar, ii. 379.
Penn, Elder, death and character, 269. Penobscot rifled, 29. Taken, 46. By
Cromwell, 183. Restored, 258. Taken by the Dutch. 311. By Sir William Phips,
397.
Pequods kill Stone, 45. Protect the murderers of the English, 58. Urge the
Naragansets to war, 59. The tribe destroyed, 76 to 81.
Peter's, Hugh, one of the first planters, 9. Arrival, 41. Agent, and his
tragical end, 98. Opposes collection for the Indians, 165.
Philip, King, or Indian Sachem, subjects himself and nation, 279, 282. Rashly
begins a war, 284. In imminent danger, 291. Killed 306.
Phips, Sir William, birth, etc. 396. Takes Port Royal, 397. Ill success at
Quebec, 399 to 401. Sollicits 2d expedition, 403. Governor, 413. Arrives, 415.
Public entry, ii. 12. Encourages prosecution of witches, 23. A warrant from his
lady, 61. Quarrels with collector and captain of a man of war, 75. Ordered to
England, 78. His death, 85.
Phips, Constantine, agent, ii. 85. Drew the bill for reversing Leisler's
attainder, 86. Removed from agency, 186.
Phips, Spencer, lieutenant governor, ii. 81. Piscataqua submit to
Massachusetts, 101. A summary of settlements, 102.
Plaisted, Col his son taken prisoner the day he was married, ii. 200.
Planters, first, whether churchmen, 417. Became separatists, 418.
Platform, sum of it, 431. Popham, Sir John, a promoter of colonies, 2. His
brother president of Sagadahoc colony, 2.
Porter, John, sentenced to die for disobedience to parents, 239. Portroyal
taken by Phips, 397. Attempted, ii. 165. 171. Taken, 182.
Portsmouth, N. Hampshire, their generous donation to Harvard college, 268.
Prince of Orange, news of his landing in England, 372. His declaration called a
treasonable libel, 373.
Prince of Wales, his birth celebrated, 372. Printing first set up, 257.
Prodigies reported, 126, 127. Providence, island, colony, 94 to 97. Province of
Massachusetts bay bounds, ii. 7. Puritan ministers in England did not approve of
separation, 81. Come over in Charles the second's reign, 225.
Pym, John, designed to New England, 42. Intimate with the first planters, ii.
2.
Pynchon, William, assistant, 17. Settles at Roxbury, ^^ Springfield, 98.

Q.
QUAKERS persecuted, 196 to 205. 320. Quinnypiack, afterward New Haven, 63.
Quittamug, John, a very old Indian, ii, 305. Quo warranto against the charter,
328, 340.
R.
RAINSFORD, brother to Lord chief justice, a ruling elder, 260. Ralle, father,
ii. 241, 262. His character, 263. Killed, 309.
Randolph, Edward, arrives, 311. Made 8 voyages in 9 years, 329. Appointed
collector, 330. Quarrels with Dudley, 351. Boasts that he is as arbitrary as
the great Turk, 369. Voted a capital offender, ii, 5.
Ratcliffe, Mr. the first episcopal minister, 355. Read, John, his character,
ii, 376. Registry of deeds, 453. Representatives first chosen, 35. Rovell,
John, assistant, 17. Revolution in New England before any certain news from
England, 373. Circumstantial account of it, 374 to 377. Persons concerned
afraid of the consequence, 380.
Rhode Island settled by refugees from Massachusetts, 72, 73 Refused to be
admitted into union with the other colonies, 124. Surrender their charter, 339.
Reassume it, 407. Line settled, ii, 400.
Robinson, John, minister, ii, 454. Andrew, his exploit, ii, 295. Robinson,
William, a quaker, executed, 200. Rochellers apply for leave to settle in
New England, 224. Rogers, John, college president, 174. Rossiter, Edward,
assistant, 17. Roswell, Sir Henry, patence, 8. Rowley settled, 89. Rowse,
William, tried and fined, ii, 152. Ruling elders 426. Russell, hon, George, at
Boston, 332. Russell, Richard, an assistant, 189. Russell, James, an assistant,
ii. 14.
S.
SAGADAHOC settled, 2. Saint Christophers, contribution for relief, 257. Saint
Francois settled by eastern Indians, ii. 142. Saltonstall, Sir Richard,
patentee, 9, 15. Settles at Watertown, returns to England, 24.
Saltonstall, Richard, assistant, 61. Makes a vow, 94. Give's Whaley and Goffe
fifty pounds, 217.
Saltonstall, Nathaniel, 351. ii. 14. Salisbury settled, 89. Salary fixed,
controversy, ii. 333. Salem, court removed there, ii. 350. Sanderson, Anthony,
agent, ii. 292. Sanford, Major, takes Sir E. Andros and sends him to Boston,
392. Sassacus, Pequod sachem, 80. Savage, Thomas, banished, 73. Commands
forces, 288.
Say and Seal, Lord, intended to New England, 42. Urges removal to the
Bahamas, 94. Kind letter to the colony, 220.
Saybrooke fort, 47. Burnt, 155. Scott, Patience, a quaker child, 199.
Schuyler, Col. friendly, ii. 142. 163. 172. Sewall, Samuel, 359. ii. 61, 291.
Sedgewick, Major, Commissioner from Cromwell, 183. Takes St. John's, Penobscot,
etc. id.
Sharp, Samuel, assistant, 15. Sharp, Thomas, 17. Shawmutt, 21. Sheaffe,
Sampson, his letter about Canada expedition, ii. 198. Shepard, Thomas, arrives,
41. Dies, 151.
Ships, number of in 1665, 244. Short, Capt. imprisoned, etc. 77. Shrimpton,
Col. writ of intrusion, 369. Shirley, William, succeeds Belcher, ii. 399. Forms
an expedition against Louisburgh, 405. Retires to the castle, 439. House of
representatives resolve to stand by him, 433. Returns to town, 434.
Shute, Samuel, governor, ii. 215. Arrives, 217. Controversy with house of
representatives, 231. Negatives the speaker, 233. Dissolves the court, 260.
Leaves the province suddenly, 288. Exhibits articles against the house, 299.
Succeeded by governor Burnet, 325. Sickness the first winter, 19.
Skeleton, Samuel, first minister of Salem, 10. Smallpox among the Indians, 34.
The English, ii. 273.
Smith, Ralph, separatist, 10. Soil, opinions about it, 479 to 486. Summers, Sir
John, for the colony, 394. Southcott, Thomas, a patentee, 8. Speaker, dispute
about him, ii. 149. Springfield called Agawam, 98. Burnt by the Indians, 295.
Stevenson, Marmaduke, a quaker, hanged, 200. Stillingfleet, Dr. his remark,
228. Stone, Mr. arrives, 34. At Hartford, 99.
Stone, Capt. Killed by Indians, 45. Storm, remarkable, 53. Stoughton, Israel,
assistant, 61. Commands against Pequods, 76. His death, 144.
Stoughton, William, agent, 312. Prosecutes witches, ii. 23. Commander in
chief, 81, 121. Death, 125. His character, 127.
Stuyvesant, Dutch governor, 158, 159. Suffolk, county, 117. Sunderland, lord,
would not admit a house of representatives, 367. Subjection civil, notions of
it, 251. Sudoury settled, 89. Symonds, Samuel, assistant, 117. Deputy governor,
270.
Synod, 67, 68, 69, 225, 324.
T.
TAILER, William, lieut. governor, ii. 200. 368. Dies, 381.
Temple, Sir Thomas, begs the lives of condemned quakers, 200. Recommended by
N. Fiennes, 206.
Temple, Capt. Robert, commander of forces eastward, ii. 297. Test,
New England, 431. Thurloe sends orders to proclaim Richard Cromwell, 209.
Tilton, Peter, a zealous deputy, 331. Titles to lands questioned, 359. Town, a
fortified one projected, 23. Trade, state of it in 1639, 91. Flourishing, 189.
In 1670, 269. In 1750, ii. 441.
Trees, reserved by charter. ii. 253.
V.
VANE, Henry, arrives, 41. Governor, 53. Supported by Mr. Cotton, 53.
Dissembles, 54. Peculiar tenets, 57. Winthrop's interest too strong for him,
61. Shows his resentment, 62. Returns to England, 63. Character, 64 to 67.
Vassal, William, Assistant, 17. Further account of him, 145.
Veils worn by Salem women, 430. Vetch, Samuel, tried, ii. 154. Colonel of
forces against Canada, 176. Governor of Nova Scotia, 184.
Uncas, Mohegin sachem, 136, 143. Underhill, John, captain, 76. An enthusiast,
77. Chosen governor of Exeter and Dover, 107.
Union of the colonies, 124 to 126.
W.
WADSWORTH, Benjamin, college president, ii. 175. Wadsworth, Capt. killed and
his company, 305. Walker, Sir Hovenden's, expedition, ii. 190. Walley, John,
commands land forces against Canada, 401. Journal, 554.
Ward, Nath. simple cobbler of Agawam, 120. Warwick, Earl of, 7. Warwick,
Countess of, benefactor, 18. Warren, Commodore, ii. 414. His testimony, 4^2.
Watts, Sarah, claims 26th part of Massachusetts colony, ii. 225. Washburn, John,
secretary, 10. Weld, Thomas, agent, 98. Dismissed, 149.
Wells, action there, 67. Wequash, a christian Indian, but betrays his
countrymen, 77. West, secretary under Andros, 3^8. West, vice admiral, 6.
Westbrook, Colonel, ii. 294. 302. Weston's plantation, 5. Broke up and he cast
away, etc. 6.
Whaley the regicide, so called, 213. Wharton, Lord, friend to New England,
389. Wheat first blasted, 229. Wheeler, Sir Francis's expedition, ii. 71.
Wheelwright, John, antinomian, 55. Banished, 70. At Hampton and Salisbury, 74.
At Exeter, 106.
Whetcomb Simon, a patentee, 8. White, counselor, his opinion, 13. White,
John, encourages planters, 8. White, Peregrine, first born child, his death,
ii. 148. White hills first explored, 114. Whiting, Mr. a minister, killed, ii.
105. Wiggins, Capt. assistant, 160. Wilks, Francis, agent, ii. 353. Willard,
Josiah, secretary, ii. 223. Willard, Samuel, vice president of the college, 75.
Willard, Simon, commander of forces, 186. Willett, Thomas, referree between the
English and Dutch, 159. Willoughby, Francis, assistant, 160. Deputy governor,
258. Death, 269.
Williams, Roger, makes disturbance at Salem, 37. Banished and removes to
Providence, 38. Shelters Gorton, 117. Gives notice of plots among the Indians,
139.
Williams, John, minister of Deerfield, his captivity, 138. William and Mary,
their accession most joyful news to New England, 387. Wilson, John, minister,
22. His zeal, 61. Death and character, 258.
Wilson, Deborah, a quaker, whipped, 204. Winslow, Edward, principal of
New Plymouth planters, 5. Agent, 149. His death, 187.
Winslow, Josias, seizes Indian princes, 276. Governor of Plymouth, 286.
General in Naraganset sight, 299.
Winslow, Capt. Josias, killed by Indians, ii. 307. Winthrop, John, first
engages, 12. Elected governor, 14. Account of his family, 14. Travels on foot
through the woods, 21. Is called to account and honorably acquitted, 40.
Engaged with Mr. Vane and the opinionists, 55 to 75. Governor, 61. Very
popular, 62. Overrules at the synod, 68. Great concern at his apprehended
danger, 129. Called to answer, 147. Death and character, 151.
Winthrop, John, commissioned by Lord Say and Seal, ^^. Winthrop Wait, agent,
ii. 129. Death 223.
Wise, minister of Ipswich, imprisoned, 366. Wiswall, Mr. agent for Plymouth,
405. Witches executed, ii. 53. 58. 59. Women at Oyster-river gallant, ii. 163.
Woodward, Samuel, secretary, 212. Resigns, 223.
Writs of intrusion, 369.
Y.
YORK county, 177. Government there, 260. Town destroyed, 405.
Young, Sir John, Patentee, 8.

