Father Abraham's SPEECH To a great Number of People, at a Vendue of
Merchant-Goods; Introduced to THE PUBLIC By POOR RICHARD, (A famous Conjurer
and Almanac Maker) In Answer to the following Questions,

Pray, Father Abraham, what think you of the Times? Will Not these heavy Taxes
quite ruin the Country? How shall we be ever able to pay them? What would you
advise us to do?

Printed and sold by T. and S. Green, in New Haven.

Father Abraham's Speech, introduced by Poor Richard, viz.
COURTEOUS READER,
I HAVE heard that Nothing gives an Author so great Pleasure, as to find his
Works respectfully quoted by other learned Authors. This Pleasure I have seldom
enjoyed; for though I have been, if I may say it without Vanity, an eminent
Author of Almanacks annually now a full Quarter of a Century, my
Brother-Authors in the same Way, for what Reason I know not, have ever been
very sparing in their Applauses* and no other Author has taken the least Notice
of me, so that did not my Writings produce me some solid Puddin^ the great
Deficiency of Praise would have qu^^^ discouraged me.

I concluded at length, that the People were the best Judges of my Merit; for
they buy thy Works; and besides, in my Rambles, where I am not personally
known, I have frequently heard one or other of my Adages repeated, with `as
Poor Richard says,' at the End on it. This gave me some Satisfaction, as it
showed not only that my Instructions were regarded, but discovered likewise
some Respect for my Authority; and I own that, to encourage the Practice of
remembering and repeating those wise Sentences, I have sometimes quoted myself,
with great Gravity.

Judge then how much I must have been gratified by an incident I am going to
relate to you. I stopped my Horse lately where a great Number of People were
collected at a Vendue of Merchant Goods. The Hour of Sale not being come, they
were conversing on the Badness of the Times, and one of the Company called to a
plain clean old Man, with white Locks, Pray, Father Abraham, what think you of
the Times? Will Not these heavy Taxes quite ruin the Country? How shall we be ever
able to pay them? What would you advise us to? -- Father Abraham stood up and
replied, If you would have my advice, I Will give it you in short, for A Word to the
Wise is enough, and many Words will not fill a Bushel, as Poor Richard says. They
joined in desiring him to speak his Mind, and gathering ^^^und him, he
proceeded as follows. Friends and Neighbors,
THE Taxes are indeed very heavy, and if those laid on by the Government were
the only Ones we had to pay, we might more easily discharge them; but we have
many others, and much more grievous to some of us. We are taxed twice as much
by our Idleness, three times as much* by our Pride, and four times as much by
our Folly, and from these Taxes Collectors cannot ease or deliver us by
allowing an Abatement. However, let us hearken to good Advice, and something
may be done for us. God helps them that help themselves, as Poor Richard says,
in his Almanac.

It would be thought a hard Government that should tax its People one tenth
Part of their Time, to be employed in its Service. But Idleness taxes many of
us much more, if we reckon all that is spent in absolute Sloth, or doing of
Nothing, with that which is spent in idle Employments or Amusements, that
amount to Nothing. Sloth, by bringing on Diseases, absolutely shortens Life.
Sloth, like Rust, consumes faster than Labor wears, while the used Key is
always bright, as Poor Richard says. But do thou love Life? then do not
squander Time, for that is the Stuff Life is made of, as Poor Richard says: How
much more than is necessary do we spend in Sleep! forgetting that the sleeping
Fox catches no Poultry, and that there will be sleeping enough in the Grave, as
Poor Richard says. If Time be of all Things the most precious, wasting Time
must be, as Poor Richard says, the greatest Prodigality, since, as he elsewhere
tells us, Lost Time is never found again: and what we call Time enough, always
proves little enough. Let us then up and be doing, and doing to the Purpose; so
by Diligence shall we do more with less Perplexity. Sloth makes all Things
difficult, but industry all easy, as Poor Richard says; and he that rises late,
must trot all Day, and shall scarce overtake his Business at Night; while
Laziness travels so slowly, that Poverty soon overtakes him, as we read in Poor
Richard, who adds, Drive thy Business, let not that drive thee; and early to
Bed, and early to rise, makes a Man healthy, wealthy and wise.

So what signifies wishing and hoping for better Times. We may make these Times
better if we bestir ourselves. Industry need not wish, as Poor Richard says,
and he that lives upon Hope will die fasting. There are no Gains without Pains;
then help Hands, for I have no Lands, or if I have, they are smartly taxed.
And, as Poor Richard likewise observes, He that has a Trade has an Estate,
and he that has a Calling, has an Office of Profit and Honor; but then the
Trade must be worked at, and the Calling well followed, or neither the Estate,
nor the Office, will enable us to pay our Taxes. If we are industrious we shall
never starve; for, as Poor Richard says, At the working Man's House Hunger
looks in, but dares not enter. Nor will the Bailiff or the Constable enter, for
Industry pays Debts, while Despair increases them, says Poor Richard. What
though you have found no Treasure, nor has any rich Relation left you a Legacy,
Diligence is the Mother of Good-luck, as Poor Richard says, and God gives all
Things to Industry: Then plough deep, while Sluggards sleep, and you shall have
Corn to sell and to keep, says Poor Dick. Work while it is called Today, for
you know not how much you may be hindered Tomorrow, which makes Poor Richard
say One Today is worth two To-morrows; and farther, Have you somewhat to do
Tomorrow? do it Today. If you were a Servant, would you not be ashamed that a
good Master should catch you idle? Are you then your own Master? Be ashamed to
catch yourself idle, as poor Dick says. When there is so much to be done for
your Self, your Family, and your Country, be up by Peep of Day: Let not the Sun
look down and say, Inglorious here he lies. Handle your Tools without Mittens;
remember that the Cat in Gloves catches no Mice, as Poor Richard says. It Is
true, their is much to be done, and perhaps you are weak-handed, but stick to
it steadily, and you will see great Effects, for constant Dropping wears away
Stones, and by Diligence and Patience the Mouse ate in two the Cable; and
little Strokes fell great Oaks, as Poor Richard says in his Almanac, the Year
I cannot now remember.

Methinks I hear some of you say, Must a Man afford himself no Leisure? I will
tell thee, my Friends, what Poor Richard says. Employ thy Time well if you
meanest to gain Leisure; and, since thou art not sure of a Minute, throw not
away an Hour. Leisure is Time for doing something useful; this* Leisure the
diligent Man will obtain, but the lazy Man never; so that as Poor Richard says,
a life of Leisure and a Life of Laziness are two Things. Do you imagine that
Sloth will afford you more Comfort than Labor? No; for, as Poor Richard says,
Trouble springs from Idleness, and grievous Toil from needless Ease. Many
without Labor, would live by their Wits only, but they break for want of Stock.
Whereas Industry gives Comfort, and Plenty, and Respect. Fly Pleasures and
they will follow you. -- The diligent Spinner has a large Shift; and now I have a
Sheep and a Cow, every Body bids me Good Morrow; all which is well said by Poor
Richard.

But with our Industry, we must likewise be steady settled and careful, and
oversee our own Affairs with our own Eyes, and not trust too much to others;
for, as Poor Richard says. I never saw an often removed Tree,
Nor yet an often removed Family,
That throve so well as those that settled be.


And again, Three Removes is as bad as a Fire; and again, Keep thy Shop, and
thy Shop will keep thee; and again, If you would have your Business done, go;
if not, send. And again, He that by the Plough would thrive,
Himself must either hold or drive.


And again, The Eye of a Master will do more Work than both his Hands; and
again, Want of Care does us more Damage than want of Knowledge; and again, Not
to oversee Workmen, is to leave them your Purse open. Trusting too much to
others Care is the ruin of many; for as the Almanac says, In the Affairs of
this World, Men are saved, not by Faith, but by the Want of it; but a Man's own
Care is profitable; for, says Poor Dick, Learning is to the Studious, and
Riches to the Careful, as well as Power to the Bold, and Heaven to the
Virtuous. And farther, If you would have a faithful Servant, and one that you
like, -- serve your Self. And again, he advises to Circumspection and Care,
even in the smallest Matters, because sometimes a little Neglect may breed
great Mischief* adding, For want of a Nail, the Shoe was lost; for want of a
Shoe the Horse was lost; and for want of a Horse the Rider was lost, being
overtaken and slain by the Enemy, all for want of Care about a Horse-shoe Nail.

So much for Industry, my Friends, and Attention to one's own Business; but to
these we must add Frugality, if we would make our Industry more certainly
successful. A Man may, if he knows not how to save as he gets, keep his Nose
all his Life to the Grindstone, and die not worth a Groat at last. A fat
Kitchen makes a lean Will, as Poor Richard says; and, Many Estates are spent in
the Getting,
Since Women for Tea forsook spinning and knitting,
And Men for Punch forsook hewing and spliting.


If you would be wealthy, says he in another Almanac, think of saving, as well
as of getting: The Indies have not made Spain rich, because her Outgoes are
greater than her Incomes. Away then with your expensive Follies, and you will
not have so much Cause to complain of hard Times, heavy Taxes, and chargeable
Families; for as Poor Richard says, Women and Wine, Game and Deceit,
Make the Wealth small, and the Wants great.
And farther, What maintains one Vice, would bring up two Children. You may
think, perhaps, that a little Tea, or a little Punch now and then, Diet a
little more costly, Cloths a little finer, and a little Entertainment, now and
then, can be no great Matter; but remember what poor Richard says, Many a
little makes a Mickle; and farther, Beware of little Expenses. A small Leak
will sink a great Ship. And again, Who Dainties love, shall Beggars prove. And
moreover, Fools make Feasts and wise Men eat them.

Here you are all got together at this Vendue of Fineries and Knicknacks. You
call them Goods, but if you do not take Care, they will prove Evils to some of
you. You expected they will be sold cheap, and perhaps they may for less than
they cost; but if you have no Occasion for them, they must be dear to you.
Remember what poor Richard says, Buy what thou have no Need of, and ere long
thou shall sell thy Necessaries. And again, At a great Pennyworth pause a
while: He means, that perhaps the Cheapness is apparent only, and not real; or
the Bargain, by straitning thee in thy Business, may do thee more Harm than
Good. For in another Place he says, Many have been ruined by buying good
Pennyworths. Again poor Richard says, It Is foolish to lay out Money in a
Purchase of Repentance; and yet this Folly is practiced every Day at Vendues,
for want of min^ing the Almanac. Wise Men, as poor Dick says, learn by others
Harms, Fools scarcely by their own; but `Felix quem faciunt aliena Pericula
cautum* Many a One, for the Sake of Finery on the Back, have gone with a hungry
Belly, and half starved their Families. Silks and Sattins, Scarlet and Velvets
(as Poor Richard says) put out the Kitchen fire. These are not the Necessaries
of Life, they can scarcely be called the Conveniences; and yet only because
they look pretty, how many want to have them. The artificial Wants of Mankind
thus become more numerous than the natural; and, as Poor Dick says, For one
poor Person, there are an hundred indigent. By these, and other Extravagancies,
the Genteel are reduced to Poverty, and forced to borrow of those whom they
formerly despised, but who, through Industry and Frugality, have maintained
their Standing; in which Case it appears plainly, that a Ploughman on his Legs
is higher than a Gentleman on his Knees, as Poor Richard says. Perhaps they
have had a small Estate left them, which they knew not the Getting of; they
think it is Day and will never be Night; that a little to be spent out of so
much, is never worth minding; (A Child and a Fool, as Poor Richard says,
imagine Twenty Shillings and Twenty Years can never be spent) but, always
taking out of the Meal-Tub and never putting in, soon* comes to the Bottom;
then, as Poor Dick says, When the Well's dry, they know the Want of Water. But
this they might have known before, if they had taken his Advice. If you would
know the Value of Money, go and try to borrow some; for, He that goes a
borrowing goes a sorrowing; and indeed so does he that lends to such People,
when he goes to get it in again. -- Poor Dick farther advises and says, Fond
Pride of Dress, is sure a very Curse.
Ever Fancy you consult, consult your Purse.
And again, Pride is as loud a Beggar as Want, and a great deal more saucy.
When you have bought one fine Thing you must buy ten more, that your Appearance
may be all of a Piece; but Poor Dick says, It Is easier to suppress the first
Desire, than to satisfy all that follow it. And it is as truly Folly for the
Poor to ape the Rich, as for the Frog to swell in order to equal the Ox. Great
Estates may venture more,
But little Boats should keep near Shore.
It Is however a Folly soon punished; for Pride that dines on Vanity, sups on
Contempt, as Poor Richard says. And, in another Place, Pride breakfasted with
Plenty, dined with Poverty, and supped with Infamy. And, after all, of what Use
is this Pride of Appearance, for which so much is risqued, so much is suffered?
It cannot promote Health, or ease Pain; it makes no Increase of Merit in the
Person; it creates Envy, it hastens Misfortune. What is a Butterfly? At best
He Is but a Catterpillar dressed,
The gaudy Fop's his Picture just;
as Poor Richard says.

But what Madness must it be to run in Debt for these Superfluities! We are
offered, by the Terms of this Vendue, Six Months Credit; and that perhaps, has
induced some of us to attend it, because we cannot spare the ready Money, and
hope now to be fine without it. But, ah! think what you do when you run in
Debt: You give to another Power over your Liberty. If you cannot pay at the
Time, you will be ashamed to see your Creditor; you will be in Fear when you
speak to him; you will make poor, pitiful, sneaking Excuses, and by Degrees
come to lose your Veracity, and sink into base downright Lying; for, as Poor
Richard says, The second Vice is Lying, the first is running in Debt. And
again, to the same Purpose, Lying rides upon Debt's Back. Whereas a freeborn
American ought not to be ashamed or afraid to see or speak to any Man living.
But Poverty often deprives a Man of all Spirit and Virtue. It Is hard for an
empty Bag to stand upright, as Poor Richard truly says. What would you think of
that Prince, or that Government, who should issue an Edict forbidding you to
dress like a Gentleman or a Gentlewoman, on Pain of Imprisonment or Servitude?
Would you not say that you are free, have a Right to dress as you please, and
that such an Edict would be a Breach of your Privileges, and such a Government
tyrannical? And yet you are about to put yourself under that Tyranny, when you
run in Debt for such Dress! Your Creditor has Authority, at his Pleasure, to
deprive you of your Liberty, by confining you in Goal for Life, or to sell you
for a Servant, if you should not be able to pay him! When you have got your
Bargain, you may, perhaps, think little of Payment; but Creditors (Poor Richard
tells us) have better Memories than Debtors; and in another Place says,
Creditors are a superstitious Sect, great Observes of set Days and Times. The
Day comes round before you are aware, and the Demand is made before you are
prepared to satisfy it. Or if you bear your Debt in Mind, the Term which at
first seemed so long, will, as it lessens, appear extremely short. Time will
seem to have added Wings to his Heels as well as Shoulders. Those have a short
Lent (says Poor Richard) who owe Money to be paid at Easter* Then since, as he
says, The Borrower is a Slave to the Lender, and the Debtor to the Creditor,
disdain the Chain, preserve your Freedom, and maintain your Independency. Be
industrious and free; be frugal and free. At present perhaps you may think
yourself in thriving Circumstances, and that you can bear a little Extravagance
without Injury; but For Age and Want save while you may,
No Morning-Sun lasts a whole Day.
as Poor Richard says. -- Gain may be temporary and uncertain, but ever while
you live, Expense is constant and certain; and it is easier to build two
Chimnies, than to keep one in Fuel, as Poor Richard says. So rather go to Bed
supperless than rise in Debt. Get what you can, and what you get hold; It Is the
Stone that will turn all your Lead into Gold. as Poor Richard says,

And when you have got the Philosopher's Stone, sure you will no longer
complain of bad Times, or the Difficulty of paying Taxes.

This Doctrine, my Friends, is Reason and Wisdom; but, after all, do not depend
too much upon your own Industry, and Frugaliry, and Prudence, though excellent
Things, for they may all be blasted without the Blessing of Heaven; and
therefore ask that Blessing humbly, and be not uncharitable to those that at
present seem to want it, but comfort and help them. Remember Job suffered, and
was afterward prosperous.

And now to conclude. Experience keeps a School, (...) Fools will (...)in no
other, and in that; ^or it is true, We may give Advice, we cannot give Conduct,
as Poor Richard says: However, remember this, They that will not be counseled,
cannot be helped, as Poor Richard says: And farther, that if you will not hear
Reason she will surely rap your Knuckles.



Thus the old Gentleman ended his Harangue. The People heard it, and approved
the Doctrine, and immediately practiced the Contrary, just as if it had been a
common Sermon; for the Vendue opened, and they began to buy extravagantly*
notwithstanding all his Cautions, and their own Fear of Taxes. -- I found the
good Man had thoroughly studied my Almanacks, and digested all I had dropped on
those Topics during the Course of five-and twenty Years. The frequent Mention
he made of me, must have tried any one else, but my Vanity was wonderfully
delighted with it, though I was conscious that not a tenth Part of the Wisdom
was my own which he ascribed to me, but rather the Gleanings I had made of the
Sense of all Ages and Nations. However, I resolved to be the better for the
Echo of it: and though I had at first determined to buy Stuff for a new Coat, I
went away resolved to wear my old One a little longer. Reader, if thou will do
the same, thy Profit will be as great as mine.

I s^ as ever, Thine to serve thee, Richard Saunders.


