Mr. Phillips's DISCOURSE On the unnatural Sin Of Suicide, Or Self-Murder.

The Sin of Suicide contrary to Nature.

A Plain DISCOURSE, Occasioned by the late Perpetration Of That heinous Crime:
Viz. on January 7th 1767. Delivered (the Substance of it) on the LORD'S DAY
next following. Viz. on January 11th. AND Published for a WARNING to Survivors;
AT THE GENERAL DESIRE Of the Hearers: Unto whom it is Dedicated.

By SAMUEL PHILLIPS, M. A. And Pastor of the South-Church in Andover.

Acts 16.28 Paul cried -- saying, Do thyself no harm.

2 Cor. 11.3 I fear, lest by any Means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve by his
Subtilty, so your Minds should be corrupted. --

1 Pet. 5.9. Whom resist, steadfast in the Faith.

James 4 7. Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by KNEELAND and ADAMS, in MILK-STREET. MDCCLXVII.

A WARNING against the Sin of Suicide.
EPHESIANS V. 29. For, no Man ever yet hated his own Flesh, but nourishes and
cherishes it. --


I PRESUME, my Brethren, I need not mention the sorrowful Occasion, of
selecting this Portion of Scripture, for the Subject of my Discourse, this Day:
-- An Occasion quite new, as well as very awful; such as, I think, has not
occurred among us, till now, since I came into this Place: Which is now, almost
the Space of Fifty-seven Years.
And I pray God, that we may never see the like again!

THE Words now read stand in a fair Connection with the preceding, as appears
by the illative Particle, For: -- The Apostle is here exhorting to the faithful
Discharge of relative Duties: -- And particularly, that Husbands and Wives be
very careful to perform the Duties, which are mutually incumbent each on other.
And as to the Husband, the Apostle says, ver. 28. So ought Men to love their
Wives, as their own Bodies: He that loves his Wife, loves himself. Then it
follows, as in my Text; For, no Man ever yet hated his own Flesh, but
nourishes and cherishes it. Q. D. In like manner, ought Husbands to discover
their Love to their Wives, by nourishing and cherishing them: For, the Wife
being made One with her Husband, that is, in a civil and relative sense,
therefore he should love her, with as cordial and unfeigned Affection, as he
loves himself. And the Apostle here refers to the Words of Adam, when Eve was
given to him for a meet help. Genesis 2.24. Therefore shall a Man leave his Father
and Mother, and shall cleave unto his Wife, and they shall be one Flesh. ver.
31. of my Context. By which, "we are not to understand, that a Man's Obligation
to his other Relatives, as Father and Mother in particular, is wholly made void
upon his Marriage; but only, that this Relation is to be preferred to all
others; there being a nearer Union betwixt these two, than betwixt any others."

BUT I am not, at this Time, about to discourse on the respective Duties of
Husbands and Wives toward each other: But only on the Words introduced by the
Apostle, as a Medium, for the Illustration of his Argument, and which is here
laid down as an incontestable Proposition, viz. That no Man ever yet hated his
own Flesh, etc. Q. D. Whatever show or appearance of this, there may sometimes
have been, yet, no Man ever did, in Reality, hate his own Flesh, but nourishes
and cherishes it.

NO Man, i. e. no one considered as a Man, or worthy the Name of a Man, or as
answering to the proper Definition of a Man, Man is a reasonable Creature: Or,
as some choose to say, He is a religious Creature, having in his Nature, some
Sense, Belief and Dread of the Deity. -- Now, no such Man, did ever yet hate
his own Flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it.
did ever yet hate his own Flesh, or his own Body; nay, but he is so from
hating, that he nourishes and cherishes it; being very desirous to have the
Life of it prolonged -- So that we may make this OBSERVATION from the Words,
viz.

THAT it is an unquestionable Truth, that no Man, while in his right Senses,
and so long as he retained the Reason and Understanding of a Man, ever yet
hated his own Flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it.

I SUPPOSE, I need to say but little for the Confirmation of the Doctrine; the
Improvement of it is what I especially intend. -- However, it is proper that
something be offered in Proof of the Point. -- Wherefore,

1st. THE Truth of the Doctrine appears from the Law of Self-preservation,
which is implanted in the Nature of Man, as well as of the Bruits. -- This Law
of Nature, implanted by the God of Nature, inclines and urges every Man, while
in his right Mind, to endeavor the lengthening out of his own Life, as also
that he may enjoy the Comforts of Life. Nothing in the World is so near and
dear to him as himself, and his own Life: And this is owing to his Nature and
Constitution, and therefore is transmitted from Generation to Generation: So
that, it is a Truth, although spoken by the Father of Lies, and of Liars (for
Liars sometimes speak the Truth) viz. Skin for Skin, yea, all that a Man has,
will he give for his Life. Job 2.4. Men commonly love themselves, more than
their nearest Relatives, even, than their own Children, though they be pieces of
themselves: And moreover, they will not only hazard their Estates, but give
them away, to save their Lives. -- And the true Reason of this, is, because
Self-preservation is a powerful, commanding Principle in the Hearts of Men, so
long as they retain their right Senses. And,

2dly. THE Truth of the Doctrine further appears from our own Observation and
Experience: -- As for instance, how strenuously will Men oppose an Adversary,
when endeavoring to deprive them of their Lives? They will kill one, yea,
many, if possible, rather than be killed themselves: Nor is it uncommon for Men
to rejoice and glory in the Slaughter of those who seek their Lives. -- And I
may add, that when any are taken Captive by a barbarous Enemy, they (and also
their Friends) think nothing too much to be given for their Redemption, because
they are daily in fear of losing their Lives. -- And then, as to the Means of
supporting the Body; because Men find, that the Body stands in need of Meat,
Drink and Clothing, and cannot, in an ordinary Way, subsist without them;
therefore they labor with all Diligence, and strain every Nerve, to procure
the same; insomuch, that some Men need to be called upon to slack their Pace,
and to be more moderate in the Pursuit of these Things: They don't consider the
Danger of excessive and immoderate Labor; but use their Bodies, as though their
Strength was the Strength of Stones, and as though they thought their Flesh was
Brass: Alas! how many, while they labor for the Body, are, by their
Imprudence, actually destroying it; and yet, all the while, they toil in Love
to the Body, and to the Supports and Conveniences of the present Life. -- And
furthermore, if a Limb be broken, or if the Body be seized with some Distemper,
which threatens it is Dissolution, then, the Physician or the Surgeon is called
for in great haste, and no Cost shall be spared for the obtaining of Relief:
And the true Reason of all this, is, because, commonly speaking, nothing is so
dreaded by Mankind, as Death; and therefore, Death is styled the King of
Terrors. Job 18.14. Yea, Death is so terrible to Nature, that many are all
their Lifetime, subject unto Bondage, through fear of Death. Heb. 2.15. The very
sight of a Corp's is ghastly; Abraham therefore sought to bury the dead Body of
his well-beloved Sarah out of his Sight. Genesis 23.4. But when we feel our own
Souls about to leave the Body, how great Reluctance shall we then find? -- Yea,
our Savior himself, when Death was approaching, prayed, saying, Mat. 26.39. O
my Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me! For, as Man, he could
not but be averse to Suffering and Death: This shows, that He was touched with
the feeling of our Infirmities, and that He was tempted as we are, yet without
Sin; for, He referred himself entirely to his Father's Will. -- In short, so
strict is the Union between Soul and Body, that whatever affects the Body,
affects the Soul also: For, the Body is not only the Soul's intimate Friend,
but even it is House and Habitation; as also it is Instrument, by which it does
it is Business in the World, both natural and religious.

BUT probably, some will object and say, there are several Passages of
Scripture, which seem to contradict what has been now advanced. -- As for
instance; Job said, Chap. 10.1. My Soul is weary of my Life -- To which I
reply, that this was owing to a fit of Impatience: And yet it should be
remarked, that he did not intend, that he was weary of his Life simply
considered; but only, that he was weary of such a Life of Pain and Trouble: So
that, though he was weary of his Affliction, yet strictly speaking, not of his
Life. -- Again, it is also written in Prove. 8. ult. All they that hate me, love
Death. -- I answer, the meaning of this is, that they love Death in it is
Causes, i. e. they love that which will end in Death, and put that away from
them which would end in Life. -- Again, it is said in Heb. 11.35. Some were
tortured, not accepting Deliverance: And in like manner, we read in Rev. 12.11.
They loved not their Lives unto the Death. -- I reply, this intends, that they
would not accept Deliverance on the Terms proposed, viz. to renounce the true
Religion, and embrace a false one: Their Love to their own Lives was overcome
by a stronger Affection to Christ, insomuch, that in his Cause, they could
freely lay them down: And agreably, the Apostle Paul said, Acts 20.24. I count
not my Life dear to my self, so that I may finish my Course with Joy. He was
willing, not only to spend his Life in Labor, but also to lay it down in
Martyrdom: And of the same mind were all the other holy Martyrs; for, though Life
was sweet to them, yet they were determined to die for Christ, rather than to
deny him, and actually did so; and therein complied with the Term of
Discipleship, laid down by Christ, in Luke 14.26. -- So that the Law of
Self-preservation did bear Rule in them, until it was overruled by another and
higher Law.

IF it be further said by way of Objection, that some Persons make an higher
account of their Honor, than of their own Lives; namely, such Men who agree to
decide their Controversy by way of Duel. -- I reply briefly, that both he who
makes, and he that accepts the Challenge, are infatuated: So far from being in
the regular Exercise of Reason, that their unbridled Appetites and Passions
have the Empire over Reason and Conscience. -- But then I shall add, that
notwithstanding Madness is in their Hearts, yet their Love of Life is in no
measure diminished; for, doubtless, each one nourishes in himself a fond
Desire and Hope, that he shall vanquish and survive his Antagonist.

ONCE more, it may perhaps seem very inconsistent, that Self-preservation
should be a Principle in Nature, and yet some Persons actually destroy their
own Lives, for fear only of being reduced to Penury. -- I reply, that all those
Persons (if there have been any such) were too thoughtful for the Body, and the
Life that now is; and the continued Thoughtfulness and Anxiety of their Minds,
arising partly from bodily Infirmities, and partly from Losses and
Disappointments, was so very great and perplexing, as in Conjunction with the
Suggestions of the busy Adversary, to over-balance the said Law of
Self-preservation, and even all their intellectual Powers; and then, if God
permits, they are led captive by that malicious Enemy of their's, at his Will:
And thus, the Sorrow of the World works Death. 2 Cor. 7.10. -- But I hasten
to that which I chiefly intend, viz. the

IMPROVEMENT.
FIRST, We may here see the Wisdom, and the Kindness of God, in putting a
Principle of Self-preservation, in the Nature of Man. -- This, certainly, ought
to be acknowledged with all Thankfulness; for, if Men were careless of their
own Lives, they would be void of any Motive to regular Actions: But now, they
have within themselves a constant Spur to Diligence in some lawful Calling,
that so, the beloved Body may be supported, and be continued in a Capacity for
Service: And thus, not only Individuals, but the Commonwealth is upheld and
preserved in due Order: Whereas, without this Principle in Man's Nature, all
things would quickly go into Confusion. -- True indeed, this Law of Nature, by
reason of Corruption within, and of Temptations from without, is often
exceedingly perverted (and the like may be said of every other Talent) for
alas! how irregular and sinful is Self-love in the most of Men! For, self, yea,
carnal self is their Idol: They love to gratify their own Lusts; and are
Lovers of Pleasures, more than Lovers either of God or Man: They make Provision
for the Flesh, that so, they may fulfill the Lusts thereof: And this brings in a
long Train of Sins and Mischiefs; as may be learned from 2 Timothy 3. begin. --
And yet, if Man was wholly destitute of the principle of Self-love, and
Self-preservation, this World would be in reality, no better than a larger
Bedlam. -- In a Word, it highly concerns us all to beg of God, that He would be
pleased, to turn Self-love into a right Channel: That is, that He would, by his
Grace, dispose and enable us to have and maintain a due Regard to our own
spiritual, as well as temporal Weal: And that, for this End, "He would put his
Fear in our Hearts; or, that we may be his Workmanship, created in Christ
Jesus, unto good Works."

SECONDLY, From what has been said, we also learn, that it becomes each of us
to be very thankful to God, for his continuing to us, our Reason and
Understanding, and so, a Desire of our own Preservation in Life. -- This is
wholly owing to the divine Goodness: And a very great Favor it is; for, what
Pleasure could we take in Life, if we were become indifferent, whether we enjoy
it, or not? But it would be still much more sad, if Life was become a Burden to
us -- Job acknowledged, not only, that God had granted him Life; but moreover,
that by the divine Visitation, his Spirit was preserved. Chap. 10.12. That is,
God not only preserved his bodily Life, but also continued to him his Powers of
Reason. For, God is the Father of our Spirits; and as He has endued us with
intellectual Faculties, so we are indebted to Him, for Power to exercise and
improve the same. And agreeably, when the Apostle Paul says, in Acts 17.28. In
Him we live and move. -- His meaning is, all our Springs of Motion and Action,
both as we are living Creatures, and as we are moral Agents, are from God: And
indeed, the regular Motion of the Mind depends, under God, very much on the
good Constitution and Health of the Body; and therefore, the Disorder of the
Mind, when it becomes habitual, is commonly owing to some Indisposition of
Body: So then, when we acknowledge God, as the Health of our Countenances, we
may not omit to praise Him also, for the Order and Vigor of our Minds. -- You
are sensible, my Hearers, that many Persons, of each Sex, have, in hope of
finding Relief, been bro't from other Towns, into this Parish, who were
disordered in their Intellectuals. -- Which I now mention, to excite us unto
Thankfulness, for the Enjoyment of our own Understanding; for, what more
lamentable Objects than those abovementioned, can be presented before us?
Surely, the Loss of our Reason is to be dreaded and deprecated, much more than
Poverty, or Pain, or any other bodily Calamity: Because, if this should be our
unhappy Case, we shall then become a Burden, if not a Terror, both to ourselves
and others; and consequently unfit for the Service both of God and Man. -- You
remember the Story of King Nebuchadnezzar, how he was punished for his Pride
and Haughtiness: Deprived, not only of his Honor as a King, but even as a Man
also; for he became a Brute in the Shape of a Man: A Beast's Heart was given to
him, i. e. the Inclination and Appetite of a Beast; and accordingly, his
Dwelling was with the Beasts of the Field, and he fed on Grass as the Oxen. See
Dan. 4th Chap. -- And it is alike easy for the most High, to deprive any, yea,
all of us, of this invaluable Talent, viz. the Reason and Understanding of Men,
and to rank us also among the Beasts of the Field. -- And O, that we may not
abuse our Reason, to the Indulgence of Pride, or of any other Lust, lest God be
provoked to deprive us of it! But, on the other hand, let us be advised to use
and improve it to the best Purposes, even to provide for Eternity, now, while
we are in good bodily Health; and this the rather, because it is very
uncertain, whether we shall, by a fit of Sickness, have previous Notice given
to us, of our Dissolution: And if this shall be our Case, yet, how common is it
for Persons, at such a Time, to be seized with a Delirium, and thereby rendered
incapable of serious Reflection, and sincere Repentance and of every thing,
that has a Tendency to promote the Welfare of our never-dying Souls. -- Today,
therefore, if you will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts, as in the
Provocation. Heb. 3.7, 8.

THIRDLY, We may further infer from what has been said, that commonly speaking,
such Persons who offer Violence to their own Lives, have not at that time, the
due Exercise of their Reason. -- They are destitute of natural Affection; have
lost, not only, that Love which they once had to their Relatives and other
Friends, but even to themselves also: And in this respect, they degrade
themselves, even below the Rank of the Beasts that perish: For, it is natural
to these, in their several Kinds, to protect both themselves and their Young,
as much as lays in their Power.

AND now, it may not be though it amiss to digress so far as to say something here
of the Folly and Madness of all wilful Sinners Eccl. 9.3. Madness is in their
Heart while they live; and after that they go to the dead. -- You may justly
look upon it, as an Evidence of grievous Madness, for a Person to hang or drown
himself; and is it not an high Degree of Madness, for Persons, by their
shameful Intemperance, or any other Irregularities of Life, to beget and
nourish such Diseases in the Body, and quite contrary to all Advice, as will
prove the Cause of it is Overthrow; although not so suddenly, yet as certainly, as
though it was effected by some bloody Weapon? -- But then, their Folly and
Madness appears, not only in destroying their own Health and Lives, but
moreover in despising and even destroying their own Souls. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10 --
Yea the Reason why the more sober part of Mankind are so negligent of their
Souls, is, because they don't improve the Understanding which God has given
them, as they ought, nor as they might: Although they know better, yet instead of
minding the One thing needful, they postpone the same to their secular
Concerns, and use Religion as a thing only by the Bye: And these, though not
scandalous as others, yet are in the Way to utter Ruin. Mat. 5.20. Except your
Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye
shall in no Case, enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. -- Ah! it is matter of the
deepest Lamentation, that so large a Number of each Sort remain in a spiritual
Lethargy; and though they are often advertised of their Danger, yet persist in
their evil Way. -- O, that we may all show ourselves Men, by walking up to that
Light which God is giving to us! For, otherwise, we may be said to destroy
ourselves, and our Blood will be on our own Heads. -- But I must hasten on to
say,

FOURTHLY, From what we have heard, let us be advised to be very cautious, lest
we give just Occasion unto any to say concerning us, that we are so unnatural,
as to hate, or even to neglect, our own Bodies. -- Although the Soul demands and
deserves our first and principal Care and Concern, as was, just now observed,
yet the Body may not be disregarded. -- Indeed, it must be granted, that while
we are making Provision for the Welfare of the Soul, we are also acting a wise
part, in behalf of the Body; because, as to the true Believer, his whole Man,
"the Body as well as the Soul, is united to Christ, and partakes in the
Benefits of his Purchase: It Is bought with the same Price, sanctified by the
same holy Spirit, interested in the same Promises, and designed for the same
Glory:" So that, although it must sleep for a Season in the Dust; yet, shall be
raised again, and be fashioned in some Degree, or, according to it is Measure,
like to the Savior's glorious Body: And in Conjunction with the Soul, shall
partake in the Felicity of the heavenly Paradise. -- But notwithstanding this,
yet, we may not take upon us, like Hermits, to retire from the World, and
devote ourselves to religious Solitude; but must consider the Body, as
consisting of Flesh and Blood, etc. and provide for it accordingly: Our
heavenly Father knows that we have need of all these things; these necessary
things, Food and Raiment; and He allows us Time, and has also enjoined it upon
us, as our Duty, by Diligence in our Calling, and an humble Dependence on his
Blessing, to provide for the Body. -- Self-preservation (I say) is enjoined by
the Law of Nature, and of Scripture too; both of which are the Law of God: And
therefore, the Apostle fitly styles such as were idle, disorderly Persons; and
also gave in Commandment, that if any would not work, neither should he eat. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10, 11. -- In a Word, all such who take not a due Care to provide for
themselves, and for their Families; but indulge themselves in santering from
House to House, have denied the Faith, and are worse than Infidels. 1 Timothy 5.8.

BUT to come at that which I further intend, and which the late sorrowful Event
obliges me, to take a more special Notice of, namely, seeing it is a Sin (only)
to neglect to make suitable Provision for the Body, it is easy to infer and
conclude, that it is a very heinous Transgression, actually to destroy the Life
of it. -- It Is Sin, in the sight of God, for any in a Passion, to wish for
Death; or even to entertain and indulge in ourselves, any Thought relating to
Self-Murder: For, such a Thought ought to be rejected immediately, and with the
utmost Detestation, lest it spread, like the Cloud (1 Kings 18.44, 45.) which
appeared at the first, no larger than a Man's hand, but in a little Time,
blackned the whole Heaven. -- Which leads me to say, that it is still more
heinous, when Persons begin to purpose, or intend to do the thing; and then, to
devise or contrive in what Way and Manner, and in what particular Place, they
had best to effect it. -- But then, to proceed actually to perpetrate the
Crime, is heinous and horrible in the highest Degree; the most barbarous and
inhuman of all bodily Murders.

BUT that we may clearly discern the horrid Evil of this Sin, I shall offer a
few things to Consideration, from those Topics, which are commonly made use
of. -- Particularly,

1st. IT IS a Sin "directly contrary to the Law of Self-preservation;" which, as
I said before, is the Law of God: For, God put into Man, in his original
Constitution, an Inclination to love Life, and a Desire to preserve it; and
therefore it is unnatural, and consequently sinful, for any to go about to
destroy it.

2dly. IT IS also repugnant to the written and revealed Will of God; the sixth
Commandment in the moral Law, you know, is, Thou shall not kill. And this, as
our Catechism well expresses it, forbids the taking away of our own Life, or
the Life of our Neighbor unjustly, or whatsoever tends thereunto. Now, here,
the glorious Lawgiver, who has strictly forbidden the taking away the Life of
our Neighbor unjustly; has also forbidden, on any Consideration whatever, the
taking away of our own Life: For, though we are commanded to love our Neighbor
as ourselves, yet not more than ourselves: And therefore, if we may not kill
him, then surely, we may not kill ourselves. And further,

3dly. IT IS not only a practical Rebellion against the Commandment, "but
moreover against the Government of God." It Is a taking of his Work into our own
Hands; when, we are not our own, but His; and ought to be willing to be at his
Disposal in the World, and not go about to dispose of our Lives at our own
Pleasure. -- It is worthy to be remembered, that the most High retains his
Propriety in his Creatures; all Souls, says He, are mine. Ezekiel. 18.4. The Earth
is the Lord's and the Fullness thereof; the World and they that dwell therein.
Psalm. 24.1 -- In short, He that made us, is most rightfully the Lord of our
Lives; and it is most fit that our Times should be in His Hands, and not in our
own: How dare any then, to assume to themselves his Prerogative, so as to cut
off their own Lives? Surely, so to do, is no less than a despising of his
Authority and Dominion; and practically to say, we are our own Lords, and will
not be controlled, no, not by God Himself; which is the very Spirit and
Language of the Devil and his Angels.

4thly. THIS Sin carries in it, not only undutifulness to God, and a trampling
on his Authority and Government; "but moreover, the blackest Ingratitude:" --
It Is a vile Abuse of the Goodness and Kindness of God toward Man: For, Life is
certainly a great Favor, such as we ought to be very thankful for, unto Him,
who vouchsafes the same unto us, who is no other but the most High; and
therefore, one of his Titles is, that He is the Preserver of Men: -- Nor
indeed, may any worldly Enjoyment be preferred before it. Though the loving
Kindness of God is better than Life, even in it is best Estate; yet no earthly
Accommodations may be compared with it: All that a Man has will he give for
his Life: Now, the greater any Kindness is, the more heinous is their Sin, who
cast Contempt upon it: And this is what they are most flagrantly guilty of, who
offer Violence to their own Lives. -- Moreover,

5thly. THE Heinousness of this Sin appears, in that it implies in it, "the
greatest Disrespect and Unkindness toward our Relatives, and even to the whole
Community, or Society, unto which we belong." -- No man is born for himself
alone, but also for the Benefit of the Family, and of the Community, of which
he is a Member; and unto which he is, or ought to be, in some Degree
serviceable. -- But now, by destroying his own Life, he wholly deprives both
the Family and Commonwealth of that Benefit. -- And I may add, that because
hereby an Injury is offered to human Society, and a Contempt cast on the Law,
both of God and Man, therefore civil Governments, in christian Countries,
disallow a decent Burial unto such: And that, not only as a public Testimony of
their Resentment of the Crime, but moreover, as a Warning to Survivors, that no
other may, in like manner, offend.

6thly. THIS Sin further appears to be very heinous, in that, such who become
guilty of it, "render themselves wholly incapable of advancing the declarative
Glory of God in the World; and consequently deprive themselves of the
Opportunity to be laying up their Treasure in Heaven. -- Together with the Day
of Life, they put an End also to the Day of Grace; for, there is no Work nor
Device, Wisdom or Knowledge in the Grave. -- What do we live for, but to serve
and honor our Lord and Master here in the World; and in so doing, prepare for
his Coming? What Madness is it then, for any, with their own Hands, to put an
End to the space, which God is giving them wherein to repent, and to work out
their own Salvation: -- We, who hear the Gospel-call and Invitation, are
distinguishingly favored, and as our Savior expresses it, are exalted to
Heaven: And what, shall any such make so light of this their Privilege, as to
exclude themselves from the Sanctuary of God, and no more hear the joyful
Sound, viz. by putting a final Period to their own Lives? O, how ungrateful are
they to their best Friend and Benefactor, and how unkind and even barbarous to
themselves! Without Fear, and as void of Wit. Again,

7thly. THE heinous Nature of this Sin may be further argued from the
Consideration, that it is, in the highest Degree, gratifying unto Satan. -- He
is called the Evil one, and the Devil, because he takes Delight in rebelling
against God; and in soliciting the Children of Men so to do. Being abandoned by
God, for his first act of Rebellion, he became an avowed Enemy unto God, and to
all that is good. -- And now, seeing he delights only in Sin and Mischief, we
may fairly infer, that it is most highly pleasing to him, when he can prevail
with any Person, to destroy his own Life; for, this fatal Act is big with both
these kinds of Evil: And accordingly, he is said to be, not only a Liar, but a
Murderer from the Beginning: Not only at the Beginning, by tempting our first
Parents to eat the forbidden Fruit; and truly that very Sin bro't Death into
the World; for, by one Man, Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin; and so
Death passed upon all: And therefore Satan was, in effect, the Murderer of all
Mankind. -- But moreover, he is a Murderer from the Beginning, i. e. as he was,
so he continues to be the Murderer of Mankind: Although he knows, that all the
Children of Men are under the Sentence of Death, yet, is not content therewith;
and therefore seeks to hasten on the Dissolution of one and another, and if
possible, by the most unnatural Means; hoping thereby, to destroy both Body and
Soul, at one Blow: And agreeably, he is styled our Adversary, and is said to
walk about, seeking whom he may devour: And in this respect, he is compared to
roaring Lion, hungry, strong and cruel. 1 Pet. 5.8. His whole Design is to prey
upon, and devour the Children of Men; and is therefore restless in his
malicious Endeavors. -- Now, I say, seeing this apostate Spirit, this first
Rebel, is most highly gratified, when he can prevail with any Person, to
destroy his own Life; we may from thence conclude, that the Sin is very
heinous: For, the greater the Sin is, the more is he delighted at the
Commission of it. -- Once more,

8thly. THIS Sin further appears to be highly aggravated, in that they who are
guilty of it, "expose themselves to the Hazard of eternal Damnation." -- But
pray, don't mistake me; for, I don't pretend that it appertains to me, or to
any other Man, or Number of Men, absolutely to determine the future and
everlasting State of those, or of any other Persons: This is the sole
Prerogative of Him, who is appointed to be the Judge of both the quick and
dead: -- But yet, give me leave to say, here, that according to the Light which
we receive from the tenor of the holy Scriptures, their Case seems to be
extremely hazardous: For, as it appears to us, they expire, not only in the
Neglect of Repentance toward God, and of Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ;
but moreover, in the actual Violation of that express Command of God, in Exodus
20.13. Thou shall not kill. And thereby they practically put Contempt on the
Authority and Government of God, as also despise his Goodness, in granting them
Life, and a space to repent in, as was before shown. -- And therefore, however
Satan, by his sly and artful Influence on the Imagination, may delude and
beguile them, with a pleasing Dream, of their passing into a much better State
than the present; yet, they cannot (at their Exit) be reasonably supposed, to
have any just Ground to expect or hope to escape the second Death; but abundant
Reason to fear the reverse. And agreeably, we read in 1 John 3.15. Ye know,
that no Murderer has eternal Life abiding in him. That is, a Murderer has not
the Principle of eternal Life abiding in him. -- And seeing this is the Case of
him, who, in his Heart, destroys his Brother, what Reason has the Man who
designedly and actually destroys his own Life, to imagine, that he has a living
or an holy Principle within himself? For surely, he ought to set as high a
Value on his own Life, as on the Life of his Brother: For, although we are
commanded to love our Neighbor as ourselves, yet, not more than ourselves, as
was before observed.

SO then, although I am persuaded, that when Persons are betrayed into the said
unnatural Crime, they are, by one Means or other, generally disordered in Mind,
yet, I dare not send abroad any thing which shall have even the remotest
Tendency to abate the Horror, with which we ought to view every Attempt of this
Nature: For, if any thing be offered to the Public, tending, in the least
Measure, to extenuate the Guilt of this Enormity, though ever so cautiously
expressed, there may be great Danger, that in time to come, some Persons in
extreme Dejection of Mind, will improve the same to their own Wounding. Or,
that they will, upon perusing the same, be, by reason thereof, the more easily
induced by the busy and subtle Adversary, to give way to his Temptation. --
Though nothing can be said that will be to the future Advantage of the dead, for
they are gone to their long home; yet all possible Care should be taken, and
the utmost Caution used, in behalf of the living, to prevent their being taken
in the Snare of the Devil.

BUT then, I shall add, that although the said Crime should be described in all
it is awful and terrible Consequences, that so, every Thought which leads to it,
may be rejected immediately, and with the greatest Abhorrence, as being
unnatural, and diabolical; and moreover, though in speaking of the Crime, a
Reference is unavoidably had to the Criminals in general: Yet, whenever mention
is made of this, and the other particular Persons, who have been, in this
manner, overcome of Evil, it seems most safe, and best becoming a Christian, to
be silent with respect to their fixed and everlasting State, and to be content
to leave them to their Judge; who, we are sure, will never do the least Wrong
to any of his Creatures. -- And let us all learn to look at home, and to
examine our own State, whether we be, as yet, passed from Death to Life: It Is
truly a dark Symptom on People, when they indulge themselves (which alas! is
too common) in censuring and condemning others; and yet, cannot but know, that
themselves are very guilty in some other respects. Jer. 8.6. I hearkened and
heard, but they spoke not aright: No Man repented him of his Wickedness,
saying, what have I done? Every one turned into his Course, as the Horse
rusheth into the Battle. -- But this may suffice for the fourth Use. -- To
proceed,

FIFTHLY, Seeing the said Crime is unnatural and very heinous, we may infer,
that those Pleas or Excuses, which are advanced by any Persons in favor of it,
are quite vain and groundless.

HERE I shall make mention of three or four, which have occurred, and endeavor
to show the Vanity of them. -- For instance,

1st. SOME, it seems, plead, "that there are Examples upon Record, in the holy
Scriptures, of several Persons, who destroyed their own Lives," namely, King
Saul, who fell on his own Sword: And Zimri, who seeing himself in eminent
Hazard of being taken, and put to Death by Omri, he went into the Palace of the
King's house, and burnt the King's house over him with fire, and died. 1 Kin.
16.18. -- And Ahithophel, who hanged himself. -- And Judas, who having
strangled himself, he fell headlong, and all his Bowels gushed out. Acts 1.18.

TO this I reply; we may not imagine, that these Examples are left on Record in
the Scriptures, for our Direction, or that we may imitate them: Nay, but for a
Warning to all who shall read them, that we may not run into their
Transgressions, or any other like them, and so perish, as they did. -- Examples
are to be followed so far as they are good, but no further: For, we ought to be
governed by the Precepts of God's Word, and not by the Examples therein
recorded; but only when those Examples quadrate with the Precepts. -- And it
seems the more strange, that any should plead these Examples, as though they were
worthy of Imitation, seeing they were all of them, ungodly Men; as appears from
the Character given of them, in the Scriptures. -- Nor do I remember, that we
have an account in Scripture, of more than One, who may come under the
Denomination of a good Man, that can be said to put an end to his Life, namely,
Sampson. -- But then, as to him, it may be said, (1.) That his next or
immediate Design was not to destroy himself, but his inveterate Enemies: And as
he was a public Person, being Judge in Israel, he had a just Right to endeavor
the Destruction of his own, and the People's Oppressors: But this, having lost
his Eyes, he had no Prospect of effecting, unless he was willing to share with
them, and to lose his own Life in the Overthrow; and therefore, Hero, or
Martyr-like, rather than let slip so fair an Opportunity, to testify his
Loyalty to the Most High, and Love to his Country, he readily resigned his
Life, and his All, to the Will of God. And accordingly (2.) He prayed, that God
would not only remember him, and strengthen him to do Execution on his Enemies;
but moreover, that he might die with them; i. e. he desired, with Submission to
the Will of God, that he might, at that Time, and in that Manner, finish his
Course. And (3.) God fulfilled his Request; for, it was a Prayer of Faith, and
of an ardent Zeal for the Glory of God, and the Deliverance of his People: As
God had put in his Heart, to undertake the pulling down of the House, so
likewise disposed him freely to resign his own Life, and to pray as aforesaid.
-- It appears evident to me, that for the Messiah's sake, God pardoned
Sampson's amorous Follies, and all his other Transgressions, and received him
into his Favor: And in Token thereof, He gave a gracious Answer to each of his
Petitions. -- Once more (4.) It is acknowledged by all, that Sampson was an
eminent Type of Christ, in that, he willingly resigned his own Life for the
Benefit of Israel, as Christ did his Life in behalf of his People: And as
Sampson pulled down (as it is justly supposed) the Temple of Dagon, and at the
same Time, and in the very same Act, died himself; so Christ has, in effect,
pulled down the Devil's Kingdom, and through his own Death, has destroyed him
that had the Power of Death, that is the Devil. Heb. 2.14. -- Our Savior, in
his Lifetime, cast many Devils out of those who were possessed: But at his
Death, He obtained a most glorious Victory over all the Powers of Darkness; as
it is said concerning Sampson, Judge. 16.30. That the dead which he slew at his
Death, were more than they, which he slew in his Life. -- Upon the whole, it is
abusive and slanderous for any, to indict Sampson, as properly a Felo de se,
or, as obstinately guilty of Self-Murder; and therefore this Example can be of
no avail.

AND if any should be so weak, or rather wicked, as to make mention of our
Savior himself, in justification of any Persons taking away their own Lives,
pleading, that He said, John 10.15, 18. I lay down my Life for the Sheep: -- No
Man takes it from me; but I lay it down of myself, etc.

I REPLY; that our Savior's Design, in those Words, is only to teach us, that
He was perfectly free and voluntary in his Sufferings and Death: And truly, if
He had not been so, his offering would have been of no Value. None could demand
his Life of Him in a due Course of Law; nor could any extort it from Him by
Force: He laid it down of Himself, or, of his own free Will, and therefore He
said, Lo, I come to do thy Will, O God. -- But now, although He freely
surrendered himself, yet, He did not actually destroy his own Life, no; but
this was done by the Jews, in Conjunction with the Romans; as all the
Evangelists testify.

THUS, having considered the Plea taken from Example; I shall proceed to speak
of the remaining Excuses, relating to the said Crime: -- Wherefore,

2dly. SOME, "because they are quite weary of the Fatigues or Toils, and other
the many Troubles and Sorrows of this World, therefore hope they may be
excused, if by some Means, they can wholly set themselves at Liberty." -- To
which I reply, That these Troubles and Sorrows can never justify any in the
said Act of Suicide, or Self-Murder; and the Reason of it is, our Maker and
Sovereign has made it to be the Duty of us all, to glorify Him by a patient
Continuance in well-doing: And our Savior has taught us, that if we would be
his Disciples, we must deny ourselves, take up the Cross, and follow him. Matt.
16.24. Observe here, our Duty is to deny ourselves, not murder ourselves; no,
but take up the Cross; and not go out of the Way of Duty, either to meet, or to
miss it. -- It most certainly argues an high Degree, either of Pride, or of
Impatience, or of both, for any (not wholly bereaved of Reason) to destroy
their own Lives, because of that Condition of Life, which the Judge of all the
Earth has, in his all-governing Providence, ordered out unto them: Our Minds
ought to be bro't to our Condition; and we may not murmur against God, nor
offer Violence to ourselves, because of the Difficulties which attend us. -- If
our Circumstances be not so easy and comfortable, as we would have them to be;
yet, they are such, as God will have them to be: And if we, as in Duty bound,
shall resign ourselves to his Pleasure and Wisdom, we shall then be in the way
to be supported under all our Troubles, and also to have them sanctified to us;
and then they will prove to be Mercies; for many have had Reason to bless God
for the Benefit received by Affliction. -- And I shall add, that it seems very
strange, that any should entertain a Though It of dispatching their own Lives, for
the sake of getting out of the reach of the Troubles and Sorrows of this World:
For, what can such Persons expect, but only to take a Leap, from one Fire to
another; and from a lesser, to one unspeakably greater? For, while they are
influenced by a selfish and mean Principle, their unhumbled Hearts are also, at
the same Time, rising up against the Providence and Government of God. -- Let
me forewarn my Hearers, that it is one of the Wiles of Satan, viz. to suggest,
that it is much better for a Person, to put an End to his Days, than to live
any longer in the midst of so great Vexation and Sorrow; and alas! many have
been overcome hereby: -- But let us bear in mind, that while our Adversary
seeks to aggravate our Troubles, and to perplex our Minds about them, much more
than otherwise they would be; he, at the same time, is industrious to keep out
of our View, the much greater Sorrows of the second Death: The god of this
World blinds the Minds of all those, who are taken in this Snare: -- Wherefore,
as you have a Value for your own Souls, be entreated to preserve in yourselves,
a steady Belief of the Scripture-Doctrine of a future State of Retribution,
viz. both of Rewards and Punishments: In the One, the Righteous shall eat the
Fruit of their Doings; and in the other, the Wicked shall have the Reward of
their Hands given to them. Isa. 3.10, 11. -- Believe me, if you shall
discredit, or if you only begin to entertain a Doubt in your own Minds,
respecting the Truth of that Doctrine, you will be in very great Danger of being,
in a short Time, taken captive by your Enemy, at his Will. -- The very first
Step, which the old Serpent took to seduce our Mother Eve, was, to lead her to
discredit the Truth of the Threatening, saying, Ye shall not surely die: And he
observes the same Method still, with respect to her Children. -- So then, let
us adhere closely to the Voice of God, contained in the Scriptures, as our
Savior, by his own Example, has taught us to do. Matt. 4th Chap -- It Is an old
Observation, and a very true one, "That if we once suppose it possible, that
there may be Falsehood or Fallacy in any Part of God's Word, a Door is thereby
opened to downright Infidelity." -- But I may not enlarge -- Wherefore,

3dly. SOME, it seems, have pleaded for the Lawfulness of Persons putting an
End to their own Lives, when thereby, "they may avoid a more cruel kind of
Death, from the Hands of others." -- But I reply, that neither will this excuse
any Man: For, it is a Scripture-Maxim, not to do Evil, that Good may come of
it. Romans 3.8. Now, it ought to be remembered, that the Act of Self-Murder is
prohibited absolutely, or, without any Toleration or Exception; and therefore
we may not be our own Judges and Executioners, under the Pretense of a more
easy, and a less public kind of Death. -- If we have committed some Crime
worthy of Death* then it becomes us to yield ourselves up to Justice: And if we
suffer, or are in Danger of suffering unjustly or wrongfully, we ought to
commit our Cause to the Judge of all the Earth, and leave it with Him, to do us
Justice, in his own Way and Time, when we cannot, in a lawful Manner, obtain
Redress from Men: -- Nor may we doubt, if we suitably commit our Way to Him,
and cast our Burden on Him, but that He will, sooner or later, bring forth our
Righteousness as the Light, and our Judgment as the Noonday. Psalm. 37.5, 6. --
We read in Acts 16.27. That the Jailer, in his Fright, drew his Sword, and was
about to kill himself, supposing, the Prisoners were fled: And his Design
herein was to prevent a more terrible kind of Death, which he was sensible, he
was liable unto, for letting the Prisoners escape: But Paul prevented him, ver.
28. He cried with a loud Voice, saying, do thyself no Harm, for we are all
here. Q. D. Do not sin against thine own Body: Be not thus cruel to that Flesh,
which you ought to nourish and cherish. And agreeably, the same Apostle
teaches all of us, in the Words of my Text. -- Once more,

4thly. SOME, it seems, have been inclined to think, whether it would not be
much better for them, to put an End to Life, than to live longer, "because they
find, that they sin every Day," and so are continually increasing their own
Guilt, and at the same time, are doing Dishonor to the Name of God. -- To
which I reply, that although this may appear more plausible than those before
mentioned, yet, neither can this justify any Person in the said foul and
unnatural Act: For, as was observed above, it is forbidden absolutely: That is,
there is no Toleration or Liberty granted or allowed to any Person, under any
Pretense whatever, to do this evil Deed. -- If we consider the Felo de se as a
bad Man, then, by destroying his own Life, he actually puts an End to his Day
of Grace, and so puts himself out of the Reach of Mercy: For Mercy itself will
not save us in any other Way, but that only which is propounded and established
in the Gospel, namely, the Way of Repentance toward God, and of Faith toward
our Lord Jesus Christ: And therefore the said Murderer may truly be said to
destroy his own Soul, as well as his Body. -- And I may proceed to say, that if
he has been in Reputation for a good Man; yet, now there is Reason to fear, --
because he has unwarrantably deprived himself of any further Opportunity to
serve and glorify God in that way and manner, which he cannot do in Heaven:
Instead of improving his Life to maintain a spiritual Warfare, and to serve his
Generation according to the Will of God, he, by the said Enormity, greatly
dishonours God, and highly gratifies his Adversary, as also leaves a mark of
Infamy on his own Name, as a Man; and on his Character as a Christian, viz. by
reason of having quitted the Post or Station, which, God, in his Providence,
had placed him; and that (as I said before) in an unwarrantable manner; for
even at the very Time of his Exit, and in the very Method of effecting his
Dissolution, he becomes guilty of an heinous Transgression: So that while he
pretends to be weary of Sin, and to long to be rid of it, he runs further into
the Commission thereof. -- But as I said before, we must be content to leave
him to the Pleasure of his Judge.

MY Friends, if your malicious Adversary shall ever tempt any of you, to the
said horrible Crime of Suicide; and shall, at the same time, insinuate, that
your Aim and End is exactly right and good, provided, your Desire is, that you
may be wholly and forever delivered from that abominable thing (Sin) which the
Soul of God hates; and therefore, you shall certainly find Favor with Him. --
If this (I say) shall, in time to come, be your Case, beware lest you be
deceived and ensnared by the said plausible Insinuation; and therefore, let
this true and weighty Maxim have a constant abode in your Minds, viz. that a
good End can never justify an evil Action, in order to attain that End. -- I
insist upon it, that you never listen to a Temptation, to do evil that good may
come: And I urge this the rather, because I look on this as the most dangerous
of Satan's Devices, I mean with respect to such Persons who are soberly
disposed.

IN a Word, one wilful Transgression, merits eternal Damnation; and therefore
let us shun the very Appearance of, and the least Approach unto it: -- But let
us all learn to be very thankful for Life, and to improve with Care and
Diligence, all our Abilities and Opportunities, so as that, by the Grace of
God, we may keep under our Bodies, and bring them into Subjection, namely, by
crucifying our corrupt Affections and Lusts: And not only die unto Sin, but
also live unto Righteousness. -- But more of this under the next Use, viz.

SIXTHLY, and lastly, Seeing it is unnatural and sinful for any Person to cut
short his Life, let us be advised carefully to avoid all Occasions of, and
whatever has a Tendency to lead us, thereunto. I shall instance here, in a few
Particulars, by way of Direction: -- As,

DIRECT. 1st. Beware of expressing, and even of cherishing in your own Breasts,
any bad Wishes. -- Some Persons, as I have been informed, have given so much
the Loose to their Tongues, as to wish they may die, or, that they may never
speak a Word more, and the like, if what they affirmed, be not the Truth; and
yet, by what afterward appeared, it is evident, that themselves knew it to be a
Falsehood: -- If so, how abominable is this! -- And now, as to such Persons, it
is a Wonder of Mercy, that the God of their Lives did not strike them dead on
the Spot, in token of his Wrath and Vengenance; not only for their wronging the
Truth; but moreover, because of their appealing to Him, in whose Hand their
Breath is, for the Confirmation of their known Falsehood. -- But although their
Lives be spared to them for the present, yet they may justly expect to be
followed with a Curse, on their Names, or Estates, or both: And if not given up
to the Will of their Adversary, and left to destroy their own Lives, which they
have made so very light of; yet, to die an uncommon kind of Death: -- Sin and
Punishment lay at their Door, and will find them out sooner or later, wherever
they go: For, it is written in Prove. 28.13. He that covers his Sins, shall
not prosper. And more especially, such who cover them with a Lie, and adjoin an
Imprecation, or the wishing of a Curse to themselves, if they speak falsely:
Doubtless, their own Tongues, that is, the Sins thereof, shall fall upon them,
and devour them, unless a seasonable and sincere Repentance shall prevent it.
-- And if there be any such Person or Persons in this Assembly. I solemnly
exhort and beseech you, to go and humble yourselves; and in the Way prescribed
in the Gospel, agree with Him, whom you have made to be your Adversary; and do
it quickly, lest He deliver you up to the Executioners of his Justice; and
then, all Liberty for Bail will be at an End. Mat. 5.25, 26. -- And let me
further say, if you have injured or offended any of your Neighbors by your
evil Conduct, whether by Word or Deed, delay not to give christian
Satisfaction: For, this will be, not only to the Honor of God and his holy
Religion, but moreover to your own Credit and Reputation. -- It argues
Ignorance or Pride, or both, for People to be so averse, as commonly they are,
to confess their Faults one to another. As Sin is a Reproach and Disgrace to
any Person or People; so when a Man has by Sin offended, he cannot do himself a
greater Honor, than to make an humble Confession* agreeable to the Nature and
Degree of his Offense, and then, to lead a new Life. James 5.16. Confess your
Faults one to another. Prove. 28.13. He that confesses and forsakes, shall
find Mercy. -- But to return.

I SHALL just add, that all such who are of so unbridled a Tongue, as those
abovementioned* do act, not only a very wicked, but also a very foolish part:
For, no wise Man will give Credit to what they say, so readily, as he would,
provided they omit those direful Wishes, and content themselves to affirm their
Innocence, in a meek and moderate manner: Agreeable to the Direction of the
Apostle James, chap. 5.12. Swear not -- but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay
be Nay, lest ye fall into Condemnation. That is, lest you be afterward
condemned, both by God and your own guilty Consciences. And our Lord himself
has strictly commanded, saying, Matt. 5.37. Let your Communication be Yea, Yea;
Nay, Nay: Q. D. If there be Occasion for it, double your Yea, or your Nay; but
proceed no further in your common Conversation: And He gives this Reason for
it, viz. For, whatsoever is more than these comes of evil. i. e. it comes
from the evil One, and from an evil Heart, and discovers a reigning Vanity in
the Mind. -- I shall close this Direction with the Words of the inspired
Psalmist, in Psalm. 34.12, 13. What Man is he that desires Life, and loves
many Days, -- Keep thy Tongue from evil, and thy Lips from speaking Guile.

DIR. 2. Beware of a vainglorious, or self-confident frame of Spirit. -- Some,
it seems, are much inclined to censure their Neighbors, and to say (and
probably, many say in their Hearts, who do not speak out) that such and such
Persons have gone into gross Enormities; yea, such a Man by Name, has lately
destroyed his own Life: But I am determined, says one and another, that I will
never be guilty of so foul a Transgression: And alas! at the same Time, they,
probably, trust in their Hearts, and place their Confidence entirely in their
own Strength; and therefore, are in great Danger of being left to commit the
same kind of Wickedness. -- I have been told by one and another among us, that
they though it themselves to be sufficiently armed against a particular Sin, viz.
that of Fornication, being fully determined in their Breasts, that no
Temptation whatever should prevail with them, to offend in that manner; and yet
became guilty: And then, they were convinced of their Error, in having been
self-confident; and therefore readily acknowledged, that God was righteous in
leaving them to their own Heart's Lusts, seeing they had neglected Him, and
looked no further than to their own Strength and Resolution -- And alas! the
Apostle Peter was a sad Instance of the Sin and Folly of relying on his own
Zeal and Resolution: He was determined against that Sin in particular, viz. of
denying his Lord and Master; yea, he solemnly declared, that he would die with
Him, rather than deny Him: And yet, within the Space of two or three Hours, he
denied Him; and that, not once only, but twice, yea three times, successively.
-- And his Sin was greatly aggravated, in that, he had fair Warning given him,
of his Danger, by his Master himself: And moreover, the Provocation was but
trifling; for, he was not examined by the Judge, or any of the Officers of the
Court* but only the Standers-by, from whom he had no Reason to fear any Harm:
-- But as then, so now, it is dangerous being in Company with those who are
Enemies to Christ: And this is written for Warning to us, that we be not
self-confident, and so be left to Sin, after the Similitude of Peter's
Transgression. Verily, it concerns us to bear in mind the Words of the Apostle,
in 1 Cor. 10.12. Let him who thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. We
cannot be too diffident of ourselves, nor place too great Confidence on the Lord
Jesus. -- In a Word, whatever particular Sin, we resolve against in our own
Strength; we are in great Danger of being left to that very Sin, how heinous
soever it be.

DIR. 3. Let us also be advised to beware of an anxious Care for the Body. --
Indeed, a moderate and prudent Care ought to be taken of it: But a perplexing
Solicitude is of a fatal Tendency; for, this will lead on to an inordinate Love
of the World: And this kind of Love to the World, or to Money, is the Root of
all Evil, which, while some have coveted after, they have erred from the Faith,
and pierced themselves through with many Sorrows. 1 Timothy 6.10. -- And as this
Love of Money, was formerly the Occasion of the Apostasy of many from the Faith
of Christ; even so, to this Day, it is at the Bottom of many other Sins, which
bring on Mischiefs without Number. For, they that will be rich (who are
resolved upon it) fall into Temptation, and a Snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction and Perdition. 1 Timothy 6.9 -- And
this is one of the Temptations and Snares, which some such Men have fallen
into, namely, to put an End to their Days: For, when a covetous Man meets with
many Disappointments, and great Losses, so as that he begins to imagine, that
he shall be reduced to Penury; then, the subtle and malicious Adversary,
observing his dejected State, steps in, and with Vehemence suggests to him,
that it is much better for him to destroy his own Life, than to live and beg
his Bread, and be had in Contempt among Men: -- And if the Man is so fallen
into the Arrears, as to be in a constant Panick, lest he be apprehended by the
Officer, and be cast into Prison; then, the Adversary has a still greater
Advantage against him. -- And some such Persons, it seems, have been so
followed with Temptation, from Day to Day, till being weary of Life, have
committed that enormous Wickedness, which Humanity and natural Conscience
startle at. -- What was it but the Sin of Covetousness, or an inordinate Love
to Money, that induced Judas to betray his Lord and Master? But when the Wretch
saw that he was condemned by the Sanhedrin, or supreme Council, then, his own
Conscience condemned him for his Treachery, to that degree, that his thirty
Pieces became a Burden to him: Yea, and when he had returned them, then his own
Life was no less grievous; and therefore he soon put an End to it. The Love of
the World was the first moving Cause of this piece of Wickedness, which bro't
on his Destruction, and that by his own Hand: And the same cause, I perceive,
has produced the like fatal Effect as to many others. -- We have need therefore
to beware, lest the Things of the World gain the Ascendence and Empire in our
Souls; for, if so, there is Danger, by reason of Temptations, of their being
the means of choking the Body, as well as of destroying the Soul.

DIR. 4. Let us also beware of the Sin of Despair, lest we be led thereby to
destroy ourselves. -- What was it but a Despair of having their Lives spared,
that moved King Saul, to fall on his Sword; and Ahithophel, to hang himself;
and Zimri, to expose himself to the Flames? And it was an utter Desperation of
finding Mercy for his Soul, that hurried the Traitor Judas, to put an End to
his own Life: -- And by the same Means, the Adversary has prevailed with many,
to destroy themselves, suggesting to them, that their State is hopeless; till
at length, Life becomes a mere Burden to them. -- The Devils themselves do
wholly despair of Relief, and are looking for no other, but Judgment and fiery
Indignation: And so envious and malicious are they, that they would gladly
prevail with all the Children of Men, to entertain and cherish the same
Apprehension concerning themselves; hoping thereby, to hasten on the
Destruction of Soul and Body together. -- Let us be on our Watch therefore
against this Temptation: And not fail of looking on the Gospel-call and
Invitation, as directed unto us, as well as unto others; and be giving
Diligence, that so, by the Grace of God, we may now come to Christ, at his
Call. -- And this leads me to say, that if we would avoid being taken in the
abovementioned Snare, we must beware of another, which the Enemy lays, in the
first place, and is unwearied in his Endeavors to lead People into, and to
continue them in; and this is the Sin of Presumption. -- And accordingly,
nothing is more common than for this Deceiver to insinuate, that because God is
merciful and gracious, therefore there needs no Haste to trouble ourselves,
about making our Peace with Him: The Devil never tells any, that Now is the
accepted Time, Now is the Day of Salvation: But on the other Hand, he tempts
People to idle away their Day of Grace, and Sabbath Days in particular, either
by drowsing away the Day at home, or if they come to the House of God, then to
spend much of the Time in sleeping, or else in a very careless Way and Manner
of hearing. -- And alas! how many are led by their Corruptions, seconded and
improved by the Tempter, to remain quite easy and content with only a formal
going the round of Duty, until by means of the Word, or some Providence of God,
they are awakened to consider of their Ways, and to enquire the Way to Zion,
with their Faces thitherward: Which the busy Adversary observing, he fails not
to improve all his Skill, with a Design to discourage and terrify them;
suggesting, that now it is too late in the Day, for them to expect to find
Mercy: And to give an Edge to his Temptations, he is will not to bring to their
Minds, and enforce with all his Power, those Texts of Scripture, which carry
the most threatening and affrightning Aspects; and in particular, that in Prove.
1.24. and on. -- And provided, they are thereby diverted from their religious
Purpose, and turn again to Folly, as is too often the Case; then, the Enemy
cease to molest them. Luke 11.21. When a strong Man armed keeps his Palace,
his Goods are in Peace. -- But if they continue to be solicitous to secure the
Welfare of their immortal Souls, then he follows them with his Temptations, of
one kind and another, such as are common to the People of God; for, the
Christian's present State is a State of Warfare. Ephesians. 6.12.

BUT then, I shall add, that having, by Observation, informed himself of the
Constitution of particular Persons, he discovers his Cunning, as also his
Cowardice, in assaulting those that are melancholy and timorous in a more
violent Manner: -- And if, at such a time, they are attended with some bodily
Malady, which affects the Brain, as is not uncommon, they are in great Danger
of being overcome, so as to lay violent Hands on themselves; and therefore, a
peculiar Care ought to be, by their Friends, exercised over them. -- Upon the
whole, the longer Persons presume on the Mercy of God, the more Advantage do
they give to the Enemy against themselves: And therefore, as we value our own
Souls; yea, if we love Life, and would see good Days, here in this World, let
us not any longer persist in turning the Grace of God into Wantonness; lest,
for our Obstinacy, God be provoked to take his holy Spirit from us, and to
leave us to the Will of the evil Spirits: -- And if He shall once say, take 'em
Devil; our Case will become helpless, and it had been better for us, not to
have been born. -- He that has Ears to hear, let him hear. -- To proceed,

DIR. 5. Let us beware of the Sin of Discontent, on any Account whatever: For,
remember, this is the very Sin, which the Adversary does, in a peculiar Manner,
graffe his Temptation to Self-Murder upon; vehemently insinuating into the
Minds of those, who are under the Power of it, that they had much better bid
adieu to Life, than to continue to live in so uneasy and restless a Frame:
Death (says he) will put a final Issue unto all this Anxiety and Perplexity,
and for ever set you at perfect Liberty: And at the same time, he endeavors to
hold them in Ignorance or Blindness, respecting the Consequents of their Death:
But if he finds, that they are attended with some Fear in that Regard, then he
suggests to them, either that there is no such Place as Hell; or else, if they
will only cry, before they expire, Lord, have Mercy on us! It shall be well
with them. -- In this Manner, the god of this World blinds the Minds of
Multitudes 2 Cor. 4.4. He hood-winks, or blindfolds them, in order to make a
Prey of 'em: For, he fully knows, that if Persons saw things in their true
Light, he could never prevail with them, to act so inhuman a Part, as that of
taking away their own Lives. -- But now, alas! how many, by reason of their
Discontent, and the ensuing Temptation, have been thrown into so great
Confusion in their own Minds, as wickedly to destroy their Lives, and hazard
their Souls, in order to obtain a Deliverance from their present Vexation. --
Wherefore; be entreated to shake off, or rather root out, all Appearance of,
and Approach unto the said dangerous Sin of Discontent, which has already been
the Occasion, doubtless, of the Destruction of the Lives of many thousands. --
It may not, no, not the least Shadow of it, be indulged, so much as one Moment,
lest it increase, and the Adversary get Advantage to your utter Ruin. -- What
shall I say more? Avoid this Sin, as you would shun the Devil himself; for, it
is, as I may say, his Paw, which being once admitted, he will soon gain a full
Possession of your whole Man. -- So then, let us learn, and beg of God to teach
us, that good Lesson, which He taught the Apostle Paul, Phil. 4.11. I have
learned in whatsoever State I am, therewith to be content. And this agrees well
with the Command, written in Heb. 13.5. Be content with such things as you
have. See also Lam. 3.22, 39. -- But then, I shall add, that it is not
sufficient, to be only or barely content; but we must moreover, be very
thankful to God, that it is so well with us as it is; for, this is the Will of
God, in Christ Jesus, concerning us, that in every thing we give Thanks. 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. And more especially, for our spiritual Privileges, the Day and
Means of Grace; and above all, for the unspeakable Gift of God's dearly beloved
Son; through whom, we enjoy so many, and so great Favors, and are waiting and
hoping for more and greater. We are taught, that we must join Thanksgiving with
our Prayers and Supplications. Phil. 4.6. Yea, throughout the Day, we ought, as
we have abundant reason given us, to keep up and preserve a thankful Frame of
Spirit: And we shall find this to be an excellent Means, or Weapon of Defense,
against the most fiery Darts of the wicked One -- Again,

DIR. 6. Let us, when tempted to Sin, and to that of Self-Murder in particular,
be cautioned against keeping the Devil's Counsel concealed: But be entreated to
divulge the Temptation, or, make it known, at least, to some particular Friend,
who, as you have just Reason to think, is capable of giving you the most
seasonable Advice. Our Neighbor, whose Death we now lament, was deficient, in
this Respect: For, although he appeared, of late, to some of his Neighbors, to
discover a Turn of Mind, different from what was usual; yet, it was not very
much regarded. Nor did any Person (as I am informed) suspect, that he was under
the said Temptation, until being missed, he was found Hanging in his own Barn.
This, indeed, is what the Adversary will strenuously oppose your doing of,
suggesting, that it will be very much to your Dishonor among Men, to have it
come abroad, that you have entertained a Though It, or had any Inclination, to
destroy your own Life: Instead of being pitied and relieved (says he) you will be
pointed at and despised, all your Days. -- But, my dear Friends, you must break
through this, or any other Temptation, that may be presented for your
Discouragement, and freely and fully unbosom your Case (as I said) to some
faithful Friend: And not only ask, but also thankfully accept of the Advice,
which may be given you; and with all Diligence, pursue and prosecute the same,
notwithstanding all that the Enemy may suggest to the contrary. -- Let me tell
you, that such Persons are in very great Hazard of being overcome, who gratify
the Devil so far, as to keep this Temptation of his, burning in their own
Breasts: For, what else may they reasonably expect, but that the Fuel, or
Corruption within, will ever long, take Fire, to their utter Consumption? --
But now, when the Serpent perceives that he is discovered, and that all his
Sophistry and Cunning is laid open, he then begins to hide his Head, and to
abate his Violence -- And the plain Truth is, that the Strength of the Devil's
Temptations lays in ourselves, and in our own Treachery; for, if we be not
false, and even cruel to ourselves, his Power and Malice cannot finally injure
us. -- I shall just add,

DIR. 7. Be advised to beware of too free an Use of spiritous Liquors: And in
all other respects, to exercise a prudent Care for the Continuance of your
bodily Health: For, there is so strict an Union between Soul and Body, that
they mutually affect each other. "Whatever touches the Body, by way of Injury,
affects the Soul also by Way of Sympathy:" Nothing is more evident, than that
bodily Disorders (though some more than others) bring on an Heaviness and
Melancholy of Mind, which gives to the Adversary a very great Advantage; and
therefore it concerns you to be tender of your own Health; and not, as some do,
needlessly and foolishly expose it. -- Indeed, many People do err in the Excess
of Love to their Bodies, which is a criminal kind of Love, for they abuse
themselves by their Intemperance; -- but then, there are others, who are also
worthy of Blame, by reason of their Defect in this Regard; for, through
Inadvertance and Heedlessness, they take such Steps as destroy the good
Constitution of their Bodies, and thereby do lay a Foundation for one or more
afflictive Maladies, to the Prejudice of the Mind, as well as of the Body --
And provided, this be already the Case of any under my Charge, let me entreat
you to seek for Relief, as soon as possible: Don't say, as, I am sensible, some
have done, viz. "That no Physician can relieve us, because our Trouble is
altogether a Trouble in Mind, and the Body is not at all affected." Which is,
as to many Persons, a very great Mistake; for, very often, this Trouble of Mind
takes it is Rise from bodily Maladies; and therefore unless the Body be
relieved, and the dark Cloud which hangs over the Brain be scattered, it will
be to little Purpose, to offer them the very best Instructions, because they
are, at present, incapable of weighing Matters according to their true Value.
-- Neglect not therefore, in the Case of Melancholy, to consult the Physician;
and if he shall inform you, that the same is occasioned by a Disorder of Body,
then submit to his Prescriptions. -- And moreover, if you apprehend, that I may
be helpful to you, then you (and even all others of the Parish) shall be
welcome to my Study; and I shall be ready to assist you, as God shall enable
me. -- I may not omit to subjoin,

DIR. 8. Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against
the Wiles of the Devil. These are the Words of an inspired Apostle, Ephesians. 6.11.
And he goes on to inform us, wherein this Armor consists. ver. 14, -- 18.
viz. The Girdle of Truth, or Sincerity. -- The Breast Plate of Righteousness,
viz. both the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, and that implanted in us.
-- Shoes; or, a resolved Frame of Spirit to adhere to, and abide by the Gospel.
-- The Shield of Faith; being fully persuaded of the Truth of the
Gospel-Promises and Threatenings; as also depending on Christ, and deriving
Grace from Him. -- And Hope, the Helmet of Salvation; i. e. such an Hope, as
has Salvation for it is Object. -- And the Sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of God. -- And Prayer without ceasing, of every kind, public, private and
secret. -- This is the Armor, which the Christian must put on and improve, as
he would hope to stand against the Wiles of the Devil. -- And Prayer in
particular, must, without fail, be joined with all, and every the other Parts
of the Christian Armor: Not only keep up a Disposition to this Duty, but also
intermix it (I mean, ejaculatory Prayer) with other Duties: For, "as without
Christ, we can do nothing; so through Him strengthening us, we can do all
things:" But then, He expects, that we often implore his Help and Assistance.
-- And remember, that as our Savior is a Friend to Prayer, so Satan is an
Enemy to this Exercise: He has not the least Encouragement given unto him, to
pray for himself; and he does what he can, to divert the Children of Men from,
and to interrupt them in, this Duty: And more especially those, who are cast
down and disquieted, lest they come short of seeing the Salvation of God;
suggesting to them, that now, in this State of Disquietude, it is not a Season
for them to pray; or, that it will be wholly in vain for them so to do, seeing
they cannot pray in Faith, and without Doubting. -- But you may not hearken to
the Tempter; for, although you cannot pray in Faith, yet you may and ought to
pray for Faith: Wherefore, open your Lips, and lift up your Souls, as well as
you can: Yea, be the more frequent, and the more fervent, in this Duty, because
you are tempted to desist from it; for truly, you have Need, on this Occasion,
to be very importunate in seeking for Help from above: -- Nor will any thing so
much discourage the Adversary, from proceeding in his hellish and malicious
Design, as when he finds, that he cannot prevail with Persons to omit this
Duty. I was formerly acquainted with a good Man, who gave the following Account
concerning himself, viz. "That when he was a young Man, he was so awakened, as
to be filled with a Concern for the Welfare of his Soul: And thereupon, he came
into a Resolution, to be found in the Way of Well-doing, and in particular, to
observe the Duty of secret Prayer: But the House where he dwelt being small, he
could not find in it any convenient Place for Retirement, and therefore made
choice of a solitary Place, not very far distant, among the Trees and Bushes,
to which he daily repaired, both Morning and Evening; but was soon followed
with Temptations to desist; and in a short Time, with such as were not only of
a discouraging, but also of a terrifying Nature; and more especially, on one
Evening, after he had made some Progress in the Exercise, he was led strongly
to imagine, that the Adversary was at his Back, and would soon seize upon him;
whereupon, he came to stop, and turned his Face about, not knowing, but that
the Devil would make a visible Appearance, in one Shape or the other: -- But the
Man saw nothing: -- And yet, being sensible, by Reason of the Temptation which
attended him, that the Enemy was very near, therefore he expressed himself in
the following Manner, viz. Satan, I wonder you are not ashamed to discover so
much of Spite and Malice, as to endeavor to discourage me from continuing in
the Duty of Prayer: If it was lawful I would pray for you, as well as for
myself: But although your Case is hopeless, mine is not so; and therefore I am
Resolved, do what you can, to continue, by the Help of God, knocking at the
Door of Mercy: For shame be gone. -- And when he thus had said, he turned about
his Face, as at the first, and proceeded in his Prayer: -- Nor was he
afterward followed with the like Temptation, nor with any other, but what is
common to Christians. -- He lived to old age, and sustained the Character of an
Eminent Christian, all his Days. -- I have published this Account, because, I
think, nothing could have been spoken, in his Case, more Brave and
Christian-like; discovering at the same Time, a Spirit both Heroic and
Compassionate. -- An Example worthy of our Imitation on the like Occasion: And
truly, unless we have the Grace to become Resolute Christians, fully determined
for the Service of God our Savior, in Opposition to all Temptations from the
World, Flesh and Devil, we are no better than nominal Christians, or
Hypocrites; and may expect the Doom of such, to be pronounced and exceuted upon
us. Matt. 6.24. No Man can serve two Masters. Matt. 12.30. He that is not with
me is against me.
Pray therefore without ceasing; pray and faint not: And moreover, beg the
Prayers of others for you; but depend on none short of Christ.

ALAS! How few consider of their Danger, while in this the Enemy's Country?
Surely, if the LORD OF HOSTS did not hold the evil Spirits under Restraint,
they would destroy all of us, with as much Ease, as they did the Swine,
mentioned in Matt. 8.31, etc. and with far greater Pleasure. -- And although
there be not in these Days, so great a Number of Demoniacks (or such who are
bodily possessed) as formerly; yet alas! What Multitudes of precious Souls,
have those evil Spirits the Possession of, at this Day, who are led captive by
them at their Will! -- And truly, Sirs, it concerns each of us, to be on our
Watch continually. For, we must watch as well as pray: Our Savior has joined
them together, and we may not separate them: We must up and be doing, otherwise
we may not expect, that God will be with us. -- And it concerns us to watch and
pray not only lest we enter into Temptation, but also in the very Time of
Temptation, or when we are actually and frequently assaulted* It Is dangerous to
let down our Watch at any Time, or in any Place: If we are old or young, in a
State of Prosperity or Adversity, in Company or alone, we must keep up our
Watch: Yea, and all our Powers and Faculties, both of Body and Mind, must be
carefully watched, lest they offend. Thus, we should make a Covenant with our
Eyes, and set a watch before our Mouths, and ponder the Path of our Feet, and
be on our Guard lest there be any Iniquity in our Hands; and more especially,
must keep our Hearts with all Diligence, for out of them are the Issues of
Life: Our Lives will be either good or bad, according as our Hearts are kept or
neglected. -- In a Word, we must pass the Time of our sojourning here in Fear,
viz. in the Fear of God, that we may not offend Him; and in Jealoussy over
ourselves, lest our own Hearts deceive us, or wicked Men divert us from
well-doing, or the Profits, Pleasures, or Honors of the World ensnare us, or
the Devil, by any of his Devices, beguile us. 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober, be vigilent
(be temperate, that you may be watchful) because your Adversary the Devil, as a
roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour: The Tipler is in great
Danger of being devoured. -- But not to trespass on your Patience. --

I NEED not spend Time to caution my Hearers, against taking the Liberty to
oppress, or in any respect to injure, the lately bereaved, and very sorrowful
Family: I am persuaded better things of you; and that, on the other hand, you
will, as you shall have the Opportunity, be kind and helpful to the weakly and
disconsolate Widow, and to the three young and fatherless Children. -- Nor
shall you lose your Reward.

TO Conclude. You are doubtless sensible, my Brethren, that in the space of
four Weeks, we have had among us, two sorrowful Instances of a sudden and
untimely Death, though in a very different Manner. The One, viz. Mr. Joseph
Abbot, jun'r, attempting to pass over the Mill-Pond, newly frozen, dropped through
the Ice, and no Help being at Hand, was drowned, on Wednesday Dec. 10th, 1766.
-- The Other, whose Name, as many think, had best to be buried in Oblivion,
expired in the manner aforesaid, on Wednesday, January 7th, 1767.
And both those Neighbors were so well in Body, as to be here, at Meeting with
us, on the Sabbath Day before they expired, and appeared to us as likely to
live longer, as any of us. -- But they have left us, and are gone to their long
Home: We shall see their Faces (as usual) no more in this World.

AND now, O, that we may all be awakened by those very sorrowful Instances of
Mortality, to consider more seriously than ever, our latter End; realizing,
each one of us, that we don't know, what a Day, and much less, what a Week, may
bring forth. -- Let us accept of the good Advice given by Eliaphaz, in Job
22.21. Acquaint now thy self with Him, and be at Peace; thereby good shall come
unto thee. And let us come up to Job's Resolution, in Chap. 14.14. All the Days
of my appointed Time, will I wait, till my Change come. We must be willing to
wait God's Time, and give Diligence, that so we may, through Grace, then be found
ready: We ought to wait for God by waiting on Him, viz. in the several Ways of
his Appointment, in public, private and secret; as also, by ordering the whole
of our Conversation according to his Word, and as it becomes the Gospel of
Christ. -- Although we ought to provide for the Body, yet we must learn to do our
civil, as well as our religious Actions, after a godly Sort. 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whether ye eat or drink; or whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God. Our
Life ought to be a Life of Faith and Holiness, and we should have our
Conversation in Heaven: While our Hands are busied in our secular Employments,
our Affections, and as much as possible, our Thoughts, should be set on Things
above: And we must make it our daily Care to use the World in such manner, as
may further our own good Account in the Day of the Lord Jesus.

WE are, by Nature, inclined to desire, that Life may be prolonged; and the
Desire, with Submission to the Will of God, is innocent: But then, it ought to
be our great Concern, that we may not (as it is to be feared, many do) spend
away our Days "in treasuring up to ourselves, Wrath against the Day of Wrath,
and Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God: But on the other hand, may
answer the End of Life, by bringing forth such Fruit, as that our heavenly
Father may be glorified by us." And therefore should not only pray, that our
Lives may be still lengthened out; but also, that we may have the Grace and
Wisdom to redeem Time, and to walk circumspectly in the World: Or, which is the
same thing, that God would so teach us to number our Days, that we may apply
our Hearts unto Godliness. -- The God of our Lives reserves the Time of our
Dissolution, as a Secret, in his own Breast, that so, we may give Diligence to
be found, through Grace, in an actual Readiness for our great Change, at what
Time soever He shall call for us: -- You observe, I said, through Grace; for,
without Christ we can do nothing: But then, we must remember that He expects
to be enquired of, or sought unto. -- Good Manners, as well as the holy
Scriptures, teach us so to do; and truly it ought to be esteemed an unspeakable
Privilege, that we may seek, in hope of obtaining Audience: -- I said, in Hope,
for, He is not wanting, on his part, toward those who seek, and continue, with
their whole Heart, to seek his Face and Favor. -- But then, you may not
imagine, that you merit his Favor by virtue of your seeking for it: Learn
therefore, to seek to Him in the most humble Manner, under a deep Sense, that
you are unworthy of the least Mercy, and that He may justly reject you and your
Services. -- And in a Word, labor to look unto Jesus, as your Strength and
Redeemer; as the Lord your Righteousness, as well as the Lord your Strength;
"and thus be pressing toward the Mark, for the Prize of the high Calling of
God in Christ Jesus:" To whom be ascribed all Honor, Glory and Power, World
without End. AMEN and AMEN.


