MR. BARNARD'S DUDLEIAN LECTURE SERMON.

THE Power of God, the Proof of Christianity. A DISCOURSE DELIVERED AT THE
DUDLEIAN Lecture, IN THE CHAPEL of HARVARD COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, N. E. MAY 11th,
1768.

By THOMAS BARNARD, A. M. PASTOR of the First CHURCH in SALEM.

SALEM: Printed by SAMUEL HALL, at his Printing-Office (newly opened) nearly
opposite to the late Rev. Mr. HUNTINGTON'S Meeting House. M.DCC.LXVIII.

A DUDLEIAN LECTURE SERMON.
1 CORINTHIANS, II. 5. "That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men,
but in the power of God."


THE pious and benevolent Founder of these lectures, having limited the
preachers of this second in the series, to the subject of Christianity in the
most precise idea of it; we are called to review it, and discourse upon it, as
the plan of supreme wisdom for the restoring a degenerate race to virtue and to
glory; -- by enlightening human darkness; -- by reclaiming the disobedient to
the wisdom of the just; -- by rendering the happiness of offenders consistent
with the perfect purity of the supreme Governor; -- by abolishing death, and
restoring those subjected to it to immortality; that plan "which eye had not
before seen, nor ear heard, nor had it entered into the heart of man to conceive
of;" a plan executed at such a time, in such a manner, and by such instruments,
as to Him, the all-perfect source of it, seemed best, and which is therefore on
all accounts best.

IN order to men's becoming partakers of the benefits of this plan of grace,
they must themselves be active. Not indeed in completely informing themselves,
as from their own proper fund, of every article which conduces to their virtue
or their hopes; (many of these must be derived immediately from him by whose
good pleasure alone they exist, and offered from him to the human mind;) but in
examining the evidence, by which whatever claims to be divine truth, supports
its claim -- in receiving it in the love of it -- and in being sanctified by it.

THEREFORE those who would attain the blessings of the gospel, and experience
it to be "the power of God unto salvation," must be persuaded of the truth of
Christianity properly so called; and the question arises, How shall men arrive
to this persuasion, which is in our text termed faith? Now St. Paul affirms
that this faith or persuasion has not it is foundation on, or it is existence in
or by the "wisdom of men, but the power of God."

I SHALL at present take it for granted, that the phrase, "the wisdom of men,"
means the disquisitions of philosophers, (especially as retailed in the
harangues of orators and rhetoricians;) the terms, "wise men of this world,"
"the scribe," "the disputer," "the natural man," point out those who refuse to
receive any thing as divine truth, but what they become acquainted with in the
same process, through which they are informed of the principles of any other
science.

I FURTHER assume here, and refer my hearers to the course of the former part
of this epistle for the justice of the construction; that the apostle intends
by "faith" the assent of the mind to those propositions which are offered to
our assent from the fountain of truth, though their abstract nature, reason and
foundation, did not before, or do not now, fully appear to the mind. (In other
parts of the gospel, however, it is plain that the word "faith" includes in it is
idea an inward, cordial reception of, and reliance upon, Jesus Christ, in all
his offices; and in other places, in a yet larger sense, the whole Christian
temper and life is described under this comprehensive word "faith.")

AND lastly, I think it plain, that by the expressions, "the power of God,"
"demonstration of the Spirit," and "spiritual discernment," he designs that
evidence of miracles and it is influence, which the preachers of Christ adduced,
as full proof of their being immediately employed of God to promulge those
truths, and upon which evidence those they were sent to were bound to embrace
them, and act upon them.

FROM this review of our context it may appear, that we are led to lay down
some truths as premises, from which the justice of our text as a conclusion
will follow. I lay it down then as clear, that the person who will assent to
nothing but what he is intuitively certain of, or convinced of by abstract
reasoning, must remain ignorant of many and very interesting truths. That
therefore in this state of imperfection and sin, men need to have much
religious knowledge conveyed to them in some other way. Christianity fully
relieves us under this unhappiness, this necessity. It relieves us by "faith"
in it as a divine revelation. And we are induced to this "faith" by the
testimony of God; the exertion of his power to warrant the divine mission of
its founders. Therefore it is "spiritually discerned." "Our faith stands not
in the wisdom of men, but the power of God."

I. THE first part of my business, then, will be to illustrate and confirm this
point; That notwithstanding the various avenues to religious knowledge, yet
there are important articles of speculation and motives to practice, which men
in the best improvement of the powers of their minds cannot attain to; (to
which I shall add) and many more, which, in a state of nature, men had but
little or no knowledge of.

WE are beings, my hearers, of limited capacities; there are bounds we cannot
pass. Within those bounds there are three dictinct avenues by which truth
enters the mind, and is acknowledged by it. They are, intuition, discussion or
reasoning, and testimony.

INTUITION is the direct view the soul has of the truth and reality of any one,
or the relation of any two or more ideas, that they are so immediate as neither
to need nor admit of any reasoning to discover it. THE proposition, "I am," is
intuitively certain; and to argue, "I think therefore I am," is trifling
logic. And where one conceives justly of God and man, it lies equally clear in
the mind, that men are the subjects of the moral government of God. Perhaps
also the idea of cause and effect, is among all created things, as clear and
unperplexed: The mind sees without a course of argument that nothing which
begins to exist, can be without some agency to produce it. There must therefore
be some fixed and necessarily existing cause of it. So with regard to morality,
right and wrong appear in many instances most ^^^ous; and he who labors by a
course of ethical arguments to prove the obliquity of ingratitude, profaneness,
murder, and the like, might be more usefully employed.


WHEN self-evident principles fail us, we apply to reasoning, and come by an
indefinite number of steps, in proportion as truth lies near or more remote
from intuition, to low probability or moral certainty.

BUT then, with respect to both these sources of knowledge, reflection on
ourselves, and the experience of mankind in general, compel us to own their
deficincy in respects most deeply concerning our best welfare.

AND though it is not intended, by any Eulogium on Christianity, to deny that
the human understandng, well improved, may attain to many prime truths
respecting God and morality, yet it is to be observed that this will be the
portion of but comparatively few. The extent of knowledge to which any one can
arrive, depends on the original standard of his intellectual powers, and on
their being cultivated by education, expanded by enquiry and the instructions
of the wise, and emancipated from the shackles of corporeal affection, which
war against truth as well as virtue. So that some will need foreign aid beyond
the operations of their own minds, much more than others, in order to their
acquaintance with the same truths; and after all, there may be many, we are
sure there are many, and those of great concern, which man at his best estate
falls short of.

WHEREFORE, though we allow, that if all men were philosophers, if all had
capacity, leisure and disposition for ethical and metaphysical speculations; if
the many were not diverted from close thought, by the dissipations and cares of
life; nor prejudiced against truth and virtue by vicious affections; a much
better system of theology, theoretical and practical, would have been generaly
received than has been; yet it is fact, experience has proved it, that not only
the untutored populace have, in the state of nature, been grossly ignorant of
the great things which intimately concern virtue and happiness; not only were
philosophers unable to make any great progress, in propagating the religion of
nature; but these wise men of this world were far from agreeing among
themselves, in their sentiments of the capital doctrines and rules of religion.

ANCIENT history, as well as modern voyagers and travelers, give us credible
evidence of the wretched state of unenlightened, uncultivated nature,
notwithstanding all the efforts of the wisdom of this world. St. Paul's account
was not exaggerated, when he said, "The Gentiles walk in the vanity of their
minds, having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their
hearts; who, being past feeling, have given themselves over to lasciviousness,
to work all uncleanness with greediness. Ephesians. iv. 17.


THE great God, the Lord of all, is a pure Spirit; and in proportion as the
multitude are immersed in sense, their conceptions of him will be gross and
unworthy, and in such proportion the motives to sanctity will be weakened.
Philosophers have been few in any age, who have attained to ideas, in any
measure just, of that great Being on whom all depend; and the arguments of
those few have been so subtle, that it is no wonder they had little success in
promoting true theism, to any very extensive and happy effect.

AS respect to God, is the formal idea of religion; so the fear and love of
him, are the main motives to it. For a man may have a quick and lively sense of
moral good and evil; may clearly see beauty and proportion in the one, and ugly
deformity in the other; may own an eternal fitness in the one, and that it is
opposite is contrary to the invariable relations of things, and yet may be a
very profligate, and say, "What care I for fitness, beauty, reason and right: I
gratify myself, and have my reward for despising these fine spun speculations?
What little hold then must such refinements have on those, who think God such
an one, or worse, than themselves?

THE natural proofs of the immortality of the soul, are extremely abstracted.
The best genius's, even at this day, must labor if they would feel their
weight -- The resurrection from the dead, nature never suspected. How then
should the multitude be induced to live as heirs of immortality?

THE chief rational basis of the doctrine of future rewards and punishments, is
the present unequal distributions of Providence. But there are so many
circumstances to be attended to, before that inequality is proved, that this
kind of evidence is not easily or generally seen in a clear and strong light.
For how many never saw instances of this inequality? Who precisely knows the
moral characters of those about him? Who is judge of the degree of happiness
attending conscious virtue under sufferings, or of the secret wretchedness of a
profligate? Upon a penetrating mind, this argument has great force; but it is
certain, that in times past it has not had a general, deep influence in theory
or practice.

WHAT man, concerned for his best interest, would not desire to be assisted, in
emerging from the depths wherein the sages of antiquity were plunged,
concerning the chief good -- the seat and nature of virtue and vice -- fixed
fate and free will -- sullen stoicism on the one side, and profane epicureism
on the other? Who would not desire a plain direction, "what he should do to be
saved."

ESPECIALLY the great question, what the administrations of God are or shall
be, respecting offending creatures, who have transgressed the divine law, and
can have no hope of happiness, but on the basis of mere mercy? This capital
enquiry, I say, is far beyond human investigation. Whether there is with God
forgiveness of the penal effects of sin, natural or judicial -- and on what
terms -- of how many sins, and with what aggravations -- and what degrees of
happiness are to be expected -- and when and where: Reason at it is best estate
is silenced here. Because these things depend on the will of him, whose "ways
are not as our's;" whose government respects not merely this little spot, but
an interminable universe; for whose peace and order, severity to offenders
might, for ought men could say, be of the highest utility. Nature might hope,
but unaided nature must fear, and be subjected to an anxious bondage.

WHEREFORE, I say, that upon these considerations,

II. "FAITH" is a suitable, needful and comfortable method of receiving
knowledge, respecting most important points of doctrine, rules of life, and
motives to right conduct.

SOME minds may be under such disadvantages, so unable to determine for
themselves in weighty matters, that it may be their prudence to act upon the
sentiments of others wiser than themselves. In matters of fact which our own
senses have not been privy to, the testimony of men deserves such credit, as we
ought to hazard our best interests upon.

BUT "if we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater." "When
we are convinced that the fountain of truth has declared, "this proposition is
true," "this conduct is right" -- "this is my method of administration" --
"this it is my decree to do" -- "that event you are to expect;" I say, so
convinced, nothing remains for us, but to believe and do. And this is what I
mean by "faith." A persuasion on that evidence, to which we ought in reason to
give credit, that God has thus declared, commanded or forbidden, or that he has
thus determined.

IT may please God to reveal his truths or will immediately. For cannot the
Father of Spirits, ever present with us, enlighten imperfect minds by his
inward energy; and direct those he so converses with, how to distinguish
between divine communications, and the heights of an enthusiastic fancy, or the
illusions of depraved spirits? He who denies this intercourse between God and
man, would or might, had he not sensible proof of the fact, ridicule it as an
absurd whimsy, that a particular modification and undulation of the air should
convey from one to another mind, ideas of the most abstract propositions.

WHEN the Almighty mediately uses instruments, like ourselves, to convey his
light and truth to us, they must be able to give convincing evidence, that they
received their messages from God, and were ordered by him to publish them. The
proof must be such as shall be perceived by those to whom it is offered, and
leave them no reason to doubt, but that what these messengers deliver, is
really the "testimony of God," or that which he in a wise and sufficient manner
testifies to the truth of.

THERE is no other avenue of moral or religious truth, but what may be aided
and rendered more perfect by "faith." Thus when the Pagans heard the pure
sentiments of inspiration concerning the one true God, which laid before, if at
all, yet in dark confusion in their minds, those truths commanded their assent,
not merely on the credit of the preacher, but of their own intuitive truth. IN
this view it is far from being true, that in order to one's receiving any
benefit from holy scripture, he must be first convinced of it is divine
authority, for they may be a means themselves of proving their original, and
opening the mind to a thorough conviction thereof.
Similar advantages may attend this way of communicating truths, which though not
before known, yet require but little though it for conviction of their solid
foundation.

BUT in matters of reasoning, the advantage of faith is still more clearly
visible. For such is the natural imperfection of the mind, such the depths of
ignorance into which it may sink, such its dullness in those who for want of
leisure or application are unused to rational processes, that innumerable
doubts are resolved, and difficulties removed, by the authority of a "thus
says the Lord," which might otherwise perplex the soul, and render the
practical influence of the most weighty doctrines and advices nothing at all.
Especially will the case be so with those who cannot abstract, nor enter into
the reason of things. And how many are they?

MOST of all, with respect to truths which depend on the sovereign wisdom of
God for their existence, relative to such conduct of his, as we must have
otherwise been ignorant of, and yet it may highly concern us to know; there we
plainly see that revelation from him, is the only method whereby we can be
informed of them.

THE presumption therefore would be strong, previous to any trial, that if God
in mercy should appear this way for men, whereby truth should enter their minds
by an easy convincing process, and motives to virtue press with their full
weight; real religion would be promoted and extended, in abundantly greater
degrees, than by any different method. If therefore Christianity in it is purity
has had such an effect, a strong argument of its divinity arises. -- But
leaving presumptions, I proceed,

III. Christianity is a system of truths, speculative and practical, of the
highest importance to men; our faith of which, properly so called, or in it is
strictest definition, is founded, and stably sounded, on the power of God,
exered for the purpose of demanding and inducing that faith.

THOUGH Christianity is most firmly founded on argument, yet the gospel is not
merely a system of reasoning. It takes for granted those first principles,
which must be fixed in the mind, before it can assent to any thing, as having
the authority of a divine revelation. It offers itself as a message from the
God of all grace to a dark and degenerate world. Men of penetration will indeed
much serve the cause of Christ, by their researches into the rational and moral
foundation of many revealed truths, but it is by a persuasion that they are the
declarations of God, that we formally submit to them and embrace them.

CHRISTIANITY is built on this foundation, that there is one only true and
eternal God, the creator, supporter, ruler and judge of all, who is the "hater
of iniquity," but the "rewarder of those that diligently seek him", and that
"man is his offspring." -- And it teaches us that man was originally designed
for immortality, while he maintained his innocence; but placed in such a rank
of beings that he might offend, the natural fruit of which would be the
increased power of vicious inclinations; the judicial effect, death. -- It
assures us, that man of his own free agency offended, vice propagated, and
death took place. -- But that in such a desperate situation, the mercy of him
who is presented to us, not by terms which denote his abstract, metaphysical
essence, but which inspire reverence and confidence, tempering the severity of
a judge with the bowels of a father, provided a method worthy of himself,
whereupon the whole human race should again live, and be placed in various
conditions of trial for an happy immortality. -- That his supreme wisdom, which
in all his works within our observation, uses subordinate means and instruments
to bring about his ends, appointed one person to be under him the savior of
sinners, from the first step of it in their being "turned from darkness to
light," to his finally presenting them to his Father, as worthy of immortal
honor and happiness.

THIS great person is characterized, in terms inspiring reverence, love, and
demanding all credit and confidence, as the "brightness of the Father's glory,
the express image of his person," who "was in the beginning with God, and is
God." This Son of God in due time became incarnate, and employed life to the
most beneficent purposes of bringing men to God; which he especially did, by
instructing us in what it most of all concerned us to know, and none but a
messenger from God could inform us of, viz. "That God was in him reconciling
the world to himself," being disposed to forgive sinners, and restore them, on
gracious and equitable terms, to such blessings as even unspotted innocence
could not claim of right -- that unfeigned repentance and the genuine fruits of
it, "sobriety, righteousness and godliness," are the terms of that covenant of
grace, whereby we are renewed to hope. He has furnished us with every motive
which can work on a cautious or generous mind, above all with the prospect of
the future terrors of the Lord, and "the blessed hope of the glorious appearing
of the great God and our savior Jesus Christ. These solemn futurities he has
distinctly and frequently set before us.

AND to the end that none should from this display of undeserved mercy, presume
upon easy pardon, but might, when they gratefully own the benefits, reverence
the purity of God and fear before him; for these, I say, among other
intentions, the death of Christ, a most memorable event, is declared to be of
the nature of a ransom, a sacrifice, which having been once offered to God,
every measure of mercy thenceforth consisted with the rectoral holiness of the
Lord of men and angels. At the same time the divine love of sanctity has been
illustriously shown, in the noble reward of the persevering obedience of Jesus,
who was therefore exalted to all power, that he might have full scope to
exercise that sublime friendship to men, which by dying for them he proved was
near his heart.

JESUS is "head over all things to the church." He promotes his cause by the
wisest means. He first sent forth ministers to propagate it, armed with the
power of God. He fixed constitutions and ordinances, to derive on it all the
advantages of religious society. And he is the dispenser, under God, of that
internal influence, respecting the real dispositions of men, whereby, in spite
of weakness and corruption, they avail themselves of the means of repentance
and virtue; whereby they are "born of God", and become, in the worthiest sense,
the "Sons of God."

THE immediate agent here, is a divine person, termed "the Spirit of God",
whose perfections and office demand our veneration and dependence.

THE exalted Jesus is to maintain this post of dignity, till the ends of wisdom
in this state of things is answered. Then the scene shall be closed; all these
subordinations shall cease; and "God shall be all in all."

I HAVE given this compendium of Christianity properly so called, to collect in
one view those important articles, which evidently need other proof than the
"wisdom of men"; they are the chief parts of the administrations of God, with
which our welfare is connected. To ask, why there are such, rather than of a
different nature or form, is a question which only pride and petulance would
dare to ask. The only proper enquiry is, are they really such? And the answer
to this question, which is our "faith, stands not in the wisdom of men, but
in the power of God."

THE wisdom of man may be challenged to contrive a more proper way, to reveal
such things, and induce the belief of them, than the sending messengers to
declare them, and to give those they were sent to, full evidence that these
ministers of God were specially charged with them by him; that what they spoke
was not their own, but his who sent them. That this is the case with respect to
Christianity, I now proceed briefly to illustrate and confirm, which will
complete our subject.

THAT Jesus, "the author and finisher of our faith," (for I shall confine
myself to him) wrought, not one or a few, but a continued series of miraculous
works, is a truth of fact as fully proved, as any one of that kind can be. --
They were many, -- indisputably beside the course of nature, and beyond human
power, -- done in a manner which evinced their reality, -- in places of
conspicuous resort, and with public appeals to the spectators. And to complete
the series, he arose from the dead himself, according to his own prediction and
declaration. These were facts, which his worst enemies who were contemporary
with them, sagacious, engaged in interest and inclination to deny if they
could, yet denied not. Numbers of more impartial minds, eyewitnesses of them,
were convinced, for they became his disciples. His own resurrection was by the
effects of it especially made so certain, that the continuance and success of
his cause can by no possibility be accounted for, but by the reality of that
resurrection. For considering the opposition of prejudice, of philosophy, of
lust, of the secular arm; through their combined influence it must have declined
and died, if this capital fact had not been true; or, to adopt the singular
language of a subtle enemy of our faith, it is success must have been an
infinitely greater miracle than any on which it professed to be founded; and
therefore, according to the doctrine of Mr. Hume, the reality of these miracles
must be assuredly believed.

JESUS, when he wro't these works, ever affirmed that he did them by the power
of God; and appealed to them as that evidence which the great God and Father of
all offered, for the conviction of all who saw them, or should have credible
testimony of them; that all his doctrines and instructions were divine truths,
and such truths as God had commissioned him to publish to the world. The
consequence is ungainsayable; that if the power of God was therein manifested
to the very end of inducing faith of the truth of Jesus, we ought to hear him,
to attend to, and embrace what he delivered, as firmly as though we heard them
by "a voice from the heavenly glory."

To prove that it was so, what shall be said? Power far superior to that of the
visible agent, was certainly exerted. The agent declared, that was "the power
of God." And did Jesus ever show a symptom of deceit or falsehood? Did he not
give the strongest proofs of veracity and integrity? Was not the design and
tendency of his system worthy (...) God to interpose in favor of? Superior
beings, one at least, were certainly concerned in these mavelous works. Were
they evil ones? Read Christ's argument, infidel! in Matthew. XV. 25. and be
silent. Were they good ones? They could not then combine with an impostor. Nor
would the God of love suffer an imposition on his poor creatures, which they
should have no reasonable means of detecting. They must therefore have been the
ministers of God; the power in the last resort is his. Let any sober mind
reflect on the uniform, plain and high Tendency of Christianity, to honor the
God of purity and mercy, and to enlighten, purify, and ennoble the nature of
men; let him review what it enjoins on us at present, and teaches us to expect
hereafter; and will he, can he doubt whence it is origin, and who sealed it is
truth? Could we transport ourselves back to the times and places, where he "who
went about doing good," healed the sick and raised the dead; could we then have
mixed with the admiring multitude; could we have followed him, and hear the
gracious words which proceeded from his lips; could we hear him say, "The words
which I speak are not mine, but the Father's which sent me, and "if ye believe
not for my words, yet believe for the work's sake;" should we not without
hesitation have owned him in his true character, unless perhaps a yet depraved
mind had tempted us, by subtle finesse and the sophistic deceitfulness of sin,
to leave the plain sentiments of common sense and judgment, and to deceive our
own selves. Would not infidelity have been beaten out of every entrenchment?
Must we not have been forced to own, "surely this man is the Son of God?"

THUS much must serve for the illustration and confirmation of our text, so
descriptive of the foundation of Christianity, properly so called. Not that I
would be supposed to set up miracles as the only proof of it is truth. The
excellency of the moral part of our religion -- the agreement of what is merely
revealed with our natural ideas of the holiness, mercy and sovereign wisdom of
God -- it is improving upon former dispensations of heaven -- the accomplishment
of ancient prophecies -- the propagation of this cause in spite of all
opposition. -- All these and others are arguments of great weight. But they
exceed the bounds of one discourse. And after all, this of miracles is the
capital proof in the case, which the founder of our faith laid the greatest
stress upon. Take away this, the foundation is comparatively slender; lay this
basis, it will support whatever you justly build upon it, though collateral
props were removed. For hereby he who delivered things worthy of God, proved
that he came from God.

THE credibility of the gospel history, whereon we depend for the reality of
these wonders, and all subsequent ones wrought by the first ministers of
Christ, is also a distinct subject, capable of convincing proof, but must be
now omitted.

I CONCLUDE with some REFLECTIONS. -- And,

1. AN opposer of our religion might well be asked, whether he could lay his
hand on his heart, and say his design was friendly to mankind. If he should
succeed in his endeavors to evert it, has he a clearer system of theology to
propose, better rules of, or higher motives to private and social virtue? Has
he a more efficacious plan to lay, for promoting the honor of God, and good of
men? Or can he relieve our ignorance, and point out the designs of God to us?
Let the writings of modern infidels answer these questions. If then in
proportion as one weakens the faith of Christianity, he hurts the interests of
peace and order, virtue and happiness, is not the presumption violent, that he
is wrong? What a heart or what a head must he have, to labor to overthrow the
best foundation of virtue, and place in its stead a vague, heartless system,
which every one may garble, according to his taste or prejudices. Men of this
turn have reason to examine themselves closely, what spirit they are of; for
truth comes not "to destroy men, but to save them."

2. IT ought to be remarked as an instance of the wisdom and goodness of God,
that the evidence of miracles is extremely well adapted to the working faith in
the plain and simple, and for them, as being the body of mankind, the gospel
was chiefly designed. Had it been intended only for the "disputer," "the wise
man," it might perhaps have been confirmed in another manner. But the people
cannot abstract much, they cannot draw far-fetched inferences, they are exposed
to err, and lose themselves when they attempt it. But they can see. Experience
has informed them what is beyond human power. When, therefore, they see works
done far beyond it, and the agent says, "These I do to prove that God is with
me;" they can infer as certainly as the shrewdest philosopher, "this is the
finger of God"; this man could not do these things, except God were with him:
And on the other hand, were such proof adduced in favor of falsehood and
hurtful opinions, they can say, either these are juggling frauds, or an enemy
to God and goodness has done this. But the nature of Christianity is such,
that this last comes not in question; it is spirit breathes "glory to God in the
highest, peace on earth, good will to and among men."

3. FROM this last remark, I am led to another, nor very foreign from it: It is
this, Christianity, properly so called, deals very little in metaphysics or any
abstruse science. It is designed for the high benefit of those of common
understanding, of babes. Of "God the eternal spirit," it declares not the
physical essence, but his attributes; it presents him to us as a creator, lord,
judge and father; and from our ideas of these relations, excites us to every
becoming affection toward him. "The blessed Trinity" is not therein described
by the doctrine of triangles, or of the emanation of light from the sun; but it
teaches us the personal properties of the Sacred Three, whom we adore, and on
whom we depend. Beyond these we ought not, nor can we proceed in our
speculations. The gospel relieves entirely under philosophical perplexities,
concerning moral liberty and necessity; for when one, by applying the
properties of mechanical powers to the reasonable mind, has argued himself or
others out of all sense of moral obligation, and reduced himself or them to be
the passive subjects of foreign impulse; if then he turn to the gospel, he will
find such a manner of address to himself and all, as is agreeable to that
freedom he was intuitively conscious of, until too abstracted reveries caused
"the light within him to be darkness." Jesus proved himself to be the way, the
truth, and the life; his authority is decisive; the limits of his discoveries
the wisest. And here may I take the liberty to mention it, as an useful caution
to my young brethren, the students of this society, esepcially those who are
designed for the pulpit, to beware of relying on the wisdom of men, or the
researches of human sagacity, where revelation ought to be their only guide.
There was a time when the Dogma's of schoolmen and monks were deemed sound
rules of exposition of the gospel. Departure from them was construed to be a
departure from the analogy of faith. Their usurpation has declined. We shall
act as wrong, and hazard as much, if we put in their place the Dogma's of
philosophy. Fix therefore in your minds the design and extent of revelation,
and receive it is truths from the mouth of its divine author. Particularly in
the article just now referred to. There has been a good deal of controversy of
late, respecting human power and weakness, of the unregenerate in particular;
and here and there a text has been supposed to favor metaphysical tenets,
contrary to the general tenor of the gospel, as well as to our own intimate
consciousness. Let others perplex themselves about an unfrustrable series of
motives operating on the mind; but do you study the whole gospel; ask
yourselves, who was its author? whom does he address? and in what manner? and
you will be quite easy. He who speaks there, could not use a vain, deceitful or
ensnaring address. The consequence is plain. Come to Christ then for light.
None teaches like him. Preach as he did, and you will be "workers together
with him". You will have no drawbacks upon your zeal in persuading sinners to
repentance; nor pull down with one hand, what you build up with the other.

4. Let us be grateful to God for his distinguishing goodness to us, that we
have such a sure foundation of our faith, such high advantages for virtue and
happiness. To this end, let us compare our situation with that of those who
lived before Christ appeared, or who now "sit in darkness." And whatever
infidels may suggest, we may have such resentment, without any dishonorable
imputation on the sovereign dispenser of his own gifts. "Shall our eye be evil,
because he is good"? Instead of praising him for what we enjoy, shall we tax
him with cruelty because all enjoy not the same? How base! Shall an angel
murmur, because man ranks not so high as he! A man, because he is preferred to
brutes! One man because he has a better capacity, or more external goods, than
another;! "Is it not right that the Lord of all should do what he will with his
own"! But the gospel does not leave us here. It is the doctrine of
Christianity, properly so called, that Christ died for all, that all the human
race may have great benefit from his redemption. This is not inferred from the
word All, not from a single, detached word, but from the professed design of
his undertaking for men; which was, according to the will of the universal
Father and Lord, to procure a general resurrection, to the end that all may be
tried (in the manner the wisdom of God sees fit) and be judged according to the
deeds done in the body. Different religious advantages are various talents put
into men's hands to improve. Some have one committed to them, some ten.
Fidelity in the improvement of one, will be accepted and rewarded. The good
improvement of ten, will receive a much more excellent reward. If any improve
not the one talent, God will be righteous when he judges. May he not indulge
also to generous benevolence. Leave then our fellowmen to God, and stop not the
springs of gratitude by gloomy, uncertain speculations.

LASTLY, Let us aim at just apprehensions of the nature and evidence of
Christianity, that it may lie clearly in our minds; that we may be able to
defend it successfully against gainsayers; and that it may become the power of
God unto salvation to us. Let us therefore apply to serious consideration, and
search the scriptures; especially deliberately study the gospel of Christ; and
to all our endeavors add constant prayers to the Father of lights, to
enlighten and direct us, that we may be made wise to salvation. Though I do not
think that the apostle, in our text, meant, by the "power of God," an inward
influence upon the mind, yet it is a Christian doctrine, that "if any man lack
wisdom, he should ask it of God, who gives his spirit of light and truth to
those who ask him." Especially let us see to it, if we would be under his
direction, that our aims be right and good. The great end of speculation is
that practice may be guided and influenced. And our Lord has promised. "if any
man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God." John
xvii. 7.
Let that then be our chief inducement in laboring to be grounded in the
faith, which was the chief design of the gospel history itself; these books
were written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God,
and that believing ye might have life through him." John xx. 31.

FINIS.

