LOOKING-GLASS FOR THE PRESBYTERIANS at NEW LONDON; To see their Worship and
Worshippers weighed in the Balance, and found wanting.

With a true Account of what the People called Rogerenes, have suffered in that
Town from the 10th of June 1764, to the 13th of December 1766. Who suffered for
testifying, That it was contrary to Scripture for Ministers of the Gospel to
teach for hire. That the First Day of the Week was no Sabbath by God's
Appointment. That sprinkling Infants is no Baptism, and nothing short of
Blasphemy, being contrary to the Example set us by Christ and his holy
Apostles. That long Public Prayers in Synagogues is forbidden by Christ. Also
for reproving their Church and Minister, for their great Pride, Vainglory, and
Friendship of the World which they lived in. With a Brief Discourse in Favor
of Women's prophesying or teaching in the Church.

Written by JOHN ROGERS, of NEW LONDON.

Thou shall speak my Words unto them, whether they will hear or whether they
will forbear.

EZEKIEL. ii. 7. Arise and speak unto them all that I command thee, be not
dismayed at their Faces, lest I confound thee before them.

Verse 19. They shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against
thee, for I am with thee says the Lord to deliver thee.

JER. 1.17. What I tell you in Darkness that speak ye in Light, and what ye
hear in the Ear, that preach ye upon the House-Tops: And fear not them which
kill the Body, etc.

MATT. x. 27, 28. PROVIDENCE. N. E. Printed for the AUTHOR. M DCC LXVII.

A LOOKING-GLASS, etc.
WE had been many times to the meeting house at New London, to put the minister
and people in mind how contrary their worship was to the scriptures, and that
it was not the worship of God. But we could never persuade the minister nor
congregation to stop and hear what we had to say concerning these articles
abovementioned, their deeds being evil, as Christ said, John iii. 20, 21.
Every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest
his deeds should be reproved. But he that does truth, comes to the light, that
his deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God.

June 10, 1764. We went to the meeting house at New London, and some of our
people went into the house and set down, others tarried without, and sat upon
the ground some distance from the house. And when Mather Byles, their priest,
began to say over his formal synagogue prayer, forbidden by Christ, Matt. vi.
5. etc. some of our women began to knit, others to sew, that it might be made
manifest they had no fellowship with such unfruitful works of darkness. But
justice Coit and the congregation were much offended at this testimony, and
fell upon them in the very time of their prayer, and pretended divine worship;
also they fell upon all the rest of our people that were setting quietly in the
house, making no difference between them that transgressed their law, and them
that transgressed it not; for they drove us all out of the house in a most
furious manner; pushing, striking, kicking, etc. so that the meeting was broken
up for some considerable time, and the house in great confusion: Moreover they
fell upon our friends that were setting abroad, striking and kicking both men
and women, old and young, driving all of us to prison in a furious and
tumultuous manner, stopping our mouths when we went to speak, choking us, etc.
So Justice Coit committed us to prison, to lie there until the evening of the
next day, and then to be set at liberty without a trial. Now let us try these
worshippers by the scriptures, and see if they be worshippers of the true God:
For Christ says, Matt. vii. 18. etc. a good tree cannot bring forth evil
fruit, and by their fruits ye shall know them, Thus it appears by Christ's own
mouth, that it is an evil tree that brings forth evil fruit: Also the scripture
says, 1 Cor. xiii. 4. Charity suffers long, and is kind. Verse 5, Is not
easily provoked. Verse 7. Bears all things, endures all things. Now it is
evident by this text, that this church notwithstanding all her pretended solemn
prayers and outward pretenses of worshipping God, had not charity, which is the
love of God, For they could not bear all things, endure all things, but were
easily provoked, and the corrupt fruit these pretended Christians brought
forth, even in the very time of their most solemn devotion, manifested that
which lay hid in their inside, according to Christ's testimony of such a
generation. Matt. xxiii. 27, 28. Woe unto you scribes and pharisees,
hypocrites, for ye are like unto whited sepulchers, which indeed appear
beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all
uncleanness. Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye
are full of hypocrisy and iniquity. Also the scripture says, 1 Cor. i. 25,
etc. The foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is
stronger than men. And that God has chosen the foolish, weak and base things
of the world, and things which are despised, to confound the wise and mighty,
that no flesh should glory in his presents. And thus it appeared, for the
weakness and foolishness of the cross in these women's knitting and sewing,
proved stronger and wiser than all the worldly wisdom and strength of that
church, for it stripped their worship naked, and left their painted hypocrisy
without any covering, and the inside of these whited sepulchers appeared to be
as the scripture says, Rev. xviii. 2. The habitation of devils, and the hold
of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.

The next first day of the week we went among them again, to warn them to
forsake their false worship, pride, etc. But justice Coit being very angry at
our coming, fell upon us in a furious manner, as he did the week before,
striking and kicking both men and women, setting an example to the rest of the
people, so he committed us to prison, to lie there two days, and then to be set
at liberty in the evening without a trial. But we constantly came among them
every first day of the week, to witness against their false worship, and to
warn them to flee from the wrath to come.

But the authority and minister, and some of the people were greatly offended
at our opposing their false worship; for they carried on their worship in such
pride, and so contrary to the holy scriptures, that they could no ways defend
it by the scripture, and therefore took another way to defend it, never
practiced by Christ or any of his followers. For justice Coit, did continually
fall upon us when we came among them, and drive us to prison, in an angry and
furious manner; sometimes twenty, sometimes thirty in a day, striking and
kicking both men and women, pulling off women's caps and bonnets, and tareing
them to pieces with his hands, setting and example to the rest of the people:
Also he made no difference between them that spoke at the meeting house against
their worship, and those that did not speak; for his constant practice was to
fall upon all our friends that came to the meeting house, and all that he could
see in sight of the house, and drive them to prison; he and his company, in a
most furious and tumultious manner, stopping their mouths when they went to
speak, choking them, etc. Also he doubled our imprisonment every time we came
among them: but this method he took, added no peace to them, for some of our
friends were always coming out of prison, as well as going in, and so always
ready to oppose their false worship every first day of the week; and they found
this scripture fulfilled. Isaiah lvii. 21. There is no peace says my God to
the wicked. However, this was the method they took, and after this manner they
celebrated their sabbaths from the 10th of June, to the 12th of August.

And then we prisoners, seeing justice Coits's mob driving some of our friends
before them, to commit them to prison for near four months, as appeared by his
mittimus; and then to be set at liberty in the evening, without a trial, for so
all his mittimuses run: Then seven of us prisoners having an opportunity,
barred the outside prison door, and held them fast at the door, according to
the example set us by Elisha the prophet, 2 Kings, vi. 32. in such an unlawful
case; and in this we did not resist the authority of the government, but a
company of lawless men for justice Coit (if he may be so called) and his
company proceeded against us without any order of law: Also we blew a shell in
the prison, in defiance of their idol sabbath, and to mock their false worship,
as Elijah mocked the worshippers of Boal: 1 Kings, xviii. 27. But the
authority, and a multitude of people soon assembled themselves together, at the
prison, and the high sheriff demanded entrance, but we employed ourselves in
exhorting the authority and people to repentance. The authority seeing this,
gave orders to break open the prison door; so they went to work, and labored
exceeding hard on their sabbath, cutting with axes, and heaving at the door
with iron bars for a considerable time, till they were wearied, but could not
break open the door. Then justice Coit and a great company with him, went up to
the garret window by a ladder, and got into the garret, and labored very hard
for some considerable time to cut away a very thick strong trap door, full of
iron spikes; and after they had obtained their end, they came down among us,
and took away our bibles, provision, bedding, and every thing they could find:
Also they committed their prisoners.

About two days after this, we were taken out of prison and brought before
justice Coit, and two other justices, who required bonds of us for good
behavior; but we refused to give such bonds, judging we had not behaved ill,
nor resisted the authority of the government, in baring the prison door against
Daniel Coit and his lawless company: so they committed us to prison, to lie
there till November court; but they turned all the rest of our friends out of
prison, that justice Coit had committed to prison in such an unlawful and
mobbish manner. Now from this time to November court, when our friends went to
the meeting house and witnessed against their worship, or carted wood to the
prisoners on the first day of the week, justice Coit would fine them, and
commit them to prison on judgments of court; but he doubled their imprisonment
no more after they stopped the prison door.

The 2d day of December, being the second week of the courts setting, our
friends that stopped the prison door, were carried to Norwich court and fined
forty shillings each, and about forty shillings cost was laid on each of them:
Execution was given out, and their estates taken away to satisfy the fine and
charges: but the court ordered our friends to be set at liberty, that justice
Coit had committed to prison on judgments of court: But after the court set
those people at liberty, justice Coit sent executions and took oxen, cows, and
other estate from these people that he had so long confined in prison, to
satisfy the fine and charges which he laid upon them when he first committed
them to prison.

After this imprisonment, justice Adams undertook to stop our testimony against
their worship, by confining us in his house on the first days of the week, when
we came among them, and when their worship was over he would set us at liberty.
This method he practiced for some considerable time. In his house we many,
times met with rough treatment. After this we were several times driven from
the meeting house, into a slaughterhouse in a rigorous manner: One of the
selectmen of the town, would beat our women with his hands, and rub dirt and
dung in their faces, and force it into their mouths: but when their divine
worship, as they call it, was over they would set us at liberty. But October
13, 1765, some of our friends was in the meeting house, and when the hired
priest began to say over his carnal prayer, forbidden by our blessed savior,
Mat. vi. 5, etc. some of our women being moved with zeal, sewed with their
needles, that it might be known they had no fellowship with such unfruitful
works of darkness. Then justice Coit drove them out of the house, but he said
the men might set in the house, if they would be orderly: then one of our men
told him, that the priest had ordered our hats to be taken off, and that we
could not have so much fellowship with his carnal prayer, as to set quietly
without our hats: then the justice ordered him to be taken care of. Upon this
others spoke, and told the people their worship was contrary to the scripture,
and therefore not the worship of God: so justice Coit committed six of our
friends to prison. October 15, they beat the drum through the street, and
gathered the people of the town together, and took our friends out of prison,
and whipped five of them publicly at the beat of the drum. When the first of
these sufferers was taken out of prison to receive his sentence of whipping,
the sheriff asked if any body would pay his fine for him: but he told the
sheriff and people, he did not want any body to pay his fine; and then went to
justice Coit, and told him that their worship was the worship of devils: and
when he had received ten severe stripes, and was untied from the post, he told
justice Coit again, that their worship was the worship of devils, and that God
would overthrow it.

The next first day of the week, justice Coit committed twelve more of our
friends to prison for the like testimony. October 23, they were taken out of
prison, and nine of them publicly whipped, at the beat of the drum, and then
committed to prison again: But soon after the prison keeper was sent to bring
them out, one by one, with their bedding and other goods; but the sheriff stood
in the lower entry, and as they came out he took away all their goods from them
that he could find, without making any demand, or showing any execution.

The next first day of the week, we went into the meeting house again, and one
of our friends went up to justice Coit's pew, and told him that he had whipped
us twice for testifying against their false worship, and that now we were come
again in the same testimony: for what Christ tells us in darkness, he requires
us to speak in the light; and what we hear in the ear, to proclaim upon the
house tops, and not to fear them that kill the body: moreover he told the
people that their worship was not the worship of God, and that God was about to
overthrow it. For these, and other words spoken by our friends against their
worship, justice Coit committed eight of us to prison. November 1, he sentenced
seven of these people to be publicly whipped, but committed them to prison
again, and deferred their punishment to the 4th of November.

The next first day of the week, three of our men went into the meeting house,
and boldly witnessed against their false worship, pride, etc. November 4th,
these three men were sentenced to be publicly whipped, and then committed to
prison, with the other seven; and soon after they were taken out, and nine of
them whipped.

There was among these prisoners, an old woman near about seventy years of age,
that had been publicly whipped the week before, at the beat of the drum, and
was sentenced to be whipped this time, but was not whipped; it was supposed her
fine was paid by some of the spectators. She seeing her friends and children
taken out of prison, one by one, and tied to the post and whipped before her
eyes, she sung this verse: Let God arise, and then his foes
Shall turn themselves to flight;
His enemies they also shall
Be driven out of sight.
There was one of these sufferers that was taken out of prison to receive his
sentence of whipping, who was comforted with these words, The name of the Lord
is a strong tower, the righteous runs therein and are safe.

There was another of these sufferers after he had received ten severe blows on
his naked body, turned about and told the people, he hoped he should be more
full in his testimony against their false worship than he had been.

Another of these sufferers after his second public whipping, testified to the
people at the post, that it was the true God and eternal life that was with him
in his testimony and sufferings.

The next first day of the week, after our third whipping, being the 10th of
November, a guard was set to keep us from the meeting house, yet two of our men
escaped the guard, and went into the house, and boldly declared against their
false worship, and justice Coit committed them to prison. November 14, being
their pretended thanksgiving day, one of our friends went into the
meeting house, and told the people, God would not hear their prayers so long as
they lived in such pride, and persecuted God's children: but justice Coit
ordered a constable to take care of him; and after their worship was over,
about eight or ten men came out from their worship, among which was justice
Coit's son William, and two of the high sheriff's sons, and took him out of a
house, and the justice's son laid hold on him, and said, "come you dog, you
shall go along with us:" So they carried him to a place of muddy water, and
threw him into it several times: also they threw mud and dirt in his face, and
upon him for some time: But he testified to these wicked men, when they had him
in the water, that he felt a peaceable quiet spirit, which they could not
disturb. After this he was carried by the sheriff's house, where justice Coit
was, who had a mittimus ready, and committed him to prison, in that wet and
dirty condition.

The next first day of the week, being the 17th of November, some of our
friends went through the town, and an old man aged about 73 years, cried
repentance through the street, and as he went, he stopped at the authorities
houses, and warned them of the danger they were in, if they did not repent of
their persecuting God's people: moreover he told them, that the cries of God's
suffering children was gone up before God, and that the Lord Jesus was coming
with ten thousands of saints to execute judgment upon all their ungodly deeds.
Now after they had gone through the town, they went to the meeting house about
the time that they were gathered together for their forenoon meeting; but the
people at the meeting house fell upon our friends in a very angry manner, and
drove them into the school-house by justice Coit's order, and a constable kept
the door, and confined them there: and in the evening a very great concourse of
people, both men and women came together to the school-house, and our friends
were taken out, one by one, both men and women, and their heads and clothes
were tarred with warm tar: also they rubbed tar in some of their eyes, which
was very grievous: also they put tar into their hats, and put them on their
heads: moreover they threw some of our friends into a ditch of water, and
rolled them over, jumping upon them with their feet.

After this they took one of our friends that had been much abused that day,
and one of his ribs broken by a Grand-Juryman, and forced him to the river and
threw him in: Now he testified to these wicked men whilst they were abusing
him, that he had a good conscience both toward God and man: Some of these
people thus used, were elderly people, that had great families of children and
grandchildren; and there is no doubt but this abuse was done to them by order
of authority. Thus their pretended holy sabbath and divine worship ended for
that day: By their fruits, says Christ, ye shall know them. Some time after
this we were confined in the school-house again, and one of our friends wrote
upon the school-master's slate as follows.

Our blessed Lord, for sinners sakes,
A crown of thorns did wear;
Why then should we ashamed be,
A crown of tar to bear.
The next first day of the week after our friends was tarred, we went to the
meeting house again; but they carried us away from the meeting house to the
school-house, and confined us there till their meeting was over, and then set
us at liberty. The next day, being the 25th of November, these three men before
mentioned, were taken out of prison and brought before Justice Coit. And he
took up the writ he had against them, and read part of it and laid it down on
the table, and asked them if they owned what they were charged with in that
writ; they answered they did own it; and they told the Justice more that they
said at the meeting house than he had got in his writ against them. Then
justice Coit said, What would you have us do? Then our friends told him they
would have them get into the love of God, and get such a meek and lowly spirit,
as to be willing to hear the meanest of God's children, and to be like our
savior, who was so meek and lowly in heart as to wash his disciple's feet. So
after some considerable discourse more, justice Coit set them at liberty,
without inflicting any further punishment on them, though guilty of the like
crime that he whipped us for just before, three weeks running, and twice at the
beat of the drum.

The next first day of the week, being the first day of December, we went among
them again, and were confined in the school-house till their meeting was over,
and then set at liberty. But as we passed by the meeting house, justice Coit's
son William, and the High-Sheriff's eldest son, and others with them, beset us,
and the justice's son said we deserved to be crucified. Now after they had let
us go, and we were some considerable distance from them, they pursued after us
to the upper end of the town, as men greedy after our blood, and indeed our
lives have been threatened by that company; but when they came near to us they
made a stop, and turned back.

February 2, 1766, some of our people were in the meeting house, and when the
priest began to say over his pretended prayer, as Christ says, for a pretense
they make long prayers, some of our women sewed with their needles: Then they
turned them out of the house, but one of them went in again, and told the
priest, that his prayers were a smoke in God's nose, a fire that burns all the
day long. Then they turned her out again, and she went to the back side of the
house, and struck against the house several times, still to testify against his
pretended prayer, that it might be declared upon the house-tops, that she had
no fellowship with such unfruitful works of darkness, and she said she had a
good conscience and boldness toward God in what she did, knowing she pleased
God in it: But though she did it in a great self-denial, for no other end but
to please God, yet some of the people ran out and fell upon her, and one of the
Select-men of the town struck her several hard blows on her head and face, by
which she was much hurt.

February 9, one of our women told the priest as he was in the pulpit, that God
would reprove his great pride, and set his sins in order before his face: For
these words she was committed to prison for several days, and then set at
liberty.

February 16, some of our friends were setting quietly in the meeting house,
between meetings, and Colonel Saltanstall came in, and laid hold of an old man
that had the numb palsy, aged 73 years, and with great violence hauled him out
of the seat, setting an example to others, who fell upon them and drove them
out of the house, and drove them to the courthouse in a furious manner, and
carried them up through a trap-door into a dark garret, and locked them in, and
at night a company of base men got together, among which was Dudley
Saltanstall, son to Colonel Saltanstall, and two of justice Adams's sons, and
two of the High-Sheriff's sons, and Daniel Hurlbut, son to Titus Hurlbut one of
the Selectmen of the town. This base company went into the courthouse and shut
themselves in, and took our friends out of the garret, and offered shameful
abuse to our women in the dark. Now one of these women, as they were taking her
down out of the garret through the trap-door, told them, that the Lord would
come with ten thousands of his saints to execute judgment upon all their
ungodly deeds; her husband hearing this, cried out to the people of the town,
that the Sodomites had got his wife. Another of these women as they were
hauling her down through the trap door, cried all the while, Lord Jesus Christ
deliver me; and no doubt God heard her prayers and the prayers of the rest, for
the women were delivered in that they feared. Now after this shameful abuse to
the women, they took two men and stripped of their clothes and tied them to a
post in the courthouse, and whipped them in a most unmerciful manner,
especially one of them, which they struck unmerciful blows with a staff and
with bunches of rods on his back, till it was like a jelly, also they rubbed
tar into their wounds, and whipped upon the tar, forcing it into their flesh;
also they rubbed tar in the mouths of the men and women when they went to
speak. When these two men were first tied to the post they sang praises to God,
and in the time of their torment, they called upon God to strengthen them.

After this they laid hold on these two men, and forced them to run down near
to the town wharf, and threw them into the water several times; also they took
their hats and threw water on them for some considerable time: moreover they
threw the women into the water. After this the sheriff's eldest son and another
man with him, took a poor weakly woman, forty odd years of age, and forced her
to run through the street till she dropped down, and then they left her.

This woman told them if they did not repent, they would remember their night's
work when they and all men must appear before God to give an account of their
deeds. Now after this shameful abuse, these people had to go near three miles
wet, in a cold winter night, before they could shift their clothes. This
night's work seems to exceed what was done by the Sodomites the night before
their final overthrow.

Thus their pretended divine worship and holy sabbath ended for that day;
Isaiah iii. 9. The show of their countenance does witness against them, and
they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not.

Their worship is by Sodomites maintained,
By cruelties their worship is sustained;
No sons of Sodom ever yet were known,
Christ's truth to favor, or his worship own.
Now the next first day of the week, after Colonel Saltanstall shut our friends
up in the courthouse, and set his son Dudley, and others to abuse them, it
being the 23d of February, we were coming to the meeting house again, but as
soon as we appeared in sight, Colonel Saltanstall run out and met us, and a
great company with him, and fell upon us in a very angry manner, before we had
spoke one word, to drive us to the courthouse, as he did the week before, when
our friends were setting quietly in the house between meetings. But as soon as
they fell upon us, we spoke and made a great noise, and refused to go with
them, telling them we chose to be killed publicly before the people, rather
than to be murdered privately in the courthouse.

Now the tumult grew very great, so that the meeting was broken up for some
considerable time, and they dragged both men and women on the ground to the
courthouse; some by their hands, some by their legs, and some by the hair of
their heads, striking them with their fists, kicking them, striking and
punching them with staffs, and tearing the clothes off from their backs, and
they dragged them into the courthouse and hauled both men and women up two
pair of stairs, and hauled them up through a trap door into that dark loft that
they had shut our friends up in the week before, and they locked them in. In
this tumult an aged woman was so overcome that she fainted away, and they left
her lying on the ground. Now there were present in this riot, justice Coit,
justice Adams, justice Law, the High Sheriff, and Col. Saltanstall, besides
constables and grand-jurymen: There was also a Deacon among them, which makes
us write as follows.

The deacon and the justices
Were busy in this fray,
Church members and grand-jurymen
Forgot their sabbath day.
Now after the tumult was over, these church members remembered their sabbath,
and returned to their pretended divine worship again: But as soon as that was
over, the authority consulted together at the meeting house, and sent the
High Sheriff, who came with a company of men, and took down ten women out of
that dark loft that the authority had shut them up in: Two of these women had
young children with them, and another was big with child, and committed them to
prison, leaving near twenty small children motherless at their homes. Now as
the High Sheriff was going from the meeting house, to commit these women to
prison, some of the people of the town asked him what they were going to do
with our friends; the sheriff answered, that the women were to be committed to
prison, but he said the men were to be delivered up to Satan to be buffetted;
so the authority kept the men locked up in that dark garret till night, and
then they were delivered up to the authority's children, and a rude company of
young men, who came and unlocked the trap-door, and abused our friends in the
manner following: They took down one man first out of this dark loft, and
brought him down into the lower room of the courthouse, and tied his hands
round a post, also they tied another line to his hands, and hoisted him up by a
tackle, then they brought his knees round the post and tied them with a line,
and stripped his clothes up over his head, and tied them also; then they
whipped him in a very barbarous manner by the light of a candle. And when they
had done torturing him, they let him down, and shut him up in one of the
courthouse chambers. They then brought down another out of the garret, and
tortured him after the same manner as they did the first, and then shut him up
also, pretending they would whip them all over again, except they would recant
and promise not to come among them any more. There were twelve whippers that
took turns to whip, and commonly three or four to whip one man, one after
another, they pretended to give those men thirty-nine stripes each; but they
used several sorts of whips, especially one unmerciful instrument made of
cow-hide, also they whipped them with large rods tied together, some of which
had ten in a bunch, so that they far exceeded thirty-nine stripes, for they
struck each person thirty-nine times with these cruel instruments, except one
man, which after they had struck him thirty unmerciful blows, one of the
spectators ran and untied him, telling the whippers he was an old man, and that
they ought to use some discretion toward him. Nine men were thus used this
night, all heads of families, some of which were elderly men, that had great
families of children.

This whipping was executed in a very barbarous manner, for the rods were
trimmed, and long sharp snags left on them, to tear the flesh of the sufferers,
also these men that whipped our friends, struck them in such a violent manner
with these heavy bunches of rods, that they beat and bruised their flesh till
it was like a jelly. Moreover, some of their wrists were so cut and their
sinews so much hurt with the line they hung by, that several of their hands
were numb for more than two months after. Also them two men that had been so
unmercifully whipped by this company in the courthouse the week before, and
otherwise abused, as is already related, were of these nine that suffered this
night: And they struck one of these men, he that had been the most abused the
week before, forty-three cruel blows on his old sores, and ten or twelve of
these blows were after he was swooned away. Our persecutors cut these rods,
upon their sabbath, and fitted them at the courthouse, and Colonel Saltanstall
was at the courthouse among them, when they were preparing these rods.

The names of the men that whipped us are as follows: Two of Colonel
Saltanstall's sons, Dudley and Richard, also William Coit, son to justice Coit,
two of justice Adams's sons, William and Pygan, two of the High Sheriff
Christopher's sons, Christopher and Joseph, also Butolph Hurlbut, son to Titus
Harlbut, one of the selectmen of the town, also John Chapman and Gideon Stacey,
John Spooner and John Weigh, son to Thomas Weigh. Our friends that suffered
this night, asked no favor of their persecutors, but called earnestly upon God
to strengthen them to go through their trial. But when their persecutors heard
them praying and calling upon Christ for strength, they would threaten them,
and whip with all their might, endeavoring to make them promise to renounce
their testimony against their worship, but were not able to make one of them
renounce their testimony, or make any promise at all: But the sufferers told
them to this effect, that what they did against their worship was for no other
end but to please God and keep a good conscience, and that if they should
promise to renounce their testimony, God would renounce their souls for ever.
Also when some of these men had suffered this cruel whipping, and were shut up
in the courthouse chamber, they prayed earnestly to God to strengthen their
brethren that were to suffer, also they prayed for their persecutors, for God
gave them a more than common love to those that were tormenting them.

So after these nine men had suffered they were set at liberty, their
persecutors threatened them to double their whipping every time they came to
the meeting house among them. And no doubt they would have gone farther had not
God prevented them by making a division among the people; the neighboring
towns crying out against such barbarous and unlawful behavior; also it was a
common saying among the people, that they were sorry their rulers had resigned
up their authority to a company of boys, and set them to defend their worship.

The 27th day of February these ten women beforementioned, were taken out of
prison and brought before justice Coit, and he called that wicked company
together, that he and the rest of the authority at New London had just before
set to abuse our men. And instead of punishing them for abusing our friends, he
made witnesses of them against these women, and fined them forty shillings
each, and laid nineteen shillings cost on each of them: Also he required bonds
of good behavior, pretending they had broken the peace and sabbath in a
high-handed manner, but they refused to give such bonds: So justice Coit
committed them to prison to lie there till the court, which was to set at
Norwich the fifteenth of April: Yet there was not one of these women that spoke
one word at the meeting house before Colonel Saltanstall, and that wicked
company fell upon them, and some of these women did not speak after they fell
upon them, only cried out under the abuse they met with, by being dragged such
a length of way on the ground, and hauled up two pair of stairs, through a trap
door into the courthouse garret, in such a cruel and indecent manner as has
been already related. Now whether it was these women that were guilty of
breaking the peace and sabbath in a high-handed manner, as is charged against
them: Or whether it was justice Coit and that company with him that abused them
at the meeting house, that was guilty of breaking the peace and sabbath in a
high-handed manner, and of a riot also, we shall leave to the judgment of the
reader.

A particular account of these two last mobs, and of these ten women's
imprisonment was laid before the county court at Norwich, April 15, 1766, the
day that their bonds were up. But the authority at New London kept all these
women in prison till June court, except two, who were set at liberty a few days
before court, notwithstanding their bonds were up the 15th of April. Now seven
of these women were men's wives, so that the authority could have no cloak of
law for imprisoning them after their bonds were up.

The 10th day of June, being the first day of the court's setting, these women
sent a paper into court to inform the judges of their wrong imprisonment: And
some days after one of our friends asked two of the judges, whether it was
according to law to keep men's wives in prison upon executions.

The same day after this question was put to the judges, two of these women
were set at liberty. One was the woman before mentioned, that was big with
child when she was committed to prison; her husband carried her home, and she
was delivered of a child within three hours after she went out of the prison. A
few days after three more were turned out of prison, and the 21st day of June
the last of these women were set at liberty. Now the next first day of the
week, after the authority had shut our friends up in the courthouse garret,
and delivered them up to the young people to be abused; we went into the
meeting house, and Colonel Saltanstall told us to take off our hats; but we
told him it was a principle we held, and that we ought to have liberty to wear
our hats: But he said, we should not wear them in the time of divine worship;
so he ordered our hats to be taken off, and we went out of the house. Now how
he can prove their worship to be divine we know not: For it is certain their
worshippers are very corrupt, and the fruits they bring forth very evil. The
next first day of the week we went into the meeting house again, and justice
Coit told us to take off our hats; but we insisted hard upon wearing them. Then
the priest spoke in the pulpit as follows: I solemnly declare before God and
this assembly, that as long as I officiate in the priest's office in this
house, no man shall sit here with his head covered, and then struck his hand
hard upon the pulpit in confirmation of his words. So justice Coit ordered our
(...) taken off, and we went out of the house. Now our hats is such an offense
to this proud priest, that he will neither preach nor pray when they are in
sight. And this has been often proved, and especially one time not long since:
When he saw some of our friends setting without the meeting house door on the
steps, he stopped in the midst of his service, and shut up his bible, and told
the authority they were come again: But the authority seemed to take but little
notice of it, but the priest continued insisting that they should be taken away
from the door; and at last told the authority plainly, that if they did not
order them away he would not preach to them; so then the authority gave orders,
and they moved them from the door.

But although this priest is so offended at our hats, yet he is no ways
offended at the authority and people for their cruel and unlawful behavior
toward us, all which he has publicly justified: But the hat he cannot endure,
pretending it is contrary to 1 Cor. xi. 4. Every man praying or prophesying
having his head covered, dishonors his head. Now if this priest would but
read the next words, he might see it to be as contrary to scripture for women
to pray or prophecy uncovered, yet his meeting is full of young women with
their heads naked, but that gives him no offense at all, it is the fashion so
to dress. And if he would but read carefully what the apostle says about this
covering, he might see that the apostle tells plainly himself, before he leaves
the matter, what covering it is that he is treating of; as is to be seen in the
13th, 14th, and 15th verses of this chapter. Judge in yourselves, is it comely
that a woman pray unto God uncovered: Does not even nature itself teach you,
that if a man have long hair it is a shame unto him: But if a woman have long
hair it is a glory unto her, for her hair is given her for a covering.

Thus it appears that the apostle is speaking of the hair, and not of any
garment of the body: Also God commanded his ministers under the law, to cover
their heads with a garment, when they came to minister in his presence, and not
to wear long hair; as appears Ezekiel. xliv. 18, 20, They shall have linen
bonnets upon their heads, etc. Nor suffer their locks to grow long.

April 13. Some of our friends were setting in the meeting house, but when the
priest came in he ordered their hats to be taken off; when one of our friends,
an old man, told him that he had something on his mind to speak to the people,
and would be glad to have him hear it: but the priest said he would hear
nothing from him, and commanded the people to turn our friends out of the
house. But the priest seeing the people very moderate, and unwilling to meddle
with us, he soon grew angry, and called to the young men in the galleries, and
bid them come down and carry them fellows out of the house: then an aged woman
of our company, being near the pulpit, spoke to this effect, "Woe, woe to them
"that worship idols, and persecute God's people." These words she repeated
sundry times: so they moved us out of the house very moderately, and we went
away.

We have lately seen a paragraph in a Boston news papers, as follows: We hear
the Sons of Liberty at New London, have taken such methods with the sect called
Rogerenes, that they are prevented from disturbing the worshipping assemblies
in that neighborhood on Lord's Day: a practice they have followed more or
less, for many years past; and which all the laws made in the government, and
executed in the most judicious manner, could not put a stop to.

Answer. As to what they have heard concerning our testimony being prevented,
is not to be credited, for we hear no such news at New London, neither have we
any reason to believe that our rulers at New London, have gained either
strength or credit in delivering us up to the young people, and setting them to
abuse us.

But they positively affirm in this news paper, that all the laws made in the
government, and executed upon us for many years past, could not put a stop to
our testimony or disturbance as they call it.

This affirmation is true, and it is good proof that we are not like the stoney
ground, spoken of Mat. xiii. 20, 21: but have dug deep, and laid our
foundation on a rock; according as we read Luke vi. 48. and Mat. vii. 24, 25.
Moreover we may consider that all the laws made in Rome for many years past,
and executed upon the protestants, could not put a stop to their testimony: nor
all the cruel and barbarous laws made in Boston government, and executed upon
the people called Quakers, in the most rigorous manner, and the righteous blood
shed in that government, could not put a stop to the testimony of that people.

Sept. 14, 1766. Some of our people went and set down some distance from the
priest's house, and when he came out to go to meeting, they walked with him and
endeavored to have some friendly discourse with him concerning the things of
God: But the priest would not talk with them about the things of God. However,
they walked with him and talked to him, but before they came to the
meeting house, justice Coit began to kick them in a furious manner, especially
the women. Also one of the townsmen fell upon them, punching both men and women
with a staff in a cruel manner, so they were driven by some of the people to
the upper end of the town.

The next first day of the week, being the 21st of September, as some of us
were setting by the side of a house, between meetings, about four or five rods
from the priest's house, saying nothing to any person, the High Sheriff came
with some assistants and took us and sent for justice Coit, who came and
committed eight men of us to prison. And on the 26th day of the same month,
justice Coit came to the prison, and we were taken out, and brought before him,
and he charged us with disturbing the minister's peace: We told him we had no
thought of doing the minister any hurt: Justice Coit answered, that he did not
suppose that we intended to strike him or wrestle with him, nor he did not
suppose that we intended to hurt a hair of his head; but he supposed that we
intended when the minister came out to go along by his his side and talk with
him. So when justice Coit had confessed that he did not suppose we intended to
hurt a hair of the priest's head, he fined us five shillings each, and required
bonds of good behavior toward all his majesty's subjects; but especially
toward the priest. But we refused to give such bonds, looking upon the
judgment to be very absurd, and that justice Coist's supposing that we intended
to talk with the priest was not breach of peace in us, so he committed seven of
us to prison again, all heads of families, one of which men was in his
seventy-fifth year. Four of these men were kept in prison till the 13th of
December following, and two were set at liberty about the 28th of November, and
one within a few days after we were committed to prison.

Now after these men were committed to prison, our friends that were at liberty
thought it necessary that some of our people should go on the first days of the
week and set in the priest's sight, and not fear them that persecute the body.
But when the priest saw them sitting in sight, if it were but a few women, he
would not come out of his house to go to meeting, which manifested him to be a
shepherd that did not care for his sheep, according to Christ's testimony, John
x. 13. The hireling flees because he is an hireling, and cares not for the
sheep. Also this behavior of the priest occasioned much trouble to his poor
flock, for sometimes the bell would ring and the people set waiting for their
priest till it was time for meeting to be half done: And then justice Coit, or
some of the rest of his sheep were obliged to come and move the women out of
the priest's sight, and guard their shepherd to the meeting house, lest these
women should speak to him of the things of God.

It was almost every first day of the week for the whole time of this
imprisonment, which was near three months, that this shepherd was kept in his
house by the sight of our friends, and sometimes only at the sight of a few
women, and he never ventured to come out till some of his sheep came and drove
the women away. But justice Coit committed no more of our friends to prison
under bonds of good behavior, because he supposed they intended to talk with
the priest after these men abovementioned. But the 23d of November, one of our
men told the priest after he was come out of the meeting house, that he came to
put him in mind how they kept God's children in prison, and that their worship
was upheld by cruelty. The priest answered to this effect, that they could
uphold it no other way. Then the man replied it must certainly be of the devil
if there is no other way to uphold it but by cruelty. But the sheriff struck
him twice on his head, and punched him with his staff to prevent his speaking
to the priest. And he and three women were committed to prison, but at night
they were set liberty. Some of our neighbors argue that they have built them a
meeting house, and have a natural right to worship in it; and that no person
has any right to come into their house and oppose their worship.

But how they can maintain this argument we know not, except they deny God to
have any authority over them, for God said, Jer. i. 7. Thou shall go to all
that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee thou shall speak. Also
the apostle Paul exhorts us to be followers of him as he was of Christ, 1
Cor. xi. 1. And Paul spent much time in going from place to place, disputing in
the synagoues on the sabbath days, as appears in the Acts of the Apostles. And
no doubt they built their synagogues, and thought as our neighbors do, that
they had a natural right to worship in them, and that the apostle had no right
to oppose them in their worship, for they were as much offended at the apostle
as our neighbors are at us, for they called him a pestilent fellow, and said
he was a mover of sedition throughout the world, Acts xxiv. 5. Also speaking of
Paul and Silas, they said, Acts xvii. 6. These that have turned the world up
side down, are come hither also.

Now the reason that we oppose our neighbors in their worship is, because
Christ has enlightened us both by his spirit and the scriptures, to see that
their worship is carried on in pride and in the vain glory of this world
contrary to the scriptures, by the instigation of that old serpent called the
devil and satan which deceives the whole world, Rev. xii. 9. And God's
children are his witnesses, Isaiah xliii. 12. Ye are my witnesses says the
Lord. And God requires his witnesses to be faithful and zealous in opposing
false worship; as appears both from the old testament and the new: for it was
the work of God's children under the law to destroy falsle worship: it was the
statutes and judgments that God commanded them to observe and do all the days
that they lived on the earth: see Deuteronomy. xii. 1, etc. It was Isarel's arrant out
of Egypt, to destroy the false worship of them kingdoms, as appears by the
following scriptures; Exodus xxxiv. 10 to 18 verse. Exodus xxiii. 20 to 26. Deuteronomy.
vii. 1 to 6 verse. Numb. xxxiii. 50, 51, 52.

Moreover they were commanded of God to destroy all such among themselves as
went after false worship; and not to pity or conceal any, though it were their
sons and daughters, or wife of their bosom, if they enticed them to go and
serve other God's; but they were commanded to witness against them; and their
hands were to be first upon them, to put them to death, and afterward the
hands of all the people: see Deuteronomy. xiii. 6 to 12 ver. and chap. xvii. 2 to 8 v.

Now under the law, God's people were to destroy false worship by the carnal
sword; but under the gospel by the word of their testimony, as appears Rev.
xii. 11. And they overcame by the blood, of the lamb and by the word of their
testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death: Also Christ says,
Mat. x. 27, 28. What I tell you in darkness, that speak in the light, and what
ye hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the house tops, and fear not them that
kill the body, etc. Thus it appears by these scriptures that Christ requires
his witnesses to be very zealous in testifying against false worship: And it is
this Godly testimony that our neighbors are offended at, it is the division
Christ came to make, for he came not to send peace on earth, but a sword; he
came to kindle a fire, and make a division: See Mat. x. 34, etc. Also Luke xii.
49 and 51. Now the established ministers of this land, learn their trades and
hire themselves out as other tradesmen do: They are hired by the year to
preach, as idolators were of old; Judge. xvii. 10. And our savior says, the
hireling cares not for the sheep: John x, 13. Also Christ calls such false
prophets and ravening wolves: Mat. vii. 15. Moreover Christ says they devour
widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayers: Mat. xxiii. 14. Also the
prophet cries out against such hirelings: Isaiah lvi, 10. His watchmen are
blind, they are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs. Verse 11. Yea they are
greedy dogs, which can never have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot
understand, they all look to their own way, every one for his gain from his
quarter. And do not the hireling watchman of this land, look to their own way,
even to their own worldly interest, every one for his gain from his quarter or
parish, as much as those watchmen did in the prophet Isaiah's time: Ezekiel.
xxxiv. 2, 3, Woe be the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves, should not
the shepherds feed the flock, ye eat the fat and ye cloth you with the wool,
ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the flock. Also we read 2 Timothy iv.
3. and 2 Peter ii. 3. that the time would come when they would heap to
themselves teachers having itching ears, and that they would make merchandise
of the people: And we see these scriptures fulfilled in this our day; for there
is such heaps of vain youths brought up at colleges, that they sworm out like
locusts out of the smoke of the bottomless pit: Rev. ix. 2, 3. Enough to supply
every town and village in the country, and to spare; for they are as thick as
Baal's priests were in the days of Elijah.

Also these hireling priests teach people to observe the first day of the week
as a sabbath, but the scripture teaches no such thing, for there is not one
word in all the scripture that says any thing about its being a sabbath: And
the scripture says, where no law is, there is no transgression, Romans iv. 15.
And sin is not imputed when there is no law, Romans v. 13. To the law and the
testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no
light in them. Isaiah viii. 20.

Moreover these hireling priests sprinkle people, instead of baptising them,
and sprinkle little infants also, contrary to the practice and example given to
us both by Christ and his holy apostles, as appears by these following
scriptures; Acts ii. 38. Then Peter said unto them, repent and be baptized
every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye
shall receive the gift of the holy ghost. But infants have nothing to repent
of, for they are not capable of committing sin, for they have no knowledge
between good and evil: See Deuteronomy. i. 39. Also we are to be buried with Christ by
baptism: Romans vi. 4. Buried with him by baptism into death, that like as Christ
was raised up from the dead by the glory of the father, even so we also should
walk in newness of life. And Christ's messengers always baptized the believing
and repenting sinner, by burying him in the water, in the likeness of Christ's
death, and raising him up out of the water in the likeness of Christ's
resurrection; as appears throughout the new testament: Acts viii. 37, 38, 39
And Philip said, if thou believe with all thine heart, thou may; and they
went down both into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him,
and when they were come up out of the water, etc. Mat. iii. 5, 6. Then went out
to him Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan, and were
baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins:

Thus it appears by these scriptures, that we must repent and believe with all
our heart, and confess our sins before we can be fit subjects of baptism: Also
the Greek word baptize, is wash or dip in water: And Jesus when he was
baptized, went up straight way out of the water, Mat. iii. 16. And John also
was baptising in Enon, because there was much water there, John iii. 23. Which
scripture fully confutes and condemns this Popish practice of sprinkling
instead of baptising.

Also Christ commanded his disciples not to be like the hypocrites that prayed
in synagogues and public places, Matt. vi. 5. But the hireling priests of this
land go contrary to this plain command of Christ, and contrary to his practice:
For the scripture does not show that ever Christ or his apostles made a prayer
in a public assembly when they were met together for preaching: Also the dress
of their churches, which are dressed in gold and costly array, contrary to 1 Timothy ii. 9. and 1 Pet. iii. 3, resembles the dress of mystery Babylon the
great, the mother of harlots, that was drunk with the blood of the saints and
martyrs of Jesus, and arrayed in purple, and decked with gold, etc.
harlot-like, Rev. xvii. 4. etc. Now Christ has enlightened us both by his
spirit and the scriptures, to see that all these articles abovenamed is
contrary to the scriptures, and that all the established worship of this land
is upheld and carried on in pride and oppression, by the instigation of that
old serpent called the devil and satan, which deceives the whole world, Rev.
xii. 9. And Christ has called us to bear an open testimony against it, whether
they will hear or whether they will forbear, for it is that which God has
appointed to utter destruction, and will be overthrown by the testimony of
God's children, as is written in these following scriptures, Rev. xii. 11. And
they overcame by the blood of the lamb and by the word of their testimony, and
they loved not their lives unto the death. Jer. li. 20. Thou art my battle-axe
and weapons of war, for with thee will I break in pieces the nations, and with
thee will I destroy kingdoms, etc. Zech. xii. 3. In that day will I make
Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people, all that burden themselves with
it, shall be broken to pieces, though all the earth be gathered together
against it. Isaiah live. 17. No weapon that is formed against thee shall
prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shall
condemn: This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their
righteousness is of me, says the Lord.

Concerning Women's Prophesying or Teaching in the Church.
WHEN God delivered Israel his chosen people from the Egyptian bondage, he did
not send men teachers only, to instruct his church, but he sent a woman teacher
also, to teach and instruct his people. See Mic. vi. 4. I sent before thee
Moses, Aaron, and Miriam. Here we may see that God sent a woman teacher to
instruct his church and people, and to go before them, as he sent Moses and
Aaron. Joel ii. 28. Your sons and your daughters shall prophesy. Acts xxi. 9.
Philip had four daughters that prophesied, these were teachers in the church:
for the apostle says, 1 Cor. xiv. 3. He that prophesies speaks unto men to
edification and exhortation and comfort. So that these women were sent of God,
to teach and exhort the church: Also in the first verse of this chapter, the
church is exhorted to follow after charity, and desire spiritual gifts; but
rather that they may prophesy. Verse 4th, He that prophesies edifieth the
church; that is by teaching and exhortation. Verse 5th, Greater is he that
prophesies. Here we may see that the apostle prefers the gift of prophesy or
teaching as one of the most excellent gifts in the church. This excellent gift
God bestows upon women. Joel ii. 28. Your daughters shall prophesy or teach.
Moreover in the 4th chapter of Judges we have an account of Deborah, a
prophetess, a judge that God raised up and sent to teach and instruct Israel
his chosen people, and to go before them. Also we read 2 Kings xxii. 13, etc.
of king Josiah's sending his princes to a woman teacher, for her to enquire of
the Lord for him and for the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem: And she said
unto the princes, thus says the Lord God of Israel, tell the man that sent you
unto me, etc. Also in Luke ii. 36, we have an account of one Anna, a woman
teacher, that departed not from the temple, and spoke of Christ to all them
that looked for redemption in Jerusalem. Moreover we have an account in Romans
xvi. 3, etc. of Priscilla, Paul's helper in Christ Jesus, who for his sake,
laid down her own neck. This woman was one that traveled with Paul, as appears
Acts xviii. 18. Also when Apollos was speaking boldly in a synagogue, knowing
only the baptism of John: This woman and her husband took him unto them, and
expounded unto him the way of the Lord more perfectly. Acts xviii. 26.

Thus it appears by the holy scriptures, that God sends women to teach and
instruct his church, and to expound the way of the Lord, and that he endues
them with the gift of prophesy: And he that prophesies says the apostle,
speaks to men to edification and exhortation and comfort.

But it may be objected that the apostle said to the church of Corinth, Let
your women keep silence in the churches, for it is not permitted unto them to
speak.

To which we answer, That this church of Corinth had gotten into great
confusion and disorder, as appears 1 Cor. xiv. 26. Every one having a psalm, a
doctrine, a tongue, a revelation, an interpretation; so that the apostle is
putting down disorder in the church, and disorderly women; and not such women
as God had endued with the gift of prophesy, to teach and instruct his church;
for such says the apostle, speaks to men to edification and exhortation and
comfort.

Neither can we reasonably suppose that the apostle meant to silence such women
as Miriam, that God raised up for a teacher, and sent before Israel with Moses
and Aaron, to teach and instruct his church: Neither could he intend such women
as Deborah the prophetess, a judge that God raised up and set over Israel, to
teach and instruct his church, and to go before them: For such godly judges are
to speak and teach in the church and not to be silent, see Judge. v. 10. Speak
ye that ride on white asses, ye that set in judgment.

2d Object. That the apostle exhorted these women in the church of Corinth, if
they would learn any thing, to ask their husbands at home. Answer. All women
have not husbands at home; and some godly women have unbelieving husbands that
are not capable of teaching them, so that we may reasonably suppose the apostle
to be reproving disorderly and talkative women, that had husbands at home that
Were capable of teaching them, and not such women as God had endued with the
gift of prophecy; for such says the apostle speaks to men, to edification, and
exhortation and comfort.

3d Object. That the apostle said, I suffer not a woman to teach, nor usurp
authority over the man.

Answ. Such women as God has endued with the gift of prophecy, to teach and
instruct his church, speak by the authority of Christ's spirit, and not by an
usurped authority; and the apostle allows such women to pray and prophecy in
the church, their heads being covered in token of their obedience: And such
women as pray and prophecy in the church, teach in the church, and speak in the
church, to edification and exhortation and comfort.

There are some things in Paul's epistles which are hard to be understood,
which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other
scriptures, unto their own destruction. 2 Pet. iii. 15, etc,

THE END.
ERRATA: In the Title Page, nine Lines from the Bottom, for Verse 19, read JER.
i. 17. The same Page, seven Lines from the Bottom, for JER. i. 17. read Verse
19. Page 28, Line 14, for set liberty read set at liberty.


