Mr. Shute's ARTILLERY-ELECTION SERMON.

A SERMON PREACHED TO THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE ARTILLERY COMPANY IN BOSTON,
NEW ENGLAND, JUNE 1, 1767. BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THEIR ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
BY DANIEL SHUTE, A. M. Pastor of the Third Church in HINGHAM.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by EDES and GILL, in Queen Street. M,DCC,LXVII.

AN ARTILLERY-SERMON.
ECCLE. IX. 18. Wisdom is better than Weapons of War --
THE story, whether real or fictitious, which gives rise to this observation,
may be considered as a specimen of the temper and conduct of mankind under
similar circumstances.

THE supreme governor has put mankind into different situations in this world;
as the potter has power over the clay to make one vessel to honor, and another
to dishonor, so he to make one being of greater, and another of less capacity,
and to place one under greater, and another under less advantages of
improvement. And as it is necessary to their well-being that mankind should be
formed into different societies, the same sovereignty is displayed toward them
in that situation; hence one society has more wealth and greater strength than
another. There was a little city and few men within it, and there came a great
king against it. The superiority of this great king, no doubt lay in numbers
and wealth, which are the sinews of martial power.

AMBITION and avarice too often arise from the circumstances of the powerful
and great; the same persons under different circumstances will act a very
different part: The aspiring views of men bear some proportion to their
fortunes; and the possession of much produces an ardent thirst for more. How
strongly soever this speaks the imperfection of man, and the insufficiency of
worldly good to the happiness for which the human mind was formed, facts
abundantly support the verity of it. Nor is it improbable, that such views led
this great king against this little city; for though small, compared to his
kingdom, yet the conquest might, in his sordid mind, be a desired augmentation
of wealth, and extent of dominion.

THE most sanguine attempts, and big with probability of success may prove
abortive: The race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong. As
the human mind is finite, and therefore incapable to take in every circumstance
that may attend the execution of a plan, seemingly laid with the greatest
probability of success, so one incident unforeseen may terminate the whole in
disappointment. So terminated the designs of this great king, against this
little city. A poor man within the walls, too obscure to be noticed by this
great general, by his wisdom delivered it from his rapacious jaws.

THE estimation of wisdom is to be made from the mind, directing the conduct,
and not from outward circumstances. The mind in its own nature, is superior to
matter, as it is capable of noble exertions, and great improvements; and in
proportion to the ideas, and justness of sentiment it acquires, determining a
corresponding conduct, it is less or more worthy: There is therefore no
absolute connection between outward circumstances, and mental nobility: The
Poor may be wise, and the Rich foolish, for riches are not always to men of
understanding.

BUT yet mankind in general, such is their imperfection, are apt to estimate
the real character by outward circumstances: The false glare of secular
grandeur presses so hard upon the feeble sight of the inattentive, as to lead
into deception in judging of themselves and others. Riches make men
self-sufficient, and produce in others a servile dependence on their sovereign
dictates. Wealth is the standard of wisdom, as well as the source of happiness,
in the opinion of the unthinking. The idea of poverty and folly are closely
connected, and outward circumstances are the criterion of a man's real worth.
And this is the foible not of a few, but of the greater part of mankind; to the
opulent they are attentive and obsequious, but the poor man's wisdom is
despised, and his words are not heard.

THE services of the truly patriotic are rewarded according to the popular
false view of things: The meritorious, in this depraved state, are not certain
of equal reward: Envy and ambition, by artifice and cunning, may wrest from the
hands of the people, the laurels designed for their heads, who have done many
worthy deeds for their country; and all they have done -- be repaid with base
ingratitude, and cruel neglect. No man remembered that same poor man, whose
wisdom delivered the city.

THERE are, notwithstanding, great advantages arising from wisdom; it yields a
homefelt satisfaction, and may be the great security of the person endued with
it: And it is also of great utility to society. Though this may not be so
perceptible when things glide on smoothly, yet a time of trial will make it
conspicuous. In such a time, wisdom will be found to be superior to folly
surrounded with wealth and aided by martial power; and this is agreeable to the
observation in the text: Wisdom is better than weapons of war; which is a
reflection arising from the foregoing story.

WHETHER Solomon in this observation leads us to conceive of different kinds of
wisdom, according to the different objects about which it is conversant, or to
distinguish between wisdom political, and religious, may admit of some dispute.
And whether the wisdom by which the poor man delivered the city, in degree,
fell short of, or came up to, that wisdom which in other parts of his writings
forms the religious character, is unnoticed. But if wisdom, in the reflection,
should be supposed by some to intend the former, and to exclude the latter; I
shall beg leave, in this discourse to consider it as including both.

AND accordingly, by divine help, shall endeavor to show,

I. THAT war is to be expected, in the present state of mankind.

II. THAT to provide weapons for defense, is necessary and fit. But,

III. THAT wisdom is still a higher qualification for defense, and will answer
the purpose better than weapons without it.

I. IN the present state of mankind, war is to be expected.

THE depravity of human nature is the ground and reason of such expectation.
God indeed made man upright, but they have sought out many inventions; are
warped off from their original constitution, and the whole world lies in
wickedness.

IT is true, the dispensation of grace, early discovered to man, is calculated
not only to save him from the evil consequences of transgression, but to
qualify him for present and future happiness. As it lays a foundation of
reconciliation with God, so of the most friendly intercourse between man and
man, clearly directing, and powerfully assisting, to the observation of the
rules of righteousness and charity.

THE moral perfections of the supreme governor forbid the supposition, that
mankind were left without proper rules of conduct toward him, and one another;
or sufficient motives to right action. And revelation clearly vindicates the
ways of God to men in this particular.

THE law written in their hearts, by the finger of their maker, was plain and
legible at first; and from their longevity in early age, could with more ease
and certainty be transmited to posterity. Great and general deviations from
this rule were followed with signal vengeance, and survivors were taught to
take warning by the sufferings of others. And the various dispensations of
providence, were adapted to impress on the mind of man, a reverential regard to
the supreme authority.

THIS law, after a while, was committed to writing, and published at Mount
Sinai to a select number of mankind, that by means hereof his way might be
known upon earth, and his saving health among all nations. The capital precepts
of which, tend to promote order and peace in the world, as they strictly enjoin
love to God, and love to men; Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart -- and thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

IN the time though it best by infinite wisdom, an extraordinary teacher was sent
into the world, to set this rule in a clearer light, and to enforce it with
additional motives. This day spring from on high has visited us, to give light
to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death; to guide our feet in
the way of peace.

BUT love to God, under this clearer discovery of duty is still the first and
great command, and the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self. The way to happiness is the same: The gospel only throws greater
light on it, and urges men into it with greater assistance, and more powerful
motives.

THE means of knowledge, and the motives to duty have, no doubt, been adapted
to the state and circumstances of mankind in every age. -- And in every age,
sufficient to lead them to that temper and conduct, which would obtain the
approbation of their lawgiver and judge, and secure their own happiness.

THE provision made by indulgent heaven, supposes in man understanding and
judgment, and a power of determination in point of conduct. And mankind have
given sad evidence of their liberty and self-determining power, in acting
counter to the evidence of truth, and going out of the right way; and while
they have approved the better, in following the worse things.

IT is their misfortune indeed, in this lapsed state to have the powers of the
mind embarrassed by the ill temperament of the body, which provokes appetite
and passion, and misguides the soul in her pursuit after happiness; and is
productive of irregularity and disorder in the world. The passions are forcibly
moved by sensible good. The soul, inattentive to higher motives, blindly
follows the passions; and borne from her natural center, is hurried on to the
violation of the rules of social duty. From hence arise all the oppression
there is under the sun -- all the invasion of the rights and properties of
others -- the rapine and murder so rife among mankind. Jam. 4. 1. From whence
come wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, even of your lusts,
that war in your members?

IN the most authentic history of mankind, we are acquainted with an early
deviation from the rule of conduct, in a gross act of hostility and murder,
when Cain rose up against Abel his brother and slew him. History, sacred and
profane, unite in the exhibition of a continued series of the like temper and
practice, though attended with a great variety of different circumstances; and
make it evident, that mankind, under the general dispensation of grace, in
every age, have corrupted themselves, renounced their allegiance to the supreme
ruler, and unweariedly endeavored to plunder, enslave, and destroy their own
species.

THE notices of the divine law inscribed in the heart, and handed down by
tradition, have been disregarded, and as they did not like to retain God in
their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things
which are not convenient, but tend to interrupt the order of his creation.

NEITHER have the advantages of a written law been duly improved by them, as
appears by the description of such in Romans 3. Their throat is an open
sepulcher, with their tongues they have used deceit, the poison of asps is
under their lips, whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are
swift to shed blood, destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way of
peace have they not known: there is no fear of God before their eyes.

THE still clearer discovery of their duty, and urged with the most cogent
motives, has been ineffectual to procure a compliance -- to preserve order and
peace, and to prevent oppression, and the most savage treatment of one another.
In evidence of which might be adduced the angry debates, the cruel persecutions
and bloody wars in christendom for so many centuries.

OUR Savior, aware that the best means to reform and make human nature happy,
would be obstinately opposed, and through the lusts of men perverted to interrupt
their happiness, gave his followers the precaution in the 10th of Mat. 34th.
Think not that I am come to send peace on earth, I came not to fend peace, but
a sword; that they might not be deceived in the expectation of better times
than they would actually find.

THOUGH his gospel is eminently calculated to recover human nature to its
original rectitude -- to inspire the heart with love to God and love to men --
to extirpate every unfriendly passion -- to cultivate the most noble and
extensive benevolence, and to produce universal peace and happiness; yet it
still lies with man to fall in with the gracious method, or to oppose it. And
as the great author of this glorious plan, when he personally appeared on
earth, was despised and rejected of men, so his religion, ever since, has fared
no better with the most. By a strange perversion of the only method that could
reform and make them happy, men have continued, and even increased their
disloyalty to heaven, and acts of hostility to one another.

THUS things, from the beginning of time, have gone on in our world. And though
before the winding up of this drama, it is firmly, and with ardor expected,
that the gospel will more powerfully prevail, and the happy effects of
innocence, and peace, will be felt in every part of the earth; when they shall
beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks, and
nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any
more: Yet while the gospel spreads no further, and has no greater influence
where it is known, what can be expected but that mankind should still be
inimical to one another, and nation should rise against nation, and kingdom
against kingdom? The same cause will produce the same effect. Under similar
circumstances human nature has ever been pretty much the same. As the former
times were not better than the present, why should these be better than the
former, while the evidence of truth is no more admitted, and appetite and
passion determine the world.

II. To provide weapons for defense is necessary and sit.

THOUGH indeed there is no absolute necessity of war, as mankind are not
necessitated to break the laws of God, and injure one another; yet it may be
necessary and sit to accommodate ourselves to it, when through the lusts of men
it comes to pass; and herein, I think, we shall be supported by reason and
revelation.

BEING itself with all the privileges of it, is the communication of happiness
from the infinite source of goodness. And all the variety of creatures that
people the universe have equal claim to those natural privileges which are
gratuitously derived to them respectively from the munificence of their creator.

EVERY creature is naturally invested with a power, in some degree, to secure
that happiness of which it is made capable: And the invasion of the natural
rights of the creature, counter to the constitution of God for the
communication of happiness, must be wrong.

EVERY rational moral agent is accountable to the creator for its conduct, and
rewardable or punishable according to it. No such creature, therefore, has
liberty to resign it is being at pleasure, or willingly to admit the
interruption of the natural course of things productive of happiness. But is
under moral obligation to receive the gifts of its creator with gratitude, and
improve them to his honor. And every such creature has a right to enjoy these
gifts unmolested, until it has by its own misconduct forfeited the enjoyment;
and is also under the same obligation, according to its capacity, and in every
fit way, to preserve and defend the grant of being with all the benefits and
privileges thereto belonging. And accordingly there is implanted, in all such
rational beings, a principle of self-preservation, and a sense of moral
obligation, to dispose them to counteract the designs of others to deprive them
of happiness, and to break in upon the constitution of God.

IT appears therefore, that the unjust encroachments on the natural rights of
the rational creature, may, and ought to be opposed by him.

AND if reason and argument will not dissuade the invaders from their
unrighteous design, every other exertion is to be made, according to the
ability of the creature, given for the security of its own happiness; for where
such exertions are necessary to accomplish the end, which is right and duty to
be accomplished, they must in the reason of things be fit.

OFFENSIVE war in any part of the rational creation is wrong; as no one has a
right to molest another in the enjoyment of his natural rights, and no society
of beings has a right to interrupt the happiness of any other society.

DEFENSIVE war only, is justifiable among rational beings; by which is
intended, opposition to others in defense of those natural immunities and
rights which are the free gift of the creator; and with a view to the general
good.

AND such war may be justified, in the reason of things, among the rational
inhabitants of every world throughout the universe; unless prohibited by the
supreme governor, who may direct his creatures to recede from their natural
rights, and to resign their present enjoyments, in lieu of greater happiness to
be conferred in reward of their obsequious resignation. But without such
interposition, they are under moral obligations to oppose the invasion of their
rights, and the interruption of the harmony of the universe.

UPON such principles we are not shocked to (...) sacred writ, there was war in
heaven and Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; though we at once
censure the attempts of the grand apostate as unworthy, yet, at the same time,
we approve the conduct of the general of the king of heaven, and applaud him as
acting from the noblest views; and triumph in his victory. Whatever may be
intended by this part of St. John's vision, the scriptures certainly lead us to
believe, that there is continual opposition to one another, among the highest
orders of creatures we know of, the one counteracting the constitution of the
creator, the other supporting it, with which their own happiness is inseperably
connected.

THE supreme Lord of the universe has made creatures of different orders, and
assigned to them different parts of his creation. The earth he has given to
the children of men. And by making it necessary to their happiness, and
disposing them, under the governance of his providence, to form into distinct
societies, has divided to them the several parts of it. For he has not only
made of one blood all nations of men to dwell on all the face of the earth, but
has determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitations.

MANKIND, therefore, have the gifts of nature, in common with other rational
beings, according to their rank in creation, and also rights and privileges
peculiar to nations, which they receive from, and hold under, the great
proprietor of the world. It is fit that they should receive these as the bounty
of heaven, and maintain and defend them in that capacity; especially as their
natural and political rights are so inseperably blended, that the one cannot be
defended without the other.

SUCH kind and degree of defense, if in our power, as may answer the end, and
only such, ought to be pursued. We are to begin with such as is adapted to the
rational nature. But if address to reason will not impede the determined
aggressor, it becomes fit to repel force with force. But yet an enemy is not to
be pursued with revenge after he is conquered, and to do us further injury is
put out of his power; in this situation we are rather to show acts of kindness,
and to overcome evil with good. It is unfit that we should attempt the
destruction of mankind, any further than our own safety, and the public good
is connected with it. So far indeed we are under moral obligations to attempt
it; but to go beyond this is to exceed the rules of right, and become
transgressors of the laws of God ourselves.

PUNISHMENT is God's strange work, to which he is represented as coming
reluctant, yet as it is necessary to secure and promote the happiness of his
creation, it is inflicted on the guilty for this benevolent purpose. Though the
destruction of our own species, in a just war, is irksome to human nature, made
after the image of God, if it be not so far debauched as to have lost all
feelings of humanity, yet the moral fitness of it remains. The like feeling may
be had by the righteous judge, in passing sentence of death on the malefactor,
who has forfeited his life by the laws of God, and yet he, notwithstanding, be
under obligation to fidelity in the execution of his office.

IF by metaphysical pursuits we may perplex this matter, and darken counsel
with words without knowledge; yet common sense can discern, that the man who
has a drawn sword in his hand and tamely submits to take a fatal blow from his
adversary, dies as a fool dies: And common conscience would highly approve, if
on the contrary, with the sword, he had taken the life of the bold invader to
save his own.

THE privileges of life, as liberty and property, in proportion to their value,
are to be strenuously asserted. And when every thing that is dear, and makes
life desirable, and even life itself is attempted, individuals, or a nation,
have not only a bare right, but are under moral obligation to the most vigorous
opposition, as they would not ungratefully resign the gifts of God, and
impiously suffer devastation among his works.

AND this kind of war is supported by the written revelation which God has been
pleased to give mankind of his will and their duty. If it were not right in the
constitution of things, he could not, consistent with the perfections of his
nature, which it is impossible he should contradict, direct, encourage, and
assist his people to it; but that he did so, most evidently appears from the
old testament.

THE new testament goes upon the same supposition, and no where forbids it.
This part of revelation, indeed, sets the original rule of conduct to mankind,
under the dispensation of grace, with all the motives to duty, in a clearer and
more striking light. It more particularly dissuades from those practices which
are injurious to mankind, and interruptive of their happiness; and as
particularly persuades to those that are perfective of their nature. -- And in
the whole, is better adapted to promote that temper and life which would take
away the occasions of war: And happy to the world if it were universally
efficacious!

BUT the gospel no where forbids that which in the relation of things is right
to be done: This indeed may be advanced to support the cause of infidelity, but
is not true in fact: For the gospel, in no part of it, is contradictory to
natural religion; if it were, it would want the main evidence to support its
divine authority.

DEFENSIVE war is then right according to the constitution of God, and
supported by the written declarations of his will; and in particular, is
consistent with the rules of the gospel; for all the dissuasives therein, from
anger, wrath and revenge, and all the persuasives to meekness, forgiveness and
charity, are reconcilable to the principles of natural religion, which allow
and require the defense of our being, with all the privileges of being, in
every capacity, private or public.

NOT only the bare right, but the moral obligation of defensive war, being
supported by reason and revelation, the necessity and fitness of providing and
using instruments for that purpose evidently appears. That is necessary without
which a thing cannot be done, and is necessary in proportion to the obligation
we are under to do the thing.

As the invaders of the rights of others furnish themselves with instruments to
execute their unrighteous designs, so it becomes necessary to provide something
of the same kind in order to a successful opposition. And as these aggressors
not only wreck their invention for such instruments, but spare no pains to get
the dexterous use of them* so others are obliged to the same efforts in this
respect, as they would, at least, stand upon equal ground with their
adversaries.

IT is therefore as necessary that the art of war should be cultivated, as that
the weapons of war should be provided. And as both are necessary to defend and
secure the invaded rights of mankind, it is fit a people should be possessed of
them, and in time of peace prepare for war.

BUT,

III. WISDOM is a higher qualification for defense, and will answer the purpose
better than weapons without it.

THE rational powers of the mind are the glory of human nature, and a due
exercise of them to the purposes for which they were given, is wisdom. For
wisdom is a just discernment of things, and such approbation of the mind as to
determine the conduct according to it; and right action is, in the constitution
of things, productive of happiness: It is so in its natural tendency, and as it
procures the blessing of the supreme ruler.

THERE are indeed, different degrees of wisdom according to the different
natural capacity, or to the different enlargement of it by improvement. All the
human species are not made with equal capacity of discernment. There is
evidently a diversity in the degree of this gift of nature to her sons. Some
are naturally formed with a larger capacity than others, as though they were born
to serve mankind.

THE natural capacity may be variously enlarged, in proportion to the different
advantages afforded for that purpose; or in proportion to the improvement of
the advantages enjoyed. Accordingly some, though not distinguished by nature, may
make greater proficiency in wisdom than others.

AND as societies are composed of individuals, and there is a close connection
between the interests of such individuals, so the whole may reap the advantage
of the distinguished abilities of the few, and on these the safety of society
may in a great measure depend.

THE natural capacity of wisdom may remain, and may be enlarged in no
inconsiderable measure, though religious improvement is wanting. Wisdom in this
view sometimes answers great purposes in the world -- In military dispute,
success very often depends more upon this, than the best contrived instruments,
and the most dexterous use of them.

IT indeed requires no uncommon degree of discernment to provide weapons, and
learn to use them -- much greater may be necessary in time of war. To lay the
plan of operation -- to lead on to battle, or cover a retreat -- to attend to
every circumstance that is connected with the well formed plan, requires great
sagacity and penetration. The wisdom of the politician, and the skill of the
soldier, are requisite to form the great general. And this wisdom is better
than weapons of war, more to the purpose of defense against the injurious
attempts of others; as it may accomplish that, which numbers with the most
formidable artillery could not effect without it.

BUT wisdom, in that degree which constitutes the religious character,
qualifies still more for successful defense. That temper of mind toward the
deity, and conduct of life, which our holy religion requires, is the truest
wisdom, and better qualifies the same persons for the performance of common
duty, and for great achievements, and, which is more, for the blessing of God,
than any thing short of it can possibly do. And in military contest, this
qualification may operate through the whole, in officers and soldiers, and in
those who are not immediately engaged in the action, but whose interest is
closely connected with it, and so may have a great influence in the decision of
the suspended important event.

RELIGION is so far from obstructing the free exercise of the powers of the
mind, that it naturally tends to strengthen and enlarge them. The mind was
formed for God, and religion is the tendency of the soul to its proper center;
and in that state it must be the most healthful and vigorous: The more it
exercises its powers, in this way, the more vigorous they will grow; and on
supposition of the continuance of virtuous exertions, this progression will
continue throughout its existence. Conformity to the precepts of the gospel, is
acting up to the dignity of our nature, and truly perfective of it. All the
advantages of wisdom in the beforementioned degree therefore, may be had in
time of danger, and greater hoped for, as the mind aided by religion, will be
more capable of those exertions, which are necessary to lay the plan of
defense, and to discern the best measures for the execution of it.

RELIGION also inspires its votaries with the truest magnanimity and courage,
and therefore, best qualifies for opposition against the injurious attempts of
bold assailants. It enobles the soul, as it raises its views above the fordid
pleasures of this world, and directs them to nobler objects, and in some
measure resembles it to its great original. -- It lays a foundation for
confidence in God, and for the hope of a blessed immortality. It removes the
grounds of those fears that arise from conscious guilt, and a sense of deserved
punishment; and intitles to a like triumph with that of the devout warrior in
Israel, Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear; though
war should rise against me, in this will I be confident. As there is nothing to
be hoped for from this world, or to be feared in the next, by the virtuous and
good, so they only with safety can brave danger, and go on intrepid in the path
of duty. Hardiness of constitution, and the mere love of fame may indeed lead
on to perilous enterprises; but religion better qualifies the soldier to face
danger, and jeopard his life in the high places of the field. The wicked, as
they act from meaner principles, and are urged on by inferior motives, will
more readily quit their post, and if attentive to the fatal consequences of
falling in battle, must flee when no man persueth: But the righteous, under a
sense of moral obligation, and in hope of reward after this life is ended, in
every department of duty, will be bold as a lion.

THE advantage therefore still lies on the side of religion, as it greatens the
mind, inspires it with the truest fortitude, and will animate the soldier to
act his part with intrepidity and vigor, without which weapons of war would be
to little purpose.

RELIGION likewise qualifies for, and entitles to the blessing of providence,
on which success in military enterprise, chiefly depends. The superintendency
of the Deity over all his works, and his intervention in human affairs, is
agreeable to reason, and plainly asserted in revelation. The designs of his
providence, indeed, are carried on by means, but the energy of the means
depends on his blessing. The means that are best adapted to the end are
generally succeeded, but not always so; sometimes these are frustrated, and the
most improbable take place, to let us know that the Most High rules in the
kingdom of men, and to teach us dependence on him. This gave rise to the wise
observation of Solomon in the context. The race is not to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of
understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but time and chance happens to
them all.

THE interposition of providence some have though it, is more clearly discernable
in the events of war, than in any other, as those have a more immediate
connection with the happiness or misery of communities. But be that as it may,
the scripture, it is certain, every where attributes the success of war to a
divine influence -- to the Lord of hosts and God of armies; and gives the
history of some victories obtained beyond all human probabilities.

BUT if, at sometimes, in this way, God has rode in his excellency on the sky,
for the help of his people, and made bare his arm in their salvation, yet his
influence is as real, though not so visible, when the means that come within the
verge of human power are succeeded to the like purposes. And no doubt this
divine influence is concerned, when the fate of armies, and the events of war,
seem to turn upon some trifling circumstance untho't of, or little incident
unforeseen, by means of which a mighty army shall be seized with a panic, and
one less formidable in number and strength shall be so inspirited, that an
hundred shall chase a thousand, and a thousand put ten thousand to flight.

IT must therefore be of the greatest consequence to a nation, in military
controversy, to engage the supreme Disposer of all events on their side: And
the only way for them to do so, is to submit to his authority as the supreme
lawgiver -- to live up to the rules of conduct prescribed by him, according to
their measure in this state of imperfection.

THIS will qualify them for his favor; for the righteous Lord loves
righteousness. And this will entitle them to the blessings of his providence,
according to the tenor of all his promises of national blessings in the holy
scriptures. A compliance with the condition will undoubtedly give claim to the
blessing of the promise: On this they may firmly depend. And happy the people
who are in such a case, whose God is the Lord.

THIS discourse gives countenance to the military appearance of this day, and
to all suitable preparations for war.

THE Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company, was founded upon fit principles
and for laudable purposes. Our fathers tenacious of their rights, and awake to
a sense of duty, early laid this plan, as a nursery of military skill, for the
public safety: The heads of the people freely offered themselves to these
exercises, with a view to cultivate and improve the art of war, that the
community might be put into a state of defense. Our military preparations have
been succeeded to their designed end, from the days of our fathers. -- Through
God we have done valiantly, and beat down our foes.

BUT though Canada with its dependencies, which has been the source of the chief
of our difficulties, is by the kind and vigorous assistance of British troops,
now conquered, and there is peace in our borders; yet it may be idle to dream
that we shall never any more have occasion to put on the harness. It is not
certain that there will be no attempt to recover these lost possessions to the
crown of France, and of consequence not certain but that the present submiss
but popish inhabitants will become hostile again, and harass our infant
settlements extended still nearer to them by our late glorious acquisitions.

BUT if we should not be called to defend the frontiers from the sword of the
wilderness, or with greater numbers to maintain our conquests; we may yet have
need of armor and military skill to defend us on some other quarter; for the
more oppulent we grow, the more we may become the object of the attention and
aim of some foreign rapacious power.

THERE being more than a possibility of things of this nature taking place, in
some future, and perhaps not very distant period; it is fit that we should hold
ourselves in readiness for defense, and truly noble in those who, of their own
accord, exert themselves to spread the art of war, and promote such
preparations.

BUT the Gentlemen of this Company will aim at higher accomplishments than the
expert use of their arms, at those suggested in this discourse, which will
complete the character of the soldier, and qualify them for more eminent
service to their country. Nobility of mind, is superior to bodily exercise, and
more friendly to heroism than guns and swords. The good man, and the soldier
are characters compatible in the same person, and the former is requisite to
complete the latter. They will not therefore indulge to that indifference in
religion, so fashionable in the present age; and while they profess to believe
the gospel, neglect to live up to its excellent rules. It is odd in those who
enter the list on the principles of defensive war, I mean to oppose them who
break through the laws of God, and molest others in the enjoyment of their
rights, every day to violate those laws themselves, and in a certain degree
interrupt the happiness of society. After all the appearance of honor and
public spirit vice may wear, it debilitates and enslaves the mind, impedes
military improvement, and disqualifies for heroic action. -- Men cannot do
themselves more honor than to live up to the rules of religion; nor any other
way capacitate themselves so well to serve their generation.

THE sneer at virtue notwithstanding, it is of great importance to those who
one day may be called into the field of battle, previously to qualify
themselves in the best manner -- to get possessed of the principles of true
fortitude and courage, to secure the favor of the great Arbiter of life and
death, on whose nod depends the fate of armies -- that in the midst of the
dreadful scene they may act nobly their part, supported by a firm reliance on
God and by the hope of a blessed immortality.

IF defensive war is lawful, and in the present state of things occasion for it
is to be expected, THIS PEOPLE do well in time of peace, to provide warlike
stores -- to increase their skill in military address -- to keep up their
martial spirit, that they may be prepared to defend themselves; and as occasion
may offer, to express their loyalty to the best of Kings, and firm attachment
to their mother country, by ready and vigorous efforts to support the interest
of the British Empire. The keeping up this company, superadded to a standing
militia, we consider as an evidence of their ardor for their King and Country.

THE presence of the Captain General, our Commander in chief, and of those who
sit next to him in the high seats of government, do honor to this day.

TO CONCLUDE. This discourse gives a humbling view of human nature in its
present state of defection, -- and leads us to attribute the irregularities and
disorders in this world to the folly of mankind: These appear to be in
consequence of the creator's leaving the human mind free, and this seems to
have been necessary to make it capable of moral government.

BUT if we are unable to solve every difficulty that may arise from God's
permitting sin* and so much disorder in this part of his creation, our minds
are relieved by the kind assurances in his word, that in his wisdom and
goodness he will overruled the whole so, as to secure happiness to man, and a
revenue of glory to himself.

IN the mean time, we should be reconciled to our present situation, and to the
circumstances into which we are born in this world: And animated by the
discoveries of divine grace with fortitude and persevering diligence sustain
the trials, and perform the duties assigned to us here; that we may secure
uninterrupted happiness on the stage of immortality.

It is no inconsiderable part of our duty on the present stage, to secure and
promote the happiness of society, with which our own is so intimately
connected. -- The peace which the British nation and its dependencies at
present enjoy, may soon be interrupted and all our martial skill and conduct
put upon trial.

OUR success in the last war was great and memorable -- But what is in the
leaves of fate unturned is known only to him who can open the book and see into
futurity. But this we may know by the Book of sacred oracles that lies open to
us, that our safety depends on his favor who is the governor among the nations,
and whose kingdom rules over all.

BY the same oracles we are assured, that his favor is to be obtained, by a
sinful people, only on the terms of repentance and reformation; agreeable to
the declaration made by the prophet to his people of old, Thus says the Lord
of hosts, amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in
this place. And when vice shall be discountenanced, and virtue encouraged, and
our manners conformable to the rules of our holy religion, we may expect,
either that our enemies will be at peace; or, if they should interrupt our
tranquillity, that, in the time of trial, the Lord of hosts will be with us, and
the God of Jacob our refuge. Being reformed, we may securely rely on the
protection of providence. The Deity propitious, we may hope, not only to be
saved from our enemies, and the hand of all that hate us: but also -- pleasing
prospect! to transmit this land, with all our unalienable rights and happy
privileges, a rich inheritance to posterity.

FINIS.

