Mr. Clarke's ARTILLERY-ELECTION SERMON.

The Importance of military Skill, Measures for Defense and a martial Spirit,
in a Time of Peace. A SERMON PREACHED TO THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE ARTILLERY
COMPANY IN BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND, JUNE 6. 1768. BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THEIR
ELECTION OF OFFICERS.

BY JONAS CLARKE, A. M. Pastor of the Church in LEXINGTON.

BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND: Printed by KNEELAND and ADAMS, and Sold by NICHOLAS
BOWS, opposite to the Brick Meeting House in Cornhill. MDCCLXVIII.

AN ARTILLERY-ELECTION SERMON.
2 Chronicles. xvii.16. And next him was Amasiah the son of Zichri, who willingly
offered himself unto the LORD, and with him two hundred thousand mighty men of
valor.


THAT GOD, the source of being and perfection, who created all things for
himself, exercises a wise, a just, an universal government and providence over
all his creatures and all his works, is a truth too evident, from the light of
nature, to be disputed, too clearly revealed, explained and enforced* in the
sacred oracles, to need any proof.

THAT this world and all that is in it, are under his direction and government,
-- that mankind have been his peculiar care, the experience of all preceding
ages abundantly proves.

TO lead mankind to see the justice and equity of divine government, to give a
general idea of the course of divine providence, toward states and kingdoms,
as well as individuals, is evidently one important end of all history, whether
sacred or profane. And as the divine conduct has been generally the same, to
people of the same temper and character, in all past ages of the world, facts
and events, truly recorded and faithfully preserved in history, are of no small
advantage to succeeding generations. -- They happily point out the errors into
which some have run, and the rocks upon which they have been shipwrecked, --
they clearly exhibit the measures by which others have rose to a state of glory
and happiness, scarcely to be conceived of, in a state of imperfection; and so
give the wisdom and experience of ages past, for the direction and improvement
of those that succeed.

AMONG the various histories with which the world has been favored, as none is
of earlier date, none is furnished with events, or examples, more interesting,
entertaining, or useful, than the Scriptures of Truth. -- Here we have a most
simple, familiar, and (yet) striking representation of the conduct of the
supreme ruler of the world, toward his saints and servants -- toward his
chosen people and their immediate enemies, and toward the world of mankind. --
Here we have (as far as is necessary for us to know) the grounds and reasons of
the divine conduct, toward nations and kingdoms, and individuals, together
with the ends proposed by providence therein. And there is scarcely any thing
mentioned in sacred history, but what is of public use, or private instruction
-- adapted to countenance and encourage virtue, in the good, or reprove and
discountenance vice, in the abandoned and profane.

THE part of sacred writ, which has now been read, with the passage of history
with which it is connected, presents us with a scene of measures, truly worthy
the character of those that pursued them, and suited, at once, to engage the
attention, excite the admiration and encourage the emulation of persons of the
same character and stations in life.

THE passage gives account of Jehoshaphat's accession to the throne of Judah,
and of the measures taken, by him and his loyal people, to strengthen him
against his enemies, to confirm him in his kingdom, and to render his reign
easy to himself and happy to his people.

THE latter part of the preceding reign, had been clouded with several
instances of weak and bad policy, quite unworthy a king, whose general
character had been really great and good: -- By reason of which, the kingdom
was left in a state, somewhat broken and perplexed. -- No sooner was
Jehoshaphat seated on the throne, but his care was to set things right in the
kingdom, and put the state into a posture of defense. -- He placed forces in
all the fenced cities of Judah, and set garrisons in the land of Judah, and in
the cities of Ephraim. Context ver. 2.


THE method this wise king took to ensure success to his measures, to lay a
solid foundation for a prosperous, an happy reign, was greatly to his honor;
worthy the wisdom of a king, and is mentioned, and left, in sacred story, for
an example to others. -- He began his reign with GOD, and early made religion
his care. -- He walked in the first ways of his father David, and sought not
unto Baalim: But sought to the LORD GOD of his father, and walked in his
commandments. Cont. ver. 3, 4.
-- In this, his pious care was not confined to himself alone, -- his people
quickly feel the happy influence hereof, and largely share with him, in the
benefits resulting from so wise a step. -- Yea, the heart of this pious king
was so encouraged, so lifted up in the ways of the LORD, Ibid. ver. 6.
that he took speedy and effectual care, to restore the true worship of GOD to
it is pristine state, and have his people taught the law of the LORD, in it is
native purity and simplicity: -- To the end, that, with him, they might taste
the sweets of virtue, and know that GOD is good.

THAT GOD, by whom kings reign and princes decree justice, Prove. 8.15.
quickly observes his conduct, approves his steps, rewards his pious care, and
establishes him in the kingdom. And, as an happy consequence hereof, this
excellent king is greatly beloved and revered by his subjects at home. -- As an
expression of their loyalty and love, it is observed, that all Judah brought
presents to Jehoshaphat. By the same wise measures, the kingdom is rendered
respectable abroad, and a terror to it is enemies. -- They are now glad to
appear as tributaries to Judah, and making rich presents to Jehoshaphat, to
accept the terms of peace, at his hands. For the fear of the LORD fell upon all
the kingdoms of the lands that were round about Judah, so that they made no war
against Jehoshaphat. Cont. ver. 10.


BUT, not enough that tranquillity was restored and the kingdom in a respectable
state, this prudent king and this loyal people are for improving the happy
opportunity of peace and rest, more effectually to provide for every event.

THE king, as he waxes great, continues to improve and provide for the safety,
support and defense of his people. -- He built castles in Judah and cities of
stone; Ver. 12.
and wisely encouraged a martial spirit, and expertness in the knowledge and
use of arms. -- The people, whose hearts were united to their sovereign, were
far from being backward in so wise a measure. Men of the best character and
greatest influence, cheerfully follow the illustrious example, and, at the head
of the thousands of their brethren, appear in arms, to cultivate, to inform
themselves (more fully) in the art of war. Vid. Cont. from ver. 14. to the end.
-- And, by the appearance they make, one would have thought, they were
preparing to engage and oppose a most powerful enemy. -- And yet, it was a time
of peace! -- No enemy nigh -- None that dared to lift the finger, or move the
tongue against them! --

TO persons unacquainted with the true character, and general conduct of
mankind, in this state of sin and imperfection, -- to such as never studied the
rules, nor considered the importance of true policy, these measures might
appear superfluous, and all these preparations for safety and defense, but
needless steps. -- That, as peace and tranquillity were restored, they might lay
aside arms, and give themselves up to ease and enjoyment. -- That their only
concern, was to reap the fruit of their toils, and taste the sweets of peace.

THIS, indeed, has been the manner of most of the states and nations, in the
world. -- Even the most warlike and politic, -- nations that have been
victorious in arms, -- states that have triumphed in war, been the scourge of
their enemies, and a terror to the world of mankind, have not been, always,
able to resist the force of so pleasing a charm, or free themselves from the
effects of so fatal a mistake.

A MAN, or a people, must know but little of the true temper and disposition of
mankind, -- but little of what has happened from the beginning, to states and
kingdoms, in consequence of remissness, in times of peace and tranquillity, not
to see the wisdom and necessity of such provident steps, -- not to know, that
the most potent and respectable state, in perfect tranquillity and the height of
prosperity, may soon be disturbed, by it is enemies, and, if in a defenseless
condition, quickly reduced to the greatest distress, -- to the brink of
destruction.

IN a state of nature, every man has a right to liberty, property and life: And
no one (unless injured, or in his own defense) can, reasonably, deprive him of
either. -- Society is formed for the preservation and defense of the common
rights of mankind, to the end, that the blessings of life may be secured to
all. The liberties and privileges, the property and possessions of society,
ought always to be held sacred; and no one is at liberty to invade, violate, or
even incroach upon them, upon any pretense whatever.

REASON and understanding were given, to teach men the unalterable difference
between right and wrong, justice and injustice. -- Conscience was implanted, in
the human breast, to enforce to a behavior, becoming the character of moral
agents, -- to excite to a conduct, toward others, agreeable to the fitness of
things, to the eternal rules of justice and equity; and to such a treatment of
all, as should express as sacred a regard to the rights and liberties of
others, as unto their own. And, to the same important purposes, was a divine
revelation added, and the word of GOD given. -- But -- alas! -- Reason and
conscience were too weak a restraint! -- Revelation was not found sufficient to
check, nor even the gospel of our LORD, to subdue, the lusts and corruptions of
men, from whence come wars and fightings! Jam. 4.1.


EARLY did the fatal effects of lust and passion appear: And, from the time
that Cain unjustly deprived his brother of life, down to the present day, such
have been the depravity of human nature, and the power and prevalence of lust
and passion, that the greater part of mankind, have made it their chief
concern, to invade the rights and live upon the spoils of others. Ambition,
avarice, revenge, and other sordid lusts and passions, have governed the world,
and made the earth a field of blood! -- Wars, and rumors of wars, have been --
Wars, and rumors of wars, will be, until the happy period commences, when the
law shall go forth out of Zion, and the word of the LORD from Jerusalem; when
GOD shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: And they shall
beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into pruning hooks: When
nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any
more: Isai. 2.3, 4.
And when the kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdoms of our LORD, and
of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. Rev. 11.15.


IN the mean time, it is happy for mankind, that, partly from necessity, and
partly for mutual safety and defense, they have been led, by providence, to
form themselves into societies; to the end, that, as far as the present state
of things will admit, the evils, that might arise from a different state, might
be prevented, the natural and common rights of mankind preserved, and the
blessings, resulting therefrom, more freely and universally enjoyed.

HENCE it appears, that, as one important end of society, is protection and
defense, every measure, every step, conducive to this end, tends to the peace
and happiness of mankind. This, therefore, justifies the conduct and measures
of Jehoshaphat and the people of Judah, upon the most rational principles, and
sets them in the clearest point of light, as wise and good, -- worthy the king
and people which pursued them, and as an example not unworthy the emulation of
the most illustrious princes and respectable states. And happy for mankind,
were such examples more closely attended to, and like measures more carefully
pursued, by rulers and people, in every state! --

THE disposition, principles, conduct and character of the people of Judah, who
so cordially and universally concurred with their sovereign, in these wise
measures, for the general safety and happiness of the kingdom, are not unworthy
peculiar notice. The heads of the people, with the multitude of their brethren,
willingly offered themselves unto the LORD, with their arms, as ready prepared
for the war. Vid. text. and ver. seq.


AS it was now a time of peace and tranquillity, with the kingdom of Judah, it
is evident they could not have in view any immediate enterprise against their
enemies: They had none to encounter. An offensive war (unless by special
direction from heaven) could never be justified, upon principles of reason and
equity: This could not, therefore, be the design of a king, who had made GOD
his guide, and religion his care; or of a people who were taught the law of the
LORD, and had wisely adopted it as the rule of their conduct. For these
reasons, it is natural to suppose, that, as to revive and encourage a truly
martial spirit, and put the kingdom in the best state of defense, were the ends
immediately in view, martial exercises, and the cultivation of the use of
weapons of defense, and of the knowledge of the art of war, was the service to
which they offered themselves; that, in this way, they might become a terror to
their enemies, and keep them at a distance: -- Or, if any should dare to
insult, or disturb their peace, they might meet with the fate they justly
deserved.

AND, verily, this is a service of no small importance to a nation, or a state,
to preserve peace, when enjoyed, as well as to reduce an enemy to reason and
equitable terms of peace, when at war. -- A service, therefore, that ought, at
all times, and by all states, to have a proper attention paid unto it.

WHEN once a martial spirit sinks, and skill in military exercises and warlike
accomplishments are held in contempt, the art of war and use of arms neglected,
among a people, they are exposed to the insults of every invader, are an easy
prey to their weakest enemies, and, like Laish of old, seem to be marked out,
in providence, for speedy destruction. On the contrary, to allude to the
language of Moses to his people, One acquainted with arms and inured to the
exercise and arts of war, will chase a thousand, and two will put ten thousand
to flight. Deuteronomy. 32.30.


CONVINCED of this, the heads of the people, with their brethren, willingly
offered themselves to this service. -- The manner, temper and disposition, with
which they engaged in martial exercises, and inured themselves to the use of
arms, were peculiar agreeable and engaging. -- It was not the effect of force
and constraint, but their own free choice. They were volunteers, in this
important service, to their King and Country -- They saw the importance of
protection, in their rights, liberties, privileges and possessions -- They saw
the excellency of the blessings of peace, and tasted the sweets of freedom and
rest: -- And, to put it out of the power of their enemies, to give them
uneasiness, for the future, they cheerfully forego every inconvenience, every
expense, that might attend such services, improve themselves in the use of arms
and arts of defense, and voluntarily arm and prepare themselves, to meet the
enemy and play the man, for the cities and people of GOD.

THE principles they acted upon, and were influenced by, were, if possible,
still more important, to the purposes of safety and defense. Principles of
piety and virtue warmed their hearts, inspired their souls, and gave the spring
to action. Their excellent sovereign had set the example, in making religion
his greatest care -- Their willing hearts catch the fire, from so illustrious a
pattern, their obedient souls are quickly warmed with the sacred flame. -- They
consider the glory of their king, the defense of their country, and the
preservation of the rights and liberties of the people, as the cause of GOD:
And, in devoting themselves to so important a service, they do it as unto GOD
himself. -- They willingly offered themselves unto the LORD. Text.


THE common father of mankind, who is supreme LORD of all, graciously
condescends to consider his people, as his peculiar care, and their cause, as
his own. Those, who engage in the cause of his people, and set themselves for
their defense, are, therefore, to consider themselves as guardians and trustees
for GOD, having the rights, property, liberties and lives of their fellow-men
(a sacred trust! --) committed to their charge; and by this consideration, be
excited to make devotion to God the principle, and love to him the spring of
action. Piety to GOD, and principles of virtue and religion, lay the happiest
foundation for, and inspire men with the most engaging and powerful motives to,
the highest seize and greatest usefulness, in every character, in life:
But in none are they of greater importance, than in the character of those,
who, voluntarily, offer themselves to the service of mankind, for their
protection and defense.

LOVE to GOD, which contains the essence of religion, is a source of every
virtue, every grace; and inspires the soul with the noblest principles of
action. From this divine root, springs that benevolence of heart, toward
mankind, which excites men, for the public good, for the safety and happiness
of society, of their country, to sacrifice any thing, every thing dear in life,
-- yea, life itself. -- From this blessed fountain, flows that humane,
generous, beneficent temper, toward our fellow men, that forms the truly
public spirit -- warms the heart with a tender, patriotic concern, and excites
to a faithful care, for the welfare of others, and the preservation and
enjoyment of the common rights of mankind.

FIRMLY to believe, fully to realize, deeply to be impressed with, the great
principles of piety to GOD, and, in the services we engage in, for the good of
mankind, to act as devoted to him; -- to realize the being, perfections,
government and providence of GOD; -- to act as under his immediate inspection,
and as accountable to him for every step; -- to remember, that the wise and
virtuous, faithful and just, are assured of his favor, and that those of an
opposite character, are exposed to his displeasure, and sure of the severest
resentment of an angry GOD, must have the happiest tendency, to store the mind
with the noblest sentiments, and lead a man to act with the firmest resolution
and most exalted views.

INSPIRED with the principles of piety, governed by the laws of GOD, encouraged
and supported with the motives of religion, such men, in the court or in the
field, in peace or war, in private or public stations, look with a generous
contempt, a sacred abhorrence, upon every advantage, they might make to
themselves, at the expense of their virtue. -- No self-interest, no venal
motive, can counter-vail, with them, the public good, the safety and happiness
of society -- of mankind. -- The frowns of the great, and the flatteries of the
vulgar, are equally despised; the greatest toils are cheerfully endured, the
most self-denying services are, with pleasure, engaged in, in this cause of
GOD. In honor to GOD, they wait on their king; in devotion to him, they serve
their country, and for the glory of his name, stand ready, cheerfully to submit
to every hardship, firmly to face every danger, and, for the support of his
cause and defense of the liberties and lives of his people, freely to make
their own a sacrifice, and shed their dearest blood. Like Moses, of old, they
rather choose to endure hardness, and suffer the greatest afflictions, with the
people of GOD, than, at the dear expense of the honor of GOD, the safety of
his people, or their own virtue, enjoy the pleasures of sin, for a season. Heb.
11.25.
Yea, when this is the price, the most tempting pleasures, the most exalted
honors, -- even crowns and kingdoms are offered them in vain! --

THUS the principles of piety lay the foundation, for that excellent
qualification, which was a peculiar characteristic virtue, in the men of Judah,
who so cheerfully offered themselves unto the LORD, in the service and for the
defense of their king and country. -- They are styled mighty men of valor.
Text.
-- By which is intended, not only, that they were men of strength and
sprightliness -- men of good constitutions, and in the prime of life, and on
these accounts, men fit for warlike services and enterprises; but also, and
more especially, that they were men of firmness of mind, of a manly, courageous
and warlike spirit, able to endure the toil, and face the dangers of war, and
prepared to bear the charge of an enemy, with becoming firmness and real
fortitude. -- A virtue, a qualification, of the greatest importance to a
soldier! --

VALOR, or true fortitude, is that virtue, by which men are enabled to
preserve presence of mind, to possess themselves fully, think clearly, judge
wisely and act with calmness, firmness and resolution, in times of great
confusion and tumult, in the midst of most pressing dangers and perplexing
distresses. A virtue which excites to the noblest actions, stimulates to the
boldest enterprises, which reason dictates, judgment directs, or duty calls
them to engage in. -- But, then, it is carefully to be distinguished from
rashness, presumption, fury and madness; which, in consequence of false notions
of this virtue, or success attending such unnatural and unreasonable exertions,
too often gain applause, and take the name of Valor. But the difference
between them, is very great, -- the same as between reason and passion, sound
judgment and madness.

TRUE Valor is, therefore, to be considered as a moral virtue, having reason
for it is foundation, and religion for it is encouragement and support. And where
courage, valor or fortitude, has reason for it is basis, and is encouraged,
cultivated and supported, by the principles of religion, it becomes a virtue of
the highest rank, and prompts and leads men on to the most heroic undertakings:
And when properly called, in a cause worthy their attention, it enables men,
with calmness and composure of mind, to face the greatest dangers, to stand the
severest shocks, to meet, undaunted and serene, the charge of the most
formidable enemy, and all the horrors of war.

THE want of true fortitude, is always attended with disgrace and reproach,
frequently with shameful defeats, and sometimes with total destruction. But,
inspired with this virtue, a man may engage the boldest rival, in arms, and
perform the most glorious exploits.

NUMBERLESS are the instances, of the amazing effects of this eminent virtue,
as founded in, and exercised upon, the principles of reason and religion, which
are celebrated in the history of ages past. -- The sacred pages exhibit a list
of the most valiant Heroes, whose virtue and piety, inspiring them with true
fortitude of soul, exalted them to the highest pitch of honor, and led and
enabled them to perform the most illustrious deeds. Inspired with the
principles of religion, and endued with this god-like virtue, they subdued
kingdoms, wrought righteousness, -- stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the
violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made
strong, waxed valiant in sight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens. Heb.
11.33, 34.
-- But not to add --

IN the above representation, we have had, imperfectly exhibited, a sketch of
the best policy and wisest measures, pursued upon the noblest principles and
with the most generous views. -- A wise king and a loyal people, from love to
GOD and their country, with a sacred emulation, uniting their endeavors, for
the preservation of peace, the safety of the state, the glory of the kingdom,
and the liberty and happiness of the people.

WHEN kings and rulers act the part of fathers to a people, and from virtuous
principles, make it their care, by the best policy and wisest measures, to
render them safe and happy. -- When a people offer themselves willingly to
every service, which the honor of their king, or safety of the state requires:
-- When, not only in war, being roused by threatened danger and distress, from
an approaching, or assaulting enemy, but even in peace, when no enemy is nigh,
persons of the most respectable character, as well as their brethren, of a
lower rank, upon religious principles, offer themselves to those martial
exercises and warlike services, which are necessary for the safety and defense
of a state, the preservation of peace, liberty and happiness to a people, and
the protection of the common rights of mankind; it affords the most pleasing
prospect, yields the most solid satisfaction and lays the surest foundation for
lasting tranquillity. -- The fear of the LORD will quickly fall upon the nations
and kingdoms that are round about them, enemies will bring presents and bow
themselves at their feet, and gladly accept the terms of peace at their hands.
Cont. ver. 10, 11.
-- Injured innocence will always find a safe retreat, in such a state, and a
sure protection under the shadow of it is wings. -- Fitly, therefore, may the
happy prince of such a state be addressed, in the language of Sheba's queen, to
Solomon of old. -- Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand
continually before thee. -- Blessed be the LORD thy GOD, which delighted in
thee to set thee on his throne, to be king for the LORD thy GOD: Because thy
GOD loved Israel, to establish them forever, therefore made he thee king over
them! 2 Chronicles. 9.7, 8.
-- Of such a state and people also, it may with equal propriety be said, in
the concise, but expressive language of the royal Psalmist -- Happy is that
people, that is in such a case: Yea, happy is that people, whose GOD is the
LORD!

SUCH were the character and state of GOD's people, in the kingdom of Judah, at
the happy time, when the words we have now had under consideration, were wrote;
and such was Judah's king -- Such, in later times, has Britain been -- such is
Britain still -- and such is Britain's King. -- And, in a careful imitation of
the illustrious example of Jehoshaphat and GOD's people, and a close attention
to their wise measures, for mutual safety, glory and felicity, -- such (GOD
grant) they may ever continue to be! -- A terror to their enemies, an asylum to
the injured and distressed, -- a sure protection for liberty, a lasting defense
to the natural and common rights of mankind! -- But to come nearer home --

THE preceding discourse, as it countenances wise measures, pursued upon
religious principles, for the safety and happiness of a people, shows the
propriety and importance of the care that has been taken, by the people of this
land, for these purposes, from the first settlement of the country, down to the
present day.

INSPIRED with the same sentiments, which influenced to, and governed the
measures of Jehoshaphat and his people, for mutual safety, felicity and
protection; -- to enjoy the blessings of liberty, civil and religious, with
greater security; our fathers, in severer reigns, left a pleasant land, and, at
the risk of their lives, sought a safe retreat, from arbitrary power, among
merciless savages, in this inhospitable wilderness. A merciful GOD, who, with a
father's pity, always beholds the distress of his people oppressed, smiled upon
their enterprise, and gave them the land for a possession. -- And, verily, it
is a pleasant land, a goodly heritage. --

EARLY did the first settlers of this country discover a due concern, a
provident care, for themselves and posterity, in making the best provision in
their power, for safety and defense. No sooner was society formed and civil
government established, but, even in their infant state, they made it their
care, to put the militia of the country upon a respectable footing.

VARIOUS were the institutions, for this important purpose. -- Like
Jehoshaphat, the chief rulers made the defense of their country, and the safety
of the people, an object of their constant and closest attention; and by their
example and influence, and in every wise and laudable way, endeavored to
inspire the people with a martial spirit, and excite them to excel in military
skill, the use of arms and art of war. -- They often honored them with their
presence, in the military exercises, and did not look upon it beneath their
dignity, sometimes, to appear in arms themselves. Their good example was not
without it is influence, nor their spirited measures without the happiest
effects. Persons of the best character and estates, cheerfully followed, and,
with the multitude of their brethren, willingly offered themselves to the LORD,
in this important service.

TO these purposes and for these important ends, the Honorable Artillery
Company was formed, soon after the settlement of the country; -- to be a school
for military exercise and discipline; -- to teach and instruct in martial skill
and the art of war. -- Great have been the benefits resulting from such a wise
design. Many brave captains and leaders have gone out from hence, that have
done worthily for GOD and their country. -- The primary design, of this early
care of the fathers of the country, for military skill and warlike
accomplishments, is happily obtained. After a long series of hardships, toils,
dangers and distresses of cruel wars, with the common enemy, who were our
rivals in America, and the barbarous, merciless savages, whose thirst for blood
and revenge has always been insatiable, through the smiles of heaven, we see
this happy land in a state of peace and rest. -- But still, measures for
defense are necessary, a military spirit to be encouraged, knowledge in the use
of arms and art of war, to be cultivated; or soon, -- very soon, we shall be
marked out for a prey, ready and prepared for the enemy's hand. Such an
institution, therefore, even in the present happy state of peace and quiet, is
of no small importance; as, properly attended to, it may answer many valuable
purposes, serve as a spring to a martial spirit, excite others to emulation,
and happily encourage those exercises, which greatly tend to the protection and
safety of this people.

TO honor and countenance an institution, so well calculated for the public
good, Gentlemen of the highest character and first places of trust and
government among us, have cheerfully attended on these occasions: -- And it is
with peculiar joy we behold the COMMANDER in CHIEF, and first Magistrates of
the province* attending the services of this day; -- to express their readiness
to countenance and disposition to encourage so worthy a design. -- In this,
they have the example of one of the best of kings, and of the princes and
chiefs of a most respectable state, to countenance them.

TO honor their exercises in arms, the gentlemen of this ancient and honorable
company, have wisely called religion in aid, that, being sanctified by the word
of GOD and prayer, and, upon religious principles, inspired with true fortitude
and valor, they might be excited and encouraged to excel in their profession,
in military skill and the art of war -- It is with real cheerfulness we join
them herein, and with great sincerity, we wish them a blessing out of the house
of the LORD.

TO revive and encourage a military spirit and martial exercises, upon
religious principles, has been the design of the preceding discourse; that,
from love to GOD and our country, from a sacred regard to our own safety and
happiness, to the welfare of society and the common rights and liberties of
mankind, all might be engaged, in their respective characters and stations, to
emulate each other, in such measures as shall tend to mutual protection and
defense.

TOO often has it happened, that states, which have been successful in war,
given law to their enemies and triumphed in arms, by negligence in this point,
have been reduced to defenseless condition and easily subjected to the power of
those, who, but a little while before, were bowing at their feet and gladly
submitting to any terms they prescribed. -- How unhappy, how inglorious would
it be, after the remarkable successes, with which heaven has blessed our arms,
and when peace is restored, and all means of safety and defense are put into
our hands, should this be our folly and fate? -- How should we, with tears of
grief, of shame and remorse, lament (too late) our stupidity, and curse the
indolent spirit that possessed us? -- Yea, how justly will posterity, in ages
to come, rise up and curse us, as the causes of their wretchedness, and the
authors of the misery, to which they are doomed, without the hope or
possibility of redress! --

MAY the characters, that have been presented us, inspire us with a different
spirit, -- and a due concern for the honor of our sovereign, the welfare of
the nation, and the preservation of liberty, peace and happiness to our selves
and posterity, influence and excite us to a different conduct. -- May all
prejudices subside, may every fordid lust and passion be forever banished, and
a manly, generous and public spirit prevail in every breast, and influence all
to seek the public good.

LET all be concerned to be possessed of true fortitude of mind, which, founded
in and cultivated upon the principles of virtue and religion, will render us
good soldiers to our king, powerful guardians to our country, and real
benefactors to mankind.

INSPIRED with this divine virtue, we shall be prepared for every service,
armed against every danger, and able to support ourselves under every shock and
trial of life. -- By this, we shall be provided for the last encounter, enabled
to support the charge of the last enemy, and, even in this war from which there
is no discharge, -- in death itself, come off victorious, and rise triumphant
to a blessed immortality.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 7. l. 21. f. weak, r. weakness. p. 9. l. 16. f. stone, r. store.


