A COLLECTION OF TRACTS FROM THE LATE NEWS PAPERS, etc.

CONTAINING PARTICULARLY The AMERICAN WHIG, A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG, WITH
SOME OTHER PIECES, On the Subject of the Residence of Protestant Bishops in the
American Colonies, and in answer to the Writers who opposed it, etc.

NEW YORK: Printed by JOHN HOLT, at the Exchange. 1768.

ADVERTISEMENT.
TO oblige a Number of the Customers to the New York Thursday's Journal, and at
their particular Desire, it is proposed that Half a Sheet of this Collection be
printed weekly, and for some Time sent to the said Customers without any Charge
additional to that of the News Papers.

It is printed in this Manner for the Convenience of binding, which it was
supposed would be more agreeable to the Readers.

[ From Parker's NEW YORK GAZETTE. MARCH 14, 1768.]
The AMERICAN WHIG. [NUMB. I.]
BY this time I suppose, Dr. Chandler's Appeal has safely crossed the Atlantic;
and if properly introduced to his superiors with those usual private advices
of his brethren on this side the water (which for a particular reason, it is
their interest should ever remain private) of what success it promises to the
cause of Episcopacy in America; and how by the aid of a Bishop it is like to
expand the gentle bosom of the church, so as to receive thousands and ten
thousands of Fanatics, Enthusiasts, Methodists, Deists, Iroqu^is Indians, and
West India Blacks. If this, I say, has been properly managed, it will
doubtless answer what without breach of charity, we may suppose at least a
secondary motive of the reverend author in composing it; namely, to demonstrate
to his benefactors, that his doctrine has not been bestowed in vain. It
certainly breaths a noble zeal for the church. Nay, in by and through the
church, and so far as she is concerned in the premises, it seems to breath a
zeal for religion it self. It proves, moreover, what all the Dissenters have
always asserted; and what the Doctor and all his brethren have always denied --
that the church of England in America, for want of the grand essential, for
which the poor gentleman is now breaking his heart, never was the church of
England but an independent church. It shows farther, what indeed does not carry
with it so clear a conviction, that though this church has hitherto been an
episcopal church, and always well governed; it has nevertheless never been an
episcopal church; nor ever been governed at all. It sagaciously distinguishes
between a primitive Christian, and a modern English Bishop. It assumes an
unusual moderation; and so naturally counterfeits the voice of a sheep, that it
is not every reader who will discriminate it from that of a wolf. In fine, it
bemoans, with deeper moans, than any of the most moanful shepherds in pastoral,
the numberless souls already perished through the neglect of his all important
plan; and congratulates posterity, if not the hopes of rescuing them out of
purgatory, at least on the prospect of speedily introducing a kind of
millenium, by the episcopal triple discharge of ordination, confirmation and
government, by virtue of which are to be converted Jews and Infidels, together
with all and singular the Whites, Blacks and Browns, farther than from Dan to
Beersheba, even from Lake Superior to Pensacola.

-- redeunt saturnia regna:
Jam nova progenies caelo domittitur alto.
By this time also, it is probable the author begins to plume himself on the
supposed unanswerableness of his performance; for he takes his leave, courteous
reader with so terrific a defiance as though he was in very deed the Goliath of
the fraternity; and would devour all his opponents like so many stripling
David's, at a single breakfast. Nay, I should not marvel if he had already drawn
that mavelous conclusion, which by a new species of logic, is infallibly to
follow from suffering his appeal to remain unanswered; I mean, that in such
case all the world must be presumed to acquiesce in his proposal: That is, in
plain English, every man must be presumed to adopt the principles contained in
every book, how absurd soever he conceives them, unless he puts himself to the
trouble of writing another book against it. Would not the Doctor think it hard
to be thought a Romanist, merely because he has never published an answer to
Cardinal Bellarmine? And is not this single question a full refutation of his
darling inference? For my own part, with respect to any execution this
remarkable performance is like to do among ourselves, where almost every
intelligent reader is able, from his own personal knowledge, to contradict the
facts upon which great part of it, and by far the most plausable part, is
sounded; I should have been very willing to leave the author to triumph in his
imaginary victory. But when I consider, that it will chiefly be read in a
country, where, with a moderate share of address, people may be made to
believe, that a man can jump into a quart bottle -- that thousands of Negroes
who never so much as heard the Gospel are notwithstanding virtual Churchmen --
that what must inevitably ruin a country, is absolutely necessary to its
welfare; and that less than half a million, is in reality three millions and
more: When I reflect, I say, what pernicious consequences may be apprehended
from even so slimsey a composition, among a people who either have no
opportunity of knowing, or will not be at the pains of inquiring into the truth
of certain facts, as confidently asserted in the pamphlet, as if universally
known to be true, when they are almost universally known to be otherwise; I
cannot but think it my duty, to administer an antidote to the poison: and to
show as well the falsity of the facts, as the futility of the reasoning, by
which the appeal may impose on the weak and credulous. I shall therefore,
without any apology of this man's having a tremor in his hand, or that one a
torpor in his head, think myself sufficiently authorized as a friend of truth
and of society, to prevent to the utmost of my power, the fatal, the tremendous
mischiefs, which the appeal is so artfully calculated to introduce; but in the
course of my speculations, I shall not think myself obliged scrupulously to
adhere to the method observed by the reverend Doctor. So systematical an
attachment would perhaps not be relished in a number of weekly papers, which
must from their respective conciseness, necessarily require too many pauses for
a work of that nature. Besides, to relieve thy spirits, gentle reader, I shall
often be obliged to quit the more solemn and polemic, for the gayer and more
airy parts of the Doctor's lucubration. By this means thou will be enabled,
after a short and refreshing interlude, to return with a keener appetite, to
the dry crust of unsavory controversey. I shall think myself even at liberty,
should such a measure appear most conducive to thy edification or
entertainment, to fall directly upon the center, and so to move toward front
or rear, as occasion requires. Nay I do not intend, by any preliminary
engagements, to resign my right of beginning with the Nag's-head, and
concluding with the preface. I shall, not withstanding this my nonconformity
to established method fully consider every part of the pamphlet that respects
the merits of the cause; or has the least tendency to introduce an evil more
terrible to every man who sets a proper value either on his liberty, property
or conscience, than the so greatly and deservedly obnoxious stamp act itself.

Considering the encroachments that have lately been made on our civil
liberties; and that we can scarcely obtain redress against one injurious
project, but another is forming against us -- considering the poverty and
distress of the colonies by the restrictions on our trade; and how peculiarly
necessary it is, in these times of common calamity, to be united amongst
ourselves; one could scarcely have imagined, that the most ambitious
ecclesiastic should be so indifferent about the true interest of his native
country, as to sow, at this critical juncture, the seeds of universal discord;
and besides the deprivation of our civil liberties, lend his helping hand to
involve us in ecclesiastical bondage into the bargain. Is this a time to think
of episcopal palaces, of pontifical revenues, of spiritual courts, and all the
pomp, grandeur, luxury and regalia of an American Lambeth? It Is true, the
pamphlet is specious, and appears to ask nothing but what is highly reasonable:
and could any man, above the capacity of an Idiot, really persuade himself, the
Doctor and the Convention would content themselves with a Bishop, so limited
and curtailed as be is pleased to represent his future Lordship; it were
manifest injustice to deny them what in their opinion their eternal salvation
so greatly depends upon. But it is not the primitive Christian Bishop they
want. It is the modern, splendid, opulent, court favored, law-dignified,
superb, magnificent, powerful prelate, on which their hearts are so intent. And
that such a Bishop would be one of the worst commodities, that can possibly be
imported into a new country, and must inevitably prove absolute desolation and
ruin to this, I shall abundantly evince in the course of these speculations.

Q.

THE AMERICAN WHIG. [NO. II.]
To the respectable Public in America.
MY DEAR COUNTRYMEN, March 21.
AS civil and religious liberty is the foundation of public happiness, and the
common birthright of mankind, it is the duty and interest of every individual,
to keep a watchful eye over, and to cherish it with the utmost care and
tenderness. Would we preserve the invaluable jewel, and act the part of true
friends to our country, we ought to maintain a sacred jealousy, that it be not
ravished from us by open violence, nor undermined by secret artifice and fraud.
The most distant prospect of danger will alarm; and every attempt to rob us of
our privileges, however artfully disguised, or varnished over with the specious
pretense of public utility, will awaken our fears, and put us upon our guard.
Nor indeed, without the highest reason, as the greatest danger arises from this
quarter. So jealous and tenacious are mankind of their liberty, thet every
attempt to deprive them of it, by open violence is generally fruitless. A
direct attack will be resented, and repelled with heroic bravery; and next to
life and property, men will most zealously contend for its preservation.
Conscious of this, those in all ages, who have commenced tyrants, and
undertaken to enslave mankind, have ever had recourse to artifice; and under
pretext of the public good, have, by insensible degrees, introduced alterations
into the civil and religious constitutions of their country; till the deluded
people are gradually wormed out of their liberty, and at last find the shackles
of slavery effectually rivetted.

This being the case, every new project proposed to the public, every attempted
innovation, ought to be critically canvassed and examined, even in their
remotest tendency and consequences; and adopted, if at all, with the utmost
caution and reserve. Barely the novelty of any proposal is, in this light,
sufficient to alarm our jealousy, and excite our vigilance. However plausible
it may appear at first view, or disguised with the colorable pretense of being
friendly to liberty, and promotive of public happiness; if we hastily acquiesce
in, or without examination rashly receive it, we shall probably lament our
folly; and when too late, feel the fatal effects of our temerity.

What led me into these reflections was the reading Dr Chandler's plea for an
American episcopate, lately published in New York.

The Scheme for sending Bishops into the colonies, has it seems been long under
consideration. It Is above fifty years since it was first started; and some
provision made for carrying it into execution. It has been lately revived, and
we hear, the advocates for it, both here and in England, have sanguine
expectations of its speedy accomplishment. This revival of the project the
Doctor tells us is in consequence of some late applications from these parts.
No less than seven petitions we are told, have been transmitted by a certain
convention of the episcopal clergy here, to some of the most respectable
personages in England, earnestly soliciting Bishops for America; representing
the deplorable condition of an unmitred church; boasting of their incredible
numbers in the colonies; their distinguished and unshaken loyalty, and not
sparing very injurious reflections upon, the other denominations, as seditious
incendiaries, and disaffected to the king and government. With what truth these
aspersions are cast upon you, my dear countrymen, and why at this juncture so
vehemently urged, you must judge for yourselves. If they are just, and you are
indeed such factious incendiaries, such disloyal subjects to the best of Kings
as these addresses are said to insinuate, it highly concerns you to repent and
reform: If not you will resent them in a manner becoming an injured people
conscious of their own innocence, when basely and falsely traduced.

The Doctor calls his piece, an appeal to the public in behalf of the church of
England; and as the grand design of it is to solicit an American episcopate,
some may doubt the propriety of the title; and be at a loss what, in this case
he means by appealing to the public. It is now generally known, that the
ministry in England have rejected the proposal. As they must be supposed to
speak the sentiments of their royal master, this must be construed a denial
from the throne. Surely the Doctor means not to affront his Majesty, by
appealing from the King to the people. To remove his suit from the sovereign to
the subject, as to a higher tribunal. This would by no means comport with his
professed loyalty; or be consistent with that zeal for the constitution and
government at home, to which he and his brethren avow so warm an attachment.
And yet, if this be not his meaning, it must be something very like it. Why
else should he talk of appealing to the public? Why lay his grievances before
the people; and expressly invite all objectors to propose their objections, to
be freely and heartily debated before the tribunal of the public?

We have been told, that in answer to those petitions of the Doctor and his
brethren, they have been ordered to be silent; to desist from future
applications on the subject; and to leave the affair to the conduct of their
superiors. Whether it was because the petitions were thought a little too
pragmatical and assuming; or to contain something too warm and petulant, has
not yet appeared. Be that as it will, it may perhaps not be amiss for the
Doctor a little to consider, how far he approves himself an obedient son of the
church, in counteracting those orders; and in what light his appeal will in
consequence be received at home.

However, as he and his brethren have seen sit, for reasons best known to
themselves, to put the case upon this issue. -- As they have in fact appealed
from the judgment of the King and his ministers, etc. to the people; and in
form submitted their cause to the hearing and decision of the public; we shall
readily follow them to this respectable tribunal, in full confidence of a just
and equitable determination.

The question then submitted to you, my dear countrymen, is briefly this, viz.
Whether it is reasonable and necessary, in the present state of the country,
that a number of Bishops should be sent to reside, and exercise their functions
in these American colonies; and whether the Church of England here, is really
in a state of persecution, for want of such Bishops? That you, my respectable
judges, may be able to determine the case impartially, the arguments advanced
by the Doctor in support of the measure, shall be fully considered, and the
objections against his scheme, heartily and fairly stated. But as the limits
allowed me, will not admit of this at present, it must be the subject of some
future papers.

N.

From the NEW YORK GAZETTE, MARCH 21. An Advertisement to the PUBLIC.
THE principal design of the appeal to the public was, to assign the reasons
for which the members of the church of England in America, are desirous of
having Bishops to reside in this country, to state and explain the plan on
which alone American Bishops have been proposed and requested, and to obviate
and confute the objections, that might be supposed to arise in the minds of any
against such an episcopate. Whether the reasons assigned are not sufficient to
justify the late application of the clergy for Bishops, whether the nature of
the proposed episcopate is not honestly and fairly represented and explained,
and whether the most considerable objections against it are not obviated and
confuted in the appeal, is submitted to the judgment of the reader -- but N. B.
not one of those who are not readers of the pamphlet. The author was, and is,
fully persuaded of the goodness of the cause which he undertook to plead; and,
although sensible of his inability to do it justice, he had the vanity to think
himself able to satisfy the public, as to the main points on which it depended.
With this opinion he entered upon the work, and in the execution of it he was
particularly careful to avoid giving offense, and to treat every denomination
of Christians, every set of men whom he had occasion to mention, with great
tenderness and all proper respect.

The appeal upon its first publication, was received as favorably as the
author could expect; several persons, of different principles and characters,
who condescended to read it, being then pleased to testify their general
approbation of the performance. If it has been treated by some persons latterly
in a different manner, perhaps it has been owing to motives that have occurred
since the time of its publication. A general attack from different quarters has
been, at length, projected, and some of the combatants begin to show themselves.

The author is not unwilling to re-examine any thing that has been advanced or
asserted in the course of the appeal, and to have the subject "fairly and
heartily debated, before the tribunal of the public," being still of opinion,
that the plea for American Bishops, the more closely it is examined, and the
better it is understood, will appear proportionably to greater advantage.
Whatever therefore shall be offered on the subject in a reasonable and decent
way, he thinks it his duty to attend to -- but to nothing farther. As to
personal abuse, he thinks he does not deserve it, even from the enemies of an
American Episcopate, to whom he has behaved respectfully; and he is determined
not to regard what every innocent and honest man ought to despise. But although
he consents to debate matters with any one, who has the appearance and manner
of a gentleman; yet he chooses not to enter the lists, in a match of flinging
dirt, with scrubs and scavengers.

Which of these characters the American Whig (for America has whigs) will think
proper to appear in, can hardly be judged from his first exhibition; but I am
sorry to say that I look upon his symptoms to be rather unfavourable. I have
also been told by some who pretend to know him, that this same Whig (who by the
bye is represented to have as many heads as the monster Hydra) is violently
enraged at Somebody and Something, and has sworn revenge upon me. If so, in
what manner I shall be treated, may be easily conjectured. But why should I be
singled out as a mark of his resentment? If some people have failed in their
application for a charter, and have been disappointed in the late election, how
can I help it? These are no affairs of mine, and I am not answerable for them.

I make it a general rule to myself, to treat all persons with as much notice
and respect as they deserve. Upon this principle I propose to conduct myself
toward the American Whig; so that what treatment he is to receive from me,
will depend greatly upon his future behavior. So far as he shall reason, or
shall appear to think that he reasons, he will have a claim to my notice; so
far as he shall rail, he will be beneath it. Not a single argument that is
pertinent to the subject, shall escape my attention; and, if it pleases God to
continue my health, I will either confess its force, or show its weakness.

But he must excuse my not attending him in a weekly paper. For such a task I
cannot always promise myself leisure; and, in the present case, I confess, I
have no great inclination. Some of my objections against this mode of defense
are the following.

1st. I cannot engage with him upon equal terms. If I appear in this way, it
must be in my own person; but my opponent is covered with a mask (and for a
particular reason it is his interest that he should remain for ever masked) and
an engagement by two persons under such different circumstances, would afford
to the public an odd spectacle. While I should risque my own character and
reputation in the fray, I know not until I can discover the real features of my
antagonist, whether he has any reputation and character to risque. For this
reason it has been generally esteemed base and ungenerous, for a writer who
disguises or conceals himself, to attack an author who stands fairly upon open
ground. Such a method of carrying on hostilities has been looked upon as a sort
of literary bush fighting, to which it is almost as inconsistent with prudence
to expose one's self, as it is with honor to practice. 2dly. There appears to
me to be a great unfitness and impropriety in such a contest, on other
accounts. The Appeal, agreeably to the importance of its subject, was written
with real and great seriousness; and the defense of it, when undertaken by its
author, ought to be carried on in the same manner. But the attack of our Whig,
is like to be conducted with a very different spirit. No. I. from which we must
at present judge, is penned altogether in a ludicrous strain; it is thickly
bespangled with drollery, it frequently flashes with witticisms (but observe
gentle reader, they are of a spurious breed,) and in short, ridicules the
general subject of the Appeal and its various parts. Now as this has never been
allowed to be the fairest method of dealing with any thing that is serious, so
serious answers to funny writers, like throwing pearls before a certain kind of
animals, are looked upon as improperly applied; and yet none but serious
answers, as has been said, does it become the author of the Appeal to give. He
proposes therefore to reserve himself for the present, and to watch whether any
thing solid can come from so ludicrous and frothy a writer; and as to the other
matters, he is perfectly indifferent. He is so entirely void of spleen, and
ill nature, and prejudice against this writer, that he is ready to confess the
nimble turns and motions of his pen, and can laugh as heartily at any
monkey-tricks he can exhibit for the amusement of his Majesty's liege subjects,
as any other person. In the mean while, if any one who is not under these
restraints, shall incline to divert himself with, or to endeavor to bring to
order, this Hussar in controversy, who will confine himself to no rules, but as
the whim takes him will fly from front to rear, and from flank to center, he
has my consent. 3dly. I object against immediately engaging with the American
Whig, because it is yet uncertain whether he will produce any thing worthy of
notice, and because I think it advisable to see the amount of his whole
performances that I may have it in my power to choose for myself in what manner
to deal with him. 4thly. Another objection arises from the strange aversion I
have to a repetition of the same things. Now it happens, that among others, a
gentleman of character in Boston has undertaken a confutation of the hapless
Appeal; and he is entitled, both from his known reputation, and his open and
manly method of advancing, to particular respect. I know of no one, at present,
that bids as fair to be the object of my principal attention as this gentleman;
as to those anonymous writers who shall please to favor me with their
animadversions on my pamphlet, they will not take it amiss, if I consider them
as belonging to an inferior class. They must be contented, so far as their
arguments shall correspond with those of Dr. C -- y, to take their places in
his train, and hear what I have to say to him; but in any cases wherein they
shall be thought to deserve special notice, they shall have it occasionally.
Having thus declared my intention to do justice to all men, I will mention the
manner in which it will probably be distributed. In the first place I shall be
careful to distinguish reasoning from railing, from empty harrangue, from the
flourishes of wit, and from all other heterogenious mixtures. The reasoning I
will keep for my own use, and leave all the rest untouched for the original
proprietors, in order, that when opportunity offers, they may bestow it more
properly. I will then make a farther distinction, and mark out those reasons
that are immediately to the purpose, separating them from those that are but
remotely so, and from others that shall have been totally misapplied. To those
of the first, and second classes, I will endeavor to give proper and distinct
answers; as to those of the third class, it will be sufficient to show their
impertinence.

In this way I hope I shall be able to serve the cause of truth, and to remove
prejudices and errors; and, to whisper a secret into the ears of the Public, I
do not despair, that even our American Whig, with all his briskness and
volatility, will be proselyted to the sober doctrine of the Appeal. For I think
his opposition cannot be of long continuance, after the honest concession he
has made toward the close of his paper. It Is true, says he, the pamphlet is
specious, and appears to ask nothing but what is highly reasonable; and could
any man, above the capacity of an Idiot, really persuade himself, that the
Doctor and the Convention would content themselves with a Bishop, so limited
and curtailed as he is pleased to represent his future Lordship; it were
manifest injustice to deny them what in their opinion their eternal salvation
so greatly depends upon. So that nothing appears to be now wanting to his
conversion, but to convince him that the Doctor and the Convention would
content themselves with such Bishops as are described in the Appeal. Now this
is as really and certainly true, as that he himself is a Whig; and unless he is
obstinately resolved to be deaf and blind to all proper evidence, it can be
clearly proved to him.

By way of conclusion, the author of the Appeal begs leave to assure the
Public, that notwithstanding the charge brought against him by the American
Whig, he neither knows, nor believes, nor suspects, that he has misrepresented
a single fact, and to subscribe himself,

Their very respectful And obedient Servant.
Elizabeth-Town, March 16, 1768.
From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Monday March 28. An Advertisement to the PUBLIC.
WHEREAS an anonymous Writer, who styles himself The American Whig, in his last
Monday's Publication, viz. No II. has accused a certain Convention of the
Episcopal Clergy here, of having transmitted seven petitions, to some of the
most respectable personages in England, earnestly soliciting Bishops for
America; representing the deplorable condition of an unmitred Church, etc. --
and not sparing very injurious reflections upon the other Denominations, as
seditious Incendiaries, and disaffected to King and Government: I beg leave to
observe, that I have acted as Secretary to the Convention, from its first
formation, and have particularly attended to, and carefully read, every
petition that they have transmitted to England, soliciting Bishops for America;
and I do affirm, that the Convention have never made any injurious reflections
upon the other Denominations, by representing them either as seditious
Incendiaries, or as "disaffected to the King and Government." I do moreover
affirm and declare, that this assertion of the American Whig, is absolutely,
utterly and entirely false and groundless. And I hereby call upon him in this
open manner, both as a member of, and as Secretary to the Convention, publicly
to pruduce the authorities upon which he has asserted so infamous a falsehood.
In this case the most positive proof is insisted on, nor will the respectable
Public be put off with a poor, simple, "We are told," which is nothing to the
purpose.

Should any person think that I do not treat this writer with proper respect,
let him turn to the last paragraph of the American Whig. No I. where Dr.
Chandler, and the Convention, (Gentlemen at least as respectable as himself)
are in fact accused of the grossest falsehood and deceit, in pretending to ask
for a Bishop only upon the plan proposed in the Appeal, while it is not the
primitive Christian Bishop they want: But, etc. Such a piece of effrontery and
malace, I think deserves, and would justify, worse treatment than a regard to
my own character would suffer me to give him.

S. SEABURY.
March 23, 1768.
From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, March 24. The SENTINEL. No. I.
Humano capite cervicem pictor equinam
Jungere si velit -- ut turpitur atrum
Desinat in piscem mulier formosa superne --
-- Risum teneatis.
Hor. Ar. Poet.
DR. CHANDLER'S Appeal to the Public in behalf of the Church of England in
America, which from his own account, seems rather to be the united effort of
all the CLERCY in New York and New Jersey, perfected by the kind assistance of
the CLERGY from the neighboring provinces, may by this time be supposed to
have circulated pretty generally. And as the season advances, when we presume
these CLERGY are again to meet in voluntary Convention, this may be the proper
time to propose a few questions for their or if the Dr. pleases for his
consideration. The performance seems replete with bold extravagant assertions
of facts, many of which have no foundation in truth; it is greatly deficient in
Christian Charity, though not deficient in low craft, and seems dangerous to the
civil and religious Liberties of the Colonies in America. But I perceive that
if any objections be made to his Plan, our new Doctor from a persuasion already
formed, is prepared to ascribe them, rather to "the dexterity and ill will of
the inventors than" to "the real fears and uneasiness of the inhabitants." (P.
112) Nay he is so bold, as to assert that every opposition to such plan as he
has proposed, has the nature of persecution and deserves the name. (82) Again
he says, "if no objections shall be offered, it will be taken for granted that
all parties acquiesce and are satisfied." (2) Thus on the one hand, silence is
to be construed into assent and approbation, and on the other hand, if we
object to, or oppose his plan, we are to be stigmatized as persecutors and the
worst of mankind. However as he seems to admit a possibility that some
"objections may continue, which may be thought to deserve notice" and is
pleased to erect an imaginary tribunal, and to invite the objectors "to propose
them that they may be debated before that tribunal," it seems hard to oblige
those, who cannot altogether approve his plan, to yield the cause untried, or
to bear the names of "malicious, "intolerant, "persecutors, "enemies to all
religion "and the church, "hot "headed writers, "pragmatical enthusiasts," etc.
nay even to have their loyalty called in question.

I must confess there are some objections to this plan, that "continue" with
me, and which, to as many as I have mentioned them, seem to "deserve notice"
but before I propose them to be debated before the "tribunal of the public," I
should be glad the Doctor would deign to explain some of his terms, and give us
farther information on some points, that I shall propose.

He begins with informing us "that application has been made to our SUPERIORS,
by the Clergy of several of the Colonies, requesting one or more Bishops to be
sent to America;" he complains of "unprecedented hardships," and "intolerable
grievances," suffered by the "Church" the "American Church" the "Church of
England in America" for want of "an American Episcopate" and upon this sounds
his Appeal to the Public.

We should be obliged to the Doctor, if he would inform us in plain terms, who
are these superiors to whom the Clergy have applied; by whom these Bishops are
to be sent; by what authority this American Episcopate is to be established; or
who are the authors of these intolerable grievances and unprecedented
hardships? that we may the better judge, whether the apprehensions on account
of our civil Liberties, which this avowed application has raised in the minds
of many people, be well or ill founded. As he has appealed to the public, would
it not be proper for him to inform us, against whom he appeals? Whether against
the King his Ministers and the British Parliament, for not redressing those
grievances, of which he complains, and for not establishing Episcopacy in
America, as he seems to think they ought to have done? Or whether the Appeal is
made against those, who, through fear of an invasion and infringement of their
civil and religious Liberties, think it their duty to oppose such an
establishment? If against the former, the court must indeed be august and
respectable, which he has constituted to take cognizance of our Sovereign and
the British Parliament. If against the latter, as by the rules of all well
established courts, both plaintisss and defendants are excluded from judging in
their own cause, I fancy there will be few in America to sit in judgment. For
let the Doctor flatter as much as he pleases, if ever the attempt be made, he
will find that the prejudices and objections of most of our Colonies are too
deeply rooted and too well founded, for them ever to submit quietly to an
American Episcopate, established over them even by act of Parliament; this
would be to destroy their charters, laws, and their very constitutions; and it
will be well if the Doctor and his associates are not considered as abettors of
Mr. Greenville and those Enemies of America, who are exerting their utmost
endeavors to strip us of our most sacred, invaluable and inherent Rights; to
reduce us to the state of slaves; and to tax us by laws, to which we never have
assented, nor can assent.

We would also ask the Doctor, why is the application made for a Bishop at this
particular time when the liberties of America are at stake? Why are some
insinuations of disloyalty thrown out against his American Brethren? For what
are the tendency of his political reasons, but to inflame the jealousy of the
people of Great Britain? Can there be no Bishops without establishments; no
ordination without act of Parliament? Must this be a new and a primitive, or a
part of the English Episcopate.

The claims of the Doctor, without an establishment, notwithstanding all his
seeming modesty and candor, are too great, not to awaken jealousies in the
minds of free born Americans, if none had been conceived there before.

The "Church" the American Church, "the Church of England in America," are the
names by which he affects to distinguish that denomination of Christans, to
which he belongs. I wish the Doctor would please to define his terms, and tell
us what he means by Church, and why that name should be applied to English
Episcopalians only. Are not the Lutheran and Calvinist Churches, are not the
Congregational, Consociated and Presbyterian Churches; are not the Baptist, the
Quaker and all other Churches in America, of what denomination soever they be,
members of Christ's Catholic Church, if they profess faith in Christ and hold
the great essentials of Christianity? Or does he mean to lay such a stress on
unbroken succession, and on Episcopacy as by law established in England, as to
make these essential to the being of a Church? His words indeed seem to import
as much, where he says, "Men may ridicule the notion of uninterrupted
succession as they please" but "if the succession be once broken and the powers
of ordination once lost, not all the men on earth, not all the angels in
heaven, without an immediate commission from Christ, can restore it. It is as
great an absurdity for a man to preach without being properly sent, as it is to
hear without a preacher, or to believe in him of whom they have never heard."
This may be the Doctor's private opinion borrowed from the No^jurors and other
disturbers of the Church and State during the reigns of King William, Queen Ann
and King George the first, but surely it is not the doctrine of the Church of
England: it has long since been disclaimed by some of its greatest Doctors and
ablest Divines. However, I should be glad the Doctor would explain himself
further, and try to reconcile these high notions with Christian Charity, and
with the validity of ordination in the foreign protestant Churches, or of those
who make no pretense to an unbroken succession. The candor of his sentiments
and (if we may believe him) of the doctrine and belief of the Church of
England, with regard to the government of those Churches in America, which are
not Episcopal, is worthy of notice. " If, says he, according to the doctrine
and belief of the Church of England, none have a right to govern the Church but
Bishops, then the American Church must be without government. (27) But lest we
may have misunderstood him, we desire he may tell us, whether he means that the
Episcopal Christians are the only Church in America, and consequently excludes
all other Churches who want Bishops, from being members of the American Church;
or whether he would assert that all others are without order and government for
want of Bishops, and therefore undeserving the name of Churches.

The "Church of England in America," which he often repeats, is a new
expression, unwarranted by scripture, not known in law, and hardly intelligible
in language, and therefore wants explanation. We read in scripture of the
Church of Antioch, of Corinth, and of Rome; and of the Churches in Asia and
Judea; but we no where read of the Church of Jerusalem in Rome, or of the
Church of Judea in Europe or Asia; in like manner, we hear of the Church of
England, the Church of Ireland, and the Church of Scotland; but the Church of
England in America is a new mode of expression: Yet by this new fangled term,
the Doctor and other Missionaries affect to distinguish themselves and their
followers, while with an air of arrogance and superciliousness, they call other
denominations of Christians, Dissenters.

We apprehend this is not a mere impropriety of speech adopted by a man who
seems not to be one of the most correct writers, but a phrase artfully
introduced with a sinister design.

The Doctor cannot have read so little either of civil or ecclesiastical
history, or be so very little acquainted with mankind as not to know the magic
of words, and the blind devotion paid to names and sounds. The words Pope and
Priest carry great reverence with them in some countries, and terrible
confusions and animosities have been raised in other countries by the words
Church, Clergy, divine right, uninterrupted succession, indelible character,
and such like undefined nonsense; we hope the like game will never be played in
America.

The "national religion" is another phrase of the Doctor's, wherewith he
gra^^^^e peculiar tenets of his Church; with what view he uses (...) may easily
guess from the privileges he has annexed (...) and the doctrine he teaches and
confirms with an "indeed" concerning it. Those, says he, "who dissent from the
National Religion, have, indeed, no natural right to any degree of civil or
military power." (109) As the Doctor in another place declares, that "nothing
has been asserted in the course of his work, but what the author believes, upon
good evidence, to be true." We hope he will produce his evidence to prove this
doctrine, which sounds strange in an American ear. In the mean time, we would
ask him, why might not Christianity have been allowed the honor of being
called the national religion? Or why is Episcopacy alone honored with that
name? Is it because it is established by law in England? Is not Presbytery also
established by law? And was it not established in 1707, a more enlightnened age
surely than that in which Episcopacy was established at the reformation? If the
one is a national church, because established in England, why not the other,
because established in Scotland? But what is this to us in America? Because
these forms are established in Great Britain, must they also be established
here? Many thousands fled to the wilds of America from Episcopal tyranny and
persecution, and to enjoy the free exercise of religion in a way most agreeable
to their consciences, (and as they conceived) to scripture and reason;
established colonies, formed governments, framed laws and founded Churches; and
must all these be termed dissenters, because the doctor and they differ? Or
have they "no natural right to any degree of civil and military power," because
they are not of the national religion. That is, if we believe the Doctor, the
religion which he, and " the Clergy of the several colonies (meaning the
missionaries) profess?"

It is not doubted but every man who wishes to be free will, by all lawful ways
in his power, oppose the establishment of any one denomination in America, the
preventing which is the only means of securing their natural rights, to all
those at least who may differ from that denomination. The Doctor seems sensible
that the opposition to these lordly prelates, will not wholly rest with those
whom he terms Dissenters, that their encroachments in civil matters are
disagreeable to very many who admit their authority in the Church; he therefore
solemnly assures us, that "the Bishops" he desires, "shall not interfere with
the property or privileges, whether civil or religious of Churchmen or
Dissenters" -- "that they shall only ordain and govern the Clergy, and
administer confirmation to those who shall desire it." But when he comes to
explain himself farther, he cautiously intersperses the words, at "present,"
now," and such qualifying expressions as leave the Bishops when once
established, a full liberty to revive every claim and privilege they have ever
made or enjoyed. Even with regard to Tithes (105) while he is obviating
objections that might be raised on account of them, he expresses himself with
such cautions ambiguity, as to leave it doubtful whether he does not mean that
a Bishop established in America may claim and recover them by the laws of
England. Nay such Ideas of Grandeur and Magnificence has the Doctor united with
the word Bishop, that while he is pleading for such as he calls primitive
Bishops, he hints at lordly revenues; he lets us know a committee was
extraordinarily appointed to find out ways and means for the maintenance and
support of Bishops in America; (49) that a fund has been established for that
particular purpose for more than half a century past;" that many thousand
pounds have been contributed to increase this fund. (108) But, "if this stock
is not sufficient for the support of a proper Episcopate in America," "should a
general tax be laid on the country and thereby a sum raised sufficient for the
purpose" "this would be no mighty hardship on the country;" and he who would
think much of paying it, deserves not to be considered in the light of a good
subject." (107) That hereafter they may be invested with some degree of civil
power worthy their acceptance. (110) In short, hints, that legislative and
executive powers may both be placed in their hands, (ibidem) And with all these
princely revenues, with all this accession of power, what are they to do? Only
to ordain and govern the Clergy? No: They are "to defend and protect both the
Clergy and Laity." These things are so unlike the appearance of a primitive
Bishop, that we must say, that though "at present" we hear the v^^^e of Jacob,
we see and may "hereafter feel the rough and hairy hands of Esau.

One thing more I would beg to know from the Doctor; what assurances (besides
his own, which are too weak to be relied on in so momentous an affair) are we
to have that Bishops will be sent over with such limited powers? attempts are
made upon American liberty from a quarter where it ought not to be expected. A
temper is shown by some leading prelates even now in England, that will not
suffer us to place a confidence in them. One of them at the head of the society
for propogating the gospel was not ashamed to oppose a plan for the conversion
of the Indians, because concerted by a denomination of Christians who "followed
not with him." Another of them lately attended the board of trade to prevent
the grant of a charter to the Presbyterian Church in New York.

But suppose these Bishops sent over with these limited powers, is there any
probability they will be content with them? can we suppose that the Clergy of a
Society, which thinks itself peculiarly entitled to national favor, and
asserts itself to be so essentially connected with the state, will, if once
established ever give ease or peace to other Churches in America, whom they now
treat as Dissenters, until they have a plenary possession of every privilege
enjoyed by the Church in England by law established? With Bishops at their
head, will not the cry be as loud, if they have not ecclesiastical courts, for
discipline and to harrass their neighbors? A Bishop without a court, is as
unparalleled as any hardship complained of? Again must not the Clergy have a
maintenance? The society for propagating the gospel is not able to provide for
all that may be ordained; the Episcopal congregations cannot maintain them;
must they then starve in America? When in England they have a legal right to
the tithes? Will not the cry at last be, nay does not the Doctor almost make it
already, that they alone have a right to all places of power and profit in the
colonies as well as in England and Ireland, because the most friendly to
monarchy?

We hope the Doctor will explain himself fully, and resolve the doubts and
queries we have here proposed. On some other occasion we may enter the lists
and examine his divine right of diocesan Episcopacy; his unbroken succession:
the connection between natural rights, and a national religion; his Doctrine of
tithes; the numbers of his denomination and their unparalleled sufferings in
America, etc. etc.

N.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZZETTE, Monday March 28.
ADVERTISEMENT.
ON Monday next will be published, in the New York Gazette, and weekly mercury,
numb. I. of a weekly paper, entitled, A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG.

[From Mr. Parker's New York Gazette, March 28, 1768.] THE AMERICAN WHIG. [No.
III.]
And of some have Compassion, making a difference.

Apostle JUDE.
THE first settlers of the Northern colonies fled from the cruel persecution of
the Church of England to this country, which then was an uncultivated
wilderness. The Indians soon became jealous of the new settlers, and gave them
all the disturbance in their power. But those brave sons of religion and
liberty, chose rather to run the risque of the rage and malice of the Indian
savages, than of the perfidious and persecuting bishops. They continued to
settle the country, and God, in whom they trusted, appeared for their defense,
and drove out the heathens from before them.

As America is a new country, and the settlers generally poor, they are obliged
to be very laborious, in order to procure a tolerable subsistence for
themselves and families. They have ever been, and still are, too much engaged
in business, to get acquainted with the parties and controversies that
continued in the mother country, and particularly in the Church of England;
especially as they hoped, that their great enemies the diocesan bishops, would
be contented, since they had in effect procured them to be banished from the
land of their nativity. Indeed, we could not but hope, they would have suffered
us to live in peace in these remote parts of the earth; and that the vast
Atlantic ocean would have served for a partition between us to all generations.
But since it appears, that their spiritual lordships are invited to follow us,
even into these distant corners of the earth, it is become necessary to
consider, with some degree of attention, the parties which compose the Church
of England. This is requisite, to show what little regard is to be paid to
those ignorant zealots, who assert that there are no parties among them, in
order that due justice may be done to their respective characters; and that it
may be clearly known who are the persons we intend to censure. For as there are
many worthy men belonging to that communion, equally exposed with the wise and
virtuous of every other denomination to the pestilent project in embryo, I mean
the design of importing a cargo of Bishops, it is not our intention to give
them any offense.

The reformation was begun in England by Henry the VIIIth, and that from no
very religious motive. Since the Pope refused to grant him liberty to marry, he
assumed to himself the same supremacy in England, which the Bishop of Rome had
usurped over the Church and consciences of men. And he carried this power so
exceeding high, that his subjects were forced to comply with his injunctions,
or be ruined. The consequence was, that while a few embraced the reformation
out of conscience, multitudes submitted merely to save their estates, and avoid
persecution. Hence, when Queen Mary commanded them to return to popery, they
very generally complied. Nor is there any reason to think they were, for the
most part, more sincere in their re-conversion to protestantism, at the command
of Queen Elizabeth. And thus the national Church of England was erected; such
were the greater part of her clergy and laity.

This clearly shows us the origin of two famous parties, viz. High-Church and
Low-Church, as they are termed in England. From the beginning of the
reformation, it being effected so much by force, many who were really papists
in their hearts, yielded to the times, and conformed out of self-interest. Such
were always strongly inclined to prevent every farther step of reformation; and
chose rather again, to coalesce with the Church of Rome. Such were always
mighty sticklers for pomp in religious worship; for rites and ceremonies, and
the uninterrupted line of succession: And such, in a word, have always been the
ringleaders in persecuting all, who, from a principle of religion and
conscience, could not adopt their measures. For having themselves no idea about
tenderness of conscience, they would make no allowance for others. When the
house of Stuart was called to the throne of England, and proved, as is well
known by woeful experience, a weak and tyrannical race of princes, who meditated
utterly to destroy the liberties of the nation; the high Churchmen joined
heartily with them, and endeavored to support all their measures. The Bishops
and Clergy intoxicated those monarchs with the most fulsome flattery, assuring
them, that as vicegerents of God, they were not accountable to men, and that
subjects must obey on pain of damnation: The kings in return promoted those
sycophants to great riches and dignity, and permitted them to gratify their
cruel and popish spirit, by persecuting their fellow protestants. And thus they
continued to ravage and destroy the nation, till God, in his merciful
providence, put an end to their tyranny, by King William the IIId. of glorious
memory. But have they been quiet and submissive since the happy revolution? No,
they greatly disturbed the peace and comfort of that excellent prince, by many
plots and conspiracies: And they had accomplished the extirpation of the
national liberty in the reign of Queen Anne, had not the Almighty graciously
interfered, and again blasted their execrable designs.

The same restless party raised rebellions in the reigns of George the first
and second, and involved the nation in blood and slaughter. -- And who are now
so earnestly desirous of having Bishops introduced into the colonies, to lord
it over them? Who indeed but the High Churchmen? Many of the American
Missionaries are High Churchmen; since they cannot on any other consistent
plan, justify their conduct in gathering Proselytes from other communions. They
are the true, if not the only, descendants and approvers of Archbishop Laud's
principles and measures.

The other party is that which is commonly known by the name of Low Churchmen,
and may be thus characterized. They embraced the reformation from conscience,
and have always been disposed to carry it farther; lamenting the many unhappy
deficiencies of the Church of England; the relics of popery; and the
superstitious rites and ceremonies still retained. They have ever been
favorable to the protestant Dissenters; and firmly attached to the civil
liberties of their country; to the revolution, and the illustrious house of
Hanover; but avowed enemies to popery slavery, and arbitrary power. These do
not desire to impose diocesan Bishops to undermine our rights and privileges.
Nor do the Low Churchmen in the colonies, wish for the residence of those
ecclesiastic Lords amongst us. With this part, which is the worthy part of the
Church of England, we have no controversy. They are generally men of amiable
characters; and heartily concurred in every lawful and decent measure, in
opposing the late stamp act. They are sincere friends to their country; and
pity it is, that the Missionaries do not learn moderation and candor from
them; nor pay more regard to their advice and example. Then should we not be
perpetually stunned with the Church is in danger, the Church is in danger; nor
with the great importance and necessity of rites and ceremonies; nor the
introduction of Bishops into the American plantations. -- Whenever therefore,
in the course of these papers, I shall say any thing respecting the Episcopal
Clergy or laity, that appears harsh or invidious, I would always be understood
as aiming at the High Church party, the restless and implacable enemies of our
liberty civil and sacred.

R.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, March 31. The SENTINEL. No. II.
Aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris and carcere dignum,
Si vis esse aliquis --
JUVENAL.
IN my last paper I took notice of some of the favorite cant words in Dr.
Chandler's Appeal, etc. which he has used to amuse and impose on the public;
the common practice of designing men, who want to raise disturbances in Church
or state. Such kind of words they usually throw out to catch the unwary; the
more undefined and the less understood, so much the better. Great is Diana of
the Ephesians, was the watchword given, when Demetrius and his
fellow-crastsmen threw the whole city of Ephesus into an uproar. Dr. Demetrius
honestly told his fellow-tradesmen, that by the preaching of St Paul their then
Crast, and consequently their wealth, was in danger. Whatever weight this
argument might have with them, he knew it would not have the same with the
populace; therefore it was necessary to tell them that the temple of the great
Goddess Diana and her image, were in danger of being despised. This was
sufficient to alarm the people and to raise their spirits and inflame their
passions, the cry was put into their mouths; great is Diana of the Ephesians,
High-Church forever. It requires but very little reading to know how often and
how successfully the same art has been practiced since. The Church, the Church
is in danger, was a notable cry, at a never-to-be-forgotten period of the
English history, when the very persons who raised it and kept it up, were
laboring to introduce Popery, the pretender, and arbitrary power; and had not
God in his providence blasted their wicked designs, and opened the way for the
accession of the present royal family, before they had brought their schemes to
bear, the consequences might have been ruinous to the nation.

The people had been taught from their infancy to revere the Church without
knowing what is meant; they were told by their spiritual Guides that it was in
danger, without being informed from whence the danger arose. Thus their fears
were awakened, their passions inflamed and directed against the friends of
liberty, religion, and their country. In short such men as Tillotson,
Tennisson, Hoadly, Burnet, the shining Lights and greatest ornaments of their
own Church, were vilely misrepresented as betrayers of the same.

Let us now see in what manner Dr. Chandler endeavors to raise a clamor in
America. throughout his whole appeal, he takes it for granted that the
Episcopalians are the American Church, and that his associates the missionaries
are the Clergy: all other denominations of Christians be treats as Dissenters,
Schismatics, and Sectaries; and to their pastors and public teachers he hardly
deigns to allow the name of ministers; their Ordination, he says, is at least
irregular and defective, but in his judgment null and void, and of consequence
they are no ministers of Christ; for says he, it is as great an absurdity to
preach without being properly sent, as to believe in him of whom they have
never heard -- The cry is then raised the American Church is in Danger, its
sufferings are unparalleled, it is perishing for want of common necessaries,
(99) its oppression is such as to deserve the compassion of the whole Christian
world, (114) "it is ready to expire, and nothing but its ruin is foreseen,
unless Bishops be sent speedily" (113)

The Clergy, a word of deep import, and used to purpose in sounding the trumpet
of sedition; the Clergy of several colonies have taken the alarm, and applied
to our Superiors for aid and assistance in this dangerous Crisis: Who these
Superiors are, he does not tell us, but doubtless they are the same on whom he
calls for an establishment of Episcopacy, namely the British Nation (87) and
the Guardians of its Interests, (114) those who are entrusted with the
Interests of the Nation, etc. (113) in short, notwithstanding the Doctor's
studied ambiguity, this application must be ultimately intended for the
parliament of Great Britain: And to rouse the passions of the British Nation,
and inflame their Jealously, already too much raised by the enemies of America,
he strongly insinuates, that the state is not safe unless Episcopacy be
established in America; and attempts to raise suspicions of disloyalty against
all other denominations of Christians. No Trumpet of sedition, says he, was
ever heard to sound from our Pulpits; no seeds of disaffection have been
suffered more privately to be sown in our houses. For fear this should not be
applied, the Doctor adds a curious Note in the following Words; "This
Accusation is not intended to imply any accusation of others; who are able,
it is hoped, to make their own Defense, whenever the Occasion shall require it.
His Majesty's American Subjects of all Denominations, belonging to the old
Colonies, have always professed sentiments of Loyalty, and the author believes
they have generally been sincere in those professions, etc.
Our religion is a security to the government for our honoring the King, and
not meddling with them that are given to change, (41) Notwithstanding the
Doctor here insinuates, that passive Obedience and Non-Resistance are the
reigning Principles of the American Church, yet to the Honor of the
Episcopalians it must be allowed, that they are not of the Doctor's Stamp; but
are zealous Friends to Liberty, and have always been, and no doubt are, as
ready to oppose any attacks on their own Rights, and those of their
Fellow Subjects, as any Set of Men in America.
it may be reasonably expected from those in authority, that they will support
and assist the Church in America, if from no other reason, yet from a regard to
the state; (115) nay in another place (113) he asserts, that monarchy cannot
subsist without episcopacy; so that in his next appeal we may expect to hear
the old cry "no Bishop no King," revived. But as if this was not sufficient to
alarm the fears of the nation, the Doctor endeavors to persuade, that his
Church is the Church of England by law established, that they are essentially
the same; that both must subsist or perish by the same means; and that
therefore unless Episcopacy is established in America, the Church in the mother
country will be ruined; (113) and to confound the Ideas in the minds of the
populace, the term Church of England in America is used, just as the favorers
of popery use the phrase Church of Rome in England, in Ireland and in France,
to give a color and lay a foundation for the claims and usurpations of the
pope in those countries.

Let us now enquire who are the Cergy of the several colonies, who have made
this application. I believe that no man will suspect that the ministers of
either the Baptist, Congregational, Consociated, Calvinist, Lutheran,
Presbyterian, or Quaker congregations are concerned in such an application: and
if I am well informed (and I believe I am) not one of the Clergy of any
denomination to the Southward of Pennsylvania had any hand in it. The
missionaries only therefore seem to be the Doctor's Clergy. Though their
knowledge of the civil rights of mankind, and profound erudition may not be
disputed, yet their rank in life at present is not very high; for this reason
probably the Doctor thought it necessary, in order to give some weight and
importance to the application, to dignify them with the title of the "Clergy,
of the several colonies." By acts like these, men of low original have been
exalted into high stations, and thereby enabled to distress persons more worthy
than themselves; thus the Cardinals rose to the high rank they now hold in the
Church of Rome.

As these missionaries assume of late an air of importance, I may be indulged
while I endeavor to explain their rise and the nature of their mission.

Our Forefathers harrassed by spiritual Courts and the Power of the lordly
prelates (which in opposition to the Doctor I will venture to assert, and if he
pleases will undertake to prove, has always been strained too high, when the
times would admit) being likewise denied the privilege of peaceably worshipping
God in a way the most agreeable to their consciences, at last wearied out with
persecution, resolved to leave their native country, and seek shelter in the
wilds of America. The power of the Church of England by law established, they
imagined was confined to England; and for this opinion they had reason, and the
authority of some of the greatest lawyers; having therefore crossed the
Atlantic, they thought themselves secure from the oppressive tyranny of any
proud Eccesiasticks.

What hardships they endured in forming their settlements, are not to be
described, hardly to be conceived! However amidst these distresses their
spirits were supported with the enjoyment of their civil and religious
liberties, and the hopes of transmitting them to posterity.

No sooner was the country settled, towns built and prospects of peace and
plenty opening to their view, than those prelates from whose power and
persecution they had fled, began to envy them their liberty, and to lay plans
and concert measures to bring them again under the yoke of bondage. To prepare
the way, a society is formed under the specious pretense of propagating
Christianity in foreign parts; a fund is established for defraying the
expenses, and pious well disposed persons are desired to contribute to this
fund.

For every proposal, there may be assigned a specious reason and a true reason;
the specious reason here alleged was the conversion of the Indians in America;
this being cried up, captivated many and procured large donations from people
of all denominations. The true but latent reason, as it seems, was to prepare
the way for Episcopal dominion; hence it came to pass that though many
missionaries were sent to America, with salaries paid them out of the money
subscribed for converting heathens to Christianity, not more than two or three
(just enough to talk of and keep up the pretense) were ever set among the
Indians, the rest were chiefly employed in New England, New York, New Jersey
and Pennsylvania, and settled in the cities and larger towns and villages, in
which the regular public worship of God had been long before duly kept up and a
ministry maintained. The candid Doctor Bray, the Bishop of London's Commissary
in Maryland, just before the Incorporation of the Society (who our Doctor calls
the Father of the Society) after having taken great Pains to inform himself,
says "that from New York Northward, be found very little Need of Missionaries,
and in the Colonies of Connecticut and the Massachusetts, none at all -- And
yet in 1761 there were 30 Salary Men employed by the Society in New England, 35
in New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania, and only 14 in all other Continent
and Island Colonies, although poor blind Heathen Negroes, make up the Body of the
People in most of these last mentioned.
These missionaries to magnify their office and show the success of their
mission, transmit regularly to the society, journals of their proceedings
stuffed with accounts of the conversion of Quakers, Baptists, Presbyterians,
etc. not to Christianity, but to Episcopacy. This calls to my mind the bishop
of St. Asaph's Sermon before the society who speaking of the Popish
missionaries, says, Their missions do not seem to be managed with an Apostolic
Simplicity. They settle themselves in nations that are Christians already and
have been so from the beginning; and under the pretense of converting the
infidels that are among them, their chief business seems to be to pervert
Christians from their ancient faith; and to draw them over to a subjection to
the Pope; the want of which subjection, they think the greatest error they find
among them, and which they zealously endeavor to eradicate, whilst the
Infidels are very sparingly (if ever) applied to by them -- How applicable is
this to the conduct of the society! Mutato Nomine de te Fabula narratur.

In the latter end of Queen Ann's reign a violent push was made to establish
Episcopacy in America by act of parliament, and to get Bishops sent over whose
power and authority might influence or over awe the people there, and prepare
them for what was meditating in England; these Bishops were to have power to
protect and defend both Clergy and Laity. (50) The demise of the Queen and the
accession of the Hanover family blasted their hopes, whereupon the American
Episcopate was dropped; and the colonies left to the enjoyment of their civil and
religious privileges, till this time of danger and distress, which these
restless ambitious men have again seized as their most favorable opportunity
-- Notwithstanding this disappointment the missionaries have been kept up, and
their numbers enlarged to the utmost Ability of the society; but of late they
have considerably diminished their salaries. Whether this arises from a failure
in their funds, occasioned by some attempts that have been made to explain the
manner in which the society have perverted the design of their institution, and
misapplied the moneys committed to their care; or whether it arises from the
exaggerated accounts sent over by the missionaries of the numbers by them
converted, who if the case had been so would undoubtedly have been able to have
supported their ministers as is done by the people of all other denominations;)
or from whatever cause it proceeds, such is the disagreeable situation of their
affairs; and this seems greatly to alarm the missionaries and make them
struggle hard for a maintenance from other societies. For notwithstanding (if
the Doctor is to be believed) there are a million of souls belonging to their
Church, yet he confesses that they have no prospect, but must still depend in a
great measure upon the charity of their benefactors, until God shall either
enable or dispose their friends in this country to do more for them. (107) With
Bishops at their head, their forces will be better united and their attempts to
have this "more" done for them, will probably be attended with greater success:
then to be sure will be the time to try for a general tax for the support of
the Bishops and Clergy, which last now depend on the charity of their
benefactors at home, and should they be able to carry their point and a general
tax be laid on the country, and thereby a sum raised sufficient for the purpose
the Doctor peremptorily declares that he that could think much to pay it,
deserves not to be considered in the light of a good subject or member of
society. (108) This he modestly demands only for the Bishops at present, but
leaves room to think he desires to have the missionaries included, as he has
the remarkable expression, for any use. I dare say if the Doctor should live to
see that time, he would have no scruple to excommunicate such a person as his
predecessors in the unbroken line have frequently done in like cases.

The Doctor seems sensible, that the present crisis of public affairs is
favorable; when a powerful party at home is formed against America, and
therefore he presses the establishment of an American Episcopate with all
possible speed; and no doubt it is to encourage the attempt that he exaggerates
the numbers of his party, and would persuade his superiors in England, that it
is desired by near a million in America, a deception so barefaced, that if his
appea had been designed only for the people of America, it would need no
refutation.

N.

[From Mr. Parker's New York Gazette, April 4, 1768.] Remarks on the Title, of
a Whip for the American Whig.
Mr. PARKER. Please to insert the following in your next, and you will oblige a
Friend.
ON reading in the New York Mercury, an advertisement of a weekly paper to be
published, under the title of A Whip for the American Whig; I could not help
falling into a train of serious reflections, on the persecuting genius that
inspires the high flying Tory-party, in the Episcopal Church: To this day,
inhuman severity has marked their character; and for aught I see, it is so
deeply radicated in their very constitution, that they will not cease to be
savages, till they cease to exist, without passing through some wonderful
metamorphosis. You are warned of your fate a whole week before the scene is
opened. Sentence is passed, it will certainly be executed. The poor Whig must
undergo the discipline of the Whip. This, Sir, is but a prelude of what you may
look for; you, are yet to be chastised only with whips; but depend upon it,
when the apostolical monarchs are come over, and well established in their
American dominions, you, and such as you, will be chastised with scorpions. But
this is not all; the bellum episcopale, will doubtless be declared with every
circumstance of awful pomp; and this extensive continent may soon be alarmed
with the thundering signal, the sword of the lord, and of the Bishop. Then, O
dreadful! The torrent of episcopal vengeance! Then all who will not be so
senseless as to adore the mitre and surplice, and dedicate both their
consciences and purses to his episcopal Majesty, may lay their account with --
With what? With something, I will not yet particularly name, but what one may
easily discover, by turning over a Church history or two. This may be the fate
of many, unless indulgent heaven interpose, by not suffering the right reverend
and holy tyrants, to plunge their spiritual swords in the souls of their fellow
creatures; or, if this is permitted, by determining the secular powers, not to
suffer their anathemas to be executed to the utmost limits of their severity. I
know what I am saying, Americans shall feel the truth of what I have now
surmised, at least, in part, if they do not now bestir themselves, and unite as
one man, to oppose the erection of spiritual monarchies, with all the heroism
they would display in opposing a formidable army of dons and monsieurs.

It seems the Whipper is not of opinion that the almost unparalleled hardships,
which the ancestors of many of us suffered, under the most absolute tyranny of
the spiritual lords in the last century, do not constitute a sufficient reason
for our being alarmed at the present conjuncture. It seems his soul within him
is in agony, when he reflects, that such of them as escaped the episcopal
sword, sound an asylum in the wilds of America, among Indians and
rattle-snakes, more hospitable to them than Bishops, and their devoted
creatures, the curates; and when he takes a view of their posterity peaceably
enjoying the repose that was purchased by unexampled industry and fatigue. It
seems I say, this is the real temper of this episcopal zealot; else why is he
offended at us, and threatens us with the Whip, when we complain that the
prelatical Clergy (for I dare say the people in communion with them, do not
desire the woeful day) are incessantly laboring to bring over the Atlantic, men
of the same office and stamp, with those blood suckers, who obliged our
ancestors to abandon their native land, and leave behind them what is the very
heaven of persecutors, and temporising conformists.

I intend to lay before the public, a tragical history of the cruelty of
British Bishops, since the reformation which, I am persuaded will alarm, not
only those who are called dissenters, but every person in communion with the
episcopal Church, who is not so hardened as to be unsusceptible of every human
and Christian impression.

Mean while, I cannot help smiling at the cringing submission of the complete
gentleman, who has undertaken the office of a Whipper, a high flying Tory so
humbled! One, who no doubt expects to be elevated one day or other, to a
deanary, perhaps to the episcopal throne, now brought so low as to stand at a
Whipping-Post, and belabour the posteriors of a poor Whig; I wish he would take
care of the consequence. After this, I hope I shall have the pleasure to find
every one who is found to be an accessory to the Whipper, or who favors his
paper, to be laughed at in the streets, and in every corner to meet with the
salute, your humble servant Mr. Whipper.

[From Mr. Parker's New York Gazette, Monday, April 4.]
THE AMERICAN WHIG. [No. IV.]
To the Author of the American Whig. SIR,
If you approve of the following sentiments, I beg you will publish them to
prevent Episcopalians in general, from being the subjects of undistinguishing
reproach.

SUCH a train of evils have followed the investiture of the Christian clergy
with temporal powers and dignities, that it is impossible for a generous mind,
to reflect upon the exemption of America from the dominion of rich and proud
ecciesiastics, without exultation and transport. While the primitive Church was
neglected or persecuted by the princes and nobles of this world, it spread and
triumphed; but no sooner was it fostered and patronized by the great, than it
became distinguished rather for corruption than piety; and manifold experience
has evinced what our blessed Lord had declared, that his kingdom was so far
from being of this world, that true Christianity, as though it scorned all
secular aids, flourished best, when, instead of the smiles, it had the frowns
and the contempt of the world. All history is in favor of these remarks; and
therefore, though I am not against Kings becoming nursing fathers to the Church,
yet has she no cause to thank them for all their flattering endowments, which
tend to puff up the pride of her sons: This instead of nursing, is poisoning
her; and it would be so far from promoting her interest, to make every
successor of the apostles, as rich as a lord, (a condition which too many
desire) that I believe the gospel harvest would in such case, find scarce a
labourer to gather it in.

I was led to these reflections by the perusal of Doctor Chandler's
lamentations for the want of Bishops in America: This gentleman thinks we have
greatly suffered, and are exposed to still greater hardships, for the want of
this order of Clergymen amongst us; I say we, because I profess myself a
Churchman, though utterly opposed to his project; and I hope a difference of
sentiment upon this subject, will never be made a test, whether a man is, or is
not, a true son of the Church. If a sincere approbation of the worship,
discipline, and doctrine of the Church of England, is sufficient to merit the
character, my claim to it is free from exception; and had I my residence in
England, it should not be forfeited for want of an acquiescence in, or indeed,
if necessary, a contest for the Church, with all the temporal privileges and
immunities confirmed by the law of the land; because I am of opinion, that it
would be difficult, if not impossible, to innovate with amendments in that
country, without exposing the Church and kingdom to consequences ruinous to
both.

But though a Churchman, I am an American Churchman, a member of the American
episcopal Church; for in my judgment there is a real difference between an
American Church of Englandman, if I may so speak, and an American Episcopalian.
There are many civil and religious appendages and annexations, the undoubted
rights of the Church of England in England, which Episcopalians in America
cannot, as friends to this country, wish to see introduced. According to this
distinction, I am in principle opposed to tithes, Bishops, baronies, and a
thousand other powers and peculiarities, occasioned by the liberality of popes
and princes, and the superstition of the vulgar.

Thus far, perhaps, I have given no great umbrage to the author of the Appeal;
and I believe to but few of the Episcopalians of this continent. But I go
farther than the Doctor and his advocates will perhaps think consistent with my
profession as a churchman. And I confess the opposition to an Episcopate in
America, gives so much ground for suspicion, as to render an assignment of a
few reasons necessary to vindicate my claim; these are too many to be crowded
into the compass of a single letter, and if they are not better urged by
others, will occasion a continuation of our correspondence. I shall at present
confine myself to one single topic, and that is this,

With the Bishops we shall naturally have the introduction or establishment of
spiritual or ecclesiastical courts.

The power of these judicatories is great and formidable; for the spiritual
cognizance reaches to perjuries in Church matters, usury, assaults and
batteries of Clergymen, brawlers in Churches, and Churchyards, marriage
contracts, alimony, adultery, divorces, fornication, drunkenness, blasphemy,
absence from Church, withholding contributions for building Churches,
substracting legacies, temerary administration, or the obstructing the proof of
wills, slander, disturbing the possession of pews or seats, substraction of
marriage portions; fees of judges, registers and proctors, and to all other
offenses prohibited by the canons of the Church.

As a Christian, I am not averse to the punishment of enormities that bring
reproach and scandal upon our most holy religion. As a Churchman, I hold, that
the power to inflict it, belongs to the Bishop. As an Old England Churchman, I
assert, that the Bishop's decree does legally expose the delinquent to civil
inconveniences: But as an American Churchman, I would limit the power of the
Church and clergy to a mere excommunication, or denial of the sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, and give the farther punishment of the offenses triable in
England in the spiritual court, to the judges of the court of common law. For
no man can insist, that the English Bishops have authority, jure divine, to all
that extent of power they at present enjoy. As successors to the apostles, they
can claim no right which their predecessors had not; and to me, the supposition
is utterly incredible, that the Apostles either exercised, or claimed the
authority which the Bishops of the Church of England now execute in their
spiritual courts.

The Bishop's title is not derived from the apostolic commission: They are
seized by the law of the land, and will hold their preheminencies till this law
is altered, by king, lords and commons.

Lord Hale, who was no zealous advocate for the ecclesiastical courts, tells
us, in his history of the common law, that every Bishop by his election and
confirmation, even before consecration, had ecclesiastical jurisdiction annexed
to his office, as judex ordinarius within his diocese, and diverse abbots
anciently, and most arch deacons to this day, by usage, have had the like
jurisdiction within certain limits and precincts.

The Bishop's right to open his court being therefore secured by the common
law, and that being universally acknowledged to be the law of the colonies, his
lordship will find no difficulty, after his diocese is established, to erect a
tribunal, for good reasons long disgustful to the people of England; and which
Americans dread to almost the same degree of horror, which they feel at the
thoughts of the inquisition itself,

As the new Bishops will have the law on their side, so the dependent state of
the judges in the provinces, will probably favor the design, not only of
erecting those courts, but of extending them, in all doubtful cases, most to
the advancement of episcopal claims. To be the better understood, I will put a
case, which, if ever a Bishop should arrive in this country, will doubtless be
a very common one.

It may well be supposed that the zeal of some English or Dutch Calvinist
minister, in some private or public controversy with one of our missionaries,
may let slip the old accusation, that the latter, instead of preaching the
doctrines of the thirty nine articles of our Church, inculcates the heresy of
Arminius; such a charge, if ill grounded, may be thought sufficient to support
a libel for defamation; upon complaint, the Bishop's court will doubtless order
process to issue: A defendant wrongfully impleded there, must apply for his
relief to the judges at common law, for a prohibition to his lordship. But if
the matter is proper for spiritual cognizance, or even dubious, what prospect
will there be of success; while my lord Bishop figures away in parade and
interest, beyond any governor upon the continent; and the judges hold their
commissions only during pleasure? The inferior clergy of our own Church, I
consider as so many life-guards to his lordship, and supported by their letters
in his favor, and his own connections with the reverend bench in the mother
country, no remonstrance on the part of the judges, will secure them from
calumny and misrepresentation. In so unequal a contest, every irresolute judge
will become the dupe of the clergy; and what hopeful effects the episcopal
influence will then have upon liberty and property, is easier to foresee, than
to describe. In a word, as no lay characters in this country will be a match
for the Bishop's, in point of fortune, splendour, power and interest, not a man
will mount the ladder of perferment, without his Lordship's aid; and we may
have the mortification to see the officers of government, from his Majesty's
council, down to a justice of the peace, courting the parson of a parish, to
recommend them to the favor of a haughty prelate, who will doubtless
monopolize, by the creatures of his power, all posts and places civil,
ecclesiastic, and military.

If any man thinks these the visionary dreams of an extravagant despondency, or
an over-weaning attachment to American liberty; I must reply, in my turn, that
his ease and security, are owing to his ignorance of the nature and extent of
the spiritual court; and the countenance given to it by the common law itself.
The Bishop has a throne of judgment for all scandals upon the Christian name,
and two scolds cannot fling out the charge of whoredom, free from his
Lordship's control. Under him there will be a regiment of deans, and chapters,
arch-deans, and prebendaries, vicars-general, chancellors, commissaries,
officials, registers, deputy registers, apparitors, proctors, and advocates,
who all practice as our admiralty courts do, according to the course of the
civil law, and will, (if the English models prevail,) be maintained by a table
of fees which by emptying the pockets of the unhappy delinquents, will teach
them with a witness, to beware of the censures of the Church.

But the sharpest arrow in his Lordship's quiver, is the power of
excommunication.

This is a censure by which the defaulting party is, for a time, cast out of
the communion of the church. In the primitive age it consisted in the
deprivation of the use of the sacrament; but as wickedness abounded, the
punishment was contemned, and the temporal grandeur of the church made it
necessary to super-add temporal sanctions.

At this day excommunications are divided into the lesser and greater. By the
first, the offender is deprived of the sacraments and divine worship; and it is
denounced for disobeying the process of the Bishop's court: But the greater
excommunication inhibits a man from the society or conversation of the
faithful; and by a constitution of Archbishop Stratford, they who even trade or
communicate with persons excommunicated, are punishable by ecclesiastical
censure. Lind. 266.

As to its consequences, according to the course of the common law, they are, a
disability to commence any action; and hence the excommunication of the
plaintiff is pleadable in abatement to his suit; nor can he be a witness,
advocate or juror, nor dispose of his estate by testament: It also suspends an
executorship; nor shall his remains, according to the rubric in the Book of
Common Prayer, have the honor of the burial office, and Christian interment.
See Lit sect. 201 -- Gib. 1050 Swin. 109, 367. -- 2 Haw. 418. Godolp. Orphan
Law 37, and the 68th Canon.

Such being the severity of the sentence of excommunication, I believe few
Americans wish to see a judicatory erected to give the law on this head, an
opportunity of being applied: And the advocate for an American Episcopate must
be an enthusiast in the cause, if this is the discipline he longs to have
exercised: For though the Doctor admits, that our Clergymen at present may, and
ought, to refuse the communion to disorderly and scandalous persons, he wishes
for the restoration of something more efficacious; but what that is, he has
rather left to our conjecture, than clearly explained.

An American Churchman. W.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE violent clap of thunder wherewith this city had for a week before been
daily threatened, was last Monday morning at about six minutes after ten
(attended with a great snow storm, and some rain,) impetuously discharged from
our American Vatican, having been, after great consultation, agreed to be
hurled, by the coruscatious arm of Mr. Secretary Seabury: but very fortunately
for man, beast, and buildings, the bolt wanting an essential quality to do
execution, we cannot learn that any creature, rational, animal, or material,
has received the least damage from the explosion. With respect to the American
Whig, for whom this nitra-sulphureous fulmination was expressly fabricated, and
at whose pericardium it was point blank levelled, it has not so much as singed
a single thread of his garments. The reverend secretary begins with solemnly
affirming, that the convention have never made any injurious reflections upon
the other denominations, by representing them either as seditious incendiaries,
or as disaffected to the king and government. This affirmation happens
unfortunately to respect a matter of fact which it is impossible for him to
know: For the convention being no corporation, they do not want any of his
instrumentality to authenticate their acts. He can therefore only declare this
on the poor, simple, "I am told," which is not worth one farthing more than the
poor, simple, "we are told," of the American Whig; with which he is
nevertheless in so violent a taking. After having delivered this part of his
testimony, which is nothing to the purpose, he proceeds in the following
elegant and dispassionate language. I do moreover affirm and declare, that this
Assertion of the American Whig, is absolutely, utterly, and entirely false, and
groundless. And I hereby call upon him in this open Manner both as a member of,
and a Secretary to the Convention, publicly to produce the Authority upon
which he has asserted so infamous a Falsehood. In this Case the most positive
Proof is insisted on, nor will the respectable Public be put off with a poor,
simple, "we are told," which is nothing to the purpose.

Should any Person think that I do not treat this Writer with proper Respect,
let him turn to the last Paragraph of the American Whig, No. I. where Dr.
Chandler and the Convention, (Gentlemen at least as reputable as himself) are
in Fact accused of the grossest Falsehood and Deceit, in pretending to ask for
a Bishop only upon the Plan proposed in the Appeal, while it is, not the
primitive Christian Bishop they want," but, etc. Such a Piece of Effrontery and
Malice, I think, deserves, and would justify worse Treatment than a Regard to
my own Character would suffer me to give him. Before I give any direct answer
to the charge brought against me I must in my turn complain of an injury little
inferior to that about which he makes so tremendous an outcry. It appears
evident, by his saying, that Doctor Chandler, and the Convention were gentlemen
at least as respectable as myself, that he is acquainted with my personal
character; and yet he has had the assurance to assert, that I am both Secretary
and a member of the Convention, which he knows in his own conscience, (to use
his own tautological epithets) to be absolutely, utterly, and entirely false,
and groundless. For I do affirm and declare, that I never was either the one or
the other; and I take it extremely unkind, to be placed pending the lawsuit
between the Convention and the Public, amongst such unpopular company. As to
the remainder of this most delicate composition, I would observe, that our
Secretary did not consider, (and indeed who in such a flustratious ferment
could be capable of any consideration) that the respectable Public, before whom
the cause is now at issue, is entitled to the highest proof of which the nature
of the thing will admit. They will therefore not be satisfied with the bare
verbum sacerdotis, while such superior evidence remains in his own possession.
The proof which they have a right to expect is, that he forthwith publish true
copies of all the petitions, that were written and sent on that occasion,
noting what was in the original drafts, and struck out by a few moderate
members of the Convention, (for luckily for the colonies a few such there
happened to be, or no mortal can tell of what we should not have been accused)
and that such publications be declared to be true copies, upon oath. When this
is done, the American Whig will have the pleasure of surprising him with a
secret he little suspects. In the mean time, I would advise him to lift up
hands without wrath, as well as without doubting; though I should not have the
least objection against instantly suffering the execution of his menaces, did I
not flatter myself, that my life is of some moment to the Public, while I am
engaged in exerting my endeavors to avert the terrible curse of an American
Episcopate. This being accomplished, the Secretary, or any of his brethren, the
disciples and ministers of the gospel of peace, may use what violence they
please, and put me to death in their own way and manner; as I should really
expect to die with vastly greater cheerfulness and serenity, on being able to
reflect, that I had, in any degree been instrumental in defeating so portentous
a project. Relative to my saying, that I do not believe Doctor Chandler and the
Convention want a primitive Bishop; I have hitherto seen no reason for
repentance, but on the contrary, Know all men by these presents, that I do
hereby declare and affirm, that I do not, nor ever shall, believe any thing
like it; it being absolutely, utterly, and entirely incredible, that they
should be so excessively ignorant, as not to know the impossibility of the
thing. For that it is altogether impossible ( I should say absolutely, utterly,
and entirely impossible) I shall abundantly show, in some succeeding numbers of
the American Whig, to their extreme mortification, and the full satisfaction of
the Public; and if this my incredulity is to be termed effrontery and malice,
this Ecclesiastical Secretary deserves to be told, that he has involved forty
nine fiftieths of the whole province in the same anathematical predicament.

The AMERICAN WHIG.

A Letter to the AMERICAN WHIG.
Leave off Contention before it be meddled with.

SOLOMON.
SIR,
I Observe you have vigorously undertaken a controversy with Doctor Ch -- r.
Now in all controversy, or dispute, a good Christian, who is deeply sensible
that he must give an account of every idle word, will singly aim at nothing but
the truth and right of the case: But this, (by the manner of your beginning,)
does not seem to me, (a By-stander,) to be what you aim at, but rather to beget
in your readers, all the odium you can against the Doctor, his cause, and his
friends. A good cause does not need such a method of proceeding. It is certain
that the Doctor has pleaded his cause in a calm, serious, and candid manner,
and as it becomes a Christian. What the world expects therefore, is, that you
should in the same manner undertake to answer him, and say nothing, and attend
to nothing, but the real merits of the cause. The only question of much
importance, relates to the rights of conscience, and the liberty every man
ought to have, to think and act for himself, in matters of religion. -- It is
this, whether the Church has not a right to enjoy the whole of its own
constitution, as well as its neighbors? And since this is not the fact in this
country, whether we have not an undoubted right, and whether it is not most
reasonable, that, at this distance, we should be peaceably allowed, (even by a
Whig) to enjoy our own Episcopal form of government, as well as our neighbors
their Presbyterian form? Every thing foreign to this, is quite beside the
question. -- Pray, therefore, Mr. Whig, attend only to this point, and let us
see fair play.

Whether right or wrong, is not now the question, nor is it to be decided by
ridicule, but by sober reason; and I hope Mr. Whig, (as it does not become
you,) you are not so uncharitable as to think, but that we may be as
conscientiously persuaded of our Episcopal form, as our neighbors of their
Presbyterian. We do solemnly declare, that we are; nor can you be more
conscientious in your way, than we in ours; tell us, then, why we ought not to
enjoy ours, as well as you yours? We seriously declare, we do not envy you
yours; why then, in the name of all that is good, should you be so bitterly set
against our enjoying ours? Is not liberty our right as well as yours?

You affectedly cry out, with dreadful terror, of the danger of Ecclesiastical
tyranny: But pray Mr. Whig be sober; you fear, where no fear is; there is no
danger; you cannot, (and you know you cannot) be more averse to tyranny, in any
shape, than we are. And besides, you know we ask for no Episcopate that can
have any concern with you; nor do we desire any. We only desire such a happy
state for us both, as shall issue in this, that Ephraim may have no temptation
to envy Judah, nor Judah to vex Ephraim.

I am, Sir, your Friend, ARISTOCLES.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, April 4.
A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG. No. I.
By TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
Think on their Rapine, Falsehood, Cruelty,
And that what once they were, they still would be.
DRYDEN.
WHEN a writer publicly attacks men of good character, with virulence, and
endeavors by sophistry, to set truths, which are held sacred by many sincere
Christians, in a disadvantageous light; it may be proper to inquire into his
temper and character, and the motives which set him to work.

These circumstances, I confess, do not much affect the intrinsic value of any
literary composition: But if this latter has a pernicious tendency -- either to
sow dissentions, or raise prejudices among honest men, -- to unhinge religion,
or unsettle any of its principles: The showing what quarter it comes from, will
often go a good way to confute it.

Thus -- if a man of unmeaning phyz, should think proper to despise every
animated countenance, -- or, if a man of rueful length of face, should take it
into his head to declaim against round faces, and insist that there is no
comeliness in any but such as have the same degree of longitude with his own,
reviling all who dissented in opinion from him -- If a libertine should write
against religion, and try to persuade people to throw off all concern about it;
-- if a busy factor in dissension, who has long been a hackneyed journeyman in
defamation, should begin to scatter his poison, in order to set well-meaning
people together by the ears; all who know these circumstances, would
immediately be on their guard: A knowledge of them would serve as an antidote
against the mischief which artful sophistry might otherwise produce.

Dr. Chandler, and his Appeal to the Public, in behalf of the Church of England
in America, have lately been attacked with great indecency and fury, by the
American Whig. Now if it happens that this attack comes from an ambitious,
disappointed faction, the members of which are well known to have been always
enemies to the Church of England; who have wantonly endeavored to revile it,
-- to ridicule many of those truths which its members hold sacred, -- and who
make religion a political engine to accomplish their designs; The unprejudiced
reader, upon knowing this, will treat it with that neglect and contempt it
deserves.

To check the insolence of this faction, is now become necessary for many
reasons. It is high time for the members of the Church of England, whose lenity
has been much and often abused by them, to vindicate themselves from the false
aspersions of these enemies to peace; and administer some wholesome discipline
to the author, or authors of the American Whig; -- which paper is to be the
future vehicle of their malice. No. I. is stuffed with low, spurious
witticisms, misrepresentations, scurrility, buffoonery, falsehood, abuse, and
slander. But to pass by all these, the author deserves flagellation for his
blunders, with which this piece is plentifully begrimed. Take the following
sample of these, gentle reader, for the present, which I beg you would
carefully observe. He says, the Appeal "so naturally counterfeits the voice of
a sheep, that it is not every reader who will discriminate it from that of a
wolf." As much as to say, -- it sings so like a Nightingale, that you can
scarce distinguish its voice from that of a hoarse croaking Raven. Or, a thing
is so like an egg, that you can scarce distinguish it from an oyster. This is
the mighty man who is to adjust with precision the limits of religious Liberty,
and defend it from all encroachment! And great things, no doubt, are to be
expected from him.

What were the motives of the present attack on the Appeal? Not any thing
demanded in the Appeal itself, nor the manner in which it is executed. It is
written with great moderation, and asks nothing but what every denomination of
Christians has a right to, and actually enjoys in America, the Church of
England only excepted; -- namely, the liberty of having the institutions of our
Church, with its forms of discipline and government, to which a Bishop, or
Bishops, are essentially necessary. Yet still with this restriction, -- That
the Bishops to be sent to America, shall have no authority, put purely of a
spiritual and ecclesiastical nature, such as is derived altogether from the
Church, and not from the state. That his authority shall operate only upon the
Clergy of the Church, and not upon the Laity, or Dissenters of any
Denomination. That the Bishops shall not interfere with the property or
privileges, whether civil or religious, of Churchmen or Dissenters. That, in
particular, they shall have no concern with the probate of wills, letters of
guardianship, and administration, or marriage licenses, nor be judges of any
cases relating thereto. But that they shall only exercise the original powers
of their office, namely, ordain and govern the Clergy, and administer
Confirmation to those who shall desire it. Appeal to the public, p. 79.
This is the whole of what is desired by the Appeal; nor does the warmest
advocates for American Bishops even wish for more.

The American Whig himself, acknowledges that the Appeal "asks nothing but what
is highly reasonable." And the supposed author of this Numb. with others of his
fraternity have frequently owned it was just and reasonable, that the Church of
England, in America, should have Bishops on these terms; nor does it appear
that there was any intention, until very lately, of writing against it in this
place.

What could occasion this change of sentiment, -- this sudden attack on the
Appeal? All these doleful apprehensions, as if it were replete with utter ruin
to the colonies? Those who are acquainted with some late transactions in this
city, can easily answer these questions. Men who are solely guided by ambition
and interest, are never steady in their conduct. While you gratify these, they
will be quiet, -- but no longer. Thwart them in the least, and they are like so
many bears robbed of their whelps. They will indiscriminately wreak their
vengeance on all that come in their way. To gratify it --

Electere si nequeant Super^s,
Acheronta movebant.
This motto was chose some years ago for a periodical paper in this city, by a
writer who was no stranger, I dare say, to our Whig; but as he did not deign to
give a translation of it, I will beg leave to do it for him here -- If hap'ly
should the powers above,
Reject the vow that is paid them;
The powers below they will try to move,
And rouse all hell to aid them.
I wish them joy of their company.

The Appeal had been read and considered long enough after its publication. If
not approved, why was it not then objected to? The reason was, no ambitious
attempts were then opposed, -- no towering expectations were blasted. Matters
went on smoothly; and had they gone on in the same manner since, the Appeal
might have remained in peace, without any molestation from this quarter,
notwithstanding its tremendous consequences.

Our Whig pragmatically assumes to be defender-general of the religious
Privileges of all Denominations of protestants, against the secret or open
attempts of their enemies. He must be a cunning fellow indeed to know and
counteract those attempts which are secret. But to let this pass. Who assigned
him this post? Or, who are these enemies? If by these he means the author of
the Appeal, and his friends, why was not this made appear before? If he had
such a regard, as he pretends, for the religious Liberties of others, -- if the
Appeal had any tendency to infringe those: Surely this magnanimous Champion
would not have slumbered and slept so long! The truth is as I have mentioned.
The spirit of ambition and self interest, had not met with any ch^ck 'till very
lately. But now that their blooming hopes are withered, the faction is enraged
to a degree of phrenzy; and the poor Church, through the Appeal, must fall the
devoted victim of their vengeance. It is more than probable that the same
motives set some Philadelphia engineers to work, in writing a paper called the
Sentinel: for in No. I. the transactions alluded to above, are mentioned. No
other tolerable reason can be assigned for their engaging in this controversy
now, and not before. The alarm, I suppose was given from hence; and how widely
soever the authors of the American Whig, and Sentinel, may disagree in other
respects: Yet we see they can unite in abusing the Appeal. No. I. of the
Sentinel, has somewhat more of the appearance of reasoning than the Whig; but
breaths the same rancorous, insolent spirit; and plentifully abounds in
misrepresentation, impertinence, nonsense, etc. etc. As the Church of England
has several able advocates in Pennsylvania, I doubt not but some of them will
take the Sentinel to task, and give him proper castigation. See the
Pennsylvania Journal, March 24, 1768.


Some pretense however was necessary to storm the Appeal; and one was found of
an extraordinary kind, -- such perhaps as would be the last thought on by a
person who possessed the most moderate portion of honesty and charity. And what
was it? Why this -- It is not a primitive, Christian Bishop, that the Dr. and
the Convention want. It is a modern, splendid, opulent, Court-favoured,
law-dignified, superb, magnificent, powerful prelate, on which their heart is
so intent.

Now to pass over the defects of this last wonderful period, in point of
propriety and style, -- the whole of it I aver to be utterly false. There is
not a syllable of truth in it. And here I publicly call on this Gentleman to
make good his assertion, -- to produce some sort of satisfactory evidence,
besides his own bare word, which on this occasion will not go far, that the Dr.
and Convention desire such a Bishop. Until he gives some proof of this, he does
nothing at all. He fights with a phantom his own imagination has raised. Like
his illustrious predecessor, Don Quixote, he encounters wind-mills instead of
giants. He might as well write against introducing the Pope of Rome, or Mufti
of Constantinople, and it would be as much to the purpose: As writing against
the introduction of such a Bishop into America, as no one member of the CHURCH,
either desires, or wishes for. I repeat it again, that until the author of the
American Whig produces some authentic proof or testimonies, that the Clergy
want such a Bishop as he has specified, -- that they want to involve America in
ecclesiastical bondage, introduce "spiritual courts," etc. as he insinuates: He
stands convicted by his own declaration, when he says, the Appeal asks nothing
but what is highly reasonable, -- and it were manifest injustice to deny
churchmen, what in their opinion, their eternal salvation so greatly depends
on. But if he cannot produce any such authentic proof or testimony, which I am
fully assured he cannot do, the world must necessarily look on him as an
invidious calumniator, a false accuser of the brethren; and certainly he knows
very well what an ancient, powerful coadjutor he has in this.

This writer disclaims the setters of order and system in his future
productions; and were I to suppose the reason of his doing so, is because his
principles are opposite to all order, it would be showing him full as much, if
not more, charity, than he has showed to Dr. Chandler and the Convention.
Doubtless the Whig, like his brother-savages, will choose to carry on an
irregular war. I may not choose to follow him in all his twistings and
windings. However, I shall give him such chastisement, now and then, as he
deserves. I shall develope his sophistry, I mean such as I think worthy of
notice, and rescue truth from his falacies and pervertion. I may sometimes
carry the war into the enemy's country, and make reprisals; or, digress to
other subjects, as I think will be entertaining to my readers. I may not only
strip the wolf of his sheep's clothing; but also divest the ass of his lion's
skin, and then his braying will have no other effect, than perhaps to frighten
women and children.

[The following not being printed till the third No. of the Whip, occasioned
its being overlooked in reprinting here, till after the first part of this
paper was struck off.]

Mr. Tickle presents his compliments to his readers, and begs they would
correct the following erratum, -- occasioned by an erasure in the copy, page
37, bottom line, instead of if this latter has, read if such composition should
have.

Also the following literal Errata, p. 39. line 15th; instead of his authority,
read this authority, -- bottom line, instead of movebant, read movebunt.

ADVERTISEMENT.
ALTHOUGH I, Timothy Tickle, Esquire have arguments in abundance, as well as facts,
to vindicate the Appeal, and the cause of an American Episcopate specified
therein, against whatever the American Whig can offer: Yet if any Gentlemen has
any thing to communicate to the public on either of these points; or on any
other that may concern the welfare of his fellow subjects, it will cheerfully
be inserted in this paper; yet still reserving to myself the liberty of
examining and correcting every such performance. Correspondents are desired to
send any letters, etc. for me, to the Printer hereof.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, April 7. The SENTINEL. No. III.
Tantum religio suadere potuit malorum.

LUCRET.
HAVING opened the general tendency of Dr. chandler's appeal, etc. I shall now
proceed to make some remarks on the inconveniences and mischiefs of religious
establishments.

The Doctor, as has been shown, endeavors to engage "our superiors in
England," "the guardians of the national interests" on his side, by
endeavoring to make them believe, that without an episcopal establishment
here, they must not expect due obedience from the colonies; nay that the state
is not safe. It has, at all times, been the policy of ambitious ecclesiastics
to persuade the civil magistrate, that necessity of state, and even his
particular interest required him to interfere in their behalf, and invest them
with dignity and power; and then he ought to oblige all persons to Church
conformity, and to enforce obedience by civil disabilities and penalties,
though such a conduct is obviously an invasion of the rights of mankind, and
tends to disturb the public peace, which can only be effectually restored, by
removing the iniquitous restraint, which introduced the mischief. Equality
among subjects is the great source of concord." HUME.


Our blessed Lord was the only lawgiver in his Church. He expressly commands his
followers to "call no man father upon earth," and adds "neither be ye called
master, for one is your master, even Christ;" Math. xxiii. 9.10. words which
obviously mean to exclude all religous obedience, or claims to dictate to
conscience on the footing of human authority; yet how commonly have Church
governors, under all establishments, assumed the place of God, and demanded a
submission, as sinful, as the exercise of the power was unjust and impious.
Indeed the Church of Rome, by setting up a pretended infallibility have a more
specious though false pretense to contend for uniformity.

In short, whoever peruses ecclesiastical history, ever since the time of
Constantine, will find it contains little else than the follies, absurdities,
frauds, rapine, pride, domination, rage, and cruelty of spiritual tyrants; who
practiced every artifice to persuade, or cajole the temporal rulers to support
their measures. They told them, that as the King's of Israel were bound, under
that very singular kind of government, a Theocracy, to preserve purity in
religion, so were Christian Princes obliged on pain of damnation, to root out
error; even by racks and tortures, sword and fire. How ill this horrid doctrine
became the followers of the meek and holy Jesus, who refused with indignation
to call for divine judgments on the schismatical Samaritans, needs not at this
day to be explained. Now the same spirit, which not content with the many
thousands already contributed for the establishment of a Bishop, calls for aid
from every quarter, even for a tax on all other denominations, in provinces
where the episcopalians are not a fortieth, perhaps not a fiftieth part of the
community; the same spirit, which represents the body of the people as
diaffected to government and dangerous to the state, and would disable them
from holding civil offices; the same spirit that unchurches all their Christian
neighbors, merely for the want of a particular form of Church government, no
ways essential to Christianity; and because they make no pretensions to a
certain whimsical uninterrupted succession of Bishops from the Apostles, which
counteracts the principles of the reformation, and can serve only to sanctify
the tyranny of their order; this spirit would beyond all doubt, carry the abuse
of ecclesiastical domination, as high as ever Laud and his brethren did, or as
far as Doctor Sacheverell contended for, if the civil magistrate could but be
deluded once more to lend his aid. Indeed as a great writer speaks "it requires
an uncommon degree of grace and virtue in the clergy, not to abuse so dangerous
a power."

Thanks be to our wiser statesmen, of late spiritual power has been kept within
bounds, and Dissenters in England have been suffered to worship God peaceably
according to their consciences; and many of the Clergy of the establishment,
with a truly Christian temper, have written and preached in favor of
toleration. It is evident however, that to maintain the toleration, and support
the rights of conscience, the government has been careful to promote in the
Church, men of moderation only, and at the same time, has thought it expedient
to prevent the convocation from meeting to do business for fifty years past.
They fear there is still enough of the old leaven left, to work up abundance of
mischief, whenever times shall permit; and on this account dare not hazard the
least alteration in any thing established, either as to doctrine, discipline,
worship or ceremony, however necessary.

Although the body of the established clergy have taken the liberty of
departing from the ancient doctrines, as set forth in the thirty-nine articles,
yet they are tenacious of the words of their service book, and of every rite,
mode and ceremony to the last degree. They would disturb the public peace, and
set the populace, in an uproar with the old cry, The Church is in danger, if an
Jota in outward form should be taken away. Rather than suffer ecclesiastical
authority to be explained, and regulated on a scriptural footing, they choose
to let matters, however repugnant to Christianity, continue in their present
state; and are deaf to the loud complaints which many good men among
themselves, make of the necessity of some alteration. They may write Candid
disquisitions, etc. and show unanswerably wherein great amendments and
improvements ought to be made in the worship of their Church, till they are
tired; but the people educated in a narrow attachment to forms, and from their
infancy, taught to look on every part of their own, as essential to the true
worship of God, are easily led to shut their ears against every proposal of
alteration, and to revile the authors as betrayers of religion: An incurable
evil this, arising partly from the use of forms, but especially from the rigid
manner in which governors in Church and state, almost ever since the
reformation, have pressed uniformity.

I would not be understood to assert that the principles of the episcopal
Churches tend more particularly to these abuses, than those of others; but it
is the fault of human nature, which cannot bear great power with equanimity,
and perhaps is most apt to abuse it in religious matters. The high rank and
large revenues of the Bishops in England must tempt them, however into this
error, more easily, than the leaders in Churches whose influence depends on
personal qualifications only.

The Doctor strongly hints the need of an establishment in the colonies for the
purposes of discipline, his words are Churches are set up against Churches, and
those who are rejected by one are received by another. (31) This complaint
comes somewhat unexpectedly from a missionary of the society: The Doctor would
do well to explain which Church among us, is most remarkable for undermining
the discipline of the rest by receiving, with open arms, their outcasts or
deserters; how many of these are among the missionaries, I leave the Doctor to
tell? On this subject I would likewise ask him, how the primitive Churches
managed? They had no coercive aid from without, nor did they stand in the least
need of any; yet their discipline was rather severe; for if a Church member had
not esteemed it his honor and felicity (next to pleasing God) to stand well
with his Fellow Christians, his presence in their assemblies would have given
them no satisfaction. Far from seeking to enlarge their society by courting the
rich and great, or attracting the herd of nominal professors into membership,
by winking at their irregularities and vices, they chased out of the Church all
back sliders and scandalous persons without reserve. At the same time the terms
of communion were as large as the great head of the church had left them;
unembarrassed with the trifling niceties of modern uniformity; which by fixing
men's zeal on modes and ceremonies, habits and gestures, has diverted them from
the weightier matters of the law, whilst forbearance, charity, and other
Christian virtues have been neglected and forgotten.

Religious establishments are very hardly kept from great corruption; but if
the provision made for the Clergy be large, and the leaders are enabled to live
in grandeur, it is not likely they should long continue pure. Ambitious
worldly-minded men, who seek the fleece, not the well-being of the flock, will
insinuate themselves into the chief offices; their example and influence will
mislead or discourage others, who in better company might have been usefully
employed; the industry and vigilance of the spiritual guides in the proper
business of their function will be relaxed; and that skill in their profession
which practice, study, and attention alone can give, will not be attained.
Secure in their salaries, they may look on it as superfluous to be further
active, than just to keep up some decent appearance of duty. Thus preacher and
people will indolently go to sleep, and forget the important messages and
warnings of heaven, which from the intervention of earthly and present objects,
are but too apt to escape our attention, under the most diligent administration
of God's word. And should the evil proceed yet f^rther, and the Clergy, instead
of being "examples to their flock," set before them patterns of irregular
living, open immorality, and daring wickedness, will it not be readily granted
that there can be no religion at all among the zealots for an establishment so
enormously corrupted; of which yet we want not dreadful instances in Church
history, as well as our own daily observation.

But still worse than this: There is no probability of religion's being
reformed under these ecclesiastical polities. Nothing less than a state
convulsion effected the reformation, in most of the countries where it took
place. Generally the body of the established Clergy, instead of promoting,
violently opposed it, by the help of those very emoluments and advantages which
had been granted for the support of religion; and in some kingdoms they
succeeded: And even since that glorious period, have we not seen the like
difficulties stand in the way on every occasion? Bishop Burnet very pleasant
says, in some of his writings, "we acknowledge our Church liable to err in the
general, but when you come to particulars we are always in the right." Under
the specious pretense of keeping out dangerous innovations and errors, no
mistakes or corruptions, however hurtful or disgraceful, are allowed to be
corrected. One might as well say Churches and Chapels need no repair, though
castles and houses do; whereas commonly to speak the truth, dilapidations of
the inward and spiritual edifices of the Church, are in all times as great as
the outward and material. Bacon, on the peace of the Church.
But above all, the most dreadful evil is the danger of persecution; which
worldly minded men to gratify their own pride and lust of power, are forward on
proper occasions to practice; and which weak men with better intentions, are
too apt to be led into. We too readily think ourselves secure from error, if we
have the wise, the powerful, and the many, in our opinions. Those who differ
from us we conclude must be obstinate and perverse; and are without much
difficulty brought to look on it, as an act of charity as well as duty, to
administer some wholesome restraints and severities to such manifest heretics.
Thus is the pride of supposed right opinion nourished under establishments,
till from one step to another in the practice of hardships on dissenters, we
easily proceed to inquisitions, tortures, and death. For if penalties can be
justified in religious matters, perhaps the most violent may be the most
merciful, as well as effectual. "Imprisonments, fines, and whipping, serve only
to irritate the sects, without disabling them from resistance; but the wheel,
the gibbet and the stake must soon root out, or banish, all non-conformists."
H^me.


Such are some of the mischiefs which spring from the civil power's meddling
with religion. Beware! O beware then my countrymen, of countenancing this
mistake! Your forefathers and predecessors fled from the tyranny of religious
establishments; and do you resolve "to stand fast in the liberty wherewith
Christ has made you free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of
bondage." Gal. 5: 1.
let not "cunning crafty men, who lie in wait to deceive," Ephesians. 4: 14.
persuade you there are any other terms of salvation, besides faith and
repentance, much less lead you to think modes of discipline are to be accounted
essentials. If "all things be done decently and in order" among you, but
especially "if they be done to edification," you want neither an unbroken
succession, nor an indelible character in your pastors and teachers. You should
have virtue enough to treat them with reverence whilst they deserve it, but so
much discretion at the same time, as to keep any order whatever, "from lording
it over God's heritage."

Dr. Warburton, the present bishop of Gloucester, although strenuous for civil
establishments in religion, concedes that no such institution can be useful,
unless it includes the major part of the people. See Divine legate. Vol. 2. And
Discourses on principles of not. and reveal. religion, Vol. 2.
On this footing, who with any good face can claim it in Pennsylvania? surely
not the missionaries; though it is one of the "unparralleled hardships" which the
doctor says "demands speedy relief." But this will be more strikingly apparent
when the Doctor's monstrous exaggerations of the number of their followers
comes to be considered on some future occasion.

X.

From the NEW YORK JOURNAL, Thursday, April 7.
To the PRINTER,
SIR,
I Was pleased to see by your Advertisement in last Thursday's New York
Journal, that you intend to republish in your Paper, the Pieces signed An
American Whig, together with the Answers, and the best Pieces that come out in
the other Papers upon the Subject of that Controversy, on both Sides of the
Question. The Exhibition of the Arguments on both Sides in the same Paper, is
certainly the most likely Means to enable the Reader to form a just and
equitable Judgment; -- and if we must needs be forced into this religious
Controversy, your Proposal bids the fairest for deciding it according to Truth
and Justice. But at the same Time, as a hearty Friend to the British Colonies,
I cannot but express my Concern, that this Controversy should have been begun
at such a Time as this, -- when the united Efforts of all the Colonies are so
necessary for the preservation of their Constitutional Rights and Liberties.

The Introduction of such a Dispute at this Time, I conceive to be in many
Respects extremely injudicious, -- as it will tend to take off the public
Attention from the Main Chance, to disunite, and set us to quarreling among our
selves, and give our Enemies an Advantage over us: Beside the Time is quite
improper for the Discussion of the Subject; -- When our Minds are in a State of
anxious Concern, -- whether we are henceforth to consider ourselves as having
any other Relation to Great Britain but as being her Slaves, -- whether we have
any Part or Lot in her beloved Constitution and the Rights of Nature -- which
have always been our Boast and our Glory; -- whether we are a Nation of
generous Freemen, or of abject despicable Slaves? -- In such a State of dread
Suspense, can our Minds be in a proper Frame for determining the subtle
Disputes between Arminians and Calvinists, Church Men and Presbyterians? These
Matters have of themselves been often found sufficient to set whole Kingdoms in
a Flame, and shall we needlessly kindle the Fire of Contention among ourselves,
when our dearest Interests are in Danger, from false Friends within, and open
Enemies without?

Can we think the Designs of this Author of Dissension, this Sower of Discord
among us, are friendly to the English Constitution and Government, or the
Rights of these Colonies? When these were in the most imminent Danger of being
overturned and torn from us by the Stamp Act, did this Author, or his Party
stir a Finger to prevent it? Or have they done any Thing since, in Favor of
the English Constitution and American Rights, though these have been repeatedly
attacked, by the Acts, for Billeting Soldiers, -- for imposing Duties, etc? On
the Contrary, has not this Attempt of the American Whig to disunite us, a
manifest Tendency to bring upon us all the Evils that threaten us, and reduce
us to a State of general Confusion? And is it not, from a careful Review of
every Circumstance, at least highly probable, that he and his Party would
rejoice in a Disunion between Great Britain and her Colonies, and would be
among the first to change a Monarchical for a Republican Government? Which may
Heaven avert!

A SON OF LIBERTY.

From the PENNSYLVANIA CHRONICLE, April 11.
Friend GODDARD,
Suffer me through the channel of thy paper, to offer a word of expostulation
to the Revd. Dr. Thomas Bradbury Chandler, the Society's Missionary at
Elizabeth-Town, on his late Publication. -- Thine,

PROBITAS.

To the Reverend Dr. CHANDLER.
Rev. Friend,
THE seeming candor with which thou have thought proper to usher thy
performance into the world, induced me to give it a serious reading, in hopes
therein to find somewhat tending to edification. But how great was my mistake
when, on perusing the first section, I sound thee warmly reviving the old
controversy concerning uninterrupted succession, and torturing thy invention to
produce arguments in support of an opinion which the wisest people of thine own
order have long given up as insupportable.

This queer part in thy creed, however, I was willing to attribute to the
prejudices of thy education, and the close trammels in which thy conformity to
Church discipline obliged thee to move. Accordingly I continued to read on --
but greater still was my concern on hearing thee assert roundly that the
offices of ordination and confirmation were solely vested in Bishops, hereby
deriving an argument in favor of an American episcopate.

Here I paused, and reflected on the good character which thou have obtained
with the world. -- I knew it had been said that thou were expert in all things
touching the Church, which compelled me to believe mine own information was
very imperfect, being so widely different from thine.

Thou will probably conclude from my mode of expression that I am of the
society called Quakers -- If so, thou art greatly mistaken -- For, though I agree
with those good people in some things, wherein they approach the simplicity of
the primitive times, yet it is in those and those only.

Ordination and confirmation are with me indispensable rites, and however
overlooked by the superficial, bear the seals of the Gospel. Yet am I
constrained to differ from thee in thy partial representation of these things.
Surely thou have forgot thy Bible, else have thou wilfully prevaricated. For
thus speaks St. Paul to Bishop Timothy -- "Neglect not the gift that is in
thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery. 1st Epist. to Tim. chap. iv. ver. 14.

And first as to ordination, if we look into an impartial account given of the
next centuries after CHRIST, by chancellor King, we shall be convinced from
many quotations which he produces, that a Presbyter could perform all the
Duties of a Bishop. Let us take the following, which he gives us from St.
Cyprian. In his epistle to his own Clergy, he exhorts them, "to discharge their
own and his office too, that so nothing might be wanting either to discipline
or diligence." -- Now do thou think, Doctor, that the Bishop, who must be
supposed to know his own consequence. would have made so free with his office,
as to commit the care of it to men who, (if it had been so) he must have been
apprised, could not possibly discharge it. No, no Doctor, the supposition is in
itself absurd, and that Presbyters could and did ordain, we are assured from
the usage of the synods of Alexandria, who always ordained their own Bishops.

I believe it is a point settled on all hands, that the ceremony of
confirmation in early times, was performed immediately after Baptism, and as it
is well known that Presbyters did Baptize, so it may reasonably be inferred
that they confirmed likewise. To save thee the trouble of turning to the book,
in which employment thou will probably be dust thy fingers (it being a huge
folio) I will transcribe a passage from Tertullian, in proof of my assertion,
just as I find it quoted in Peter King's volume. As soon as we come out of the
baptismal laver, (says Tertullian.) we are anointed, and then are we confirmed.
But now adays, says that arch wag who styles himself a dissenting gentleman) as
if there were some superior sacredness in the Bishop's than in the priest's
hands, this act is, by the authority of the Church, confined to the Bishop.

Absolution and Confirmation have often been proved to be one and the same
ceremony. The intention of both was the conferring of the Holy Ghost, and as
Presbyters were gifted with the powers of absolution, it seems inconsistent to
deny them the privilege of bestowing the grace of GOD at one time, (...) could
so freely impart it at another -- And now having given thee my sentiments in
few words, let me request thee, in the spirit of charity, to desist from
religious altercations; for by the time thy head is as gray as mine, thou will
conclude with me, that they favor strongly of pride -- For as the good popish
poet says,

For modes of faith, let graceless zealots fight,
His cannot be wrong, whose life is in the right;
In faith and hope the world will disagree.
But all mankind's concern is Charity.
ALEXANDER POPE. Thy Friend in all things honest, PROBITAS.

Mr. GODDARD,
Please to give the following lines a place in your next weekly paper.

WHAT the deuce is the matter? What demon of late,
Has awakened the fury of strife and debate?
Ho! ye Sons of contention, pray whither so fast?
Don't ye know that -- "a cobbler should stick to his las^?"
Then why, ye p^rt Whigs, ye dull Sentinels, why
Do ye fly in a passion and make such a cry
About Churchmen and Bishops; why make such a-do
About other men's matters? What is it to you
Whether Bishops are sent us or not? If we choose
To request such a favor must you fill the news
With invectives and scandal? Perhaps you may find
That, should we condescend to repay you in kind,
There Is enough to be said in reply to your spleen;
But in such dirty work we disdain to be seen.
Yet occasion may happen to call for a sprig
Not of laurel, but birch, for a libelling Whig.
When a SEABURY therefore stands forth, as the friend
Of sinceriry, honor and truth, to defend
The Convention from slander and groundless abuse,
Take the hint, Mr. Whig, you may find it of use;
It may serve to convince you, we are not quite so tame
As not to repel an attack on our same,
But that when you assert what is false, we'll reply
To your malice, and prove your assertion a lie.
But observe -- this is no indiscriminate charge
Brought at rand^m against a profession at large:
For, of every sect, there are many who merit
The praise of a generous catholic spirit,
Of ^robity, candor and truth; and we deem
(...) a character worthy our love and esteem,
Notwithstanding we find it, as often we may,
Among those whom we judge to be sheep led astray.
So that if in the present debate you should find
We reply with some warmth, do, for once, be so kind,
Ye grave Sentinels, Whigs, and all other abettors,
Of the scurrilous writers of scandalous letters,
Once for all, be assured what we tell you is true,
It is not at Dissenters, as such, but at you,
At you only we level our aim, and determine
No such insolent, meddling, anonymous vermin
Shall be suffered among us to sculk, with impunity,
To disturb our repose, and infest the community
By sowing the seeds of dissension and strife
Among those who would fain lead a peaceable life.
Not that we would debar you the use of the quill;
Only stick to the truth, and then scribble your fill.
But alas! in that case, you will have nothing to say;
For, in truth, it is as clear as the Sun at noonday,
That the Church's request for a Bishop or two,
And whether she gets them or not, is to you
And all other Dissenters, a matter in which
You have no more concernment, than whether my Bitch
Be a New Foundland Spaniel (and here -- to be plain --
She comes in for the ryhme) or a pointer from Spain.
Thus you see all the clamor you're making is founded
In falsehood at last, and the spleen of a Roundhead.
VERIDICUS.
--, in NEW JERSEY, April 4th, 1768.
From Mr. GAINE's GAZETTE, April 11.
A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG. No. II.
By TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
In Friendship false, implacable in Hate,
Resolved to ruin or to rule the State.
I Hate controversy, -- especially when I must enter the lists with an unfair,
abusive adversary one who pays not the least attention to truth or decency. --
who deals out slander and invective, as liberally as the famous disputants of
Billingsgate, and much in the same style. These are some of the amiable
characteristicks which eminently distinguish the Faction now concerned in the
American Whig.

Nothing therefore but a regard to injured truth, could engage me in this
controversy. When that Church, which is the glory and bulwark of the
reformation, is so insolently traduced, -- and traduced by those whom it
tolerates and protects, -- when its rights are attacked, and its members
audaciously insulted: To be silent would be criminal. It is the duty of every
honest man to strip designing hypocrisy of its mask, and point out those who in
reality are forging chains for their fellow subjects. And as I am thus dragged
into this contest, whatever bad consequences may attend it, will be chargeable
on those, and those only, who began it; and will not suffer other to live in
peace.

Perhaps my readers may think that I have taken sufficient notice of No. I. of
the American Whig, already, -- that a thing so frothy, so malicious, and
destitute of argument, deserves not any further animadversion. I confess this
to be true in a great measure; and no person can be influenced by that paper
either against the appeal, or the cause in defense of which it was written,
unless he gives up the exercise of his judgment, (if he has any) and becomes a
mere dupe to prejudice and party.

However a fool must sometimes be answered according to his folly, lest he
should be wise in his own conceit, and lead others into the same predicament
with himself. No doubt the author of this piece is the very hero of the cause,
-- the chief engineer, -- the conductor-generalis of the intended operations
against the appeal, the Bishops, and the Church. Accordingly he steps forth the
most forward of the faction, and like him in the Gospel, he gives them their
name, and like him also he might say, we are many. It will not be improper
therefore to examine a little further into the merits of this production, by
which we may form an estimate of the author's designs, as well as of the cause
in which he is embarked.

And here I shall not again repeat his egregious Blunder mentioned in my last;
of which that waggish companion, and very good friend of mine, Jack Punlove,
said -- It was a Bull, begot by a Bear, on a Sheep and a Wolf. Depend upon it,
courteous reader, I shall not be so prolix in my exercitations on any of his
future productions, unless he should throw some Argument or matter in my way
that will be worthy of it. As for the two next, low, creeping Whigs, -- without
life, or spirit, or truth, or argument in them: A lash at the cart's tail will
be enough for them. Nay, half a dozen such may be dispatched in one answer;
just as a careful cook would truss up two or three brace of Snipes on one and
the same spit. Proceed we then to our first Whig.

He insinuates -- that encroachments have been lately made on our civil
liberties; and that we can scarce obtain redress against one injurious project,
but another is forming against us. If this be the case, why does he not exert
himself in behalf of his country? What has he, or any one member of the
faction, written, or otherwise done, to avert these impending mischiefs? --
Nothing at all. He either throws out this insinuation, and yet believes it to
be false; or else he remains an idle, inactive spectator of our danger. Instead
of promoting that union among ourselves which he says is "peculiarly necessary"
at this time: He is doing all he can to divide and distract us, -- to fill
those with groundless prejudices, with mutual hatred against each other, who
should unite to carry on any salutary scheme for the public welfare; and I
believe would willingly do so, were it not for such restless incendiaries as
himself.

Several Gentlemen in America, when they apprehended the liberties of their
country were injured, engaged with a generous and noble spirit in the
vindication of them. The author of the Considerations on the propriety of
imposing taxes in the British colonies the Pennsylvania Farmer, and others I
could mention, are striking instances of this. These worthy patriots,
disinterested in their views, and regardless of the dirty, selfish design of
any particular party, inlisted in the cause of freedom, and acquitted
themselves with honor. Their aim was to unite their countrymen, and animate
them with the spirit of liberty; yet so as to inspire them with affection to
the mother country, and show how much the interest of both depends on their
harmony, and mutual adherence to the principles of our constitution. This was
acting the part of real patriots; for which the worthy authors are justly
entitled to the hearty thanks of every friend to Britain and America.

How different the conduct of our American Whig! How perfect a contract to
these in every respect does he exhibit! Inflamed with party rage, actuated by
low, selfish motives, and goaded on by malice: He pours out a torrent of
slander against a number of innocent, inoffensive, useful men, who are warm
friends to liberty, and enemies to slavery-of every kind; and through them
strikes at the Church for the blow is levelled at the Church in general, (as I
shall fully evince in the course of these speculations,) and tends to promote
universal discord throughout the continent.

And what was the mighty crime of which the members of the Church were guilty,
to draw down his heavy displeasure on them? Why truly they had the presumption
to apply for an indulgence which every denomination in America enjoys, -- an
indulgence which they neither intend should interfere, nor possibly can
interfere with the rights or liberties, civil or religious, of any Christians
whatever; and have appealed to the world, in the most moderate, decent manner,
for the reasonableness and equity of their claim. This is the sum total of
their offense.

This poor gentleman, however, is pleased to be in a violent rage, -- so
violent that if his nerves are weak, it may be attended with fatal
consequences. This excess of passion, I must charitably think, is what betrays
him into the absurdities and contradictions which are to be found in every part
of his piece. The Christian reader, I am persuaded, has more humanity than to
expect I would be at the drudgery of enumerating and animadverting on all
these. I will just point out a few of them, which indeed are not a third of
what it contains. He tells us in one place, that the appeal is a trifling,
flimsy piece, and the futility of its reasoning such as can only impose on the
weak and credulous: But in another place he says it is artfully calculated to
introduce the most fatal, tremendous mischiefs. Now Dr. Chandler "breaths a
zeal for religion:" Then, he is a most ambitious ecclesiastic, -- indifferent
about the interests of his country, -- sowing the seeds of universal discord,
-- etc. One while the appeal asks nothing but what is highly reasonable, and it
were manifest injustice to so greatly depends on: Again, it has a tendency to
introduce an evil more terrible -- than the obnoxious Stamp Act. Here the
Church of England in America is an episcopal Church; There, it is not the
Church of England, nor episcopal, but an independent Church, With many other
flowers and conceits of the same kind, -- equally ingenious, curious, just and
entertaining to the reader.

Our Whig says that Dr. Chandler has exhibitted a new species of Logic, by
infering that if his appeal remained unanswered, all the world must be presumed
to acquiesce in his proposal. Now if the Dr. had said so, it would be no
unreasonable Inference, considering the complexion of his present antagonist,
and of many others of the same stamp around him. Why Bellarmine was introduced
on the occasion, no mortal can tell; his case having no resemblance to that of
the Dr. and therefore quite impertinent.

To be even with Dr. Chandler, the Whig has enriched our rhetoric with several
samples of new and rare wit. Take one instance in what follows. The appeal he
says, congratulates posterity, if not on the hopes of rescuing them from
purgatory, at least on the prospect of speedily introducing a kind of
millennial state by the episcopal tripple discharge of ordination, confirmation
and government. I dare say there is abundance of wit here, if any person living
could be sagacious enough to find out whereabouts it lies. This unusual turn in
thought and expression, which is entirely out of the way of common sense, and
makes people stare and wonder what he would be at, is what distinguishes a
great genius, and advances him to a chief seat among your profound authors. And
this writer deals so much in tropes and figures, in the application of which he
is peculiarly happy, that he may vie with the famous Hudibras himself, of whom
it is recorded --

For Rhetoric, he could not open
His Mouth, but out there flew a Trope.
And here I join the appeal in felicitating posterity on the many Improvements
in genuine wit, without any allay of dullness, -- in candid, fair reasoning,
without any mixture of sophistry, or prevarication, they are likely to reap
from this gentleman's labors. From such ominious beginnings, what may we not
expect!

Upon the whole -- our Whig, from his first performance, appears to be better
calculated for acting the part of a ludicrous buffoon, than a cool reasoner --
to injure a good cause, if he had one, than serve it, -- kindle, than
extinguish the flames of discord, -- to obscure, than elucidate truth. As the
strength of his cause lies in misrepresentation, and its success depends on
that misrepresentation going undetected: So his chief talent seems to be the
art of throwing a mist before his reader's eyes, by Jesuitical sophistry,
larded well with buffoonery. And thus the cause and its advocate are worthy of
each other. Whilst he, and his brethren of the faction, have the word,
moderation, in their mouth, they act the part of furious persecutors. They
betray their intolerant principles, and desire to enslave others, amidst
clamorous outcrys for liberty. As the lust of power is one of their predominant
passions, and the way to gratify it and others, is to kick up a dust, and be at
the head of a party: So this is the great spring that puts the whole machine in
motion, and lends a clew to unravel their conduct; for I believe it is not very
clear that any of them, especially our first Whig, either knows or cares much
about religion.

The Church stands in no need of sordid, low arts and subterfuges to support
her. She appeals to the world for the justness and reasonableness of her claim
for Bishops in America, on the proposed plan. Her members desire nothing more
than to have the matter fairly and impartially examined.

This same faction have long since tried their utmost efforts to injure the
Church. They have scribbled, and slandered, and reviled, etc. -- they have
snivelled, and snorted, and roared, and raved, and spit their venom, etc. like
lord Peter's bulls: But it was all mighty harmless. The Church flourished under
their persecution, as I doubt not but it will at this time.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHEREAS a paper appeared in the last New York Post-Boy, raving about Whippers,
Tories, Whigs, Bishops, consequences, right reverend Majesty, holy tyrants,
apostolical monarch, mitres, surplices, anathemas, dons, monsieurs, prelatical
Clergy, Atlantic, blood-suckers, etc. etc. etc. Know therefore all men of
sense, candor, and honesty, that such unintelligible Jargon, shall not only
for the present, but for ever hereafter, be passed over, by me, with that
contempt and silence which it deserves; and that I shall leave the truly
meek-spirited author, and all others who may be accessory to the Whig, to enjoy
what train of serious reflections they please, in such a manner as may best
agree with their pious dispositions, without being afraid of any consequences
which their weak heads, or bad hearts, may vainly imagine that I or any other
person may feel, from such decent, judicious, candid, and cleanly performances.

[From Mr. Parker's New York Gazette, Monday, April 11.]
THE AMERICAN WHIG. [No. V.]
Lo! swarming over the new discovered World
Gay Colonies extend; the calm Retreat
Of undeserved Distress --
-- Bound by social Freedom, firm they rise;
Of Britain's Empire the Support and Strength.
THOMSON.
NEVER had a nation such a prospect as Britain of erecting a vast and durable
empire: Consider the origin of the Persians and Medes, Babylonians and
Egyptians, Macedonians and Romans; hemmed in on every side, and accessible to
their neighbors, they could add nothing to their extent, but at the expense of
a war. Every expansion depended upon conquest; situated as they were, the
enlargement of the empire, was itself the cause of its fall: When the energy of
the government could push its force no farther, a mortifying reflux ensued, and
the victors in their turn were repelled and overwhelmed by hosts from distant
countries, which their arms were unable to reach. How inexpressibly superior
the advantages of Great Britain, with the help of her American dominions! For
territory, we need not quarrel with any power upon earth. This indispensible
substratum of empire we are already possessed of; we have a country amply
sufficient for hundreds of millions, and can spread out an inheritance from
ocean to ocean, at a moderate expense of money, and without the guilty effusion
of human blood.

The benefits we enjoy from our situation, our climates, and the fecundity of
the soil, are numberless, and not to be recounted. No quarter of the globe can
boast a pre-eminence: No nation in some respects pretend to an equality: On one
side accessible to the ocean for all the purposes of commerce, on neither
exposed to any dangerous vicinity, and from all foreign force that can
essentially disturb our repose too far removed. Never was there such a Phoenix
state. What less than the power of the Almighty, with the start we have gained,
can prevent our arrival to the highest elevation of grandeur and opulence?

Courage, then Americans! liberty, religion, and sciences are on the wing to
these shores: The finger of God points out a mighty empire to your sons: The
savages of the wilderness were never expelled to make room in this, the best
part of the continent, for idolaters and slaves. The land we possess is the
gift of heaven to our fathers, and divine providence, seems to have decreed it
to our latest posterity.

So legible this munificent and celestial deed, in the events that are passed,
that we need not be discouraged by the bickerings at present subsisting,
between us and our parent country. The angry cloud, raised by the rashness, and
supported by the obstinacy of a man, in whom opposition and disappointment,
have begot inflexible malice against the colonies, will soon be dissipated.
Britain has only to learn our importance to her own interest, and this once
understood, the enemies of both countries will instantly be put to silence; and
America advance to felicity and glory, with redoubled rapidity and vigor.

Grant it to be fact (and sure it is a truth too palpable to be denied) that a
third part of the commerce of the nation depends upon the colonies; I say, if
this proposition be true, we may wind up our hopes to all the confidence of
assurance, that Great Britain will never suffer this cord to be cut, by which
we are so intimately united. And this cord uncut, it requires no depth of
policy to foresee, that we shall one day or other, draw every thing valuable at
home (the Terra firma of those islands only excepted) into the spacious bosom
of the continent of America. Nor need this prospect give either of us an alarm.
Happy for her, that she has an asylum prepared against the day of her calamity.
Happy for us, the work is so far advanced, that there is no looking back.
Thrice happy for us both, that the mother and her sons will again be collected
into one house, and that in proportion to the abatement of the national glory
in Europe, will be the brightness of its resurrection in America.

The day dawns in which the foundation of this mighty empire is to be laid, by
the establishment of a regular American constitution. All that has hitherto
been done, seems to be little beside the collection of materials, for the
construction of this glorious fabric. It Is time to put them together. The
transfer of the European part of the great family is so swift, and our growth
so vast, that, before seven years roll over our heads, the first stone must be
laid. -- Peace or war; famine or plenty; poverty or affluence; in a word no
circumstance, whether prosperous or adverse, can happen to our parent; nay, no
conduct of hers, whether wise or imprudent, no possible temper on her part,
whether kind or cross grained, will put a stop to this building. There is no
contending with Omnipotence, and the predispositions are so numerous, and so
well adapted to the rise of America, that our success is indubitable; and
Britain, who began the work, will not, cannot, withold her assistance. Her
assistance did I say; She will spend all that she has. -- nay, she is coming,
fast coming, in her own proper person, and will desert her beloved island, to
complete the stupendous and lasting monument of her power. What an era is this
to America! and how loud the call to vigilance and acti^^^y! As we conduct, so
will it fare with us and our children.

In some future paper I shall dilate this idea, and attempt to point to the
proper objects of our attention, that are of civil concern; but the remainder
of this day's lucubration, is intended to guard against the undue influence of
our clergy, while we are moulding the great political mass into order.

Every eye should be open at such a season as the present. No man reveres this
necessary and useful part of the community, more than I do, I don't mean,
therefore, to take an occasion, with Deists and Libertines, for licentious
abase. Rancour against the blessed author of our most holy religion, is the
common motives of the scurrilities uttered against the ministers of his gospel.
But it is nevertheless our duty; nay, our regard to the clergy, demands the
utmost attention, to the efforts they are constantly inclined to make, in
favor of themselves. As a learned and speculative body, they possess
knowledge, one of the most fruitful sources of power, and in spite of all the
mortifying lessons, taught by their divine master, the leaven of pride and
ambition works night and day, to acquire dominion; which as often as they have
succeeded, proved to be beyond all others relentless and intolerable.

It is storied in their own history, that when the Emperor Constantine endowed
the church with lands and possessions, the voice of an Angel was heard in the
air, crying, Hodie venenum infunditur in ecclesiam. This day poison is poured
into the church: and bitter experience has confirmed the truth of these words,
whatever we believe concerning the being by whom they were uttered. Of this
execrable potion, the bishop of Rome took the first draught; and all
Christendom furnishes instances of priests who long to tipple this wine of
fornication, Our wise and pious reformers began therefore with absolutely
renouncing the cup, and it is too, too evident, that in spite of the admonitions
of prophecy, the principles of sound policy, and the experience of every age
since this destructive bowl was stirred up, in which spiritual gifts and
worldly benefits, are absurdly compounded together, that some of the protestant
clergy are as desirous to take the intoxicating sip, as those, who with the
scarlet whore, have often got drunk, and defiled the nations.

To this I impute all the prayers, entreaties, conjurations, sighs, and
lamentations, of a certain class of priests, for the introduction of a
spiritual Generalissimo into this country. I am sensible that they disavow all
noxious designs, and that like other sots they palliate their inordinate thirst
after the insalutary dose, by pretenses that seem friendly to health and
consistent with sobriety and innocence. But as all attempts from an order, who
abjure the roughness of violence, will be dictated by the wisdom of the
serpent, and cunningly affect the harmlessness of the dove; we ought, for
preventing the success of their machinations, to set a double guard upon our
privileges. Of all thraldom, spiritual thraldom is the worst; and if ever any
sect acquires a dominion in this country, the fires of persecution must burn
with hotter vengeance here, than in any other part of the world; because our
numerous persuasions afford the most plentiful fuel. Cowards are malicious, and
the fears of the assuming denomination will never be quieted till the throne
they erect is free from all danger. Which of our numerous persuasions bids
fairest ^o lord it over the rest, I have shown in some former papers; and for
that very reason, they of all others, ought to be content with their lot.
Guarantied on every side against oppression, what have Episcopalians to fear?
In the distribution of power they have so immoderate a share, that the very
desire to have more, is not only inconsistent with all Christian moderation,
but gives just grounds for suspicion that they are meditating an offensive war.

But conscience is pleaded -- For what? that the church, says Dr. Chandler, may
be better governed. -- Over whom is this government to be exercised? -- Not,
says he, over the laity, (a sure proof this, that the government desired, is
not deduced from the scriptures) but only over the clergy. -- Let them behave
better. This is in their own power, and if any remain incorrigible, my Lord of
Landaff, and the rest of the society at home, upon proper complaint, (which
complaint every man is invited to make) will soon bring the delinquents to
reason. As to the matter of ordination, the candidate's conscience is
relieveable by a trip to London; nor need the laity be afflicted, if he makes
any difficulty; for those must be small motions of the spirit indeed, toward
the work of the ministry, which the sight of salt water will subdue. -- And
with respect to confirmation, since we have so long been without it, and no man
is so shamelessly uncharitable, as to suppose it necessary to salvation, and
that our ancestors have all perished for want of it, the conscience bound on
account of this defect, can be on no very pitiable rack of pain. Besides, what
is most fatal to this plea, is, that the majority of the continent have
consciences too, and by those very consciences, think themselves bound to
oppose the unseasonable introduction of proud prelates into this country. --
That it is a fact, that thousands have horrors at the bare prospect, the Doctor
can want no proof at this day; and if the minority have such unconscionable
consciences, as not to possess their souls in patience, till God, in his wise
providence, and for the punishment of our sins, opens a wider door for these
right reverend fathers, and their lay and clerical officers and attendants,
they can have no Christian consciences at all.

But the Doctor tells us, that our fears are groundless, and that the bishop he
wants, is a primitive bishop. -- This, good master appellant, is at present a
very scarce commodity; and you would yourself laugh at the wide-mouthed
credulity, that can swallow such a camel. Are they wanted for patterns of
imitation? -- The Doctor has not said such a word. -- For their prayers and
their sermons? -- No one asserts it. But to the astonishment of all that are
acquainted with the history of the church, they are said to be necessary for
protection and defense. -- Would not any stranger be led by this, to believe,
that the missionaries were persecuted; And yet not a man of them all -- no, not
the meanest missionary upon the continent, would exchange the society's bounty,
for the revenues and rank of a primitive bishop. The apostles, to begin with
the first bishops, we know lived by charity, and the labor of their hands. --
For three centuries after, they were maintained by private helps, and the pay
of their scholars. -- These were the times in which the clergy resisted unto
blood, and by the way, the good reputation of our American clergy, is greatly
owing to the necessity they are under, of living near these glorious examples.
Anciently a bishop's palace was a cottage; for the fourth council of Carthage,
about the year 350, laid it down as a canon or law, that the bishop should live
near his church, in Hospitiolo, that is, in a little cottage. In the
excerptions of Egbert, archbishop of York, so late as the year 750, the same
canon was renewed. -- Bid tells us, that their very cathedrals were built of
wattle and boards pieced together, and covered with reed. -- The table of St.
Austin, a bishop of the highest renown, as Possedonius relates, was spread with
dishes and trenchers of wood, his house was mean, he seldom had any flesh to
eat, and his whole service of plate consisted of half a dozen spoons. --
Spiridion tended a flock of sheep. St. Jerome, one of the most learned of the
fathers, though no bishop, dwelt like them, in pauperi tuguriolo, a poor little
cottage; and Ambrose, the bishop of Milan, turns the tables upon the pampered
priests of the Gentiles, by boasting in his maxim, that the poverty of the
ministers of Christ, was an honor to them, Gloriosa in sacerdotibus domini,
paupertas. These are the bishops some men pretend to desire. How much more
credible, that instead of being a bulwark to the missionaries, unless by their
prayers, such bishops as those would be a tax upon their charity, not to
mention the probability that lives so apostolically spiritual, and abject,
would render them, if not subjects of persecution, at least objects of contempt.

If by primitive bishops, they mean not such poor miserable bishops as these,
it remains to give this equivocal expression, some determinate meaning, and
till then the treaty between Dr. Chandler and the public, may doubtless remain
unratified, without any impeachment of the honor and justice of North America,
which this writer has unwarily drawn into question.

We should estem it the palladium of our liberties, if the King's judges held
their commissions by the tenure of good behavior; and to the preservation of
the morals of our clergy, it is essential that their subsistence depend upon
the same honorable condition. A bishop and his officers, independent of the
people! -- I tremble at the thought of such a powerful spy, in a country just
forming a state of soundness and stability -- Rouse then, Americans! You have
as much to fear from such a minister of the Church, as you had lately from a
minister of state, and whether this project is not a device of the latter, by
dividing us to favor his designs, though he is now in disgrace, is submitted to
your wisdom, to discern and prevent.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE author of the American Whig, was confident from the goodness of his cause,
that he should soon drive his adversarives out of the fair field of battle, and
reduce them to vent their disappointed malice, in the impotent ammunition of
scandal and misrepresentation; but he did not flatter himself, that they would
sneak behind their intrenchments so early, as he finds by the letter in Holt's
last paper, signed, a Son of Liberty. Could that artless Tory have given any
better proof of his regard to the thing, than by the unwarrantable liberty he
has taken of counterfeiting the name, he would instead of censuring, have
applauded the defense of the religious liberties of his country. My paper for
this day, which was in the hands of the Printer before his letter came out, is
of itself a sufficient refutation of the insinuations of this scribbler. If the
discussion of an American Episcopate is at this juncture unseasonable, why, but
because he was a zealot for the pernicious project I oppose, and am determined
with thousands and ten thousands of Americans to oppose, did not he point his
little pistol (as in justice he ought to have done) at the original aggressor?
or can he be ignorant that Doctor Chandler unmasked his battery, and began his
assault so long ago as last autumn? Having thus detected a foe, under the cloak
of a Son of Liberty, let the public beware of every writer, who while he
affects a zeal for our civil liberties, will not declare his abhorrence of
ecclesiastical tyranny, which is by so much worse than every other species of
tyranny, as our religious, are preferable to our temporal interests. The
virtuous son of liberty will vindicate both; and I doubt not that in a few
months more, the whole continent will agree, that he who contends only for the
one, is not entitled to either.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, April 14.
The SENTINEL. No. IV.
Tantaene animis caelestibus Irae.

VIRG.
AS the proposal of introducing Diocesan bishops into British America is an
innovation, which would probably affect the religious and civil liberties of
his Majesty's American subjects, I shall not be terrified from offering my
objections, merely because Doctor Chandler has been pleased to call it
persecution. Appeal, page 82. The good gentleman knows that all the rejecters
of episcopacy have distinguished themselves in the cause of liberty, and that
their principles of church government are principles of freedom. He ought not
therefore to think it persecution, if they, jealous of their liberty, should
oppose this dangerous innovation; the very mention of which recalls to our
minds the unrelenting rigors of episcopal tyranny; the heavy fines,
imprisonments, and persecutions which peopled the savage wilds of America; and
forced many thousands of our forefathers to seek a peaceful retreat, from the
cruelty of their Fellow Christians, amongst more hospitable Indians. These
refugees have not yet forgot the groans and blood of the many myriads of
oppressed Puritans, which cry beneath the altar "how long O Lord"! the list of
^y thousand persons that suffered in England on a religious account, betwixt
the restoration and the revolution; nor the severe penalties inflicted on them,
for worshipping God according to their consciences; by which they suffered in
their trade and estates near two millions in the compass of a few years. These
instances of episcopal tyranny, which should fill every reader with horror,
extort from the Doctor himself, notwithstanding his fondness for ecclesiastical
power, the modest softened concession, that there have been formerly some
instances wherein the power of our bishops has been strained too high P 91. And
lest we should be led to imagine, that he, out of his abundant charity, had
acknowledged too much against his church, he endeavors to wipe off the
reproach from her, and cast it rather on the times, in which neither the
natural rights of men, nor the religious rights of Christians, were so well
understood, as in the present age. For even then," he says "the spirit of the
church of England, like that of the gospel, was more peaceable, gentle, and
easy to be entreated, than that of any other national church. This may serve to
give us some idea of the Doctor's comparatively peaceable and gentle spirit.
But I hope we shall have a still more peaceable and gentle spirit to reign in
America: Indeed he labors to persuade us, that when his so much wished-for
bishop comes, he will bring it with him, "for the times", he says, "are much
mended in this respect," P. 90 -- Excuse us, good Sir, if we think, that
however the spirit of the times be much mended, the spirit of your church and
her bishops, is not yet so much mended, as to free us entirely from any fears
of oppression by their extensive powers.

In considering the peaceable spirit of the rulers of the church of England
now, or in some following paper, I may have occasion to point out some things
that do not savor much of the spirit of moderation and candor. However I
would be understood through the whole, not to intend any reflection on the laity
of that communion, nor on all the clergy. The moderation of some is well known:
they have endeavored with a truly Christian spirit, not only to bear a
constant testimony against the numberless abuses, which have arisen from the
powers of the clergy, but are endeavoring to bring about a reformation in many
things, which they heartily acknowledge to stand in need of it. Far be it from
me to lay that to the charge of those men, which they, as well as we,
acknowledge to be unjust and tyrannical. But there are others of a very
different character and temper, especially among the clergy, who have been
distinguished by the name of high-church; and who according to Doctor Chandler,
compose the body of that national church, who have not as yet candor enough to
admit of such a reformation. Page 96 and 97.

Although the wings of these high-flyers have been cropped, and their exhorbitant
powers limited in some degree, by the salutary restrants of some modern
statutes; yet we know it was much against their wills, that such merciful laws
were made. They must therefore give the world some more substantial proofs of
their peaceable forbearing temper, than their advocate Doctor Chandler's word,
before we can believe, that the spirit of persecution is not yet alive in that
Church, and would not flame out again in all its wonted rage, if they were but
allowed to exercise the powers they claim.

Until that flagrant abuse of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, occasioned by
the TEST Act, shall be removed out of the churches of England and Ireland, we
must believe, good Doctor, that you not only would but do persecute your
brethren, and cut them off from the natural rights of serving their King and
country, in all important places of power and trust; unless they can concur
with you, not only in what they look on as a superstitious mode of
administering that divine ordinance; but also in prostituting that sacred rite
to secular, nay to worse than secular purposes; by making that which was
instituted as a test of our fidelity to the King of Kings, a test of our
allegiance to our earthly sovereign. That this is persecution, the Doctor
himself will help me to prove, page 82, To punish us for our religious
principles when no reasons of state require it, is persecution in the strictest
and properest sense. Whatever evil is inflicted on us, on account of our
principles and practices, is properly punishment; and every good we are
deprived of, is equal to an evil inflicted. As such treatment has the very
essence of persecution, so it can have only its source in an intolerent
persecuting disposition. The sacramental test is therefore a standing monument
of the persecuting spirit of the church of England; even in the judgment of
Doctor Chandler, unless he be hardy enough to attempt assigning reasons of
state to change that which has the nature of persecution, and arises from an
intolerant spirit, into a salutary regulation. When he produces arguments to
convince men, who are the least conversant with the rights of men or
Christians, that it is reasonable and necessary, that so large a body of his
Majesty's subjects, as the rejecters of his beloved hierarchy in England and
Ireland, who have always distinguished themselves, for their loyalty and
attachment to the present royal family, should have such an unheard of stigma
fixed upon them, that they are deprived of the common privileges of subjects;
then, and not till then, will the Doctor be able to wipe away the reproach from
his church. But it is hoped, he will never subject his knowledge of the rights
of mankind, nor his own Christianity, to the suspicions which must arise from
such an attempt. The Doctor would indeed in some places appear charitable
enough to allow, that they are as loyal and as good subjects, as the
episcopalians themselves are, "There are," says he, many British subjects both
at home and in the plantations, who reject episcopacy, and yet are warm
advocates for our happy civil constitution. It is therefore rash and injurious
to charge any with disaffection to the government, at this day, because they
dissent from the national religion. Page 115. Whether he means that of South or
North-Britain, is not distinguished; but it is most likely the former, as very
few of his brethren the Dissenters in Scotland, are friends to the present
government.

What reasons of state can there be alleged, why so many of his Majesty's
loyal and faithful subjects, should be deprived of their natural and undoubted
rights? Possibly the Doctor's fertile imagination will furnish us with some,
which have hitherto lain hid from the penetration of men of inferior genius and
invention. When he condescends to do this, and thereby attemps to wipe off the
offense which his church continues to give by the profanation of the Lord's
supper and the denial of civil rights to as good subjects, as those who join
her communion, it will be time enough for me to give them a thorough and
impartial examination. But till this shall be done, the good Doctor will not
take it hard, that we fear the spirit of persecution is still alive in his
church, and ready to operate, with its native violence, whenever an opportunity
shall offer. There is no way at present for the Doctor to evade the force of
this argumentation, transcribed from his Appeal, unless he boldly cuts the
knot, and asserts, that none who reject episcopacy, have any natural right to
civil or military offices. He has indeed such an expression in page 109; but it
betrays such an unacquaintedness with the rights of mankind, and savours so
much of a persecuting disposition, that charity would incline us to think it
fell inadvertently from his pen, when he was solacing himself with the glorious
prospect of the clergy and the people of his church engrossing all honorable
and profitable employments throughout the colonies. The Doctor surely will not
vindicate the expression, but from a regard to his character for moderation,
candor, and catholicism, retract it without delay.

But this is not our only reason for concluding that the spirit of the Bishops,
and inferior Clergy, (as they are called) is not like the spirit of the gospel,
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated. Nor is it owing to the gentle
temper of the constitution of their church, that the rejecters of episcopacy
are not treated as harshly now as formerly. The Act of Uniformity breathes a
very cruel and slavish spirit. It enacts that whoever shall declare, or speak
any thing in derogation, or depraving of the book of Common Prayer, or any
thing therein contained, or any part thereof, he shall, for the first offense,
suffer imprisonment for one whole year, without bail or main-prize; and for the
second offense be imprisoned during life. Weak must the church have appeared,
which stood in need of such a support! But we are assured by divine authority,
that the gates of hell shall never prevail againg the Church of Christ. This
famous act however has been often called, and I doubt not Doctor Chandler
himself has long esteemed it a grand pillar of his church. But who envies him
the honor of belonging to a church, that must be supported, if supported at
all, by such a notorious infringement of the rights of private judgment; such a
prohibition of a fair and candid examination of her principles and discipline;
and such a restraint on the freedom of speech, essential to British liberty?
Here I can safely appeal to the impartial world, and even to the conscience of
the Doctor himself, whether this be not a very unjust and persecuting law.

I might easily proceed to show, that the Canons of the Doctor's church do not
bespeak a very charitable temper; but this I shall have more room to enlarge
upon in some future paper.

Z.

Extract from the Letter of the House of Representatives of the Province of
Massachusetts Bay, to Dennis De Berdt, Esquire their Agent in London, dated Boston,
January 12, 1768.
THE establishment of a protestant episcopate in America is also very zealously
contended for: And it is very alarming to a people whose fathers, from the
hardships they suffered under such an establishment, were obliged to fly their
native country into a wilderness, in order peaceably to enjoy their privileges,
civil and religious: Their being threatened with the loss of both at once, must
throw them into a very disagreeable situation. We hope in God such an
establishment will never take place in America, and we desire you would
strenuously oppose it. The revenue raised in America for ought we can tell, may
be as constitutionally applied toward the support of prelacy as of soldiers
and pensioners: If the property of the subject is taken from him without his
consent, it is immaterial, whether it be done by one man or five hundred; or
whether it be applied for the support of ecclesiastic or military power, or
both. It may be well worth the consideration of the best politician in
Great Britain or America, what the nat^^^^ tendency is of a vigorous pursuit of
these measures.

From Mr. GAINE's GAZETTE, Monday, April 18. A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG. No.
III.
By TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
There is a Serpent that wants Teeth, and consequently cannot bite; but if its
vomit (to which it is much addicted) happens to fall upon any Thing, a certain
Rottenness or Corruption, ensues.

CTESIAS.
HAVING gently corrected the American Whig, for the Licentiousness of his Pen
in his first Rhapsody, I shall now proceed, in Course, to animadvert upon No.
II. of this weekly Effusion, alias, Introduction the Second by a different
Hand, having taken it into my Head to be more liberal for this Time, than I
intended, or such a Publication deserves; refering those who are desirous to be
informed wherein personal Identity consists, to a Chapter on that Subject in
Mr. Look's Essay concerning human Understanding.

Our Whig introduces this Introduction with two stiff clumsy Paragraphs upon
the Subject of Liberty; the whole Meaning of which, so far as they have any
Meaning, may be much more clearly and fully expressed in these two short
Sentences, reduced to plain English: Liberty is a very good thing. -- and Men
ought to be careful to preserve so good a Thing as Liberty. I dare say he had
not a single Idea which is not fully expressed in these two Propositions. What
Occasion then was there for all this round about pedantic Harangue, upon so
plain and familiar a Subject?

I am at a Loss to discover, what could have been the primary and immediate
View of this Writer, in obscuring these plain and honest Truths, by a
Representation of them through the misty Medium of such Verbage; but without
Breach of Charity, we may suppose at least a secondary Motive, to have been,
The giving to his Friends some Proof of his Zeal for the glorious Cause o^
Liberty. And, since plausible Words are a much cheaper Commodity than
commendable Actions, perhaps he had the farther Intention of reconmmending
himself by a patriotic Example, in these Time of Economy. Yet as to the
Character he assumes of a zealous Advocate for Liberty, it appears to be forced
and unnatural; and, with all his Study to disguise himself, he makes but an
awkward Figure, and hobbles abominably. For, to say nothing here of his general
Design, which is unfriendly to the Cause of Liberty, as he aims confining it to
his own Party to the exclusion of others, he ^as suffered an expression to drop
from his Pen, which betrays the most dishonorable and sordid Conceptions, --
and proves that he is a Stranger to the Charms of this amiable Goddess. Other
Writers, when they enter upon the Subject of Liberty, are immediately animated:
But this Writer shows, that he has no Acquaintance with this sovereign Beauty,
by the Insensibility of his Deportment. Else why such Rudeness and want of
Respect? Why does he attempt to push her into the Rear of Life and Property? --
telling us, with much Phlegm, that next to Life and Property, Men will most
zealously contend for its Preservation.

Before he proceeds farther, I advise him, if he has any Regard for his own
Reputation, or that of his Party, to make a Halt, and apply himself for a few
Weeks, with the whole Force of his Abilities, to study the Principles of true
Liberty, so far at least as to understand the Elements of that noble Science.
In the mean while, for his present Use, I will lay before him a few Maxims
relating thereto, which are incontestable. Every sincere Friend of Liberty, is
impartial in his Esteem for it, and w^shes it an universal Dominion. He that
wishes Liberty universally to prevail, will endeavor to promote it in all
Cases, without. Respect to Persons. He that endeavors to promotes it in ^ll
Cases will be careful not to oppose it in any. Until he makes (...) self a
Master of these Principles, he will be only able, with his utmost Application,
so naturally to counterfeit the Voice of Liberty, that it is not every Reader
who will be able to discriminate it from that of -- Tyranny, and Persecution.
By way of Postscript to what I have said on this Head, I will take the Liberty
to inform him, that the Members of the Church of England, in requesting an
American Episcopate, aim at nothing more than the Enjoyment of that religious
Liberty, which all other Denominations of Christians throughout the British
Dominions in America, are possessed of.

In his third Paragraph, the American Whig goes on to apply his general
Observations to a particular Case. What led me into these Reflection, (says he)
was the reading Dr. Chandler's Plea for an American Episcopate. His
Reflections, we have seen, amount to two Propositions. The first that Liberty
is a very good Thing -- was naturally enough suggested by the Appeal: But he
blundered in the second. For instead of concluding that Men ought to be careful
to preserve so good a Thing as Liberty, -- he ought more logically to have
infered -- that the Members of the CHURCH in America are right in seeking to
obtain so good a Thing as Liberty, -- and -- that no true Friends of Liberty
will ever oppose them. And in this Train he might have gone on to a Number of
Conclusions, which would have done infinitely more Honor to his Head, and his
Heart.

But he tells us, the Scheme for sending Bishops into the Colonies, has it
seems been long under Consideration. It Is above fifty Years since it was first
started. This I believe, because the Author of the Appeal has proved it. And
most People will think it is high Time that it should be more than considered;
but I fancy the CHURCH may wait fifty Years longer, before such Friends of
Liberty as this will consent to its being carried into Execution.

We hear (says he) the Advocates for it, both here and in England, have
sanguine Expectations of its speedy Accomplishment. Let us see whether he
offers any Thing by way of Illustration or Proof of these "sanguine
Expectations." What he says further on the subject is in the next Paragraph in
these Words: It is now generally known that the Ministry in England have
rejected the Proposal. As they must be supposed to speak the Sentiments of
their royal Master, this must be construed a Denial from the Throne. Now as
this will not answer the Purpose of Illustration, we must suppose it to have
been intended as a Medium of Proof. And as good proof it is, as the Whig has
hitherto given us Reason to expect. Superficial Readers may object against it,
because the Premises and Conclusion stand at rather two great a Distance from
each other on his Paper; and because he leaves them under some Uncertainty as
to the process -- whether he means to prove the Expectations from the
Rejection, or the Rejection from the Expectations. But upon a nearer Scrutiny,
these Difficulties will vanish, and his Intention to prove the Expectations
will be evident. For see how cleverly the Premises will tumble out the
Consequence, when properly managed.

Whatever has been rejected by the Ministry, and denied from the Throne, is
likely to succeed: But, the Plan for American Bishops has been rejected by the
Ministry, and denied from the Throne: Ergo The Plan for American Bishops is
likely to succeed, and, the Advocates for it have sanguine Expectations of its
speedy Accomplishment.

It is only allowing him his Principle in his Major Proposition, and his Fact
in the Minor, and then the Consequence he will claim in his own Right.

But to proceed, No less than seven Petitions, we are told, have been
transmitted by a certain Convention. Undoubtedly the Number seven is of most
tremendous Import. For we read in Scripture of Seven Horns, of a Dragon with
seven Heads, (emblematical of the American Whig,) of Seven Abominations, and of
Mary Magdalene, out of whom were cast Seven Devils. If then the Number of
Addresses transmitted by a certain Convention, amounts to neither more nor less
than Seven, is not our Whig entitled to immortal Honor for teaching his dear
Countrymen to conclude, that there must be a deep Plot laid to ruin and enslave
them, -- and, should the Plot succeed, that nothing better than Devils, and
Horns, and abominations, must be the Portion of him and his Party?

But this is not all: These Seven Addresses represent the deplorable Condition
of an unmitred Church. It seems then that all that is requested is a few
Mitres, which never did Harm in any Country. For as a late Writer well
observes, a Man bent upon Mischief, can do it as effectually with a
Pumkin-Shell upon his Head, as with a Mitre, now as Mitres are not worn at this
Day in England, it is probable that as many as are wanted, may be purchased at
second Hand; and in a little Time we may learn to make them in the Colonies,
and, as this will be a new Manufacture, it will prove a public Benefit to our
Country.

Again: Those who signed the Addresses, boast of their incredible Numbers. This
is a vague, indefinite Expression and I do not well understand it. The Tenor of
those Addresses. I am told, is the same of that of the Appeal. In the Appeal
the Matter is expressed Page 55) in these Words: should it be said that the the
Church of England in America, contains now near a Million of Members, the
Assertion might be justified. But the Author of the Appeal grants, in the
following Sentence, that it is not easy to ascertain the Number exactly in a
Country so widely extended, and unequally peopled; and then proceeds to assign
the Reasons for his believing them to be near a Million. From no other Ground
than this, the poetical Imagination of the first Whig raises him to an
Apprehension, that the Appeal will lead People in England to believe, "that
less than half a Million is in Reality Three Millions and more." Did ever Poet
make a loftier and bolder Flight!

If the Members of the Convention boast of their distinguished and unshaken
Loyalty, I know not who can gainsay it. Nay, this Writer himself in his next
Paragraph, testifies in Favor of their general Character, and speaks of that
Zeal for the Constitution and the Government at Home, to which he (the Author
of the Appeal) and his Brethren, avow so warm an Attachment. If People have a
Zeal for the Constitution, either in Whole or in Part, may they not be allowed
to declare it, on proper Occasions? Does any one blame the late Petitioners for
a certain Charter, for declaring that they BOAST the most undissembled Loyalty
and Attachment to his Majesty's Person, Family and Government? That the Members
of the CHURCH should not be allowed an equal Privilege of declaring their
Loyalty, is -- is -- is -- not fair.

As to the Addresses not sparing very injurious Reflections upon the other
Denominations, as seditious Incendiaries, and disaffected to the King and the
Government; Several of the Persons who signed the Addresses, tell me this is a
false Accusation; and we are assured by the Secretary to the Convention that
this Assertion of the American Whig is absolutely, utterly, and entirely false
and groundless. And he publicly calls upon him to produce the Authority upon
which he has asserted so infamous a Falsehood. Until therefore the American
Whig produces the Evidence which the Secretary to the Convention calls for, he
must be looked upon as the Father of this infamous Falsehood.

I have frequently been surprised in the Course of my Life, but never more so,
than on finding it asserted by this Writer with so much Confidence, that it is
now generally known, that the Ministry in England have rejected the Proposal of
an American Episcopate: And I have made it my Business to enquire of several
Member of the Convention, with whom I am accquainted, whether there was any
Truth in the Assertion. They all, to a Man, agreed in affirming, that the
Proposal was so far from having been rejected by the Ministry, that it had
never been made to them, to the best of their Knowledge. They also assured me
that they have not the least Apprehension of a Denial from the Throne, -- and
that the Insinuation that in Answer to their Petitions, they have been ordered
to be silent, is false and scandalous. Now as these Gentlemen must be supposed
to know as much of the Matter as any other Persons, and as they are generally
esteemed to be Men of Integrity and Veracity, I shall rather take their Word
for it, than that of an anonymous, abusive Incendiary.

As I have been detained much longer with this Pair of Introductions than I at
first intended, I shall pass over many obnoxious Passages, without particular
Notice. The Reader I believe is tired, and after a few Words more, I will take
my Leave of him, promising not to trouble him again for -- a whole week. What I
would observe before we part is, That this Introductioner juggles with the
Titles of the Appeal to the Public, and tries to make it imply a Removal of the
Suit from the Sovereign to the Subject, as to a higher Tribunal. That the
Author of the Appeal looks upon that of the People as the higher Tribunal, he
has never declared; but I presume he takes it to be an Article of American
Whigism, that all Power, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, is derived from Them;
and according to our Whig's Logic, it may be proved from Scripture, for the
Powers that be, are ordained of God. Nor does Dr. Chandler appear to have had
any Design of removing his Suit from the Sovereign to the Subject. He uses the
Word Appeal freely and properly, and not in that technical Sense to which the
Pedants of the Law would confine it. He has clearly explained his own Meaning
and intention, which was to submit the Reasonableness of an American
Episcopate, to the Judgment and Consciences of Men, in order to know whether
any Reasonable Objections can be offered against it. This is the Queston to be
debated before the Tribunal of the Public; and as our Whig declares his
Willingness to appear there in Behalf of his Clients, I advise him to be
careful in what manner he behaves, -- and to remember that a Whip is prepared
for his Flagellation whenever he deserves it. In a particular Manner let him
guard himself against his constitutional Sins of "evil-speaking, lying and
slandering,"

Dixi.

[From Mr. Parker's New York Gazette, April 18, 1768.] THE AMERICAN WHIG. [No.
VI.
DOCTOR Chandler's Appeal, begins with a denial of the validity of the
ordination of all the protestant ministers in the world except those of his own
denomination. This to be sure is no great recommendation of his project, to the
people of a country, who, a few only excepted, are firm in the opinion he
attacks. Had he proceeded to express himself in the spirit of his principles,
the bulk of the reformed clergy, and ours among the rest, would have ^^^en
called non-commission laymen and mistaken pretenders, or egregious impostors.
My next remarks therefore, upon the section entitled, a sketch of the Arguments
in favor of episcopacy, are designed to guard his incautious, and less
discerning readers, against too great a confidence in the seeming simplicity of
an address calculated to cajole us into a voluntary consent to the scheme of
establishing a proud hierarchy on this continent.

It is far from my intention, where the Doctor delivers himself with the
benevolence of a Christian, or the candor of a gentleman, to excite censorious
and ill grounded jealousies. I mean only to expose artful disguises, contrived
to conceal the true spirit of the Appeal, and an insidious affectation of
courtesy, the better to promote a pernicious design. Mr. Lock with the
generous indignation of a friend to truth, some where declares, that the man
who wilfully connects ideas to terms, foreign to their ordinary sense, deserves
the punishment of him who stops the conduits of water to a city. And a much
greater authority commends the Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile. A
professed address therefore to all ranks of people, upon a subject of the
utmost importance to their liberties and interests, should not only be free
from the entangling weeds of chicanery, but dictated with a contempt of the
reserves forbidden by an honest open-hearted sincerity.

After asserting the position, that bishops are jure divino above presbyters;
or (...) other words, that they are so by the Authority of Christ; the
consequence was plain from that premise, that all the non episcopal churches
had departed from the true standard of government, and were censurable as
schismatical and erroneous. And whatever might be the effect, as to the project
he was concerned to promote, I appeal to the reader, whether it would not have
done honor to the Doctor's sincerity, to have applied his tenet to the
American churches with apostolic plainness of speech? Instead of so commendable
and courageous a conduct, we are first told, that none not ordained by a bishop
can officiate as clergymen; and then follows the mincing conclusion, that every
other ordination is esteemed to be at least irregular and defective. Would not
every man imagine from these soft words, that though the writer conceived other
ordinations to be, when strictly examined, not precisely regular, yet that they
might nevertheless pass muster, and the main end be answered? But no two points
of the compass are more directly opposed to each other, than such a supposition
to the Doctor's true and real sentiments. The reason is apparent; at present
the church he belongs to, is supposed, with the woman in the vision, to be in a
state of persecution; persecuted for the want of wealth, pomp and power;
persecuted as I shall show hereafter, for the want of wealth, pomp and power to
enable her to persecute others. Without the concurrence of the dissenters those
benefits it seems, are not to be expected. In this state a little
velvet-mouthed delicacy was thought to be reasonable and prudent: It Is
therefore to carnal policy, and not to Christian moderation, this tenderness is
to be truly ascribed. The Doctor's creed unchurches all the churches on the
continent, except his own, and the church of Quebec. According to that, not one
of the ministers of other denominations, are sent out by Christ to promulge his
gospel; and let my lords the bishops be once landed and fortified in their
palaces, guarded by their dependents, and supported by their courts, and
instead of this coaxing and trimming, we shall soon hear the thunder of
excommunication uttered with all the confidence and pride of security. The soft
bleatings of the lamb, will be changed into the terrible howling of the wolf;
and every poor parson whose head never felt the weight of a bishop's hand, will
soon know the power of his pastoral staff, and the arm of the magistrate into
the bargain.

If any man doubts my prediction, and fondly presumes upon the charitable
indulgence of ecclesiastical clemency, after it is exalted to the power of
applying punishments at will and pleasure, which must inevitably be the case,
upon the introduction of spiritual lords into a country where they will find no
laymen for their match, let him learn wisdom from history. Without the
knowledge of mankind, it is impossible to govern them well. This necessary
accomplishment seldom falls to the lot of speculative mortals immured in a
study. Hence their conceit, contraction, and obstinacy. Give the reins to one
of these book-worms, and he will attempt to drive the chariot of the sun: let
him be an ecclesiastic besides, and impelled by the two irresistible momentums
of the glory of God and the salvation of souls, and how can he refrain from
adopting the Popish comment upon the text, compel them to come in! He will
compel them with a witness. The dignity of the end justifies all sorts of
means. Mines and galleys, fire and faggot, pains and penalties, the rack and
the cross, have all been applied instead of reason and argument; and thus
mankind will ever be pilaged and butchered, as often as they are subjected to
the unbridled power of zealots, who as we said of archbishop Laud, by the pride
of a good conscience, will be more obstinately in the wrong.

There can be no dependence for the continuation of our liberties, if ever a
lordly clergyman is clothed with sufficient power to put down all opposers.
Give him that, and his conscience will set it to work; nay, judging from
experience, he will think himself conscience-bound, by the sword of the spirit,
to brandish for our conviction, a sort of weapons of a very different nature.

That the Doctor's principle leads to condemnation of all who deny it, none can
dispute; and however artful the terms in which it is conceived, I have still so
high an opinion of his veracity, that I will risk the credit of the
aforementioned prophecies, if he does not give an affirmative answer to the
following question. It is this, and for the information of the simple part of
the tribunal he appeals to, I challenge a categorical reply to the
interrogatory proposed, Whether he has not a better opinion of the validity of
an ordination performed by the bishop of Rome, whom some Christians suppose to
be the very scarlet whore mentioned by St. John, than of any one in which all
the clergy of the national churches of Holland and Scotland, should concur?

While this is preparing, or because the Doctor may perhaps be disinclined to
have any correspondence with an American Whig, I will relieve the impatience of
my readers by reminding them of two notable instances, which may help their
conjectures concerning the answer requested. It is not long since the Rev.
Mons. Haudin, took the pastoral charge of the episcopal church of Trenton, in
New Jersey, and afterward that of New-Rochelle, without any reordination; but
before Mr. Munro could be qualified to serve the chapel of Philipsburgh, he was
obliged to make a visit to the bishop of London, for his hand and his blessing.
What other reasons can be assigned for these differences, than that as this
former, though a fugitive from Canada, had priestly orders from the Popish bishop
of that country, his right to dispense the ordinances of the gospel was
incontestibly clear; so the latter was inadmissible to the chapel, because he
had only the defective ordination used in the schismatical, or ill disciplined,
though national and law-established church of Scotland.

The following passage is another instance of the same temporizing prudence: It
is, said the appellant, not necessary to enter upon a particular defense of
this doctrine, in an undertaking of this nature, since our present plea is
EQUALLY valid, whether these principles are founded rightly or wrongly: However
a brief sketch of the arguments whereby the necessity of Episcopal government
is defended, may on this occasion be not altogether useless or improper.

It being impossible, as the laws now stands, to introduce a bishop into
America, who will not have authority the instant he arrives, to set up an
ecclesiastical court, to which all denominations will be equally subject; the
Doctor's plea can have no validity at all; since no man can plead conscience
for a measure mischievous or dangerous to his neighbor. But admitting the
validity of this plea, surely it must at first view appear to be a mysterious
declararation, that it is equally valid whether the divine right of episcopacy
is well or ill grounded. If the doctrine was not thought to be of importance to
the grand thing in design, why is a whole section taken up in an attempt to
support it? His words and his conduct certainly have the show of repugnancy,
and it may serve a good purpose to guess at the reason.

The Doctor supposes a Bishop to have powers, which no clergyman in America,
save the right reverend father in God, the present bishop of Quebec, can
pretend to. If the generality of the reformed churches are not mistaken, every
presbyter is a bishop to all intents and purposes, in the scripture sense of
the word. According to this opinion, the Doctor himself, and the rest of his
brethren, who are of the order of presbyters, being in very deed bishops; the
cry set up in the Appeal is idle and absurd; all this appealing, entreating,
weeping, coaxing, and lamentation, being for a boon already possessed. It was
therefore of vast importance to the success of the scheme he aims at
accomplishing, to convict the American churches of error, in denying the
superiority of bishops above presbyters; since if this could be done, the
consequence is undeniable, that every prohibition upon the importation of
spiritual lords into this country, is nothing less than a direct opposition to
the great head and founder of the Christian church. It is easy then to discern,
not only that the plea is not equally valid whether the principle advanced, is
founded "rightly or wrongly." but the reason of assertion that it is so.

I am aware of his subterfuges, it is enough if we believe the doctrines, and it
will be persecution not to allow us the benefits of this article of our faith.
As a Whig, I am utterly opposed to the irrational and execrable practice of
punishing people for opinions in no degree hurtful to civil society, and if the
scheme which the author of the Appeal so ardently espouses, portended no evil
to others, I should bid it good speed. But after all, as nothing would more
effectually advance the favorite project, than the establishment of the divine
right of episcopacy, for an incontestible truth; it can never be said that the
plea in its behalf is as valid, if that doctrine may be disproved, as it would
be if it triumphed over all possible objection; and hence my conjecture that
there was a reason for the Doctor's assertion, not very consistent with the
simplicity of the gospel.

The sum of the whole matter is this, and I submit it to the impartial
consideration of the public. Apprehensive that great execution might be done by
the pretended jus divinum of episcopacy, the Doctor advances, and attempts to
support it: Aware that the application of the doctrine would startle his
countrymen, he affirms the validity of his plea, independent of his tenet.
Silence upon the subject might expose him to his superiors; avowing its
consequences would alarm the people whose assent is solicited. In this dilemma,
the doctrine is asserted, and the consequences tenderly mentioned. Like a
trespasser who means to steal a possession, he works with haste and
trepidation. He gives and takes back; builds upon the foundation of the divine
right of episcopacy, and yet treats it as a point of little or no consequence.
He runs swiftly through a section more important than the rest with a reference
to a dignified author in England, ^^^le read, and to a humbler one here scarce
known; does all he can to establish his point, and forestalls the severity of
the application, by roundly asserting that the plea is as solid without it.
After Rat^bane, a dose of Opium is administered, that the poison may work while
the patient is asleep. and if in all this there appears more of the wisdom of
the serpent, than the harmlessness of the dove; how much reason is there for
the simple to beware; and for all to suspect the sincerity of the declaration,
that bishops, like the apostles, without scrip or purse; without worldly power
and opulence, are the bishops recommended to the approbation of the continent.

W.
THE author has received the piece signed Patrobus, enclosing a piece against a
Scribbler even below contempt, and with whose name he had determined not to
contaminate his paper; but as this correspondent has had the address to support
the dignity of his performance, though levelled against so consummate a
blunderbuss, by several historical facts well adapted to the main design of the
American Whig, it shall be inserted in some future paper.

Q.



[From the New York JOURNAL, April 21, 1768.] To the PRINTER.
SIR,
IN your last Journal, I gave my Countrymen a Word of Caution, against what I
believe to be a wicked Design of the American Whig, Whom I take to be a Snake
in the Grass a lurking Enemy bent upon Mischief; who under the specious
Pretense of Zeal for Religious Liberty, (which no Body pretends to restrain,
and which is as dear to Episcopalians as to Whigs or any other Denomination
whatsoever) would raise needless Fears, Jealousies, Ill Will and Divisions
among us, and thereby divert our Attention from the Dangers that threaten our
political Liberty, and the necessary Means for its Preservation. This I believe
to be the real and principal Design of the Whig, and when I have told my
Reasons for this Opinion, I believe I shall not be singular in it. But whether
I am mistaken or not, with Respect to this Design, I am certainly not mistaken
as to the Effects, that, if not checked and prevented in Time, must, whether
foreseen and intended or not, naturally result from its Prosecution: These are
Disaffection, Disunion and Distrust among ourselves; our Attention, our
Counsels, our Power, will be divided and weakened, we shall lose all Confidence
in each other, our Enemies will gather Strength from our Weakness, and we shall
have no Power of Resistance left. Let us only, a little, consider our Situation.

We Americans are a Body of People who claim and possess several Rights and
Privileges, some of which are common to us all, some belong to particular
Societies of different Sorts, and some to Individuals. Before any Disputes
among ourselves can arise concerning these Rights, there must be something nice
and intricate in the Nature of the Case, otherwise there could be no Dispute;
for how can a Dispute arise about a Matter that is quite plain and self
evident? Every such Dispute therefore necessarily occasions a Division among
ourselves. -- and in order to settle the Difference between the Parties, we
must interest ourselves on both Sides of the Question. While the Matter is in
Suspense, it is not to be expected that every Person who hears of, and in some
Measure becomes engaged in it, will fully consider, or understands the Case,
and act as an impartial Judge. No, -- Interest, Connection with the Parties,
imperfect Information, Inattention, Passion, Prejudice, etc. in every such
internal Dispute, will divide us into at least three Parties, -- one on each
Side of the Question, the other, Neuters.

Now if those Rights that we all possess in common, are invaded, Common
Prudence and Interest, direct us to unite in repelling the Invader: But the
Rights that we are in Danger of losing, are common to us all, -- of every
Denomination, -- and we are all equally concerned in their Defense and
Preservation. Common Sense then, directs us in such a Case, to wave all Matters
of private Dispute among ourselves, that so our whole Force may be collected
and exerted in Defense of our Common Interest; we may thus easily defeat an
Enemy, who if we were divided into the different Parties of which we are
composed, would infallibly subdue us all, one after another. When an Enemy is
at Hand that would plunder us all, of our whole Property, is this a Time to
dispute and determine the Difference between ourselves? When a City is on Fire
is it a proper Time to determine the particular Property of the Inhabitants?
What then shall we think of a Man who manifestly labors, -- who impertinently
introduces every far fetched Pretense, who makes use of all the Arts of
Misrepresentation, -- caluminates, reviles, abuses, insults, and forms
Conclusions against Probability, against Reason, -- in order to embroil all
America, and our Friends in England, in a Dispute concerning the Respective
Rights of Churchmen and Presbyterians? Judge my Countrymen! is this Man a
Friend or an Enemy? this Whig, in his Advertisement in Parker's last Paper,
artfully endeavors to screen himself from all Possibility of Detection, by
raising a Suspicion against every Person that should write any Thing against
him. He tells, the Public to beware of every Writer who while he affects a Zeal
for our Civil Liberties, will not declare his Abhorence of ecclesiastical
Tyranny. -- That is, every Writer in favor of our Rights, who don't join in
the same Cry with the Whig, and, like the Demon Anarchy in Milton, help to
promote the Strife, are to be suspected? According to this Rule, the
Pennsylvania Farmer must fall under Suspicion. I beg the Reader's Attention to
the following Transcript, from his 12th Letter, the 6th, 7th and 8th Paragraphs.

["Our vigilance and our union are success and safety. Our negligence and our
division are distress and death. They are worse. They are shame and slavery.
Let us equally shun the benumbing stillness of over weening sloth, and the
feverish activity of that ill formed zeal, which busies itself in maintaining
little, mean and narrow opinions. Let us with a truly wise generosity and
charity banish and discourage all illiberal distinctions, which may arise from
differences in situation, forms of Government, or modes of religion. Let us
consider ourselves as men -- freemen -- Christian-freemen -- separated from the
rest of the world, and firmly bound together by the same rights, interests, and
dangers. Let these keep our attention inflexibly fixed on the great objects
which we must continually regard, in order to preserve those rights, to promote
those interests, and to avert those dangers.

Let these truths be indelibly impressed on our minds -- That we cannot be
happy without being free -- that we cannot be free, without being secure in our
Property, -- that we cannot be secure in our property, if without our consent,
others may, as by right take it away -- that taxes imposed upon us by
Parliament do thus take it away -- that duties laid for the sole purpose of
raising money, are taxes -- that attempts to lay such Duties should be
instantly and firmly opposed. -- that this opposition can never be effectual,
unless it is the united effort of these provinces -- that therefore benevolence
of temper toward each other, and unanimity of counsels, are essential to the
welfare of the whole -- and lastly, that for this reason, every man amongst us,
who in any manner would encourage either dissension, diffidence, or
indifference, between these colonies, is an ENEMY to himself and to his country.

The belief of these truths, I verily think, my countrymen, is indispensably
necessary to your happiness. I beseech you therefore Deuteron. vi. 7.
"teach them diligently unto your children, and talk of them when you sit in
your houses, and when you walk by the way, and when you lie down, and when you
rise up."]

What then must we think of the American Whig? does he not fall exactly under
the Description, is he not the very Man this excellent Writer points out, and
cautions us to beware of? [Let the Reader pause here, and think, whether the
Name would not be much more proper and significant, if instead of the American
Whig, that Author should be styled the American Pest, and treated accordingly.]
Indeed it is no Wonder the Whig should clash with the Farmer, -- their Tempers
and Principles are essentially different, and the Tendency of their Writings as
opposite as Light to Darkness. If I am not greatly mistaken, this is no^ the
only Occasion upon which the Farmer and the Whig have been in Opposition, it is
more than barely probable, they were so at the memorable Congress in this City.
-- Let the Whig clear himself if he can.

I have already declared what I believe to be the true Character and Design of
the American Whig, which was my sole Reason for endeavoring to detect, and put
my Countryman upon their Guard against him. Before I have done with him I
believe the Reader will be convinced that my Opinion is well supported. He
seems to triumph in his sagacious Discovery that I have assumed a Name to which
I have no Right. He has discovered he says, that I am not a Son of Liberty but
a Tory. Whether this notable Conclusion does most Honor to his Judgment or his
Heart I shall not take upon me to determine. However as I shall demonstrate
that my Actions have always exactly corresponded with the Name I have assumed,
in the only Sense in which it was ever in the Eyes of the Public, a respectable
Name of Distinction, every one is at Liberty to judge, whether the Whig's Error
proceeded from Want of Penetration, or from Consciousness -- of pretending to
one Thing and Meaning another, himself, and therefore concluding that I did the
same.

A Son of Liberty.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, April 21.
THE SENTINEL. No. V.
They shall put you out of the Synagogues; yea, the time comes, that whosoever
kills you will think that he does God service.

John xvi, 2.
IN my last I began to examine the peaceable and gentle spirit of the church of
England, and now shall endeavor to trace it a little f^rther. The canons of
your church, Dr. Chandler, do not seem to us to breathe a very gentle spirit.
Your 4th, 5th, and 6th canons solemnly denounce, "that whosoever shall affirm,
that the form of God's worship, contained in the common prayer has any thing
in it repugnant to the word of God, -- or that any of the 39 articles are in
any part erroneous, or such as may not with a good conscience be subscribed,
let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and not be restored, until he repent and
publicly revoke his wicked errors." Does not this bear hard on the rights of
private judgment, and the indispensible duty of every Christian to examine the
Scriptures, "to see whether these things be so or not?" In the judgment, of an
inspired apostle, the noble Baereans were justly commended who searched the
scripture, and by that infallible rule judged of the truth of the doctrines
that were preached to them. But the highest censure of the church is inflicted
by the church of England, on the person that would presume to judge for himself
and pronounce his judgment, if it should happen to be against and thing
contained in your 39 articles, common prayer and forms of ordination. Yet there
are many things therein, acknowledged by your own most learned divines, to need
alteration, as is abundantly evident from their candid disquisitions, etc. And
Dr. Chandler himself, speaking of some of the laws, which relate to the
spiritual courts, which are imagined to bear hard upon British liberty, says,
(page 96) "it is probable that these, and all other ecclesiastical laws, as
well as our liturgy and public offices, and our translation of the bible, will
be reviewed, as soon as it shall be thought that there is good sense and
candor enough in the body of the nation to admit of it." It is indeed
pleasantly ridiculous to see the most zealous advocates of the church of
England, and her brightest ornaments excommunicated ipso facto, by the gentle,
peaceable spirit of their own church, merely for confessing what all the
Christian churches, as well as themselves, know to be true, that there are many
things in their church that need reformation and amendment. By the force of
these canons, the Dr. himself is really an excommunicated person, if we can
believe the learned primate Dr. Wake, who says, concerning an excommunication
ipso facto, "^^hat th^re is no need, in the case, of an admonition, as where
the judge is to give sentence, but every one is to take notice of the law at
his peril, and to see that he be not overtaken by it, and that there is no need
of any sentence to be pronounced, which the canon itself has passed, and which
is by that means already promulged upon every one, as soon as he comes within
the obligation of it."

See app. in behalf of the King's Supremacy. p. 22.

If these canons do not breathe a persecuting spirit against the rejectors of
episcopacy -- I am sure they breathe a very ungrateful spirit against the most
valuable members of that church, who would willingly wipe off at least some
part of that reproach, which they are sensible has laid heavily upon her ever
since the reformation. You know reverend Doctor, that the rejectors of your
form of church government, have been calling upon your church to reform many
things, some of which the best men among yourselves have confessed to need
reformation, for more than a century past; and is there not yet good sense and
candor enough in the body of your national church, to admit of such a
reformation? "If this is the complexion of your church, what must we expect
from the plenary establishment of such a church among us, as has not good sense
and candor enough in the body of it, to admit of the removal of such things as
have been justly complained of so long a time, as an unrighteous persecution of
their brethren, and even unchristian violation of the rights of conscience and
private judgment? The Doctor's conjecture, that "it is probable, that there
will be a reformation in some things in his church." gives us but very slender
encouragement to submit to his American episcopate; when we know it is at best
just as probable that there will be no reformation in that church, which has so
long continued to persecute her brethren, and yet has not good sense enough in
the body of it, to remove the persecution. We rather conclude, that as she has
encroached so long on the rights of conscience, and oppressed her fellow
Christians, where she has the power in her hands, she would continue to give
sensible proofs of the same peaceable and gentle spirit in America, if she was
clothed with the same civil and ecclesiastical authority. When she has given
some substantial proofs of her moderation, by restoring her fellow Christians
to the full enjoyment of their civil and religious liberties, and by abrogating
the penal laws which oppress their consciences, we promise them we shall
entertain fewer jealousies of the exorbitant power of her bishops being
exercised in the colonies.

Pray, is it an equal thing that all denominations of Christians, should be
taxed for the support of episcopal ministers in the provinces south of
Pennsylvania; especially when we consider, that thereby some ministers of that
communion, are enabled to revel in luxury and wantonness, who, as Dr. Chandler
expresses it, "are such wretches as are not only a scandal to the church, but
also a disgrace to the human spicies? -- Must not this be a grief and a burden
to such Christians as have any regard to the promotion of the Redeemer's
kngdom? And must it not be peculiarly grievous to other denominations, to
support a church in which the pure worship of God is corrupted and obscured
with human inventions, while they "teach for doctrines the commandments of
men?" Pray Dr. would you not think it an unrighteous oppression, if the members
of your church were taxed for the support of the church of Rome? I can safely
appeal to your own conscience, whether you would not think it so,
notwithstanding all your fond partiality for her, which leads you in a very
Christian-like manner to unchristianize the foreign protestant churches, with
the church of Scotland and the Dissenters in England, in order to secure to
yourselves the unenvied treasure of an uninterrupted succession? -- Remove
therefore this instance of oppression out of your church, and show us that you
have as much moderation as the churches established in New England, who oblige
no different denominations to pay to the support of their clergy, but every one
supports its own. Believe me, Dr. had your clergy united together in addresses
to your superiors at home, to obtain a deliverance for the rejectors of
episcopacy in the Southern colonies, from this yoke of bondage laid on them for
the support of your church; you had given a more substantial proof of your
moderation, and regard to the rights of your fellow Christians, than you have
lately done in your application for an American episcopate. Do you expect we
can lay aside all jealousy of a church, which we see oppressing all others both
in England and in the colonies in such flagrant instances; regardless of the
rights of reason and conscience, where she has the power to oppress; or that we
can peaceably submit to a scheme, which threatens us with a still farther loss
of our civil and religious liberties.

Thus we have examined the peaceable and gentle spirit of the English episcopal
church, and still find in her the mournful relics of her ancient persecuting
spirit, and from thence conclude, that neither her spirit nor that of the times
are so much mended, as to pave the way for an easy and safe introduction of the
beloved Hierarchy, among those whose ancestors abandoned their native country,
and all the tender endearments of relations and friends, to escape her
ecclesiastical rage and persecution. -- Nor is the spirit of her bishops so
much mended, as Dr. Chandler would persuade us. Did not almost all the bishops
in parliament vote against the repeal of the stamp act, and use their influence
to rivet the shackles on the colonies which our enemies had formed? Can we
then, expect that those, that are so regardless of the property and civil
liberties of their fellow subjects, would be tender of the rights of
conscience; or that chose who so lately manifested a disposition to enslave us
in one instance, would not also oppress us in another?

But this is not the only indication of their present peaceable and gentle
spirit. The episcopal congregation in New York is established by the law, and
incorporated; when the Presbyterians there applied lately for a charter, did
not the bishop of London appear against them, and use his utmost endeavors to
render their application fruitless and ineffectual? with what pretext then can
the episcopalians complain that they do not enjoy the same privileges with
other denominations of Christians in the colonies; when themselves think it no
injustice, to prevent others from obtaining the same privileges with
themselves? Nor this is not all, the legislature of the province of
Massachusetts Bay, moved with pity and compassion for the poor savages in
America, who continue in deplorable ignorance, of the way of salvation through
a Redeemer, lately by act of assembly erected a society in Boston, to spread
the gospel through these benighted tribes; when this law went home for the
royal approbation, the pious Archbishop of Canterbury appeared in person, and
made use of his extensive influence to have it repealed. Why should the highest
dignitary in the church of England, oppose so well meant a design for the
conversion of the Heathens? What have these poor wretches done to deserve so
heavy a stroke from his Grace? Was he afraid that the known zeal of the clergy
and society of Boston would engage with vigor in carrying so good a work into
execution, and thereby bring a reproach upon a society in England erected for
the same purpose, who, for more than half a century past, have been squandering
away large sums of money, collected for the relief of those savages, in the
support of a body of missionaries, whose usual feats are some few conversions
from other denominations of Christians to their communions? His Grace can best
tell what were his motives to this conduct; but at present it must appear very
strange to us at this distance, that his Grace should have so little compassion
for the souls of those poor outcasts of the human species; so little zeal for
the promotion of Christianity, that he would rather suffer the Heathen tribes
behind us, to continue in their deplorable ignorance without God in the world,
and strangers to the covenant of promise, than that they should be instructed
in the doctrines of the gospel, by protestants of a different communion.

You will excuse me, Dr. Chandler, that I presume to think you also have
imbibed a small portion of the spirit, which seems to have influenced your
charitable primate, and that, though the times are mended, you have yet no
great abhorence of persecution; for in pa. 31 you lament, that Excommunication;
however it was dreaded in the purest ages of Christianity, has lost much of its
force in this, wherein altars are set up against altars, and churches against
churches, and those that are rejected by one may be received by another; a
disposition to slight the highest punishment, which the church can inflict, has
become general, and there appears to be no remedy, but in the use of reason and
persuasion. A lamentable case truly! that your church has lost her discipline,
and that there is (...) way to restore it but by reason and persuasion! What a
pity is it that the penal laws formerly executed in England and Ireland against
Dissenters, are not in force in America; and that spiritual courts, aided by
the secular arm, are not introduced to restore primitive discipline! Then might
we see some more success follow the good Doctor's labors, among the Heathen in
and about Elizabeth-Town; and refractory Quakers, Baptists and Presbyterians,
who never claimed any relation to the CHURCH, solemnly cast out of it, and
brought to due obedience, by fines, imprisonment and outlawry. Then, indeed,
might there be some good prospect, that the word of God would mightily grow and
prevail in New Jersey, etc. as well as "New England, according to the liturgy
of the church of England. See Dr. Philip Bearcroft's sermon, in 1744, before
the Society for propagating the gospel.


Thus we see, that neither the spirit of your church, nor of her bishops and
clergy, nor of the times, if we believe Dr. Chandler, is so much mended as to
free us from fears of oppression, upon the introduction of an American
episcopate.

Z.

A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG. [No. IV.]
By TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQUIRE.
They are apt to be unruly;
Lash them daily, lash them duly.
J. S. D. D. D. S. P. D.
I intimated in my first Paper, that I did not intend to confine myself to the
servile Business of animadverting regularly upon every dull Essay that the
American Whig should obtrude upon us: But such of his Performances as deserve
it, shall From Time to Time, have such Notice taken of them as either their
Merits or Demerits shall demand. For the present, I beg the Reader's Attention
to the two following Pieces which were left at the Printer's for my Use, and
which I hope, as they are calculated to serve the Cause of Truth, will be
acceptable to the Public.

EVERY careful Observer who has refided any Number of Years in this Colony,
must undoubtedly have remarked the Conduct of a certain unrelenting,
persecuting, begotted Faction, toward the CHURCH and the CLERGY. They first
opened with the Independent Reflector; A Paper chiefly pilfered from the
hireling, republican, deistical Writers of this and the last Century. Their
Success was equal to their Deserts. Their next Attack was from the Watchtower.
This was more furious and worse conducted than the other. They lost all
Patience, as they lost all that they were contending for: And it was hoped that
they had fallen -- never to rise again. For after this the CHURCH enjoyed some
Respite from their Persecutions, and possibly might yet have lived in Peace,
had not the Ambition of the Faction met with some equally unexpected and
mortifying Disappointments; which together with the distant Prospect of an
American Episcopate, promising some Advantages to the CHURCH and RELIGION,
fired their Envy, and put their Rancour into a Ferment. As these Writers have
now served two Apprenticeships in Slander and Defamation, we can be at no loss
to ascertain what Treatment honest Men are to expect from such malevolent
Spirits.

The Attack was begun by the American Whig, with a Triple Discharge of
Falsehood, Malice and Revenge (true Independent Artillery!) against the CHURCH
and the CLERGY; In order to hinder her from receiving the full Benefit of her
religious Establishment, to which, by all the Laws of God and Man, she is
incontestably entitled. The Pretense for this Assault is Dr. Chandler's Appeal
to the Public. -- a Book which, even the Enemies of the CHURCH must confess, is
written with the greatest Candor and Modesty; and as the American Whig himself
acknowledges, asks nothing but what is reasonable and just. One Section
however, seems to be wanting, to render the Dr's Performance unexceptionable,
viz. a Section to prove, That the establishing of Bishops in America, would be
of no SERVICE to to the CHURCH of England. Had it been possible to have done
this, and had this been done, with the same Force of Argument, and Perspicuity
of reasoning, with which the whole Book is written, not a Dog had moved his
Tongue against it. But, lest the CHURCH, which by the mere native Force of
Truth, has amazingly increased, especially in New England, where it has always
labored under the greatest Oppression; -- and which, from the Number and
Reputation of its Members in this Province, especially in the Capital, is
really venerable, and commands Respect; so as to be able to check the lustful
Thirst of Power, for which the Ringleaders of the Independent Faction have ever
been infamous, from the Day in which the Cockatrice first emerged from the Egg,
'till this present Moment: -- lest, I say, the CHURCH should receive so great a
Blessing as the Enjoyment of her religious Constitution; -- lest she should be
put upon an equal Footing with the other religious Denominations in the
Colonies, and be made as perfect and complete in her Way, as they are in
theirs, -- every Art is to be used, that Falsehood can invent, that Malice can
instigate, or Revenge can execute.

Not content with the most ample Toleration, -- which inviolably secures to
them the full and peaceable Enjoyment, not only of all their religious
Liberties, but also of all their religious Whims and Vagaries, -- they
continually grasp at Power; are always striving to be the greatest in the
Kingdom of -- England; more especially in the King of England's American
Dominions. And if the CHURCH has the patriotic Resolution, to oppose these
lordly Saints, and check their native Lust of Domination, -- which by God's
Grace, she ever has had, and I trust in his Goodness, she ever will have; --
all Obligations of Respect and Gratitude, of Decency and good Manners, of Truth
and Honor, are immediately broke through, being of too flimsy a Texture to hold
an English Independent, when disappointed of his Prey.

One probable Reason of the present Clamor is, that the Heads of the Faction
have been disappointed in the Issue of a late Election; when, by a well-timed
Opposition of the most respectable Inhabitants of this City, their ambitious
and insidious Designs were defeated; and, as the greatest Opposition came from
the Members of the CHURCH, so the CHURCH must bear the first Fury of their
Revenge.

Another Reason is, that these same Sons of Discontent, have from true
Principles of sound Policy, met with a Repulse in their Application for a
Cha^^er; (of Establishment, "we are told:") -- and as it would hardly bear to
vent their Spleen immediately against his M -- y, yet his M -- y's Religion
they presumed, might safely be attacked, and afford them ample Satisfaction.

And the grand Reason of the Attack upon the Episcopal Order, is, that the
Bishop of London (as they say) appeared against their Charter at the Board of
Trade; where, like an HONEST MAN, a worthy Patriot, and a conscientious
Prelate, he supported the Rights of the ESTABLISHED CHURCH.

For these Reasons that very CHURCH, to which they are indebted for their
TOLERATION, is to be painted in the most odious Colors, that Falsehood can
Invent, or Malace dictate; and the venerable, primitive, APOSTOLICAL Order of
Bishops, (without whose Consent the Act of Toleration could not have passed) --
which was ever held sacred, even by Heretics and Schismatics, -- 'till
Faction, and Enthusiasm, produced this new Sect, this Religion of Yesterday,
this motly Mixture of Ignorance and Pride, Hypocrisy and Superstition: This
sacred Order, I say, is to be described with all the vile Epithets, that the
most envenomed Malice could suggest, or the most flatulent Fustian could
express. But why it should be a Mark of Reproach to the English Bishops, that
they are court-favoured, and law-dignified, I cannot conceive. I rather think
the American Whig intended by those Epithets, to hint to his gentle Readers,
the great Bigotry, Profaneness, and Impiety, of the K --, the Court, and the
Laws of England, in giving their Countenance and Protection to English
Protestant Bishops. That it is the introduction of English Protestant Bishops
only, in the Colonies that they oppose, is evident from the Consideration, --
that a Popish Bishop is fixed at Quebec, and Moravian Bishops have been in this
and many other Provinces, without giving any Offense to these Antiapostolical
Opposers of Episcopacy. But talk of an English Protestant Bishop's residing in
the English Protestant Colonies, for the sole Purposes of ordaining and
governing the Clergy, and confirming such as are so attached to the primitive
Christian Church, as to desire to receive that Apostolical Rite; and such a
Bishop, sent for such Purposes, and for such Purposes only, is ranked with
Impositions upon Trade; is declared to be worse than the Stamp Act -- the worst
Commodity that can be imported; and that his Introduction must prove the
absolute, inevitable Desolation and Ruin of this Country.

But Whatever Arts these Sowers of the Seeds of public Discord, may make use
of, to inveigle the other religious Denominations, to join them against the
CHURCH; the other Denominations -- all of whom, as far as I perceive, live
quietly and peaceably under the present Religious Establishment, -- will, I
trust, see and pursue their true Interest; and consider the CHURCH as in Truth
she is, their grand Security against Independent Oppression For I dare
pronounce it, That should God, for the Punishment of our Sins, ever give up the
present happy Constitution, into the Hands of that persecuting Faction, no one
religious Denomination would enjoy the least Toleration from them; but like the
poor, harmless, inoffensive Quakers in Massachusetts, must be content -- to be
HANGED for their Religion.

To TIMOTHY TICKLE, Esquire
Hold, hold, friend TIM, attend to me,
I Will treat you with a Simile.
HAVE you not seen in Summer Morning,
When Sol (the Fields and Woods adorning,)
Shows from the East his decent Face,
Like Delia's decked with blushing Grace,
How Worm's that dwell some Dunghill deep in,
Will into Light be boldly creeping;
(Creatures that deal in the profound,
And never rise above the Ground,)
In the warm Sunshine crawl and play,
Or round the lowest floweret stray?
Stoop down, and raise them from the Plain,
They Will twist and creep to Dirt again;
Sever the grovelling Things, -- you will wonder
To see them crawl, though cut asunder:
Squeeze close your Hand, -- you will fret to find
That nothing's lest but Dirt behind.
Say then, shall Man exert his Power
On such frail Creatures of an Hour;
Such little, lowly lifeless Things,
Who boast of neither Teeth nor Stings?
No, -- let the humble Vermin toil
Untroubled, in their native Soil;
They Will crawl perhaps an Hour, -- and then
Sneak harmless to their Holes again.
EBENEZER TAG-RHIME. Squire TICKLE returns thanks to Prelaticus, and requests
the promised Anecdotes, etc.


Mr. PRINTER,
When the Church appears to be so deliberately attacked, and a Series of Papers
are to be laid before the Public to raise a Party against her, and to prevent
her enjoying her ecclesiastical Government, equally with his Majesty's other
Subjects, -- it may not be improper to show the Public who they are that oppose
her, and to guard against the Insinuations of those who are her professed
Enemies; -- be pleased therefore to insert the following.

Z.

NO Protestants have ever given the Government so much Trouble, nor shown such
fixed and Rooted Enmity to the established Church, as that Denomination called
Presbyterians: -- Whether this arises from real zeal for the Cause of
Christanity or any other Motive, may be an Inquiry. -- At present, I will pass
over every Thing that has happened on the other Side the Atlantic, and only
take a View of them upon, and since their Settlement on this Continent. -- in
Britain, they were ever calling out for Toleration and claimed it as a Right.
Upon their Settlement in America, their Spirit of Persecution broke out in full
Blaze; and no sooner had they the Power, than every Denomination, particularly
the Quakers, very sensibly felt, that this Sect of Men, have little other
"Grace than what is founded in Dominion." While other Denominations have
contented themselves, with the free Exercise of their Religion, and an equal
Share in the Offices of Government, this Restless Sect has in every Colony
either attempted, or actually seized all Power, and shown an equal Disposition
to tyrannize over all others; to root out not only the established Religion,
but every others Denomination from these Colonies. -- Hardly a Colony on the
Continent, but has groaned under their Tyranny, or been agitated by violent
Parties fomented by these People, to advance and procure their favorite Point,
Dominion. -- The eastern Governments are a Proof of the first, and the Parties
in New York and Pennsylvania, are recent Instances of the latter. -- But
sensible, that their darling Point can never be attained, while the Church, as
by law established stands in their Way, they have ever paid their greatest
Attention to prevent its Increase. -- How have they calumniated her Ministers,
and ridiculed her Ceremonies from Time to Time, as best suited their Purposes?
And when she asks, only equal Toleration on this Continent with them, their
Pens are employed to alarm the People that some Encroachment is intended upon
their religious Liberties; and according to the Candor of these Men, every
Story, whether true or false, we may expect to see revived, and new ones
propagated, to prevent that Church from being able to stem them in their Career
to Power, and hinder them from assuming Dominion over all others. During a late
Administration, the Province of New Jersey, saw and felt the Effects of
Presbyterian Power; her seats of Justice, etc. Commissions of the Peace, were
preferably conferred upon them; their Meeting houses, which now they affect to
call Churches, were every where incorporated, while Charters were denied, not
only to Churches, as by Law established, but to other Dissenters, who had equal
Right with Presbyterians. -- The Instances of their Lust for Power, and
uncharitable Treatment of those who differ from them in Opinion, are notorious
every where; nor have they ever shown a Zeal for Religion, or a charitable
Disposition to their fellow Christians, but when it suited their Purposes and
favored their darling Scheme. -- At this Time, when Peace and Christian
Charity should most abound among us, that Spirit again raises its Head, aims to
throw the Contient into Confusion, and "sow the Seeds of Discord," to prevent
the Church from having its Government fully and freely enjoyed; and that too
after the Church has, for many Months laid before all Denominations, in an
honest Appeal, the Difficulties she labors under, and the Means she proposes
to procure Redress; which is in a Manner, that can give no one Sect any
reasonable Cause of Ossence: Nay, it has been repeatedly acknowledged, by some
of the best of them, to be a Measure which they cannot disapprove of; and what
the American Whig owns to be "highly reasonable." But it then suited their
Politics to be silent; it now suits their Purpose to kick up a Dust, and
inflame and divide all Men as much as possible. -- All other Dissenters need
not be told, that in the Ruin of the CHURCH will be involved the Ruin of them
all, excepting the Presbyterians: And as they have never experienced, nor can
from any Thing proposed in the Appeal, entertain a Doubt that the Church
intends the least Injury to the religious or civil Rights of any Dissenters;
so, I hope they will not be led away by the Arts and Insinuations of these Men,
to join in a Cry raised only to prevent the Professors of the Church of
England, from enjoying the like Freedom in Church Government with Dissenters,
-- but will attend to their Reasonings, if happily any may be found in their
Publications, and not permit Witticisms, or Insinuations unsupported by good
Authority, to beguile their Understandings; and if then they discover, that the
Church meditates any Thing against their civil or religious Liberties, it will
be their Duty to prevent it: But, if, on the other Hand, it shall be found,
that she has no such Intentions, Christian Charity must induce them, not to
deny her equal Toleration with themselves.

Z.

[From Mr. Parker's New York Gazette, Monday, April 25.] THE AMERICAN WHIG.
[No. VII]
The following Piece being sent me by a very humorous Correspondent, I shall
insert without any Apology.
SIR,
THOUGH every lover of liberty is greatly obliged to you for your noble and
vigorous stand against that more than Egyptian bondage, wherewith we are
threatened by the convention; yet I conceive you will give up a great advantage
to which you are by law entitled, if you prosecute your design of giving a
particular answer to every part of the Appeal; because in my opinion, only some
parts of it ought to be answered, others to be pleaded to in bar, and the rest
of it is subject to a demurrer. For this purpose, I enclose you the form of a
plea, answer, and demurrer, which I beg you to insert in behalf of the public,
and you will greatly oblige

Your most humble servant, WILLIAM PEER WILLIAMS.
The people of North America appellees, ad sectam Thomas Bradbury Chandler,
Doctor of Divinity, Appellant. On the Appeal in the case of Bishops, or no
bishops.



The joint and several plea, demurrer, and answer of the people of
North America, Appellees, to the Appeal of Thomas Bradbury Chandler, Appellant.
THE said Appellees by protestation, not confessing or acknowledging all, or
any of the matters in the Appellant's said Appeal contained, to be true, in
such manner and form as the same are therein set forth and charged; these
Appellees for plea to so much thereof as claims a divine right to episcopacy,
for, and in behalf of the English bishops, these Appellees say, that in the
year of our lord 1533, the nation being tired of the exorbitant claims of the
clergy; and their ill-gotten wealth, as well as ill-used power, being grown
intolerable to mankind, it was by a certain act of Parliament of our sovereign
lord King Henry the VIIIth, late King of England, began and held at
Westminster, on the 15th day of January, in the year last above said, and
thence continued until the 30th day of March, then next ensuing, declared and
enacted, that the clergy of the realm of England, shall never from thence forth
presume to attempt, allege, claim, or put in use, or enact, promulge, or
prosecute any new cannons, constitutions ordinance provincial, or other without
the King's license.

And these Appellees for plea farther say, that in the same session of
parliament, the manner of proceeding upon the conge d'lire, is directed, that
is to say, a license from the crown is to be sent to the chapter, to choose or
elect an arch bishop or bishop, and a letter missive with it, to nominate the
person whom they are to choose, which if they do not obey, nor signify the same
according to the tenor of the act within twenty days, they are subject to a
proemunire; and if the election be not made within twelve days, the King may
nominate a bishop by letters patent, without any election at all.

And these Appellees do farther say, that by another act of parliament made in
the 26th year of the same reign, reciting, that the King justly and rightly is,
and ought to be, supreme head of the church of England, the same is enacted
into a law, and that he shall have full power to visit, redress, reform,
correct, and restrain all errors, heresies, abuses, offenses, contempts, and
enormities, whatsoever they be, which by any manner of spiritual jurisdiction
ought, or may be reformed, redressed, etc.

And these Appellees farther say, that by another act of parliament made in the
37th year of the same reign, reciting, that archbishops, bishops, or
archdeacons, and other ecclesiastical persons, have no manner of juridiction
ecclesiastical, but by, from, and under the King's majesty; it is enacted, that
laymen qualified as the law appoints may exercise all parts of ecclesiastical
juridiction and all censures, coercions, appertaining, or in any wise belonging
thereunto.

And these Appellees farther say, that by another act of parliament made in the
first year of Queen Elizabeth, it is enacted, that all Jurisdiction,
privileges, superiorities, and pre-eminence spiritual and ecclesiastical, at
any time lawfully used, or received, for the visitation of the ecclesiastical
state, or persons, and for the reformation, order, and correction of the same,
and of all manner of errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, contempts, offenses,
and enormities, shall be annexed to the imperial crown of the realm. Wherefore,
these Appellees do say, that there is no other right of episcopacy within the
realm of England, than what is derived thereunto by human laws, and that all
claim or pretense to any divine right of episcopacy by any of the English
clergy, (who have sworn to the aforesaid acts, and are subject to a proemunire,
if they contradict them) is as absurd, illegal, and nugatory as the divine
right of geography.

And these Appellees farther say, that they are advised by their counsel, that
there is no matter or thing in the said Appeal contained, good and sufficient
in the law, to call them in question in a plea of equity before the tribunal of
the publ^^, but that there is good cause of demurrer thereto, and for cause of
demurrer they say,

First. That the Appellant's said Appeal (in case the allegations therein
contained were true, which they do in no sort admit) contains not any matter of
equity whereon the people can ground any decree, or give the Appellant any
relief, remedy, or assistance; but that the same is properly, and only
cognizable before the parliament of Great Britain.

Secondly. For that it appears by the Appellant's own showing, that he claims,
or pretends title in behalf of the bishops, to one full and equal tenth part
(the whole into ten equal parts to be divided) of the premises in the Appeal
mentioned, that is to say, of all the lands in North America, as persons next
in remainder in tail under a devise of St. Peter, in the said Appeal mentioned
and set forth, (or in lieu thereof, by way of a modus decimandi to a pecuniary
tax to be laid on his Majesty's liege subjects in America, by the respective
legislatures of the colonies, as soon as the said legistatures shall be
sufficiently swayed by priestly influence to commit so great an iniquity,)
which these Appellees are advised is a matter merely triable at law, and
touching which, he may sufficiently ascertain their title by ejectment or
ejectments to be brought at law.

Thirdly. For that the Appellant has made a profert of all the negroes in the
West Indies, whose testimony cannot be admitted in evidence, barely on their
being virtual churchmen, while they continue, as it appears by his own showing
that they do, in a state of heathenism and infidelity.

Fourthly. For that the Appellant proposes a harmless bishop, which these
Appellees are advised is a thing not known in the law.

Fifthly. For that it appears by the Appellant's own showing, that he claims
title to the said tenth part of the premises in question, as agent or attorney
to the said bishops, by virtue of the uninterrupted succession; and thereby
deduces their title through the Pope of Rome, who by the laws of the land, as
these Appellees are advised, cannot be seized of any lands, tenements, or
hereditaments within his Majesty's dominions in America.

Sixthly. For that the Appellees are charged in the said Appeal with blowing
the trumpet of sedition; and they ought not to be compelled to discover, or set
forth any matters, whereby they may impeach or accuse themselves of any crime,
for which they may suffer corporal punishment, or be grievously fined.

Seventhly. For that the appellant has appealed to the tribunal of the
Appellees, and by the law of the land no persons can be judges of their own
cause; but if the Appellant will nevertheless insist on having the cause
determined by them, they adjudge and decree, against him, and do order and
decree, that no bishop do presume to set his foot on the continent of
North America, on pretense of exercising his function on the same; and do
farther order the Appellant's said Appeal to be dismissed with costs of suit.
And.

Lastly. For that the Appellant has only made profert of part of a certain
instrument in support of his title, pretended to be executed by the right
reverend father in God, John, lord bishop of Landaff; when by the rules of law,
he ought to have proffered the whole, that the court might be able to judge,
whether by some precedent or subsequent clause therein, the same is not null
and void, by reason of sundry defects, imperfections and untruths, which these
Appellees have heard, and do believe is really the case. And therefore, and for
diverse other good causes of demurrer, in the said Appellant's said Appeal of
his own showing, appearing, these Appellees as to so much thereof, do demur,
and do demand judgment of the court, whether they, or any of them ought, or
shall be compelled to make any answer thereto, other, or otherwise than as
herein after follows; and for answer to such part of the said Appeal as is
not pleaded and demurred unto, they say, for answer to so much thereof as is to
compel them to set forth and discover their approbation, or disapprobation of
the Appellant's proposal, of importing one or more bishop or bishops, into the
American colonies; that they do utterly disapprove thereof, and will by all
lawful ways and means in their power, let, hinder, molest, interrupt, disturb,
obstruct, gainsay, gain-write, gain-reason, expose, defeat, refute, impede,
repel, oppugn, resist, repulse, oppose, and contravene, the same. And as to so
much of the said Appeal as sets forth, that the Appellant did not intend to
keep the matter a secret, these Appellees do say, that the Appellant and his
associates, commonly called, and known by the name of the convention, did, and
each, and every of them, did endeavor to keep the same secret, privy, opake,
covert, and occult; and have expressly denied the same, until it was casually
discovered, by reason of sundry and diverse petitions, by them indicted and
transmitted to that part of Great Britain, called England; which said
petitions, as these Appellees have heard, and do verily believe, did contain
manifold untruths, imperfections, aspersion, reflections, misrepresentations,
defamations, prevarications, evasions, tergiversations, villifications,
adulterations, sophistications, twistifications and conundrums. And these
Appellees further answering, do deny, that any of them have ever persecuted the
church of England in America, or that she has ever been to the knowledge of
these Appellees persecuted by any other person or persons whatsoever; but that
on the contrary, they have heard, and hope to be able to prove, that she
appears more like a church triumphant, than a church militant; and all that
ever they have, or do intend to devise and considerate against her, was and
shall be, only se defendendo, that she shall not also become a church rampant
and gubernant; which they are advised is well lawful for them to do. And these
Appellees do deny, that they, or any of them, now have, or has, or have ever
had in his or their possession, the said pretended last will or testament of
St. Peter, whereby the tenth, or any other part of the lands, tenements, or
hereditaments of his Majesty's loyal subjects in America, is devised in tail to
any bishop or bishops: nor do they believe that he ever made or executed any
such last will and testament; or if he did, that any lands or tenements did, or
could pass by the same; because they have heard, and hope to prove, that if he
was ever seized of any lands or tenements, by right apostolic, he was seized
thereof as joint-tenant with eleven other persons, of whom St. John was the
survivor, from whom the Appellant has not deduced any right or title
whatsoever. And they do further deny, that they or either of them, now have, or
has, or have ever had, the said charter of the uninterrupted succession, in
the said Appeal mentioned; nor do they, or any of them, claim any interest or
title in, or to the said premises, from under the same. And these Appellees do
say, that they hope to prove, that the said Appeal is not exhibited to be
relieved against any real grievance or oppression, but for the aggrandizement
and exaltation of the episcopal churches, on the ruin of all other Christian
denominations in his Majesty's American dominions; and that this suit is not
prosecuted by any number of the members of the said churches, but at the
special instance and request, and at the proper costs and charges of the said
Convention, who not having the peace and tranquillity of these colonies before
their eyes, but being moved and instigated with an inordinate lust of
ecclesiastical power, have retained the Appellant to institute the said Appeal,
with intent and purpose to subject this flourishing country to priestly
dominion, and the power of high-church; and that the said Convention have
causelessly, and unnecessarily, and not only without, but against the leave,
consent, and approbation of their respective churches, exhibited the said
Appeal, to vex and trouble the Appellees, and to put them to unnecessary
charges in the law; of which these Appellees hope the court will take due
consideration, and consider the same in costs, Without that. etc.

Z.

AS Mr. Seabury has again made his corporal appearance, though it was currently
reported, that like Romulus, he was gone off in a thunder storm; and though not
quite so pugnatious, seems as evasive as ever. The Author intends speedily to
convince him (of what the public is already convinced) that the onus probandi
always lies on the person possessed of the instrument concerning which the
controversy is raised; and that the parties said to be calumniated in the
petitions, cannot be satisfied with that strange departure in pleading, so
apparent in his valedictory oration; but are justly entitled to a profert of
the instruments, without any farther evasion or equivocation whatsoever.

The ingenious piece signed Liberius, is come to hand, and well deserves a
place in the American Whig.

The Author has also received the remarks signed Spicelegus; and an anonymous
piece on the horrid and abominable tyranny and oppression of bishops which
shall be duly considered.

An Appeal from the American Whig, to all that are impartial.
Prove all things, etc do nothing by Partiality. St. PAUL.
MY DEAR COUNTRYMEN,
I Thus address, you as well as Mr. Whig, because I beg you will believe, as
the truth is, that our country, its people and liberties, are as dear to us of
the church, as they can be to any of our neighbors. -- It is but too evident,
from the furious and declamatory manner in which the American Whig writes, that
he has no notion of attending to the real merits of the cause; it therefore
greatly concerns you, to be much upon your guard against him; for he is
certainly a man of too much sense, not to know that he is miserably trying to
impose upon his dear countrymen, as all his wild talk is quite beside the
question, and aims only at raising a spirit of venom and bitterness toward his
neighbors, that are of the church.

This is evident from his pretended history of high-church and low-church, N.
III. by which he would have it believed, that we being high-church, are little
better than papists in disguise, and aim at setting up a spiritual tyranny in
the country; than which, nothing can be more false and groundless. But the
truth of the matter is this, that those who were called high-church, were
Jacobites, or disaffected to the present Royal family; whereas we can defy the
Whig to produce among us one instance or symptom of the least disaffection to
that dear prince, our present most gracious sovereign King George the III, whom
we do know to be a friend to us and our cause So that the only distinction that
can be here, is between those that are intemperately and imprudently zealous
for the church, (if such there be) and those who are of a moderate and
Christian temper, though seriously zealous in its cause, and such Dr. Chandler,
and the rest of us profess to be. In this sense, there are also high and
low-presbyterians, as well as churchmen. Of the high sort, are those that are
furiously and venomously zealous, such as Mr. Whig. The low presbyterians are
of a moderate and charitable temper toward the church. Of such I know a great
many, (I hope they are much the majority,) with whom I live in good
neighborhood and friendship, and who declare to me they think Dr. Chandler is
in the right, and that it is most reasonable that the church should have
bishops, as well as they their way.

But says the Whig N. IV, with bishops, there must needs come in spiritual
courts, etc. I answer there is no necessary connection between them: It is the
state, and not the church, that has made that settlement; and without the state
no such settlement can be made here; which therefore never will, nor can be.
But pray my dear countrymen, how is it possible to quiet and satisfy such a
suspicious and unreasonable mortal? We do solemnly declare, as the truth is,
that we do not desire any spiritual courts relating to any of those matters he
mentions; we are as much against them as any of our neighbors; nor was any
such thing ever thought of, nor that our bishops should have any juridical
concern with the laity. We can only beg of you, not to give any heed to him, as
it is plain he only designs to deceive you, and without any manner of ground,
to blow up in you the same malicious and contentious spirit, that reigns in
himself. The apostle's advice is, From such turn away.

Nor do we desire, or expect any other than such a moderate and reasonable
support for our bishops, as shall be judged necessary to enable them to live
decently, as it becomes their station, and to be exemplary in the good works of
piety and charity, and that without a farthing's expense to the laity; and our
de^re is, that their peculiar business shall be, only to ordain and govern our
clergy (as the primitive bishops always did) and admit our children when adult,
to renew their baptismal covenant, which we call confirmation. And for all
this, we do (without uncharitably censuring you,) seriously plead conscience;
as we do really believe it grounded on the most ancient facts of scripture and
antiquity, for which we think we have as much evidence, as for the canon of the
new testament.

And now, my dear brethren, do but mind how ludicrously he makes a ridicule of
our poor consciences, and of the national establishment, in No. V. Now it is
well known, that the very heathen thought it ill manners, and a crime, as well
as ill-policy, to vilify and ridicule the established religion of their nation;
and I would only beg leave to add, that if Mr. Whig has any seriousness, to
make it his own case, and to lay his hand on his heart, and say, whether he
would not think it a barbarous thing, if the presbyterians were obliged to send
a 1000 leagues for every ordination, as is our unhappy case? But alas! it may
deserve to be well considered, whether a man that makes a ridicule of other
people's consciences, can be reasonably supposed to have any conscience of his
own? I am, my dear countrymen,

Your affectionate friend, and very humble servant HIEROCLES.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, April 28. The SENTINEL. No. VI.
LIBERTY is a most tender plant that thrives in very few Soils; neglected, it
soon withers and is lost; but is scarce ever recoverd. Nothing less than a
supreme regard to this inestimable blessing, could have induced me to undertake
the disagreeable task of a disputant. I conceived it was dangerously attacked
by Doctor Chandler and his associates in their attempt to introduce diocesan
Bishops among us, and my design was to show the manifest tendency of the
Innovation, to undermine and demolish that religious freedom by which these
northern colonies are so remarkably distinguished from every other country; and
under the auspices of which, joined with an excellent frame of civil
Government, they have beyond all example grown up and prospered. In some future
papers I shall pursue the subject; but at present, I wave it, to make room for
the following letter, just received from an ingenious correspondent; who
considers the manner in which our civil liberties must be violated, by this
scheme of an American Episcopate. As his reasoning appears to be clear and
demonstrative, I shall be much obliged to him for the continuance of his
correspondence.

To the Author of the SENTINEL.
SIR,
AT a time when the liberties of America are at stake; when claims are set up
destructive of our rights as freeborn subjects, we cannot be too much on our
Guard against any measure, that has a tendency to give color or strength to
these claims, nor ought we to give the less opposition, because it has been
undertaken with a different design.

In this light I view the application for an American episcopate, lately made,
by some of the Missionaries from the Society for propagating the Gospel. I
would fain acquit the applicants of any intention to infringe the civil rights
of the colonists; and yet I am clearly of opinion the application has a direct
tendency to this, and therefore ought to be opposed.

I shall not enter on any disputes about uninterrupted succession, the divine
right of episcopacy, etc. These are subjects to which I am altogether a
stranger. I apprehend Christianity can well consist with the enjoyment of civil
liberty; and that a man may worship God and be "accepted with him" without
becoming a slave, or parting with the rights of a British subject.

It is not more lamentable, than true, that the clergy of all denominations and
in every age, have discovered a fondness for power, and have seldom been
scrupulous about the means of procuring it; nor have they used it with
moderation when obtained. This might be improved as an argument against every
attempt they may make to increase their power. But waving this, I shall at
present consider the subject in another view, and endeavor to show that the
application of Dr. Chandler and his brethren, is in itself a dangerous attack
upon the civil liberties of this country. If this can be made evident I hope
the Missionaries will not only decline every attempt of the like nature for the
future, but that they will, from a regard to the liberties of the colonies,
unite with their fellow subjects in opposing any steps that may be taken, in
consequence of the application already made; and that the Doctor will admit,
that the opposition, neither arises from a spirit of persecution, nor from
disaffection to monarchy.

It is well known, that the far greater part of those who first settled the
northern colonies, left their native country, and took shelter in the wilds of
America, in order to be free from the persecution of ecclesiastical rulers, and
to enjoy the liberty of worshipping God in a way agreeable to their
consciences. It must be acknowledged, that it was the unhappiness of New
England and the adjoining Parts, to be first planted and inhabited by persons
who were generally disaffected to the church by law established in England, and
many of them had taken refuge in those parts, on account of their sufferings
for non conformity here at home. Account of the foundation, success, etc. of
the society for propagating the gospel Inno 1706; page 10.

That it was their unhappiness, thus to suffer is plain enough -- but that it
was the unhappiness of the Northern Colonies to be settled by conscientious Non
Conformists is not so clear.


Although they disclaimed the jurisdiction of ecclesiastical courts, they
retained their allegiance to the King, and claimed the protection of the
British crown. In conformity therefore to the principles of the British
constitution, to which they strictly adhe^ed, they accepted from the crown a
grant for the lands they settled, and charters declarative of their rights and
privileges.

In consequence of these grants, both they and their posterity ever since, as
free born subjects, have always claimed, and do still claim, not only the sole
right of disposing of their property, but also of making, with the consent of
the crown, such la^^ and regulations, as they think most convenient, for their
internal police and Government.

Without the full enjoyment of these rights, it is impossible for them to
preserve the least shadow either of liberty or property. For what property can
any man have in that which another can by right take and dispose of as he
pleases? See Lock on government.
Or what liberty has he, whose conduct must be regulated by the pleasure of
another? a government without the consent of the governed, is with me, the very
definition of slavery.

It is readily granted that the colonies are dependent states, united under one
head; and with the other British dominions, form one cature ^mp^re. It is also
admitted, that the parliament of Great Britain, as the supreme legislative
power, has a superintending authority to regulate and pre^erve the connection
between the several parts and members of the Empire. But this does not imply,
^ither a power of disposing of the property of the subjects in the several
in^erior legislative jurisdictions; nor of making laws for their internal
government. Both of these, by the con^titution and charters of the several
colonies, are lodged, where nature and reason and justice point out that they
ought to be lodged; with the Representatives of the people.

Sufficient caution is taken that this power may not be abused. The laws in the
colonies must be made 'as near as conveniently can be agreeable to the laws and
statutes and rights of the kingdom of England:" The Words of the charter from
K. Charles 2d. to W. Penn.
They must receive the sanction of the governor or the King's Representative.
And even after that, a power is reserved to the crown of repealing, within a
limited time, any law that may be enacted.

Every application Dr. Chandler, in his appeal, tells us, Application has been
made to our superiors; and in sundry Places he calls upon the "Nation" to
establish Episcopacy in America. Who these Superiors are, he does not explain:
but by the nation he must mean the parliament; for the Nation has no mode of
acting, but by its Representatives in Parliament.
therefore, to any other than the legislatures of the respective colonies, for
laws or regulations relative to our internal police, I consider as an attack
upon the liberty of the colonies. The regulating of church discipline, and
establishing particular forms of religion is certainly a matter of internal
police. If the parliament, or any other power upon earth, may establish in the
colonies any form of religion, or the heirarchy they please, they can grant to
the members of that establishment what immunities and exemptions they see fit,
and inflict penalties upon such as do not conform If they may, without the
consent of the colonies, establish bishoprics and bishops among us, they may
appoint revenues for their support, erect spiritual courts, and enforce
obedience to the authority and jurisdiction of those courts. And if the people
must yield obedience to such laws and establishments made not only without, but
against their consent, I would gladly know wherein their liberty can consist.

In vain did our ancestors leave their native land, and fly into the wilderness
to avoid spiritual tyranny, if those who established it in England can extend
it to America. In short if the parliament is to interfere, and regulate one
part of our internal police, why not every part? if they among whom we have no
representatives; who from the distance between them and us, must be
unacquainted with our condition, circumstances, etc. they in whose election we
have no choice, over whose conduct we have no check, as the laws they make for
us, will not affect them; if our superiors in Britain, can bind on us religious
establishments, and rule us by laws made at the distance of three thousand
miles, we may boast of our liberty, as we please, but it is no more, than, "The
baseless fabric of a vision." Shakespeare.


I am Sir, Yours, etc. A. B.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZZETTE, Monday May 2. A Whip for the American Whig, No. V.
By TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
A Lash like mine no honest Man shall dread,
But all your babbling Blockheads in his Stead.
POPE.
To TIMOTHY TICKLE, Esquire
SIR,
Although I live at a considerable Distance from New York, I am a constant
Reader of the several Newspapers that are there published. Among others, I
peruse Mr. Parker's Gazette, which of late comes full freighted with a weekly
Load of Slander, and malicious Falsehoods, consigned to the Public by the
American Whig. It gives me a very sensible Pleasure to find you are engaged in
preparing a WHIP for the Faction (as you justly call them) concerned in that
Paper; and although I do not imagine you stand in need of an Auxiliary in your
laudable Undertaking to expose the Design of that angry, malevolent Faction (as
they appear to be) I could not forbear making the following Remarks on No. III.
of the Whig, which are at your Service, to do with them whatever you think
proper.

THE manifest design of the author of that paper, is to divide the members of
the Church of England, and gain as many as are weak enough to catch the
insidious bait he throws out, to join in what must finally terminate in the
ruin of the Church. This being the case, the praise he bestows on any of them
should be deemed their reproach; and they should say with the wary Trojan. --

Timeo Danaos, et dona ferentes. Divide and Go^^rn has been a favorite maxim
with most tyrants, and has been practiced, time immemorial, with success, by
those who were laying dark schemes to enslave others. Let us now examine how
Mr. Whig endeavors to inveigle his readers and bring about his design to
divide Churchmen.

He tells us -- That Henry VIII, began the reformation -- that whilst a few
embraced the reformation for conscience sake, multitudes submitted merely to
save their estates, and avoid persecution. Hence the Origin of two famous
parties, viz. High church and low church. The former were papists in their
hearts -- conformed out of self interest -- were always mighty sticklers for
rights and ceremonies, and the uninterrupted line of succession -- persecuted
all who from a principle of religion and conscience could not adopt their
measures, -- whose true, if not only descendants, he says, the American
missionaries are at present, because they desire bishops." The low church party
were such as embraced the reformation from conscience, and were disposed to
carry i^ further. But these were chiefly distinguished by their grievous
lamentations over the unhappy deficiencies of the church of England, the
relics of popery, etc. -- by their being favorable to protestant dissenters;
and to crown all these do not now desire to impose diocesan bishops upon us

Here, to be sure, is a curious specimen of exact historical knowledge, and of
fair, impartial representation! That some embraced the reformation from
temporal views, and motives, I believe, even, although a Whig -- nay, even although
the American Whig himself affirms it -- that most conformed on that account,
fact and history evince to be false; and it staggers me much to think how any
protestant could throw such an injurious, unjust reflection on the reformation.
As for the other particulars here mentioned, and throughout his paper, they
show in general that this writer is either ignorant of the history of England
in those days, and since that period; or else that he is guilty of malicious
misrepresentation.

Henry VIII was no reformer, nor is he called so by any that I know of, but
papists. He quarrelled indeed with the Pope, because his holiness would not
grant him a divorce, and therefore threw off the papal supremacy. But still he
was a true catholic, if any thing. Before this, he wrote a book against Luther,
-- after it, he burned those who denied transubstantiation. It pleased God,
it is true, to order matters so that this quarrel with the Pope proved
favorable and subservient to the reformation; for hereby Cranmer, Latimer,
Ridley, and many others had an opportunity of carrying on the glorious design.
Nor was this effected with much force or violence, as the Whig injuriously
represents; but with great mildness and Christian temper, considering
especially the spirit and circumstances of those times. His insinuation that
the distinction of high church and low church originated from these different
motives upon which the reformation was embraced, is as opposite to truth as any
legend in the Koran. That distinction was not known for more than a century
after; and was invented by those who were enemies to the Monarchy and Church of
England. But the high church party, says our Whig -- were Papists in their
hearts -- persecuted dissenters -- were sticklers for ceremonies, and the
uninterrupted line of succession; whereas the low church party, disavowed all
these, and were for a further reformation. Did the limit of this letter permit
me, I could, by an induction of facts, show how contrary to truth these
assertions are -- that the greatest sticklers for ceremonies, were among the
greatest opposers of popery; and that the warmest friends of dissenters, were
among the most strenuous asserters of the uninterrupted line of succession in
bishops, and divine institution of their order. Let two instances suffice. --

The unfortunate LAUD, (several of whose measures I do not approve, though they
were the fault of the times, more than of the man; nor was he so blameable by
any means as his enemies would represent;) He, I say, was one of those no doubt
whom our Whig will call a stickler for ceremonies; yet he was so far from being
a "Papist in his heart," that no protestant ever opposed popery with greater
warmth. He wrote against it with more spirit and more to the purpose, than any
one dissenter -- nay, than all of them put together, from the time of Harry
VIII, to this day. The pious and learned bishop HALL is well known to have been
a favourer of puritanism, -- was represented as such to the king, (which we
learn from himself) and was one of those who assisted at the Synod of DORT. Yet
he was so zealous an advocate for the uninterrupted line of succession, that he
proved it in a book he wrote for that purpose, entitled -- Episcopacy by Divine
Right. And it may with truth be averred, that there has been scarce one
clergyman of any note in the Church, however favorable to dissenters, who did
not hold the same principle with the good bishop HALL in this respect. Indeed
all hold it, except Erastians, who teach that purely spiritual powers, like
civil are derived from the state. Even Presbyterians, such of them I mean as
know, and will adhere to their own principles. -- believe the uninterrupted
line of succession as much as churchmen; but with this difference -- that the
former place the succession in presbyters; the latter in bishops.

High churchmen however, with all those vile qualities he is pleased to give
them, were enemies to any further reformation, according to our Whig; but low
churchmen were perpetually grieving over the relics of popery, and wanted them
to be removed. The enemies of the church have often practiced this method to
ruin it, by blackening those who thwarted their measures. No Church on earth is
more distinguished for moderation however, or has showed more indulgence to
scrupulous consciences, than the Church of England; and accordingly, she has
made frequent reviews of her liturgy, endeavoring to satisfy all reasonable
requisitions. But were she to gratify the demands of every heated enthusiast,
-- every factious sectarist, -- every restless Heretic; she would soon be
utterly annihilated, she would neither have ceremony, nor creed, nor article,
nor canon left; to the great contentation of Papists, Arians, Socinians,
American Whigs, and Deists, who have been formerely, and are at this day, as
loud as our author himself could wish them to be, in their demands for a
further reformation.

As this writer's aim is to divide the church, by reviling her friends, and all
this to serve his present purpose, he prudently passes over that period when
his party triumphed in her ruin. it was his interest to do this; as the bare
mention of it would revive no very pleasing ideas in his readers, nor suggest
any thing favorable to his partisans. But it may be proper to remind
Americans, that when the predecessors of our Whig -- (into whom, as well as
into the faction he is leagued with, the spirit of these king-murderers, and
church-destroyers seems to have transmigrated;) when they, I say, had gained
the ascendency by cutting off the King's head, and overturning the
constitution; they exercised severities on the members of the Church, which
were scarce exceeded by the most persecuting Heathens. In the year 1645 a fine
of L. 5 was imposed on any person who used the prayer book in any Church, or
private house, for the first offense; L. 10 for the second; and one whole
year's imprisonment, without bail or mainprize for the third. Upwards of SEVEN
THOUSAND clergymen were sequestered, plundered and ruined; many of whom were,
for piety, Wisdom, and learning, the brightest ornaments of Christianity since
the reformation.

Nor can this be wondered at, if we reflect on the intolerant principles that
prevailed among those sanctified Hypocrites, and were resounded even from the
pulpit by their most admired teachers. The following is a small sample of what
I have collected from their writings; more of which I shall hereafter produce,
if necessary. "Toleration." according to them, was a city of refuge in men's
consciences for the devil to fly unto, -- a toleration of soul murder; for
establishing whereof. damned souls in Hell will curse men upon earth, -- a
transcendent, catholic, fundamental evil, -- the abomination of desolation. all
the devils in hell, and their instruments, are at work to promote a toleration.
etc. etc.

O MY COUNTRYMEN! -- beware of those who are the avowed defenders of the men
that taught these principles; and who give but too glaring proofs that they
inherit the very same temper and spirit! What might churchmen, and every other
denomination, look for from them, should Heaven permit them again to domineer
over their fellow subjects!

Our Whig's attempt to disunite us reminds me of the practices of Papists, (in
which the Jesuits were principal agents) to divide and dis^ract the CHURCH of
England, and finally ruin her. This method of embroiling Protestants, by
promoting a variety of sects among them. They have always esteemed the most
effectual to bring them back to the bosom of Mother Church; and have employed
many emissaries for that purpose. The story of Heath, a Jesuit, is well known.
He was discovered by a letter which he accidentally dropped; and at his
examination confessed -- That he had been six years in England, -- had labored
to refine Protestants from all Smacks of ceremonies, and to make the Church
purer. Camden, Fuller, and other historians, mention "several men, among whom
C^leman, Burton, Hallingham, and Benson, were the most forward, who were great
fomenters of the church-divisions in Queen Elizabeth's reign. "These," says
Camden, under pretense of purer reformation, opposed the discipline, liturgy,
and Calling of Bishops, as approaching too near the Church of Rome. Yet it was
undeniably proved afterward, that those very puritan reformers, -- Coleman,
Burton, Hallingham, and Bens^n, who opposed the Calling of Bishops, -- were
Jesuits in Disguise, employed on purpose to promote Popery. Nor is there any
question but several Jesuits were among Oliver's blessed Thorough-Reformers.

By reason of my distance from your city, I cannot tell how matmers are
situated there. But I heartily wish that no Jesuits may have crept in among
you, who foment strife to serve the papal cause. I must confess there are
several suspicious Symptoms that this is the case; as first, the
disadvantageous light in which this third Whig would place the Reformation,
which is always done by Papists, and by none else. Secondly, the furious outcry
which I find is raised against an American Episcopate, which tallies exactly
with the sentiments of Papists with respect to England. The famous cardinal
Bar^erini declared -- He could be satisfied there were no priests in England,
provided there were no bishops neither; for he then supposed the Catholic cause
would certainly prevail and do its own work. Sure I am that the Papists, have
frequently taken the same methods to ruin the Church, that your factious Whig
is now using; nor could they proceed with more art or effrontery. And what
heightens my suspicion is, that although a Popish bishop has been lately sent to
America, I never could learn that the faction made the least clamor or noise
about him. A Protestant episcopate is what they oppose. And they are wise in
their generation.

I shall take no further notice of the palpable falsehoods in this piece, which
may boldly contend for number with the lines;" but shall request every honest,
candid dispassionate reader to reflect, whether it be consistent with reason or
equity, that the Church should labor under the hardships with which it now
struggles! whether it be right or just that our clergy should be at the expense
of going three thousand miles for ordination, and run the resque of crossing
the Atlantic Ocean, which has proved fatal to so many of them; Whether it be
right that many conscientious Christians should be deprived of the apostolic
ordinance of confirmation, which they think it their duty to receive? -- Or
whether so many Churches should continue vacant and distitute, for want of
proper officers to ordain Clergymen to supply them? All the motives of piety,
truth, reason and equity, strongly remonstrate against each of these
grievances, and urge that they should be redressed. 'Till they are redressed,
we enjoy not the common rights of freemen, or Christians. Nor do I in the least
doubt, but the man who can brandish his pen against the removal of these
hardships from his fellow subjects, -- persecute them thus much for their
religious opinions; would also stretch forth his right hand to bind the victims
to the stake, and kindle the devouring flame with his left, had he but power
and authority to support him.

As for the clamor which the Whig and his associates have raised concerning a
Bishop clothed with all the Insignia of power, and that we can have none but
such, it is absurd and groundless, and only intended to frighten the weak and
credulous. I am a Churchman from principle, and earnestly desire Bishops,
because the welfare and even the existence, in a few years of the Church,
depends on it; (for every society that has not the means of its own
preservation within itself, must inevitably perish.) Yet I here declare, I am
utterly and absolutely against bishops having the same powers they have in
England; and for this plain reason, that it would injure both the Church and
the Colonies. I only want Bishops on the plan proposed in doctor Chandler's
appeal. That we can have Bishops on that plan, shall hereafter be shown, if you
do not think that every person of sense and candor is already convinced of it.

I am, Sir your humble servant. PROBUS.
April 25 1768.
[From Mr. Parker's New York Gazette, Monday, May 2d. THE AMERICAN WHIG. [No.
VIII]
THE prerogatives peculiar to a Bishop above presbyters, according to the
reverend doctor of a neighboring borough, are those of ordination,
confirmation, and government. And as he confesses that our own missionaries
have authority to exclude the profane from the sacrament, which is the highest
sanction for preserving the purity of the church, as he knows our episcopal
candidates can make voyages to England, and get the bishops hand on their heads
and learn politeness into the bargain; and as he dare not assert, that faith
and repentance will not save an American soul, without episcopal confirmation;
I cannot see the advantage, and much less the necessity, of importing a cargo
of spiritual carnalities into the country, to tyrannize over a people, who fled
three thousand miles to be relieved from their tithes and their courts.

There must therefore be at the bottom of his earnest and elaborate appeal,
some attribute of his lordship, which the Doctor thinks incommunicable to a
presbyt^r, and which he has not yet been pleased to disclose. All the power
necessary for good government is already transferred; and as to the trip for
ordination, it it is so far from an inconvenience, that it doubtless conduces
much to the reputable figure of the missionaries. It is also a proof of their
courage and zeal, two indispensible qualifications of a Christian soldier, and
if the expense was considerably inhanced, the church would be better secured
against an old complaint of the Jews, that priests were made of the meanest of
the people.

Upon the presumption, that the bishop will bring powers that can be delegated
to no other order of the clergy, it stands the Doctor in hand to prove, (and
for that reason doubtless we are obliged to him for his sketch in favor of)
the divine right of episcopacy. But lest any thing should be grafted upon this
stock, that may hereafter produc^ poisonous fruit, I shall fill up this paper
with some general remarks introductory to a minute examination in some
subsequent numbers, of the Doctor's argument, in support of a tenet, given up
by several bishops of great name; and which, while it claims peculiar honors
for his own church, and the church of Rome, contains odious imputations upon
all the other churches in Christendom.

In that ever memorable ecclesiastical revolution, commonly called the
reformation, most of the clergy who revolted from the dominion of the beast,
avowed the principle, that the distinction between a bishop and presbyter, was
a popish subtilty, contrived to favor the spiritual despotism of antichrist.
This, after the example of other monarchies, advances in a regular gradation
from the humble priest or curate, through the intermediate order of parson,
vicar, prebend or canon, dean arch deacon, bishop, arch bishops, and cardinals,
up to the Pope, or infallible Emperor, of the great spiritual body. Finding no
scriptural authority for this regimental progression, the reformers very
naturally imputed the whole contrivance to that pride which began to work in
the mother of the two sons of Zebedee, and was prophetically foreseen, and
foretold by the humble Disciple whom Jesus loved. They set out therefore, with
a declaration of the equality of the clergy, as most agreeable to the will and
words of our blessed Savior, that he who would be greatest, should be the
servant of the rest; and indeed it appeared necessary to the permanence of
their opposition; the order of bishops listing last of all others, as they had
most to lose, under the banners of the reformation. The glorious, work was
began by presbyters, and if they were not admitted to be bishops, and
authorized to ordain others, the prospect was clear, that unless the bishops
joined in the revolt against his holiness, the cause could last no longer than
the lives of the first insurgents: They therefore denied the episcopal
pre-eminence to be founded upon the authority of Christ; and for contending
that the powers of bishops and presbyter, were the same, the greater part of
the resomed churches became Presbyterians.

As it is natural to suppose, the protestant clergy in general, to have had
similar sentiments of the hierarchy of Rome, the church discipline of England,
if their dissent had been conducted by her priests, would have been nearly the
same with that set up in France. Switzerland, Holland, Scotland, and the other
reso^ned naturous. But as a King took the lead, and the pride of Henry VIII.
induced him on the one hand to oppose the Pope, and on the other to disapprove
the humbling cast of the presbyterian model: it is not to be wondered at, that
he contented himself with rejecting the superior, and leaving all the lower
orders inviolate; his true aim being only to be the Pope, or his Holiness of
England Hence the permission of the old popish ranks as high as the arch
bishop, and his contempt ^f Papa, and the legates and cardinals, officers
pertectly useless on his own assumption of the supremacy of the church.

The people of England saw the imperfection of the reformation in that Kingdom,
but there were a thousand objections to their interposition. Besides the
authority of the King, which would suffer no control, the catholics were still
powerful, and the higher clergy had s^^tained no loss either in point of
opulence or dignity. And therefore the presbyterian biass, and principles of
the other branches of the reformation, did not begin to ^e^ert themselves
op^^ly in England, till a succeeding reign. The leaven was never^^less working;
but the religion, which was grafted upon the old hierarchy, growing venerable
and strong, and receiving the support and countenance of the law; the
impatience of those who had now lost all hopes of a nearer conformit^ to the
other reformed churches abroad, could be no longer ^^pressed. And as the
discontent advanced to a re-reformation, opposed not only by the government,
but by the dignified clergy, who were contented and at ease, they fell under a
variety of leaders, and split into all that diversity of persuasions so
favorable to liberty and philosophy, and now comprehended under the general
name of English dissenters.

For the truth of these remarks, I appeal to the history of the church; and
they are introdaced to show that an attachment to the dogma, that bishops are
superior to presbyters, is peculiar, comparatively speaking, to but a very
small part of the protestant world; England and Sweden being the only nations,
who have in this respect, withstood the light of the reformation. I am aware,
that the Appellant for an episcopate in this country, will tell me, that if the
argument is to be carried by ^^jo^ity of voices, he is sure of success, because
the opinion he favors prevailed from the days of St. Ignatius to Calvin, an
interv^ of not less than 1400 years. By some it will be thought a full answer,
that the sentiments of the reformed, are in this case, authorities infinitely
preferable so that of a church, confessed on all hands, to have corrupted the
says; and which was the more successful, as like other harlots, she had
philtres and love potions to bestow "out of the golden cup in her hand, full of
abomination and ^^hiness of her fornication."

But this it not the most logical use I would make of the universality, if I
may so speak, of the protestant disavowal of the superiority of bishops to
presbyters. I will grant the Appellant, that the first ages of the church,
before the scarlet whore had defiled the nations, furnished instances of
martyrs and confessors, who do hounour (...) the religion which they sealed
with their blood; and it will be no prejudice to my argument, if I even admit
(though Lord Chanceller King is of a very different opinion, and for reasons
which no bishops have yet satisfactorily answered) that those holy men of old
considered a priest as a bishop's inferior, I say all this I will admit, and
that the opinion prevailed from century to century, down to the dawn of the
reformation. But, on the other hand, it will not be asserted, that any
primitive Christian died a martyr to that tenet, nor denied that the protestant
churches have exhibited an innumerable company of illustrious witnesses for the
purity of the says, who believed and practiced the very reverse, as most
agreeable in their conceptions to the volumes of divine inspiration. If the
zealous contender for an American episcopate, supports the divine right of
episcopacy, the glorious instruments of the reformation in Holland, Scotland,
and Switzerland. and elsewhere, who though presbyters ordained others, and
governed their churches; and all those numberless lights of the church, who
without the aid of a bishop in preceding ages, and to this very day, have
sounded, and are still sounding the gospel trumpet, with a success that shows
the concurrence of the unerring spirit of all truth; they must, as unauthorised
for the work, be considered as mistaken or impudent pretenders, to a commission
they neither had nor have. But as their erudition and abilities give ground for
strong presumptions in favor of their knowledge; and their lives defy the
impeachment of malice itself; and we have sensible evidence, if I may so speak,
of the power of the gospel upon the hearts of millions, by their
instrumentality, and still more undeniable proofs of the non-necessity of
episcopal authority to save souls from perdition; I conclude from these
premises, what I have always believed, that the sacred volume makes no
difference between a bishop and any other minister. Nay, farther, that as God
the father of all, left mankind at liberty to set up that kind of civil
government which tends most to their temporal felicity; so our blessed lord
established no particular form of church government, but (a sew general canons
excepted, friendly to the general discipline of the reformation, and inculcated
as a preservative against that execrable spirit of pride, which by his
omniscience he foresaw would soon arise in the churches,) left his followers to
choose such models, as best answered the ends of good order, and the
preservation of soundness both in faith and in manners.

In all societies whether civil or ecclesiastical, some kind of government
there must be; and no one can pretend, that the militant state of the church,
requires the aid of revelation to point out a proper form of discipline, more
than the general condition of mankind does any mode of national government.
Both must be adapted to the circumstances of their respective members; and as
Christianity, whenever it comes, finds civil government of one kind or another
already formed; and it was certainly not the design of our lord to demolish the
old bond of society; and to some of these, one form of church discipline would
be more agreeable than another; and in others, scarce any of the known models
could conveniently take place; it is a natural presumption, and a tolerable
argument a priori, that none of the various forms for which mankind contend
with such destructive and unchristian zeal, have any other jus divinum for
their foundation than the dictates of found reason, and with that on their
side, what need there any other? for of all that have this, it may be alleged,
whether the government be a civil or religious, one, that it is the ordinance
of God, and to be submitted to for conscience sake.

But to return more immediately to the point which the doctor asserts. Since
the divine author of Christianity doubtless aimed, above all things aimed, at
the conversion of the heart, for the recovery of a revolting world to the
allegiance due to the creator; and this was infinitely of more consequence,
than the subsistence of Christian societies under a monarchial, or republican,
or any other particular form of government; and since of the many millions of
honest men, who have sdulously perused the scriptures to find a difference
between a priest and a bishop, it still remains a^secret that any such
difference is revealed; and lastly, because no reason is assigned, why heaven
should establish an order of rank and precedence for the clergy, nor any
benefits are foreseen to result from any such revelation and establishment; we
shall have no cause to wonder, it upon farther examination, the Doctor's sketch
in support of his favorite distinction, appears to be but a sketch, and a very
weak one too. But still clearer to show that he gropes in the dark, and is in
this respect either deceived, or a deceiver of others, or both, shall be the
business of some future paper.

W.

AS I find Doctor Chandler indebted to my clients by his promissary note,
bearing date the 28th day of March last, to reply to Doctor Chancey 's answer
to his Appeal, which is since published, and now in this city; I doubt not be
will, with all conveni^nt speed discharge his engagement; as of all Actions in
the world, I should be sorry to set one commenced against a clergyman, and that
in so plain a case, as his own note of hand. But as creditors ought in these
hard times to be merciful, I will for my part, and he may take the whole
convention as auxiliaries, allow him one complete year, to answer what an old
gentleman of seventy, has as I am told, ( ten thousand pardons of the Rev. Mr.
S. Seabury, for those disagreeable expressions) wrote in less than two months.

I Congratulate my readers on that laudable zeal for the preservation of our
religious rights, exhibited by the assembly of the Massachus^ts-Bay, (a Colony
ever illustrious in the cause of liberty) in their late measures for opposing a
late american epis^opate. See Extract of the Letter etc. P. 67.
An example this, sufficient to confu^e the idle sophistry of that pernicious
Tory, who has again debased the name of a Son of Liberty, by endeavoring to
lull us asleep. during the prosecution of a most de^estable scheme, to crush us
with eccles^astical bondage, under pretense that such opposition tends to
disunite; which unluckily for him supposes a number of advocates, for the very
spiritual tyranny in question, and by his manner of writing, himself in the
number, and consequently the utter impossibility of his being friendly to
liberty.

Z.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, May 5th. The SENTINEL. No. VII.
To the Author of the SENTINEL.
SIR,
I HAVE already endeavored to show from the principles of liberty, that the
British parliament ought not to interfere in the civil police of the colonies;
and that any application to that august body, directly or indirectly, to make
laws for us, or to establish among us any form of church discipline, deserves
to be treated as an attack upon our civil liberties. I shall further evince
this, from the sentiments of those who gave, and the conduct of those who
received, the several provincial charters: This will tend not only to enforce
the arguments already advanced, but to give a clearer view of our constitution,
by tracing it back to its first principles. I wish the maxim of Machiavel was
followed; that of examining a constitution at certain periods, according to its
first Principles; this would correct abuses and supply Defects. Lord Cambden 's
Speech. etc.


Before I proceed, it may not be amiss to offer a few reflections on the nature
of charters.

I have heard it advanced by men, who ought to know better, that the people
derive their rights and liberties from the charters granted by the crown.
Nothing can be more groundless than this. A people derive their liberty from
God, the author of their being. Abeo Libertas, a quo Spirits. We are born
free, as we are born rational; ge that brings one brings the other too. Lock
on Govt. 61. Again, voluntary Agreement gives political power to Governors, for
the benefit of the subjects, and secures them in the Possession and use of
their properties.
When for the sake of security and other advantages they enter into society,
and form governments, individuals part with some of their natural rights,
freely giving up such as are inconsistent with government, and invest their
chief magistrates with such power as is deemed necessary for the defense,
protection, and security of the whole. Hence it appears, that obedience and
protection are relative terms: where the one is not granted, the other is not
due.

It is to be observed, that different nations, according to the degree of
strength, valor, understanding, and public virtue, or vigor of spirit, that
prevailed in them, have surrendered more or less of their natural rights. But
as power is of an encroaching nature; ever on the watch to extend its sway; and
ever tenacious of what it has obtained; hence it comes to pass, that the wisest
and best nations, those endowed with the greatest degree of ability, bravery,
and public spirit have often found it difficult to guard against the
encroachments of their rulers, and to defend their Liberty against the attacks
of wicked Princes.

Our ancestors, whether we trace our orgin from the ancient Britons, Picts,
Scots, Saxons or Angles, preserved an unconquerable love of liberty. Though
they paid a ready obedience to government, and revered the just authority of
their Kings, yet they kept the legislative power in their own hands; and
obliged their Princes to swear, "that they would hold, keep and defend the just
laws and customs, quas vulgus elegerit", (which the people should choose) See
the Coronation Oath.
. But as some of their Kings influenced by wicked designing ministers,
endeavored to subvert the liberties of the people, and to establish arbitrary
government, it became necessary to reduce them to reason, and to ascertain the
limits of their power. This gave rise to charters; which are no more than
solemn declarations of the rights inherent in the people, and the privileges
they are entitled to under that government to which they are subject; and
which being granted, or in other words acknowledged, and subscribed by the
King, or supreme magistrate, bound his power, and limit his prerogative. Of
this nature is that commonly called Magna-Charta; the great charter of England;
which is only an abridgement of the ancient laws and customs of the realm. Of
the same nature is the petition of rights, granted by King Charles the first,
and confirmed at the revolution. Charters therefore are not to be considered as
mere matters of favor, conferred by the grace of the prince, but declarations
of the rights and privileges inherent in the people.

Thus at the settlement of a colony far distant from the Mother Country, when
the King grants a charter to the colonists, with power to make laws for their
good government, it is not to be supposed, that they derive that power from the
charter. It was inherent in them as freemen. They enjoyed it before in their
native country. They carried it with them. And when settled in the new country
might have exercised it, though no charter had beed granted. Thus the former
Colony of Plymouth in New England, acted for many Years without Charter or
Commission, -- See Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts.
It was prudent indeed to receive a charter, in order to settle their rights,
to direct the mode of exercising their privileges, and to ascertain the bounds
of royal prerogative with regard to them, and the authority of the crown to
which they acknowledged allegiance.

For my own part, I am sorry the charters which have been granted are not
explicit enough. It is indeed to be lamented, that the prerogative of the
crown, or the privileges of the people should ever be liable to dispute, in any
single branch of either. By means of this, the public has often suffered great
inconveniences. Had the rights of the people been fully and clearly expressed
in these charters, according to the spirit of the English constitution, and the
idea that even then prevailed in the minds of people, it might have prevented
claims that have lately been set up, and disputes that threaten the peace of
the empire. Lesser matters in government may be reformed without any ill
effects, while the ancient constitution remains entire; but when the very
nature of the government is attempted to be changed, and the foundation of it
to be overturned, it is hard to say, what may be the consequence.

It is a first principle in the constitution of England, that the happiness of
the Subject is the end of government, and that the safety of the people is the
supreme law. As then the people are supposed to be the best judges of what will
promote their own good, and most interested in what conce^us their own safety
it is an established maxim, that no human laws, can, or ought to bind them,
unless made with their consent. This is the glorious privilege of Britons; a
priv^l^ge of the most inestimable value; so essential to liberty, that without
it, a state can make no pretensions to freedom.

Whatever reason there might be for granting particular Indulgences to those
who with great danger, fatigue and expense undertook to settle colonies in the
wilds of America, and thereby to extend the British dominions, and increase the
power, wealth and influence both of the crown, and inhabitants of Britain, yet
surely there could not be the least shadow of reason for depriving them of the
privileges of the British constitution. Had there been the most distant
prospect of this, it is not to be imagined, that freemen, much less men of rank
and fortune, such as many of the first adventurers were, would ever have
hazarded the attempt. Far different were their views. In going abroad to settle
colonies they considered themselves entitled to all the civil rights and
liberties of British subjects, at the same time that they were freed from the
oppressions of ecclesiastical courts, as well as from some particular customs,
tenures and usages, which by the common and statute law, were confined to
certain districts in England.

Thus in every charter granted to the colonies, the rights of English freeborn
subjects, are confirmed to the colonists; and in particular a power of making
laws for their internal Government. It is indeed provided, that the laws so
made shall not be repugnant to the laws of England: a provision founded on
wisdom and good policy. For a similarity of manners and customs is a great bond
of union among subjects of the same King. In some charters, particularly those
granted to people who left their native country from religious motives, a
liberty of conscience in the worship of God, is allowed to all Christians,
except Roman Catholics. See the Charters of Massachusetts Bay, Connecticut
Rhode Island, etc.
The only stipulation in savor of any particular denomination, is that found
in the charter granted to William Penn; which provides, that If any of the in
habitants. of said province (Pennsylvania) to the number of twenty, shall at
any time hereafter be desirous, and shall by any writing or any person deputed
by them, signify such their desire to the Bishop of London for the time being,
that any preacher or preachers to be approved of by the said Bishop, may be
sent unto them for their instruction; then such preacher or preachers shall and
may reside within the said povince, without any denial or molestation
whatsoever. But even this supposes in the people here, a power of establishing
by law any particular Church or denomination of Christians they see proper; and
the utmost this reserve can be construed to mean, is no more than this; that in
case of an establishment, the preachers above-mention^^ shall be tolerated.
King Charles and his Council saw that William Penn, a Person of Note among the
Quakers, had asked a grant of Land in North America, with Powers of Government,
as an Asylum for his Sect, then grievously harrassed and persecuted for Non
Conformity to the established religion. They observed, that laws destructive of
liberty of Conscience, had been made in the colonies already settled, even by
those who had fled from the like tyranny themselves; and they might easily
suppose that the Quakers would in like circumstances. act the same Part: They
therefore took care to secure to such few Episcopalians, as might take up their
Residence in this Quaker Settlement, full Liberty of Conscience. To the Honor
of the Friends, it ought however to be mentioned, that the precaution was
altogether needless; for the Charter of Provileges from William Penn to the
People establishes unalterably an entire liberty in religions Matters;
declaring that no one shall ever be compelled to frequent, or maintain any
religious Worship, etc. against his mind. N. B. This is also established by Act
of Assembly.




Th^^ were the Colonists lest to the enjoyment of the rights and ^^^rties of
British Subjects, and their power of making laws for their internal police
acknowledged and confirmed. Accordingly no sooner were they settled in this new
country, than they exercised this power in its full extent; particularly in
relation to Church government and religious establishments. As in Virginia.
Maryland, etc. where the episcopal clergy are supported by public ta^es; and as
in Massachusetts Bay Connecticut and New Hampshire, where the congregational
and presbyterian ministers are maintained by legal assessments, to which
however neither baptists, quakers, nor episcopalians are contributory. -- The
church of Ireland derives her establishment, articles, forms, etc. wholly from
Irish acts of parliament; no archbishop or bishop of the church of England has
any jurisdiction over her; and in some lesser matters, she differs from her
sister ^^urch.


The conclusions therefore, which I would draw from the premises are these;
that the making of laws for internal police, is essential to liberty; that this
power is, by the respective charters, confirmed to the legislatures of the
several colonies, and has been accordingly exercised by them; and that the
regulating or establishing religious denominations is a part of that internal
police: for any person therefore to apply to any other than the legislatures of
the colonies to which they belong, for an establishment, or other public
support or preference of their sect, it is very derogatory of the authority of
those legislatures; injurious to the rights and liberties of Americans; and
subversive of the constitution of their country. -- "There is a way which
seems right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death." -- Prove
xiv. 12.

I am, Sir, Yours, etc. A. B.

From Mr. GAINE's GAZETTE, May 9. A Whip for the American Whig, No. VI.
By TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
Evil communications corrupts good manners.

ST. PAUL.
I Am sorry to find any one, who calls himself a churchman, endeavoring to
propagate such crude notions as are contained in a letter "to the American
Whig," which he has thought fit to publish in his 4th number. I have heard it
disputed in several companies, (to the credit of the church of England be it
spoken) whether it is possible this letter-writer can be a churchman in any
sense; and, whether this piece is in reality any thing else than a letter from
the American Whig -- to his own dear self. The former of these two questions
was generally decided in the Negative; the latter in the Affirmative; and the
pretense of exhibiting a letter of this sort from a Churchman, was looked upon
as a Manaeuvre, from which it was natural to expect some degree of success.
Against this opinion I have no material objections; and yet, upon the whole, I
see no necessity on the other hand, for concluding that the person in question
is not a churchman in some sense, as the strangeness of such a Phenomenon may
be accounted for, upon St. Paul's maxim expressed in the motto to this paper.
But whether he be American Whig or American Churchman, since he attempts to
reason, I will readily hear him. For I love reasoning dearly, especially after
such tedious expectations, and wretched disappointments.

Before this writer enters upon the main point which he undertakes to defend,
he makes an introductory remark upon the tendency of wealth and power to ruin
the Christian Church; intimating the great pleasure it would give him, to see
the Church in puris Naturalibus, without a Fig-Leaf to cover her, as she first
existed -- when she was persecruted and oppressed by the vicil power, -- and
when the Ministers of this religion were obliged to shelter themselves "in dens
and caves of the earth," being, above all others, "distitute, afflicted,
tormented." The Clergy in particular ought to be obliged to him for his kind
wishes, well knowing that every man will exert himself, as he has opportunity,
to bring about an event which is the object of his wishes. But after all, he
has said nothing against the power and wealth of the Clergy, which will not
conclude as strongly against wealth and power in the hands of other persons. If
power has been abused by the clergy, it has been no less wantonly abused by
Princes and civil magistrates. If wealth has a tendency to corrupt the Clergy,
it is not found to have a better effect upon Christians in any other station of
life. He might therefore with as much Propriety "be opposed" to the
"Annexations" of private Christians, because they have better bread and butter,
and are suffered to eat it more quietly, than the primitive Christians.

But could we suppose wealth and power have a tendency to corrupt the clergy
only, and that these things operate in the same manner upon no other human
creature; the observation notwithstanding, as it is made here, is entirely
misplaced. It is become the common practice of the various writers against the
appeal, to harangue upon this popular subject; and yet I am not able to
discover that the Appeal has given any just occasion for it. For any one with
half an eye, that is willing to use it rather than to see by hearsay, as Don
Quixotte saw his Mistress, may easily and clearly see for himself, that the
Appeal proposes no scheme to aggrandise and enrich the American Clergy, or to
impoverish and depress the American laiety. It proposes indeed Bishops to be
sent to America, but without any temporal power, and without jurisdictions over
any persons at all, the Clergy of the Church only excepted. What foundation
then is there for all this Racket and Flustration about the power of American
Bishops, when, upon the proposed plan, they are to have no power at all over
the Clergy of other denominations, nor over the laity of any denomination? But,
it seems, the contrary to this is attempted to be proved by the writer before
us; and I am impatient to see in what manner he will acquit himself.

The reader therefore will excuse my passing over his incomprehensibly sublime
and exquisitely sagacious criticism upon the distinction between a Churchman,
an American Churchman, an American Church of "Englandman," and an American
Episcopalian: especially when I assure him of my utter inability to explain the
distinction, made by our critic, between an American Church of Englandman, and
(to use the same phraseology) a Church of England in America-man.

Let us then attend to a process of reasoning, which now, for the first time,
appears in the American Whig. The point undertaken to be proved is this, that
with the Bishops (proposed to be sent to America) we shall naturally have the
introduction or establishment of spiritual or ecclesiastical courts Our
disputant states his proposition with all the solemn stiffness of a Ramus or a
Burgersdicius, and gives the signal that the mountain is in Labor, with such
awful formality, that every reader has a right to expect that the production
will be more than a mouse.

For my part when I had proceeded thus far in reading the paper, I expected to
see a terrific movement of Syllogisms ranged in rank and file, and to hear the
rattling of a strong logical chain, to the end of the chapter. But I was
mistaken. I find but little marching and countermarching of arguments; and the
chain consists of but three short links, which have neither solidity nor
strength.

For, of the thirteen paragraphs that follow, there are but three wherein any
proof is attempted. -- Two others are manifestly intended to show his immense
erudition in the Ecclesiastical-Law, -- and as to the design of the other
eight, I am unable to fix it with any certainty. All that I know about them is,
that they prove nothing, and that they take the thing for granted which it was
their business to prove. As I think it not worth while to say any thing farther
to them, or about them, i. e. to or about these eight paragraphs of the
epicence or doubtful Gender; I will confine myself to the three reasoning, and
the two ostentatious ones.

Let us then first consider the three, and take them in their order. The
Bishop's title, says this writer, is not derived from the apostolic commission:
They are seized by the law of of the land, and will hold their preheminencies
'till this law is altered by King, Lords, and commons. If by the Bishop's title
he means the right to their temporalities, we are willing to grant, that it is
not derived from the apostolic commission, for the same reason that a
clergyman's right to the use of a Parsonage, or to the money subscribed or
promised for his support, is not derived "from the apostolic commission."
Bishops in England are invested with rights of this nature By the law of the
land; but I have never yet heard that any "law of the land," i. e. of England,
conveys or confirms, or specifies, or meddles with the rights of Bishops who do
not reside in the land, i. e. in England. The laws of England, so far as they
relate to Bishops, have reference only to Bishops in England: what shall be the
condition and authority of Bishops in America, or any other country, they have
never yet undertaken to determine. -- Our letter-writer having gained nothing
by his first effort, let us see how he succeeds in his second.

"Lord Hale, says he, meaning Sir Matthew Hale, Lord Chief Justice (as we say,
not Lord Sherlock, but Dr. Sherlock, Lord Bishop, etc.) "tells us -- that every
Bishop by his election and confirmation, even before consecration had
ecclesiastical jurisdiction "annexed to his office." What jurisdiction every
Bishop formerly had, and how he obtained it, are to us matters of mere
speculation: what jurisdiction every Bishop now has, is a more important
question, I have not lately read Sir M Hale's History of the common law, to
which we are here referred; nor do I remember what he says of the rights of
Bishops: but in this I am clear, that he undertook not to define the rights of
any Bishops, but of those in England, -- that he meant not to explain what
would be the rights and powers of American Bishops. And the present question
is, not what rights the English Bishops have had, or now have, but what
authority American Bishops will have when they are appointed. So that this
second paragraph of our American Wh -- I mean Churchman, we may say, Item,
gained nothing.

But perhaps, according to the old proverb, it may concern us to beware of the
third; and it is certain that in this he endeavors to drive home and clench
the argument. Thus he goes forward: The Bishop's right to open his court being
therefore secured by the common law, and that being universally acknowledged to
be the law of the colonies, his Lordship will find no difficulty, after his
diocese is established, or erect a Tribunal, etc This writer does not tell us,
what he means by the establishment of the American Bishop's diocese, -- nor
whether he thinks "his diocese is established" by common law. If by
establishment he means a legal establishment, we may, as is proposed in the
appeal, have Bishops in this country without any establishment of dioceses, in
this sense of the word. But let us suppose, for the present, that the dioceses
in America will obtain a legal establishment; yet still it will depend upon the
nature of the establishment, what powers will thereby be granted to American
Bishops. An ^^^blishment of dioceses by no means implies an equality of
ten^^^^d power in the Bishops that govern them. It will hardly be disputed that
the dioceses in England are established dioceses; and yet the Bishop of Durham
has some rights and powers, to who^^ other Bishops in England are not entitled;
as they all have some rights to which the Bishop of Man has no claim or
pretension; and yet the Bishop of Man is as much a Bishop of the Church of
England, and all the acts of episcopal power, -- his ordinations, confirmations
and government of the Clergy, -- are equally valid with that of the Bishop of
Durham, or any other Bishop whatever. What has been here said proves, that
although dioceses should be established in America, it does not from thence
follow that there must be an "establishment of spiritual or ecclesiastical
courts.

The truth is, the body of English ecclesiastical law is compounded of the
civil law, the common law, the canon law, and the statute law. Now a right to
hold spiritual courts, which is founded on the common law only, can be no more
than a general right; and if there be no canons, nor statutes, to regulate and
direct it, it can never operate. Such a right is an abstract idea, and it can
produce only abstract courts, which can have nothing to do with individuals, or
with particular cases. I have so good an opinion even of American Whigs, as to
believe they have no great aversion to such spiritual courts as these, which
can never exist but in theory and speculation.

If by the common law, or any other law, American Bishops will have a right to
hold courts, in the same manner that they are held by bishops in England, it
must be by virtue of the Church of England's having a full and general
establishment in the American colonies. For upon any other principle I defy
this writer and his patron, and their confederates, to show, that with the
bishops, we shall naturally have the introduction or establishment of spiritual
or ecclesiastical courts.

It may therefore be proper, before we proceed to other matters, to settle this
capital Point; whether the church of England is established in the colonies? if
it is, perhaps some act of the legislature will be necessary for the election
of such an episcopate as is proposed in the appeal, which act the friends of an
American episcopate can probably obtain, without much difficulty. If the church
of England is not established in the colonies, than all this clamor against
spiritual courts as necessarily connected with an American episcopate, is
groundless and impertinent. But as too much of "the dry crust of controversy"
at one time, may have an ill effect upon the stomachs of the American Whig and
his fellows, I will withhold my hand for the present, having, I fancy, already
given him and them more than they can manage at one breakfast. I propose
however to resume this subject in some future paper, and to give out some more
of this dry crust, by the time they shall have well swallowed, chewed the cud
upon, coucocted, and digested their present meal.

From Mr. Parker's New York Gazette, Monday, May 9th. The AMERICAN WHIG. [No.
IX.]
Which treats of that trumpet of sedition, which may be found in the 18th
line of the 41st page of the epistle general of St. THOMAS.
THOUGH the Author of the appeal assumes, at the beginning of his journey, and
retains through a considerable part of his progress, a great appearance of
moderation and candor, in order to render his scheme of an American episcopate
the more palatable to dissenters; and by the most soothing strains, to coax
them into a tame compliance; or at least to prevent any opposition by way of
answer; he found it nevertheless impossible to keep on the mask, till he
arrived at his journey's end. The constraint was too unnatural to be of any
long duration.

Naturam expellas furca, tamen usque recurret. And if, like Jason in fabulous
story, he endeavors to cast the watching Dragon into a sleep; like him too, it
is for the insidious purpose of carrying off the Golden Fleece of our religious
liberty. He had in the preceding part of his pamphlet, done strict justice to
the American Dissenters, if indeed it is not the greatest absurdity to talk of
dissenters, in a country where, upon his own plan, there is no ecclesiastical
establishment to dissent from. He had hitherto wrote like a gentleman, and a
Christian. But alas! alas! that this gentleman, and Christian, should not be
able to weather the 41st page, without betraying the old leaven. Thus far had
we rambled through the flowery fields of catholicism and benevolence, when
behold, within a foot of us, -- latet anguis in herba! With whatever gales of
lenity and temper, his little bark had hitherto been wafted along, it is now
unfortunately dashed against the rock of offense, by a sudden gust of obloquy
and intolerance. But while we suffer, says he, (would not a man lay ten to one,
that he heard the groans of a person under violent persecution?) While we thus
suffer, (Oh! Jemmy Thompson! Jemmy Thompson, Oh!) We are not apprehensive it
can be owing to the displeasure of our superiors, as we are conscious of no
crime with regard of the state. On the other hand, we claim a right to be
considered as equal with the foremost in every due expression of fidelity and
loyalty. We esteem ourselves bound, not only by present interest and
inclination, but by the more sacred ties of our religious principles, and
Christian duty, to support to the utmost, the national civil, establishment.
Accordingly, no trumpet of sedition was ever heard to sound from our pulpits:
No seeds of disaffection have been suffered more privately to be sown in our
houses.

Does not the gentleman, by this invidious passage, plainly intend to
insinuate, that some other denominations among us, are conscious of crimes with
respect to the state? If otherwise, why not satisfied with simply averring that
his brethren were as-loyal subjects as others? this has never that I know of,
been called in question. Where then the necessity of all that follows, which
though artfully, is yet evidently intended, to run an odious parallel between the
Episcopalians and Non Episcopalians of North America? But on the other hand, we
claim a right to be considered as equal with the MOST foremost in every due
expression of fidelity and loyalty. And surely it is to be hoped, that the most
foremost claim a right of being considered as equal with him, and all those who
constitute his important we, in every the like expression. Where then again the
necessity of resounding the peculiar fidelity and loyalty of a particular
church? But mark the grand discrimination between those of his persuasion, and
all the rest of the continent. We esteem ourselves (if all this cannot, by the
rules of grammar be called Egotism, it is certainly the most fulsome Nosmetism
to be met with; we esteem ourselves) bound, not only by present interest and
inclination, but by the more sacred ties of our religious principles, and
Christian duty, to support, to the utmost, the national civil establishment.
Would not every reader unacquainted with the true character of the colonists,
necessarily conclude, from the great stress laid on this most significant we,
that some of us at least, either do not think it our interest, or have no
inclination to support the civil establishment? Must he not necessarily
conclude, that except the Doctor and his party, all the rest have either wholly
discarded the Christian religion; or iniquitously perverted it to the
partronizing of disobedience to the state? would any man imagine, that we
learnt our religious principles out of the same bible, or entertained the same
ideas about the obedience due to government? But lest this insinuation of our
secret principles, cruel as it is, should prove insufficient to draw down the
resentment of our mother country in that most tremendous expression of it, the
sending us a Bishop, without a farther suggestion of some more overt acts, to
deferve her severest indignation, the Doctor is determined to make thorough
work with our political characters: Accordingly, says he, no trumpet of
sedition was ever heard to sound from our pulpits; no seeds of disaffection
have been suffered more privately to be sown in our houses. And pray in what
pulpits has this gentleman ever heard the trumpet of sedition? I think I may
challenge him to produce a single instance of any other trumpet's having ever
been heard to sound from any dissenting pulpit, than that very trumpet, which
it were to be wished was oftener heard to sound from all the pulpits in the
world, I mean the trumpet, so solemnly commanded to be blown in the 50th of
Isaiah, and the 33d of Ezekiel; even that trumpet which is to warn the people,
and to show them their transgressions. This trumpet, I am confident, is as
faithfully sounded from dissenting, as from episcopal pulpits; and I am further
confident, that the sound thereof is of much greater moment to the cause of
virtue and true religion, than the obstreperous noise of that little paultry
Rams-Horn of episcopal-Sectarianism, (which is constantly blown, where ever the
society will club for a blower,) to increase the party by a collection of
fugitives from other religious societies; which, with notable assurance and the
most solemn professions of truth, is annually represented to the dissenters in
Britain, (who are great contributors to this perverted charity) as propagating
the gospel among the native pagans of America. It is in a word, a trumpet of
infinitely greater importance to the souls of men, than the creaking,
squeaking, skreaking Bag-pipe of Arminianism, which is perpetually played by
those who have solemnly sworn and subscribed never to play it; and whose
unscriptural whistlings, are enough to whistle us all into perdition.

The Doctor has however, though probably without design, betrayed the true
foundation of his exuberant zeal for the establishment. We esteem ourselves
bound by present interest, etc. to support to the utmost the national civil
establishment. Accordingly, that is to say therefore, no trumpet of sedition
was ever heard to sound from our pulpits, Is not this a tacit confession, that
it is his present interest that holds him to his duty; and that if he got no
more by being a churchman, than others do by being dissenters, he would blow
sedition upon all the trumpets, and rams-horns, and conck-shells he could lay
his hands on? but behold, gentle reader, the mighty power of his magic wand!
before he had finished the sentence, these same seditious trumpeters, are all
at once metamorphosed into the most villainous gardeners that ever handled rake
or mattock; and what seed do thou imagine they sow? and in what kind of a
garden? and in what manner and form? Why verily it is a seed ten times worse
than Devil's weed, or Hemlock seed, even the execrable seed of disaffection;
and it is sown in the garden of their chimney-corners, and that in so private a
manner that no man knows thereof, save Doctor Chandler alone, and he only
guesseth thereat. But this gentleman will give me leave to tell him, that how
often soever this seed might have been sown, and how certain soever the most
inquisitive eve-dropper may be what ^eed a man sows privately in his own
family; one thing I know, that it has never yet been seen to grow in this
country. On the contrary, whoever chooses to sow this filthy exotic with the
hopes of a crop, must cross the atlantic, and sow it in its native soil and
climate; where our author knows it has often flourished like a bay tree,
especially when it has been nourished, and cherished, and watered, and pruned,
and dunged, as it has never sailed to be, by those indefatigable gardeners, his
own fraternity.

Here ends the first Lesson of Trumpets.
Q.

To the man that is called the AMERICAN WHIG.
Respected Friend,
I Rejoice in spirit that thou set thyself against the outcomings of our
Bishops, so called in these parts of our pilgrimage; I hope that the great
waters may be a wall of partition between us, while the sun and moon endures.
It would indeed be a thorn in our flesh, to be again entangled with that yoke
of bondage, which neither we, nor our fathers were able to bear. Ecclesiastical
courts are the tabernacles of Satan, and what is therein called justice, is in
very deed spiritual wickedness in high places. Since our fathers came out from
their Babylonish captivity into this peaceable Zion, they, and we, have sat
under our own vines and our own fig trees, and have had none to make us afraid.
But behold, those who lust after the vanities of this world, and to mix carnal
dominion with the things of the spirit, have taken counsel together to trouble
this our American Israel. But I exhort thee not to be dismayed at the
threatenings wherewith they shall threaten thee, but to set thy face like a
flint against that abomination of desolation, which, if not gainsaid in
season, will sweep this land with the besom of destruction. Yea, verily, I
exhort thee, friend, that, thou noise it abroad, that they hatch cockatrice
eggs, and weave the spider's web; and that he that eats of their eggs dies.

I am thy Friend ABINADAB FORESIGHT.
From Flushing, the place of my pilgrimage, the 4th day of the month called
April, in the year 1768.
To the ingenious Author of a WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG.
Dear Brother,
AS every true friend to the Church, as by law established, and to the glorious
cause of liberty, must wish well to your generous design, of detecting the
false pretenses of your adversaries, I cannot help contributing my mite toward
your laudable undertaking of defending the justice and equity of an American
Episcopate. You, Sir, have for this purpose already refuted the absurdity and
nonsense contained in the two first numbers of the American Whig. Permit me to
fall in your train, and not only to lend my poor assistance in corroborating
your arguments against these two frothy compositions; but while my hand is in,
to write a full refutation of all the numbers that have hitherto appeared, or
ever will appear in print. In doing this, you will pardon me, if I aim at an
humble imitation of that style, which I despair of equalling, I mean that
smartness and vivacity, which every proper judge of language must necessarily
admire in yours,

I am, your most affectionate brother, JACK CATCH.

A full and complete answer to all the numbers of the American Whig, that have
as yet been, or ever will be published.
THIS scurrilous author may pretend to what he pleases, but the public is well
apprized of his design; he wants to be the head of a faction; and to throw the
province into confusion; he is a perfect Hydra; or may more properly be called
Legion; for he is possessed with many devils; they are scrubs and scavengers;
nor are we ignorant of his person: He is a long-nosed, longchin'd, ugly looking
fellow. Nay I have the authority of a doctor of divinity, to call him that
animal, before which we are not to throw pearls. He is a man of a rueful length
of face, a libertine, a busy factor in dissension, of an ambitious disappointed
faction: His papers are stuffed with low, spurious witticisms,
misrepresentations, scurrility, buffoonery, falsehood, abuse and slander. He is
a cunning fellow, and a pragmatical assumer. His faction is enraged to a degree
of phrenzy. He is successor to Don Quixote, an invidious calumniator, a false
accuser of the brethren, and a brother of savages. He was a friend to the stamp
Act; for I never heard that he wrote against it, and therefore he did not write
against it, and therefore he was a friend to it; and how then can he be a
friend to religious liberty? yea, I say again, and intend to repeat it a
thousand times; he was a friend to the Stamp Act, to the Stamp Act, he was,
was, was, a friend to the Stampt-Act. He is, (or for the sake of variety, let
us have the plural number,) they are public incendiaries, sowers of discord,
abusive adversaries. He pays not the least attention to truth and decency. He
is an abominable hobbler, and a destroyer of that harmony which ought now to be
so greatly encouraged. For what is religious liberty in comparison of our civil
privileges? It is nonsense, and not worth contending for. They are
presbyterians, independents, Abaddons, Apollions, deists, sons of Belial, and
grandsons of Beelzebub, arch-rebels, apostates, Brownists, Muggletonians,
fifth-monarchy men, Oliverians, Spinosists, enthusiasts, fanatics, and
king-killers. They opposed the college, they opposed the harmless scheme of
establishing episcopacy in the manor of Philipsburgh; and would, if they could,
bestride the north-west wind, fling the church out of the windows, make the
convention dance a hornpipe behind the moon, strike fire out of a cucumber,
build stone senses of spider's webs, turn the whole world topsey-turvey, and
set fire to the pacific ocean. Nay, this very same identical fellow, who writes
against the Bishops in New York, writes also against them in Philadelphia. This
same Whig, scrub and scavenger, is the sole and only author, and instigator of
all the mischief on the continent, and is the only man who is against an
American Episcopate, though not one in a thousand is for it. He was begotten by
desperation in a total eclipse of the sun, on the bodies of seven infernal
furies Nor does he write from any regard to liberty, but from a disappointment
at a late election. For though his Printer can inform any man, that he had agreed
to publish the Whig before that election; yet, for all that, it was the
disappointment in that election, that was the sole cause and origin of the
Whig. Yea, it was also the origin of the Sentinel, and of Dr. Chauncey's answer
to Dr Chandler's appeal. The disappointment I say, at a late election: The
disappointment! The disappointment! This I will also repeat a thousand times;
and it is a full answer to all that has, or ever can be wrote against an
American Episcopate. He neither values his own reputation, nor the reputation
of any one else. He has no more conscience than a dog that p -- s against a
church door.

They are an unrelenting, persecuting, bigoted faction, toward the church and
the clergy. They have served two apprenticeships in slander and defamation.
They began with the triple discharge of falsehood, malice, and revenge against
the CHURCH, (the church I say, in capitals, that is to say, the only church in
the colonies, the episcopal church,) and the clergy, that is the convention,
who are the only clergy in the country. The metamorphosis of this creature is
unaccountable; first he was an Independent Reflector, which lost us half the
money out of which we intended to defraud the public, for the public good, that
is to say the College: Then he was a watch Tower, and gave so true and shocking
an account of our persecutions and iniquities, that we never can renew them,
but the province is alarmed. At present he is a Whig, and a Devil of a Whig he
is; and ten to one, but before he is a year older, he will submit to
circumcision, and turn Mohammedan. I have asserted three times already, and
intend to do it forty times more, that himself acknowledges, that the Appeal
asks nothing but what is reasonable and just; this I know to be a lie, because
he says, it is specious, and seems to ask nothing, etc. and then declares in
substance, that none but an idiot will take the appearance for reality. But
where is the harm of lying for the church, especially when it can be done so
easily as by the omission of a single word? To return to the argument, he is a
dog, and moves his tongue against the Appeal; he is a cockatrice, and uses
every art that falsehood can invent, that malice can instigate, or revenge can
execute. He breaks through all obligations of respect and gratitude, of decency
and good manners, of truth and honor. Though he is tolerated in a country,
where there is no establishment, and consequently no toleration, yet he paints
the very church that tolerates him, in the most odious colors, that falsehood
can invent, or malice dictate. He is a new sect, and his religion of yesterday,
a motley mixture of ignorance and pride, hypocrisy and superstition. He is the
pest of society, and a combustible, fit for eternal combustion. He has a chin
of a foot long, and a nose of sixteen inches. It is true, Dr. Chandler invites
every man to offer his objections to his Appeal. But his Appeal was wrote with
real and great seriousness, and the author never so much as thinks of it but
with solemnity and devotion; and shall such a serious, solemn, reverend,
right-reverend, and thrice-reverend, precious little book as this, be attacked
by scrubs, and scavengers, and swine. Besides, the Whig must either write
gravely or merrily. When he attempts to be merry, I insist upon it, that he is
scurrilous; and when he writes seriously, I insist upon it, that he is dull;
and is the doctor to be answered either with scurrility or dullness? He is born
with an evil speaking, lying, and slandering constitution, and he deals out
slander and invective, as liberally as the disputants of Billingsgate. They
deserve to be lashed at the cart's tail. Inflamed with party rage, actuated by
low selfish motives, and goaded on by malice, he pours out a torrent of
slander. He is in a violent rage, a Jesuitical sophister, and furious
persecutor, and of intolerant principles, designing to enslave others, amidst
his clamorous outcry for liberty. His effrontery and malice, I think deserve,
and would justify worse treatment than a regard to my own character would
suffer me to give him. He is a scribbler, a slanderer, a reviler, a sniveler, a
snorter, a roarer, a raver, and a spitter of venom. Thus have I gently
corrected the American Whig, for the licentiousness of his pen; and whoever
denies that I have wrote with the greatest decency, moderation, and strength of
argument, is a villain and a scoundrel.

N. B. The passages in Italicks, are from the Whipper, except the following,
viz. He values neither his own reputation, nor the reputation of any one else.
His effrontery and malice, I think would justify worse treatment, than a regard
to my own character would suffer me to give him; (which belong to the Rev. Mr.
Secretary Seabury,) and the hog, hydra, scrub, and scavenger, which are the
sole and indisputable property of the reverend Dr. Chandler.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, May 12th. The SENTINEL. No. VIII.
My Kingdom is not of this World.

St. John's Gospel, xvii. 36.
To the Author of the SENTINEL.
SIR,
MY view in these letters is not to combat any religious denomination, nor to
oppugn the theological opinions of any man or set of men, but to defend the
liberties of my country. Had any other society of Christians applied in the
same manner for an establishment, I should have thought it my duty to object to
it, and as far as my influence could extend, to oppose the design. Bishop,
Priest, Presbyter or pastor have no magic in them to justify with me, any
attempt prejudicial to public liberty.

It is very unfortunate that any dispute should be raised in America, at a
crisis, when union of sentiment and design, seem essentially necessary for
preserving our civil rights. This Affair seems to have risen in the time of the
Stamp Act. How some people love to fish in troubled Waters!
A ship's crew quarelling in a storm, or when an enemy is within gunshot, does
not argue a greater degree of infatuation. For what purpose, or with what view
it is started at this critical time, I do not willingly allow myself even to
conjecture. For the sake of their country, their posterity, and themselves, I
hope the friends and lovers of America, will consider themselves no further
concerned in this dispute, than as it relates to civil liberty.

For the debate, as I view it, is not concerning a Bishop, nor concerning
episcopal discipline; but about the manner of introducing the Bishop, and
establishing that discipline in America. It is evident from sundry Parts of the
Appeal, that application has been made to our superiors in Britain to procure
an act of parliament to establish Episcopacy in the colonies. Appeal. Page 52.
-- We are told, An Order was obtained from the Crown for a Bill to be drawn and
laid before the Parliament, for establishing an American Episcopate; but when
the Affair was in a fair Way of being speedily accomplished, the Death of Queen
Ann that excellent Princess, put a stop to it. And we are further informed that
"in the Beginning of the next Reign," (George the first) the Attempt was
renewed, and the Prospect of Success was most encouraging; but it proved
abortive. The Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of London, had in this
latter Occasion proposed, that part of the Lands in St. Christophers, which had
belonged to the French Clergy, should be applied to support two Bishops; one to
be settled in the Islands, the other on the continent of North America. -- Page
80, we are assured "no reason has been given to suspect a Departure from the
general Plan aimed at. Again, same Page, it appears that his Majesty is to fix
the Places of Residence for the (...).
But it must be allowed, that whether the present attempt "for establishing an
American Episcopate," was begun by some of the Missionaries, or set on foot by
the society for propagating the gospel, who, as Dr. Chandler says,) page 53)
have ever been watching for seasonable opportunities of exerting themselves to
obtain it, they could not have hit upon a time more unfavourable to American
freedom. However I hope the friends of the colonies, whether of the Episcopal,
or any other church, will unite in opposing an attempt, which is in itself an
open acknowledgment of the claims which the enemies of America have lately set
up, and which are totally subversive of our rights and liberties.

Suppose the application had been made to the parliament of Ireland, or to the
legislature of Virginia, to establish episcopacy in New England, in what light
would it have appeared. Or suppose Scotland were at this day a separate
Kingdom, and the Presbyterians of Pennsylvania and Maryland should apply to the
legislature of that kingdom, to establish the Kirk of Scotland and her
discipline in America, how would the application be resented?

The British empire consists of several provinces united in allegiance to one
prince. The legislative power of and for each province, consists of the King or
his representatives, with the Deputies of the people in that province. Though
Great Britain is now united in one legislative body or parliament, it was not
many ages since, divided into several districts, with distinct legislatures in
each. At that time it was not pretended, that the laws of one, bound the
subjects in another province. Each, with the consent of the sovereign, or his
representative, enjoyed the right of legislation for itself. Britain, since its
union into one legislative body, has acquired greater power; but whether it has
thereby acquired a right to make laws to bind the other parts of the Empire,
remains to be proved. There is certainly a difference between power and right;
nor does the one follow as a consequence of the other, for if power gave right,
then would the strongest have a right to whatever he pleased to seize on: and
the highway man would have a right to my purse, who demands it with a pistol
to my breast. Lock,


But why should not the Episcopalians be upon an equal footing with their
Neighbors? See Appeal, Page 42.
I answer; are they not on an equal footing? Are they not permitted, as freely
as any other denomination, to form a "voluntary society" Ibidem, Page 30. The
Church considered with relation to civil Power, is in the very Nature of it a
voluntary Society says Dr. Chandler.
for the public worship of God, in the way they think most agreeable to him.

They have no Bishop to ordain the inferior Clergy, and to govern the church
and confirm Adults. What hinders? Perhaps it may be said they cannot have a
Bishop, unless sent from England, because the succession must not be
interrupted, and that he cannot be sent from England, placed in a Diocese, and
endowed with a revenue according to his rank, without the appointment of his
majesty, as supreme head of the church, and without an act of parliament,

Before I answer to this, I should be glad to see the edict by which Christ has
enjoined the unbroken succession of Bishops Eutichius, elected Patriarch of
Alexandria, A. D. 933. says, That the twelve Presbyters constituted by Mark in
the Sea of Alexandria, chose one of their Number to be Head over the rest, and
the other Eleven laid their Hands on him, blessed him and made him Patriarch."
-- Jerome, more ancient than he, relates, that at Alexandria from Mark to
Heraclius and Dionisius, Bishops, the Priests always took one of their Number,
whom they set in the highest Place and called him Bishop. -- Archbishop
Cranmer, a great Name in the Church of England, in his Answers to Edward the
VI, says, That though in the Admission of Bishops there be diverse comely
Solemnities used, yet they be not of Necessity, but only for good Order and
seemly Fashion; his Ministrations are good without them. -- Again, he that is
appointed a Bishop needs no Consecration by Scripture, for Election and
appointing thereunto is sufficient. See Stillingfleet's Irenicum, Cap. viii. --
No Protestant Church, save those of England and Ireland, makes any Account of
this unbroken Succession of Bishops.
Next I would be glad to know how the Christian Church was supplied with
Bishops for the first three centuries, when there was no civil power interposed
to establish them. Whether a settled revenue is essential to a Bishop; or
whether the Church of England in America (as it is called) is so peculiarly
different from all other Christian Churches, that even under the fullest and
freest state of religious liberty, it cannot enjoy the "form of its
ecclesiastical government and discipline, without an act of parliament to
establish it."

Religion and government are certainly very different things, instituted for
different ends: the design of the one being to promote our temporal happiness,
the design of the other to procure the favor of God, and thereby the salvation
of our souls. While these are kept distinct and apart, the peace and welfare of
society is preserved, and the ends of both answered. But by mixing them
together, feuds, animosities and persecutions have been raised, which have
deluged the world in blood, and disgraced human nature.

In the middle and eastern governments of North America, the legislatures have,
with great wisdom, taken care to keep the church distinct from the state. They
have made laws to secure to the people in general and to each member in
particular, the full enjoyment of their civil rights, interests, and
properties; and have armed the Magistrate with power to enforce the execution
of these laws. But at the same time individuals are left at full liberty to
unite themselves into societies In some of the Colonies indeed, one religious
Society, is forbidden, not on Account of Religion, but on Account of certain
political Principles, which are supposed to be inconsistent with the good of
the State. How far the fears which those Governments have conceived against
that Society are well-founded, I will not undertake to say. In Pennsylvania,
where it is tolerated, no inconveniences have arisen. However, it is not to be
denied, that the Magistrate has a right to prohibit the propagating of Opinions
or Doctrines, which are contrary to human Society, or to those moral Rules,
which are necessary to the preservation of human Society.
for the public worship of God, in such a manner as they judge acceptable to
him, and effectually to procure eternal life and happiness. This indeed may be
disagreeable to those, who complain, that altars are set up against altars, and
churches against churches, and that those who are rejected by one, may be
received by another; Dr. C's Appeal. -- Page 31.
but certainly nothing can be more consistent with reason and religion, or more
agreeable to the sincere lovers of liberty.

How long we shall enjoy the happiness of this constitution, if establishments
can be imposed on us without our consent, is very uncertain. Let us therefore
with one heart and with one mind unite in support of our common rights, and
resolve to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be
not entangled with the yoke of bondage.

I am, Sir, Yours, etc. A. B.

To what this spirited correspondent has here, said I have added some notes, to
show that if the Episcopalians in this country are under any difficulties, they
arise from themselves; either because cause they have adopted some confined
notions concerning the Episcopal character; or from an arbitrary and needless
association of state establishment with church government in their ideas of it;
or lastly from an assuming disposition, which prompts, them to claim the
superiority over their neighbors, who reject episcopacy

For if the same privileges, which other denominations enjoy, would satisfy
their Clergy, why did not the episcopal ministers of New York and New Jersey,
instead of sending seven petitions to England for Bishops, proceed to choose
one of their number to be their superior, and voluntarily agree to be governed
by him. Thus their hierarchy might have been completed, without lordly revenue,
state appointment, or giving ground of jealousy to others. The Moravian
Bishops, who stand on this footing, never gave any Umbrage.

But a voluntary episcopate, in the primitive way, or as other societies enjoy
their forms of discipline, will not satisfy the missionaries. They and their
people are the church, the American church; as it were emphatically and
exclusively; all others are Heretics or Schismatics. They are the Church of
England in America; nay, the national Church, and of the national religion; and
must be raised upon the depression of all other Churches, whose members are
already termed Dissenters See Appeal, throughout.
, and roundly denied any natural right to civil or military offices Ibid. Page
109.
.

These extravagant claims of some of the Missionaries, in behalf of about
twenty-five thousand of their people, dispersed among a million or more of
British subjects, who are settled between Nova Scotia and Maryland, are very
alarming; especially as many of the episcopal lately are utterly averse to the
invidious scheme. But the course they take to obtain what they seek for, by
applying to England for an act of the state in their favor, is most
presumptuous, unconstitutional, and subversive of liberty and justice.

How these enterprising geniuses came to be authorized to transact for all
British America, or at least for all the episcopalians in it, does not appear.
It is very remarkable, the bustle about Bishops seems to be confined to
colonies generally settled by people averse to prelacy, in which it would, as
Dr. Chandler himself confesses, Page 47) without dispute be improper to have
any: whilst in Virginia, and Maryland, where a numerous episcopal Clergy are
provided for under acts of assembly, and where the pleas of usefulness and
necessity would have some meaning, there is little said concerning them.
Doubtless if the people of those provinces, who are generally friends to the
episcopal Church, found it expedient to complete their religious
establishments, they would pass laws for the purpose, and carefully ascertain
and limit the duties, privileges, and authority of these spiritual superiors;
which from the peculiar circumstances of the colonies; from the uncertainty of
the law on this subject; but especially from the encroaching disposition which
this order of men has shown in all Ages, would be absolutely necessary.

If the propriety of establishing diocesan Bishops in the colonies was ever so
apparent and the right of parliament to interfere in our internal police ever
so clear, yet the colonists would scarce think it prudent to have an affair so
delicate, and so nearly connected with public liberty, regulated in England.
The people there, very remotely interested in the consequences, would probably
leave it to the Clergy themselves, to form the plan; as seems to have been the
case, at the close of Queen Ann's reign, when the design of establishing an
American Episcopate by act of parliament, was on the carpet before. But I hope
we are not so infatuated as willingly to trust this momentous affair to such
interested management. Let us then speak and act for ourselves, and be watchful
that our rights and privileges be not violated, under the specious pretense of
advancing the interests of religion.

From the Connecticut Journal, New Haven, May 13.
To the Author of the American Whig, and Timothy Tickle Esquire his Ghostly
Flagellator.
MR. Whig, when I read two or three of your first papers I was sorry to see a
spirit rising which tends to irritate and, inflame our brethren of the
episcopal Church: I said to myself, surely the Gentleman is pouring his milk
into the churn, and preparing to wring their noses. Pray, Sir! consider what we
fear is that our brethren of the episcopal Church will fall into the snare that
is laid for them, by certain cunning politicians on the other side of the
water, and become a detached party in opposition to the interest of the
country, and a tool in their hands in oppressing the liberties of America. We
ought to treat the episcopalians with decency, lest by provoking our brethren
to wrath we induce them to run headlong into the snare laid for them. This
thought I am confirmed in, by the impression I find is made on their minds by
your first papers. Tickle is all in a flame, and lashes every one he meets in
his way, and brandishes his whip in a very furious manner.

As for you cousin Tim, I take the liberty to speak a word or two in your ear,
though I expect you will give me a lash of your whip for it, you have assumed a
false name; I know you well, by your whips; as the Philosopher said, "speak
that I may know, you;" your true name is not Tickle, but Scratch'em. You have
got an ugly pair of claws. If you cannot keep your hands off from them, you
ought to have your claws cut. As to the title of " Esquire" with which you honor
yourself, it is a mere piece of vanity in you, I take you to be one of those
disorderly Missionaries, Dr. Chandler speaks of, and says they want two or
three stout Bishops, from home, to govern them and give them due "Castigation."

You are soon angry, and your mouth calls for strokes: it is but a word and a
blow with you, if your Bishop was here now, he would give you due
"flagellation" for this. You and Mr. Whig both seem disposed to tell certain
ugly stories about your holy mothers, and great grand fathers you proceed, I
expect to hear one of you saying to the other, your mother is a tyrant whore;
and the other replying, your mother is a bastard, a hyprocrite and a fanatic. I
advise you both to forbear and be silent. It is not prudent for the pot to call
the kettle ugly names. If you must have a thorough scold, go out into the
field, as cholorick Gentlemen do with their swords, and scold it out between
yourselves; but don't disturb the public peace, by brawling in the streets --
I recommend to your serious consideration, the just and amiable character which
an ancient writer gives of the true wisdom which is from above. To walk in her
steps is true policy, and best serves every valuable interest.

I would that all the hot, angry, party Men, and narrow biggoted zealots, on
all sides, would altogether hold their peace: it would be their wisdom. If the
greatest and best man that ever lived was now in America, he would say to them,
"If ye have bitter zeal and strife in your hearts ye are carnal; and if ye bite
and devour each other, like angry dogs fallen together by the ears, take heed
lest ye be consumed one of another." The fiery zealots of all sides would do
well, in their lucid intervals, to consider that the ferments they are raising,
in their wrathful folly, threaten the destruction of American liberty and
honor. When the Prince of Orange, Britain's deliverer, was crossing the sea
with his fleet, bringing salvation, he was assaulted by a furious storm. As he
sat in the great cabin with some of his Officers, at midnight, the Dutch pilot
at helm, was heard repeatedly to cry out, "steady,! steady!" the prince
replied, If my father of England had been as wise as this honest tar, I should
not have been exposed to this storm.

Religion and my country's friend PACIFICUS.
N. B. Cousin Tim, I observe in your last pieces you fall to railing against
the Presbyterians in America, and others, in a shameful manner. You seem to act
like one of Solomon's mad men, who cast fire brands, arrows, and death. I see
you dearly love to flourish your whip about. I advise you to apply to the
general, and beg of him the goodly office of whipper general to the army. --
There you may whip the poor rogues till your heart is satiated, but forbear
your mad whipping of your neighbors; or you will expose yourself to public
scorn. "A Bishop must be no striker" -- I observe too, you use the style of the
Romish missionaries in speak-of the espiscopal Clergy and churches in America,
"the Clergy, the Church." As if there were no Clergy and churches in America
but yours; This is very impudent in you, I suppose you think of the church of
England, as the Romish Clergy do of the church of Rome, that she is the
mistress of all churches in America, out of whose communion there can be no
true church, nor Salvation in America.



From Mr. GAINE'S GAZZETTE, Monday May 16th. A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG, [No
VII.]
By TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
Faenum habet in Cornu; long fuge.

HOR. Your only Safety lies in Flight,
Whenever his Anger burns;
For though the Monster cannot bite,
He Will gore you with his Horns.
ANON.
SINCE the publication of Number. V. of the American Whig, no person, "above the
capacity of an Idiot," can be at a loss to determine, what the Hopes of the
Faction are, who are employed in writing that paper; nor what the particular
designs are, which they have in view, and which they pursue, per fas et nesas,
with such unremitted Clamor. Avowedly to have sown the seeds of disaffection,
between Great Britain and her colonies, might have subjected them to some
inconveniences. The present attack upon the Church and Clergy, was therefore
both necessary and convenient; -- necessary, because the Church, in its very
frame, as well as doctrines, is unfavourable to republican, leveling principles
in government; and the Clergy, have always boasted of their attachment to the
present happy constitution, ( Amer. Whig, No. 11) It was convenient, because a
common News-Paper which circulates far and wide, is an admirable vehicle to
propagate those principles, by which the minds of a virtuous, and as yet a
loyal people, are it seems to be tainted, and their affections to their mother
country, debauched. Some symptoms and indications of this design, were noted by
considerate people, in the Independent reflector, and Watchtower, of old. The
expressions in those papers, were indeed more guarded: ambiguous cant phrases,
left us to guess what their particular, ultimate end was. But now the mask is
dropped, as being of no farther use; since "the work is so far advanced, that
there is no looking back." -- A "Cord," it seems, more tough than Whalebone,
stronger than chains of brass and iron, is ready stretched from America, to
Great Britain; every thing of value in the mother country, is tied to one end
of this cord, the other end is in the strenuous hand of the American
Whig-Faction, who are to pull and tugg -- hic Labor, hoc opus est -- 'till
every thing valuable at home, is drawn safely over, into the spacious bosom of
the continent of America.

Nor let the inhabitants of Great Britain be dejected at the prospect of that
horrible destruction which is soon to overwhelm them, it ought to give them no
concern. For in proportion to the abatement of the national glory in Europe,
will be the brightness of its resurrection in America. The Whig-Confederacy
have been long employed in preparing their grand Machine for this new kind of
water-conveyance; and in the collection of materials for the construction of
this glorious fabric. -- viz. "a regular American constitution." -- Their
machine is now at work, and "the transfer of the European part of the great
family is so swift, that in order to accommodate it upon its arrival, before
seven years roll over our heads, the first stones must be laid. And so deeply
has the faction laid the plan for their intended revolution, that the American
Whig profanely asserts, that no possible contingencies, not even the sore
judgments God, war and famine, can hinder its execution: But take it in his own
words, though I tremble at the horrid impiety, while I transcribe them; -- peace
or war; famine or plenty; poverty or affluence; in a word, no circumstance,
whether prosperous or adverse, can happen to our parent; nay, no conduct of
hers, whether wise or imprudent; no possible temper on her part, whether kind
or cross grained, will put a stop to this building.

Like a true Fanatic, he also boasts of the presence of the deity with him, in
his insidious designs; and pretends to be acquainted with the predispositions
of the Almighty; and -- by way of compliment to the Almighty, I suppose -- let
us know that these predispositions are well calculated for the rise of America.
-- There is no contending with omnipotence, and the predispositions are so
numerous, and so well adapted to the rise of America, that our success is
indubitable; and Britain, who began the work, will not, cannot withold her
assistance. Her assistance, did I say? she will spend all she has, -- that she
will Mr. Whig, before your scheme takes place. -- nay, she is coming, fast
coming. -- pull away my lads -- in her own proper person, and will desert her
beloved island, -- i. e. Britain will come over and leave herself behind. -- to
complete the stupendous and lasting "monument of her power."

What is to become of the terra firma of those islands, he has unkindly
concealed from us; nor has he told us what those things of no value are, which
are to be left behind; for N. B. it is only every thing of value -- in the
estimation, I suppose, of this faction -- that is to be brought over. We may
therefore conclude, that the K --, the Church, and the Bishops will be left
behind, as not being of value enough to compensate the labor of warping them
across the Atlantic. For if we may judge from the known and avowed principles
of the faction, these things are in their estimation, not only of no value;
they are worse; they are malignant, -- hurtful and destructive to any country.
Bishops have already been declared by them, to be the worst commodity that can
be imported: They must therefore of course be reprobated. The Church must
finally stand or fall with the Bishops; the K -- must be -- But judge of his
fate, from the fate of one of his predecessors, whom God, for the punishment of
the sins of the nation gave up, into the hands of this very faction. I say,
this very faction; -- for it is principles, not men, that make a faction: where
principles are the same, the faction is the same, though the men be shifted a
thousand times. The things of value then, that are to be brought over, are the
sacred persons, and pious effects of presbyterians, independents, etc. etc.
etc. -- -- all that differ from the established Church, except Quakers; for N.
B. the Quakers, though they have always behaved toward the government in the most
peaceable and orderly way, are as much a contraband article, with this faction,
as the Bishops themselves: witness the law made formerly by the Massachusetts
government against the importation of Quakers, -- witness also the saw made in
Connecticut, entitled Heretics, by which it was enacted, that no master of any
vessel should land any Quakers, without carrying them away under the penalty of
L. 20 -- Douglass's sum. vol. I. 447 -- vol. II. 340 -- which law was
disallowed by Queen Anne, as being contrary to that liberty of conscience,
which was allowed to all dissenters.

Having thus far pursued this filthy Dreamer etc. who speaks evil of dignities,
I beg the candid of every denomination, and of every class, to reflect --
whether such publications as this 5th Numb. of the American Whig, have not a
direct tendency to raise suspicions and jealousies in the mother country,
against the colonies? -- whether it be consistent with our interest not to say
duty, to give any just offense, any reasonable cause of disgust, to the
government at home? -- whether the colonies have not reason to look upon the
author of this number of the Whig, as an incendiary, endeavoring to disunite
the colonies from Great Britain? For what purpose can these sentiments be
propagated, but to raise a spirit of animosity against the government at home,
by fomenting the prejudices of the ignorant, and winding up their hopes to all
the confidence of assurance. -- Though according to the predictions of this
prophet, the completion of these hopes, must end in THE RUIN AND DESTRUCTION OF
GREAT BRITAIN.

No Whig that ever existed can have a warmer attachment to to the interests of
British America, than I have. It is the country that g^^^e me birth; that holds
all the dear connections of life. No one could rejoice more to see it flourish
in commerce, arts and sciences, -- in every thing that can make a people
virtuous, happy and great; -- in the full and quiet enjoyment of all civil and
religious liberty. -- But I cannot please myself with contemplating the ruin
and destruction of Great Britain. -- avert it heaven! may she ever continue the
mistress of the nations, -- the grand support of liberty, the scourge of
oppression and tyranny! -- may all disgusts, suspicions, jealousies, between
the mother country and the colonies, utterly cease, and be for ever buried in
oblivion! -- may they ever be closely, inmately, affectionately united;
mutually happy, in the mutual advantage they receive from each other! and may
the Wretch who attempts to disunite them, meet with that just contempt from the
public, which I dare say, the American Whig, has before this time, in part
experienced, from a sensible, virtuous and loyal people.

The remainder of this hodgepodge of sedition, nonsense, folly, falsehood and
slander, is employed against the peculiar objects of his spleen and malice, the
Church and Clergy. After some commonplace declarations of respect to the
Clergy, he represents them as -- "longing to tipple the wine of fornication;"
-- to take the intoxicating sip -- with "the scarlet whore," and to defile the
nations. -- How the Whig can judge so exactly of the strength of this wine of
fornication, I cannot conceive, as he will hardly own, that he himself was ever
so intoxicated with it, as to defile the nations. Possibly a Nose of the
incredible length of "sixteen inches," according to the mensuration of his
correspondent Jack-Catch, -- par nobile fratrum -- may have helped him to form
a judgment of it; or possible there is some analogy between the wine of
fornication, and the lust of fornicating. If so we may casily judge how he came
by his knowledge, viz, -- having felt the force of the one, he easily guesed at
the strength of the other.

But perhaps this fornicating period is to be understood mystically, and --
"longing to tipple the wine of fornication," means the the lust of worldly
power; -- if so. I shall take the liberty of replying by recrimination, which
William Livingston, in his letter to the Bishop of Landaff, says "is reputed to
be just." -- If then it be true, as her enemies say, that the Church and Clergy
have now and then taken a "sip of this bowl," -- it is equally true, that the
English independents have ever been most beastly drunken with it.

Their whole existence has been one continued revel of intoxication; so that
their nakedness have been ever uncovered, and shameful spewing has been
constantly on their glory. -- The Metaphor is the American Whig's, he cannot be
angry at my pursuing it.

The Whig says, "he is sensible they" -- the Clergy -- "disavow all noxious
designs," -- that they -- abjure the roughness of violence. -- I wish I could
return him the compliment; -- but on the contrary, I am constrained by the
paper now under consideration, to believe, that should his sect acquire that
dominion in the colonies, which his soul so ardently longs after, the "fires of
persecution would" indeed burn with hotter vengeance here than in any other
part of the world.

The Appeal proposes the introduction of American Bishops, for the purposes of
ordaining and governing the Clergy, and confirming those of the laity, that
desire it. -- conscience is pleaded, in favor of the members of the Church; --
they say it is against their conscience, to submit to any other pastors, but
those that have received Episcopal orders. Those of her members that are
desirous of entering into orders, that they may serve God and their generation
in that honorable state, affirm, that they cannot in conscience submit to an
ordination performed by persons, who they think have no authority to confer the
powers of the Christian priesthood.

This whole plea of conscience is ridiculed by the American Whig. He cannot
suppose a Churhman to be governed by conscience in any thing, I must therefore
conclude, that he is utterly unacquainted with the force of conscience himself;
and that, of consequence, he is always ready, whenever it is in his power, to
persecute those, who he supposes, are not governed by conscience, but are
carrying on a horrid design of ruining and enslaving the country, by bringing
in a "Bishop" as a spy," -- "a minister of the church" "as much to be dreaded
as a late minister of state."

With regard to the precise meaning of the words primitive Bishop, it was
sufficiently determi^ed by the powers, with which it was proposed that Bishops
should be sent to America, viz. -- To ordain and govern the Clergy, and confirm
such of the laity as desired it. -- No great powers have been asked for, wished
for, or expected.

But if the Whig will need suppose that poverty, distress and persecution, are
essential to the character of a primitive Bishop; it is more than probable,
that the American Bishops will be literally primitive. No revenues, no one
single worldly advantage, has been asked for them; and the Whig is laying up in
store a good magazine of persecutions again their arrival.

If it pleased God, that the Christian religion should make its way into the
world, through the poverty, reproach, persecution and death of the first
preachers of it, that his power might the more conspicuously appear in its
establishment; no good reason can there be drawn to show why a man, who from a
sincere desire to serve God in his Church, and to qualify himself for that
purpose, has spent his little fortune in his education, and in an expensive
voyage of a thousand leagues for ordination, should not live decently and
comfortably upon the income of his Parish. The poverty of the Clergy seems a
favorable topic with the American Whig; and I doubt not it would please him
much, to see them reduced to the most abject state of penury and contempt -- to
all the persecution and tortures which the first preachers of the GOSPEL
underwent.

The education of a lawyer is not more expensive, than that of a Clergyman; the
profession requires no greater abilities, -- no greater labor; nor is it, that
I know of, either more honorable or more useful. Yet I dare say the American
Whig would not think 1500 or 2000 l. a Year too much, even though it should be
obtained from the poor, the fatherless and the Widow.

From the BOSTON Gazette, May 16. Extract of a Letter from a Gentleman in -- to
his Friend in Boston.
"I Have read the letter you sent me, from Mr, Livingston to the Bishop of
Landaff with particular pleasure. I am well acquainted with Mr. Livingston, and
from his known good sense I had great expectations when I heard that such a
piece was coming out: The honest manly way in which he has addressed the
Bishop, must, I think, recommend him even to his Lordship.

"In civil affairs the times have been such, of late, that bad, very bad men
have found their way up to those in power by the most infamous
misrepresentations of the wealth, loyalty, and government of this country; and
I fear the Episcopal Clergy, catching the cast of the times, are falling too
much into the same road. As to the former I believe, it is now pretty near
highwater with them, and upon the turn of the tide, I am not without
expectation that public disgrace, if not exemplary punishment will follow. A
prime minister, (even Mr. G.) may stand unimpeachable, should he be able to lay
upon the table the opinions and earnest reccommendations of the first order of
people that the crown knows in this country, in favor of taxation, and every
other severe measure that has been taken, in consequence of the rebellious
colors Americans have been painted in. The manner in which our Clergy, (for I
am a Churchman) aim at stealing a Bishop into America, is low; and I sincerely
wish that Mr. Livingston's letter may put the Bishop of Landaff upon reviewing
his authorities for the state that he has given the public of this country: and
I think He will stand in some measure exculpated, should he be able to give the
society's missionaries as vouchers for the sentiments that he has thrown out.
Indeed I think his lordship cannot well avoid entering upon this business in
good earnest, after the late publications that I have seen. Dr. Tillotson whom
I admire in all his writings, and who has done so much honor to the church of
England by his moderation, candor, and good sense, says in one of his sermons,
some men have a scurvy trick of lying for the honor and glory of God.

I would be understood to think that the government at home, both in church and
state, had no premeditated design to injure this country, but they have been
most shamefully and grossly imposed upon in the representations they have
received, and from such quarters, as they had a right to expect pure facts
only. And let me whisper a single observation to Dr. Chandler, that such a sort
of Bishop as he has sketched out for America, without his full suit of power
and glory would by no means answer the Doctor's purposes. -- It would be like
the young gentleman, who for the sake of being in bed with his mistress,
consented to be swaithed round with a whole piece of new linen, but was
afterward very restless indeed, and somewhat impatient of his confinement."

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE. May 16, 1768. THE AMERICAN WHIG. [No. X]
I HAVE engaged in this course of periodical papers, as an advocate for the
general liberties of my fellow subjects in North America. I have entered upon
the question of an American episcopate, and a consideration of Doctor
Chandler's appeal to the public, in favor of it; as I esteem the question to
be of greater importance, in its consequences, to my native country, than the
imposition of any customs, or commercial restrictions. which affect not the
right of conscience.

The Doctor addresses the public, with an air of the highest assurance, of the
propriety and expediency of his plan; and, with design no doubt, to engage his
superiors in the immediate prosecution of it, very shrewdly insinuates, that
the apprehension of any general popular discontent or opposition, is entirely
groundless. Of any considerable discontent or uneasiness, (says he,) there is
no reason to be apprehensive. Whatever notions the dissenters of this country
may have formerly entertained, concerning the church: yet of late years they
have greatly come off from their prejudices -- excepting here and their a
hotheaded writer, or a pragmatical enthusiast. So also to prejudice unwary
minds, against any presumptuous opponents, he anticipates his clerical
anathemas of every objection, that may be hereafter suggested against American
Bishops, as proofs rather of the dexterity or ill will of the inventors, than
of the real fears and uneasiness of the inhabitants -- that artful men may
raise objections, in a way that shall appear plausible to those who are
unacquainted with the legerdemain of cavillers and sophists. And that "whoever
employs his talents in this exercise," that is, gentle reader, of offering any
objections to his darling episcopate, is as unworthy of the public attention,
as the child that engages at crambo or push-pin. This reader, is the language
of the celebrated Doctor Chandler, whose fame for ingenuity and candor, has of
late, been so much trumpetted by his brethren of the Clergy. These are the
candid and ingenuous remarks of our reverend appellant; who, in the
introduction of his appeal, with so much seeming fairness, had even invited
objections, that they might be fairly and heartily debated, before the tribunal
of the public. Did the Doctor hope, by thus previously thundering his
pontifical bull, to silence all opposition? Or, forgetting his situation,
before the impartial bar of the public, did he now conceive himself in a
spiritual court, and his cause in the decision of an episcopal judge, where the
verbum sacerdotis would have all the influence he could wish; where, to gain
his point his single assertion, against the testimony of twenty lays, might
possible be sufficient, -- that there neither now is, or ever has been, any
considerable noise or public clamor, on the expectation of an American
episcopate, -- that, of any considerable discontent and uneasiness, there is no
reason to be apprehensive; and that all suggestions to the contrary, proceed
merely from the malevolence of here and there, a hotheaded writer, or
pragmatical enthusiast.

As to any "public clamor upon this account," before the public had been
informed of the seven famous petitions, and the united attempts of the clergy,
to introduce bishops into this country; perhaps the Doctor had not "heard of
any", nor, perhaps, did he "foresee any." But I may now appeal to himself,
whether, since the publication of his appeal; a very general uneasiness is not
visible among the people; and a general popular opposition expressed against
his episcopal project, among all ranks of men, as they become daily more
diffusively acquainted with the reality of the design. The Doctor will
unquestionably find himself grossly mistaken, in his opinion of the tame
acquiescence of the inhabitants. And, if the zealous opponents of his American
episcopate, merit the genteel appellation of "noisy hot-heads, and pragmatical
enthusiasts," he will hear of not a few such, among the lay members of his own
communion. Let him look into the dominion of Virginia, where, it our
information may be depended upon, the laity of the church of England, are
warmly, and almost universally opposed to it. And I am persuaded, that should
the voices of the episcopalians only, be fairly collected throughout the
colonies, there would be found a majority, declaring their aversion to the
project of introducing the English ecclesiastical hierarchy into America.
Should any British ministry therefore be found so weak, or so corrupt, as to
betray the true interest, and disregard the tranquillity of the provinces, by
the establishment of spiritual lordships; for my part, I should conceive no
scene more likely to open, than such a one as we have recently seen; I mean the
conduct of the populace with respect to the officers appointed under the late
unpopular statute: Nor would I be answerable for the safety of the ablest
prelate that ever wore a mitre, was he to arrive in this country, under the
character of a Protestant American Bishop.

To sooth the public into a favorable opinion of, and quiet submission to the
spiritual yoke, the Doctor assures them, that really nothing more is designed
than a mere primitive episcopacy, stripped of all its temporal and adventitious
appendages, and without any authority derived from the state. This is the
pretended fundamental argument for the appeal, for this American episcopal
superstructure; -- It has long been settled (says he) by our friends and
superiors at home, and the Clergy of this country have often signified their
entire approbation and acquiescence therein, that the Bishops to be sent to
America, will have no authority but purely of a spiritual and ecclesiastical
nature, such as is derived altogether from the church, and not from the state.
And for the truth of this declaration, the Doctor appeals to every reader, "who
is accquainted with the matter." If by "friends and superiors at home," he
means the ministry and government, I must, in my ^^^n appeal to every man, who
has the least acquaintance with the civil and ecclesiastical establishment of
the mother country, for the falsity of it? as no such system ever has or can be
adopted by the British government, in any consistency with its constitutional
principles. It by "friends and superiors," he means the dignified clergy of the
Church of England, his declaration is as idle as their plan is chimerical, as
neither can have the least weight or operation, unless we can suppose the
British legislature to be entirely at the will and pleasure of their spiritual
lordships: or, that they will strike at the fundamental principles of the
political machine, in so essential a point; and thereby raise a ferment among
the commons of England, as well as America, merely to gratify the desires of
the clergy. Therefore if the grand basis of the Appeal be found chimerical and
absurd, the superstructure will necessarily fall. If his lordship of America is
to have no other authority but purely of a spiritual and ecclesiastical nature,
such as is derived altogether from the church, and not from the state; and even
this power is only to operate upon the clergy, and not on the laity, whence in
the name of common sense, the propriety of this long Appeal! these pathetical
addresses to the public? Whence these terrible outcries of partiality,
persecution, and unparalled hardships, sufficient to excite the pity of every
church in Christendom? Is not all the power here contended for, in the hands of
the clergy themselves? Why is the civil government called upon to interpose?
Did ever any minister of the church of England receive the least molestation in
the exercise of his clerical office in any part of America? have not
commissaries been heretofore appointed in different places, and have they not
always been treated in a manner, worthy their sacred character? -- If "no
authority is to be derived from the state," for what purpose is the state
applied to, and so pathetically folicited? And why these protestations of being
"conscious of no crimes with regard to the state?" If none are to be affected
but the clergy, why are the laity addressed with all this warmth of
expostulation, and seeming vehemence of passion? Amidst all this strange
inconsistency and jargon, the world will suspect some unavowed ecclesiastical
machinations; and that though the voice may be Jacob's voice, yet the hands are
the hands of Esau.

But let us, for argument's sake, suppose the plan to be carried into
execution, and an act of parliament obtained for the creation of an American
Bishop, upon such anti-constitutional principles, divesting his lordship of all
the temporal powers belonging to the English Episcopate -- What, in this case,
would be the natural reflections of our fellow subjects, the inhabitants of
South-Britain, on so strange a production? -- Would they not have reason for
such reflections as these -- The Americans are a people tenacious of their
liberty; who have successfully opposed the introduction of bishops, as
political persons dangerous to their civil and religious privileges. Our
parliament have now implicitly acknowledged this; and in favor of American
liberty, have deprived their Bishops of all temporal jurisdiction; and confined
them solely to "the exercise of the original powers of their office" in the
Christian church. If fellow subjects are thus indulged with an exemption from
ecclesiastical dominion, why ought we to remain shackled with a yoke, which we
and our fathers have so hardly borne? -- it is plain, the Doctor takes it for
granted, that the temporal powers of the English hierarchy, are not to be
admitted here, as incompatible with the civil and religious rights of the
community. What would be the consequence of such reflections as these, among
the commons of England? Would any minister espouse a measure, that might have a
tendency to excite such reflections? For, tho,' the pretense of disburdening
the mother country, by a taxation of her American children, might blind the
eyes of the populace to their true interests, and lead them to approve an
injurious Stamp Act; yet in the present case, there could be no such pretense,
and they might soon cry out for the like indulgence. And can it be thought
probably, that the dignified clergy themselves would willingly suffer a
continual acknowledgment of an antichristian power, as subsisting in the
English ecclesiastical hierarchy -- inconsistent with that fundamental maxim of
the great founder of Christianity, my kingdom is not of this world? Are these
gentlemen at once become to mortified to worldly grandeur, worldly power, and
worldly assluence, as to wish for a dissolution of that dignity and authority,
in the episcopal order here, which they are themselves exercising every day? --
It Is a ridiculous pretense not to be imposed upon an American understanding,
even by the plausible arts and legerdemain of clerical sophistry.

But can any sensible American imagine, that his liberty or property would be
long secure, even should Bishops be established in the colonies, in the very
harmless character pretended. From whence would their gentleness proceed? Not
from want of inclination to exercise the powers of the English Episcopate --
but from the restraint of an act of parliament -- an act, which being passed in
direct repugnancy to the constitution, and rendering the American, independent
of the English estabiishment; would soon be found to be inconsistent with a
just system of politics: Nor would eclesiastical policy fail to set every
engine at work, for the abolition of an act so invidions in itself, and
derogatory to the episcopal character. And would their American lordships, upon
their full investiture with the constitutional powers of the episcopal office,
in Christian renderness to the laity here, refuse to exercise them, or return
to their native country? No, surely; but rather would they not piously adopt,
with a little variation, the language of our reverend Doctor -- A disposition
to flight the highest punishments, the church could inflict, had become
general; the voice of reason was no longer heard, nor the strength of argument
regarded; and though for reasons of Christian policy, no attempts were, at first,
made for the establishment of the discipline of the church, under our American
Episcopate, so far as it related to private members, (it being at that time, a
matter rather to be wished for and desired, than rationally attempted,) yet
thanks to God! it is now established, and our episcopal power is full and
complete. -- Behold now, my countrymen, the banners of episcopal dominion
lifted up in your land! See your sacred enclosures, where once you sat
undisturbed, under your own vines, and enjoying the fruit of your own
fig trees, now ravaged and laid waste by that dreadful monster, called a
SPIRITUAL COURT!

"Into whose cruel jaws, if once you sall,
"In vain, alas! in vain for aid you call,
"Clerks, Proctors, Priests, voracious, round you ply,
"Like leeches sticking, 'till they have sucked you dry."
But in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.

Math. xv. 9. Truly ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your fathers.

Luke ii. 48. NOTWITHSTANDING all the seeming candor and moderation of the
pitiful scribbler of the lonely Cottage, it is not difficult to any reader of
discernment, to discover the features of the high, even under all the disguise
of the low, Churchman, and the wolf's hide (to make use of a common simile)
through the tatters of the sheep's skin. Persons of penetration will pretty
readily see, that his piece was intended as an opiate, to calm the disquieting
apprehensions of the public, and as an anti-emetic, to counteract the several
emetic draughts, lately administered by our political physicians, in order to
enable America to disgorge the sugared arsenical pills, prescribed by Dr. Ch --
r; but this paltry quack has, to his opiate, etc injudiciously added so many
ingredients of a contrary tendency (of which he seems not to have known the
virtues) that his composition must needs have an effect, contrary to that which
he designed, on at least a very considerable part of his begotted patients; but
lest some should be more affected by the former than by the latter, I beg leave
to caution the public against swallowing the dose.

The principal nauseous and bitter ingredients (to pursue for a moment longer
the allegory) in this stupid mountebank's composition, are an impudent charge
of bypocrisy, and impertinent recriminations against, an insolent triumph over,
and a worn out (yet groundless and mistaken) interpretation of the conduct of
the presbyterian party. These I shall make remarks upon in their order, as they
constitute the substance of the whole, and perhaps afterward take some notice
of some things less material, or at least less tautologiz'd upon.

This pretended Low Churchman, charges the Presbyterians, with canting and
roaring, and sounding the trumpet of dissension, etc. out of hypocrisy. If I
have often already been unjustly manacled and chastis'd by a certain person,
and, after I have fled away from his cruelty, and been betrayed by false
brethren, evidently see the same instruments of torture preparing for me as
before; what right has any dunce in the universe to impute my outcries to
hypocrisy? Or should one of my betrayers call my cries canting and roaring, and
blame them as hypocritical, and yet at the same time inadvertently acknowledge,
that he and his companions, had by their artful machinations, exposed me to the
tortures I dreaded; what man of honor is there but must despise him as a
villain? who then can help despising this wretched scribbler, who (line 12) has
implicitly, but inadvertently, owned that snares have indeed been laid for
Dissenters, and that his party is a designing one; though he would fain persuade
the public, that the opposite one is more so? It Is true indeed, he levels his
injurious reflections professedly against the presbyterians only, and brings no
express charges against Dissenters of other denominations; but this tenderness
of his has its motive; and is no doubt, the result of the stale system of
church-politics this scribbler's party has long since made use of, and designed
to divide Dissenters of different denominations, though their interests, with
regard to the establishment of episcopacy, are inseparably connected. From
these principles of low cunning, he takes care to charge no canting and
roaring, no hypocrisy and double dealing, upon the members of the Independent,
Dutch, Luthuran, Ana-Baptist, Moravian or Quaker Churches: but the poor
Presbyterians forsooth (because they are somewhat more jealous of their
religious etc. liberties than others, and therefore in general are more active
in their own defense) must be accused of canting and roaring, with a view of
disturbing the public tranquillity, and raising commotions in the community,
etc. etc. Would not any man of sense laugh at a fellow, who, on hearing one of
his fellow subjects roar, when he apprehended he was about to be unreasonably
chastis'd, should impute his vociserations to an aim at disturbing the public
tranquillity etc? Most certainly. From what I have said, some may perhaps think
I am myself a Presbyterian; I am not; but would as zealously oppose
Presbyterian as Episcopal domination. However though I wish the zeal of the
Presbyterians was more prudent, I cannot help also wishing that, on the present
occasion, all denominations of Dissenters were as zealous as the Presbyterians.

I come now to this scribbler's recriminations; and here I will grant him all
he can reasonably desire. I will allow that human nature is universally
(without regard to religious distinctions) the same; that pride, ambition and
thirst for power, is a Presbyterian, as well as Episcopalian vice; and I will
agree with him, that no rational man, would desire to see Presbyterianism
rampant and unbridled in dmerica; and in these concessions I Am well assured,
from their writing, already published, those doughty scribblers those
disponding incendiaries, the American Whig and Sentinel, will readily concur
with me; though I fancy we shall none of us grant, that, we are fully ascertained
by any historian, that there never was a Presbyterian individual, but what had
so evident a thirst for power as to become, on that account, the subject of an
impartial history. -- And what would this stupid mortal infer from all this,
and what advantage would he make of these concessions? Why truly this -- that
I have a right to perfecute, and lord it over the conscience as well as the
property of a man, who, I have reason, or imagine I have reason, to believe,
would if it were in his power, treat me in the same manner; or at least, that,
if he loves to' torture others, he is justly chargeable with hypocrisy and
double dealing, etc. etc. etc. if he cries out, when he apprehends he is soon
to be tortured himself. In short, recriminations, on such an occasion, are
miserable arguments, and have no imaginable tendency, but to add oil to the
flame, increase animosities, and disturb (what this scribbler pretends to be
solicitous about) the public tranquillity etc. Whatever encroachments
Presbyterians may have formerly made on the religious or civil privileges of
others, it is evident they are now exerting themselves merely in the defense of
their own, and therefore what they may have done heretofore is nothing to the
present purpose; but what Episcopalians are attempting at this day, is an
interesting matter, which (to use the cottager's words) does as intimately
affect every religious denomination upon the continent, as the Presbyterians:
But if they are not ignorant of, I fear they are too inattentive to, their
devices.

We shall next just take a view of our scribbler, in the ridiculous attitude of
a childish but insolent triumph; which adds neither honor to himself,
reputation to his party, nor force to his arguments. Whatever joy, he, as a
narrow spirited partizan, might have conceived from the success of the
episcopalians in election jobbing, and however great a malicious pleasure he
might have received from the ill success of the Presbyterians, in their
endeavors to obtain a charter, any boy in the street could have advised him to
spare his insults, as being no proofs, either of his good sense, or the justice
of his cause; and any boy of spirit had rather be disappointed, and even
drubbed in a boxing match, than be laughed at. Misfortunes and disappointments
may be borne with patience, as the lot of humanity; but insults under
misfortunes are intolerable, unless, as sometimes happens, the author shows
himself not worth regarding.

This violent-moderate, this High-Low Churchman, in order to divert our
attention, from the attempts of his party, would sain persuade us, that the
Presbyterians have long been aiming to establish Presbyterianism in America.
But what proofs of this does he produce? Why as many as there are hairs on my
nails: -- We must take his word for it. What man, but he who tries to beat down
a stone wall with his head, acts a more foolish part than he, who, when
accused, defends himself against his accuser, only by groundless
recriminations, which every child almost can disprove? This is evidently the
case with our scribbler; for, should the Presbyterians aim at such an
establishment, the attempt would be no less foolish than his charge is
groundless. Should they endeavor to obtain an act of parliament, in favor of
such an establishment, could they hope to succeed? No. Should they obtain a
vote of the houses of assembly, in the different provinces, for such a purpose,
would not the act be thrown out by the councils, rejected by the governors, or
repealed by the king? Certainly. Have they ever avowed such a design? Let all
America witness. Have they secretly concerted such a favorite scheme, such a
darling purpose? Speak ye deserters from Presbyterianism, and expose, if you
can, any such mysteries of iniquity, by telling us the time, place, etc. Have
any of the desponding incendiaries plead for such an establishment? Far from it
-- Both the Whig and Sentinel oppose all establishments whatsoever, and so will
every unprejudiced man, who considers the nature of the gospel church, and
truly loves his neighbor as himself. What foundation then has this scribbler
for his injurious conclusions? Truly none at all; and none but a person of
consummate impudence, would have had the effrontery to advance (I cannot say
draw) them. Because the Presbyterians in this city have petitioned for a
charter, for the security of their particular church from encroachments, and
exerted themselves during the late election in favor of a gentleman, whom they
considered as a powerful advocate for dissenting privilege (though the
episcopal church could have been in no danger from even a whole house of such)
they are represented as aiming at a general establishment of Presbyterianism.
Horrid injustice! to construe self defense into an assault, and infer ambitions
designs from a dread of ecclesiastical bondage! but it has long been the
practice of designing persons, to charge their own crimes on those they could
not ensnare; and every body knows that Potiphar's wife, because she could not
ravish Joseph, swore a rape against him. This may serve as a counterpart to
this scribber's stuff about the tribunes, and to show with what propriety his
5th paragraph might be retorted upon himself, and his party. He seems to
suppose the ill success of the Presbyterians, in the late election, gave rise
to the Whig. Poor fellow! notwithstanding the sharpness of his nose, he has
taken a wrong scent, as Doctor C -- r and others did before him. To my certain
knowledge, the Whig has done no more, in publishing his paper, than was
designed long enough before the election; and if, in consequence of the refusal
of a charter to the Presbyterian church in this city, he has written in order
to recover lost ground, who is to blame but those restless mortals, who do
mischief for mischief's sake; and can have no inducement to obstruct the
security of their neighbors, but their own iniquitous designs upon them.
Recovery of lost ground is one thing, and encroachment another; and I leave the
world to judge of the difference.

Thus having finished what I proposed in the methodical way, I shall just
ramble a little after this rambling Scribbler, for upon my word, I can call him
nothing else.

In the first place, I observe, that he affects (and there is a reason for it)
the character of a moderate man, and makes a comparison between St. Cyprian in
his sandals, and a modern bishop; but then he cannot (for the soul of him) help
making reflections on the poor Presbyterians, by whose great blackness he
hopes, he and his party will appear tolerably white. In order likewise to
preclude a suspicion of bigottry on his side, he (in no very decent manner for
a churchman,) plays with the corner of his Lordship's cap, and the fold of his
canonical sleeve; but would not for a bishopric, have failed of laughing at the
documents of every stripling Presbyterian pastor. I next observe, that this
miserable scribbler proposes a needless alternative, and advises us (if we must
be slaves) to be as comfortable slaves as we can; but as the Americans have
long ago resolved not to be slaves to civil, why should they resolve to submit
to ecclesiastical, whether episcopal or presbyterian power, when there is no
necessity of their being duped by the advocates of either? In short, In spite
of the affected moderation of this wretched scribbler, there is reason to
believe, he is at heart a favourer of the doctrines of passive obedience, and
non-resistance, and that (so slavish are his principles) he would have made a
very consistent appearance in Sacheverell's pulpit. I have already observed
that his design seems to lull dissenters asleep, especially those who are not
Presbyterians, but his lullaby consists of such harsh uncouth bellowings as
must needs awaken any person, though he were already asleep, unless he were in
an absolute lethargy. As he talks of two sorts of Presbyterians, I shall
readily allow there are two sorts of Churchmen, but I am sorry to say, he seems
to be of the wrong, though he would fain persuade us he is of the right sort.
He highly blames political Presbyterians, and why? Because they do not, like
their careless name-sakes, (those he calls religious Presbyterians) peaceably
submit to all the tyranny of the mother church, as well as that of the
mother country. If I whip, or threaten to whip you, and you say nothing -- ah!
that is a good boy! but if you complain -- how dare you say a word, you rascal
you. This scribbler cannot see any uneasiness about a bishop; if his eyes are
bad who can help it? he expects a bishop as soon as he can be prevailed with
"to forego his temporal privileges and grandeur." I doubt not but as soon as an
American bishopric appears to be more honorable and profitable than the Sea of
L^ndaff, etc. America will have candidates enough. The low-stuff of this
scribbler about a coop of poultry, and four or five dozen of ^^adeira, ignorant
well-meaning old women, doting daddies, etc. is so disgusting, that I am sick
of the subject, and therefore immadiately subscribe myself.

ANTIPRESBYTERIANISMOS.
New York, April 28, 1768.
From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, May 19th. The SENTINEL. No. IX.
THE abuse of power, has in all ages, furnished the most copious fund of
materials to the moralist, and to the historian, and has ever given the
greatest perplexity to the Legislator. Private persons doubtless affect the
public weal by their vices and by their crimes, but standing singly and alone,
their transgressions are easily corrected. Whereas those who by the advantages
of birth, fortune, office, or superior abilities are enabled to influence
others, and to direct the public views and councils, are not without difficulty
and address kept within the bounds of law and justice. The passions and
prejudices of men are constantly leading them into one mistake or another; and
the remonstrances of reason and duty alone, are but feeble restraints. In order
therefore to curb the licentiousness of leading men it has been found
expedient to distribute the powers of government among the different, sorts and
orders of which the community is composed, so as to excite, and employ those of
one rank and interest, to correct the irregularities of another.

Although this may seem to lay a foundation for constant debate and faction,
yet even this is a small inconvenience compared to the galling and oppressive
yoke of absolute monarchy; or even the jealous severity of an aristocratic
senate. But the common disadvantages of the mixed forms of government, will be
found neither very considerable nor lasting, in case the distribution of power
is made with judgment. The old Roman policy was deficient in this respect. The
patrician and plebeian orders in that republic, wanted a third estate to
moderate between them: which defect the king in the British constitution
admirably supplies; whilst our popular branch, acting by representatives, their
assemblies are more deliberate, and less factious, than at Rome, where the
people appeared in person.

The circumstances of the British colonies, just rising out of the difficulties
of an infant state, do not admit of such a regular distribution of power. To
forward the full settlement of a new country, such a division, and diffusion of
the lands is necessary, as shall leave the profits wholly in the hands of those
who cultivate them. Hence our laws for making partition of real estates among
all the children of the family; and for the ready sale of lands to satisfy
debts, equitable in themselves, are even political in such a country as this:
but they render the rise and establishment of an upper rank among us,
difficult, if not impracticable.

In this state of things it behooves the people of North America, to consider
fully what political consequences and effects the introduction of diocesan
bishops among them may produce. By Dr. Chandler's account of them, as smooth as
he writes, we find they are not to be mere voluntary bishops, such as the
Moravian church has, but prelates commissioned by his majesty, as supreme heads
of the church, and authorized by the nation, as branching from the
ecclesiastical establishment in England. Nor are these American bishops to be
suffered to tarnish the splendour of their brethren at home, by being left to
the precarious maintenance of the episcopalians here; as was the case in the
primitive times of the Christian church. But thousands of pounds sterling have
been laying up and accumulating at interest, for above half a century past, as
a sund for supporting one or two of them. Dr. Chandler from recollection,
instances in six gifts or legacies, some of them of 50 years standing, which
amounts to L 4500 sterling; doubtless there are many smaller ones. These having
been at interest, must now make a very considerable fund; of which about L. 826
only appear to have been expended for a house at Burlington. See Appeal, pages
108 and 50.
Besides this, it is intimated that many persons in England, stand ready to
contribute to this Use, as soon as the s^^eme shall be put in execution.
Hereafter, great matters may be expected from the crown lands, which it is
proposed to set apart for the benefit of the American hierarchy: but till the
further settlement and improvement of the colonies, shall raise these to a
proper value, "the general tax on the country," which Dr. Chandler speaks of,
page 107, may supply all deficiencies.

This scheme of the episcopal missionaries and their patrons, the society for
propagating the gospel, whatever they intend by it, would be likely to have
great influence on civil government and public liberty; and therefore, whether
we consider the thing itself, or the method taken to obtain it, our most
serious attention cannot but be awakened on this occasion.

In their zeal for their hierarchy, these gentlemen, possibly, have not
considered what they are about, in this view. Or if any of them have glanced so
much beside their own concernments, as to have perceived the obvious effects of
their proposal on political affairs, they may have reconciled to themselves the
pursuit of so dangerous a measure, by the prospect of the spiritual advantage
they expect will flow from it.

For my part, I have often esteemed it a great advantage to the northern
colonies, that their clergy have very little weight in government. This is
owing to the moderate salaries paid them; to their debates and divisions about
the modes and circumstantials of religion; and to the want of general
connection among themselves, and with the churches established in Britain. By
their dissentions, we are secured from the usurpations and encroachments they
might otherwise make as a body: for one denomination carefully watches another,
and sounds the alarm on occasion of any schemes that may be devised to the
prejudice of the public. This also keeps up a spirit of free-inquiry and
prevents the ill effects of a fond superstitious credulity.

But here is a measure proposed, that directly tends to form and combine this
order of men into a regular and powerful band; and to put them under the
direction of superior officers, invested with great powers over the rest. It is
also calculated to connect them by uniformity, establishment and interest with
the church established in England.

It was formerly proposed that the clergy, on account of their wealth and
influence, should be considered as a fourth estate in parliament, but this
happily did not take place. Gilbert, on the Exah. 48.
Among us, they must be much more than a separate estate; they can have no
equals in the colonies. Whilst for civil government the British dominions on
the continent are already divided into seventeen provinces, the episcopal
elergy (who may before long by proper management, and the aid of acts of
parliament, be augmented to three or four thousand in number) will be collected
and disciplined under twenty or more bishops, and a primate appointed from
home. What restraint and check will there be on the views and schemes of a body
so well compacted, so weighty, so well established by statute, and so well
allied to powerful hierarchies in Europe. Without an order of nobility to stand
on equal footing with the prelates; without courts of common law, of
jurisdiction extensive enough to issue prohibitions and correct the proceedings
of the archbishop and his suffragans, when they exceed their proper limits; as
the spiritual courts in England frequently do; without a general assembly of
the colonies, or other association for civil purposes, in what circumstances
must the laity be to guard themselves against the ambitious designs of the
spiritual power? In short they must lie entirely at the mercy and moderation of
the clergy: and what these are, let Spain, let Italy, let the history of
England, in the papal times, and even since the reformation, under the
government of the house of Stuart, picture out to the reader. It has been a
great mistake among us, that the popish religion is the only one, of all
Christian sects, proper to introduce and establish Slavery. -- Other religions
have succeeded as effectually as ever popery did. Lord Molesworth's Account of
Denmark: He instances in that kingdom; yet he observes the super-intendants or
Bishops there have no Temporalties, nor any Power over the other Clergy; being
only Primi-inter pares, First among Equals.
Men in all ages and of every character are much the same in regard to the use
of power; and their conduct when they get above control, loudly proclaims the
necessity of attending to the proper distribution of it in every free
government, that would preserve its constitution.

From the Connecticut Journal, Newhaven, May 20th.
Mr. PRINTER,
-- "HAVE you seen Dr. Chandler's pamphlet, in favor of American bishops? We
are told that prelacy is become quite generous and inoffensive, but a late
instance should put our church on their guard. Our's at New York, lately asked
the king for a charter, to save our estates from falling into private hands,
and the bones and sepulchers of our ancestors from being sold. A laudable end,
and reasonable request! And yet it was denied in privy council last August, the
Archbishop of Canterbury being present, and the ghostly father of London, was
an open solicitor against us, at the board of trade. In a word, the decree
says, it is not expedient that we should have greater immunities than we enjoy
by the act of toleration. Will your churches admit that they hold their
privileges by this base tenure? All ranks of diffenters here (though improperly
so called) are in consternation at this unseasonable instance of prelatic
partiality. And if this is the spirit of the hierarchy, how cogent the reasons
for our bearing the most public testimony against the introduction of a
powerful order of men, who may drive us as far to the westward from our present
habitations, as they once drove our fathers. I wish you would make this
anecdote known -- you may depend upon the fact, for we have an authentic copy
of the royal dismission of our petition. -- "

From the BOSTON GAZETTE, May 23d,
Who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy the Armies of the
living God?

David.
NOT many years ago, were transmitted to the public, through the channel of the
Boston Gazette, a sew desultory essays, on the spirit of the cannon and feudal
law: in some of which were expressed apprehensions of the future mischiefs,
that might be caused in America by the efforts and exertions of those expiring
and detested systems. That those apprehensions were too well founded, time has,
already, sufficiently shown: and we have now, perhaps, stronger reasons to
fear, a still further increase of those mischiefs, than we had then. It is
therefore the opinion of many persons, who wish well to the religion, the
learning, the liberty and happiness of this injured and insulted country, that
a reassumption of that inexhaustile subject, would not be improper, at the
present juncture. And it is, without any further apology, proposed, to continue
a series of dissertations upon that and similar subjects, for some months, if
not years to come. It is claimed as an incontestible right to pursue our own
plan, method and style: and, if in the course of our lucubrations, we should
depart from the rules of established logicians and rhetoricians, if we should
sometimes in haste throw our thoughts together in rude heaps, if a few blunders
and solecisms should escape us, or if we should now and then mis-spell and
mis-point, we shall not think it worth our while to engage in any contention,
concerning such matters, with the little scribblers, and paltry critics, whose
ambition never aspired, and whose capacity never attained to greater objects.
-- Our labors will be interrupted whenever the paroxisms of the gout or the
spleen, the fits of dullness or laziness, or the avocations of business or
amusement shall make an interruption expedient. These reservations have been
thought proper to be made for our own ease and advantage. And we now take the
freedom to inform the reader, that the champion, who has lately, with so much
heroism challenged America, to contest with him the right of diocesan
episcopacy, first roused us, from our long lethargy, and determined us, once
more to try our fortune in the field.

But to renounce Metaphor, and speak soberly, The Appeal to the Public in
favor of an American episcopate, is so flagrant an attempt to introduce the
cannon law, or at least some of the worst fruits of it, into these colonies,
hitherto unstained with such pollution, uninfected with such poison, that every
friend of America ought to take the alarm -- Power, in any form, and under any
limitations, when directed only by human wisdom and benevolence, is dangerous:
but the most terrible of all power, that can be entrusted to man, is spiritual.
-- Because our natural apprehensions of a deity, providence and future state,
are so strong, and our natural disposition to enthusiasm and superstition, so
prevalent, that an order of men entrusted with the sacred rites of religion,
will always obtain an ascendency over our consciences: and will therefore be
able to persuade us, (by us I mean the body of the people) that to distinguish
between the cause of God and the clergy, is impiety; to speak or write freely
of the clergy, is blasphemy; and to oppose the exorbitancy of their wealth and
power, is sacrilege, and that any of these crimes will expose us, to eternal
misery. --

And whenever conscience is on the side of the canon law, all is lost. We
become cabable of believing any thing that a priest shall prescribe -- We
become capable of believing, even Dr. Chandler's fundamental aphorisms, viz.
that Christianity cannot exist without an unterrupted succession of diocesan
bishops, and that those who deny the succession to have been uninterrupted,
must prove it to have been broken: which very curious and important doctrines
will be considered more at large hereafter, mean time, I am, and ever will be

SUI JURIS.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZZETTE, Monday May 23d. A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG, [No.
VIII.]
By TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
Who shames a Scribbler? break one Cobweb through,
He spins the slight, self-pleasing thread anew.
Destroy his Fib, or Sophistry, in vain,
The Creature's at his dirty Work again, --
POPE.
IT is a very easy matter for a writer, who aims at carrying his point by
clamor, and raising an odium against his antagonist, to make a specious
appearance in a periodical paper. -- Give an author and his performance an ill
name; only make the common people, -- with whom positive assertions too often
pass for argument, and scurrilous expressions for spirited reasoning, --
believe that he has some covert design unfriendly to their liberty, and his
business is done. Whether the American Whig, has not chose this method of
attacking Dr. Chandler and his Appeal, let the impartial public judge, and let
his 6th Numb. be attended to in proof of the affirmative; in which the Dr. is
sometimes found fault with, for speaking too plain, sometimes for not speaking
plain enough; i. e. he has not always spoke as the American Whig would have him.

The Doctor is first accused of denying "the validity of the ordination of all
the Protestant ministers in the world, except those of his own denomination."
-- With laying down such principles as would make "the bulk of the reformed
clergy," to be only "non-commissioned Laymen, and mistaken Pretenders, or
egregious Impostors," -- The Doctor's creed, says the Whig, in another
paragraph, "unchurches all the churches on the continent except his own, and
the church of Quebeck." -- Here it seems the Doctor has spoken too plain to
please the sour temper of a Whig: But then again the Doctor is accused of the
want of "apostolic plainness of speech;" -- of "mincing conclusions;" -- of
"velvet-mouthed delicacy;" -- of "coaxing and trimming," because he modestly
said, non-episcopal ordinations were by the Church "esteemed irregular and
defective. -- Thus inconsistent is malice.

I am utterly unable to find that Dr. Chandler, in his Appeal, denies "the
validity of the ordination of all the protestant ministers in the world, except
his own denomination." The Doctor in the place referred to by the Whig, says
nothing of foreign churches at all; nor is the Doctor's dispute with foreign
churches, but with the English schismatical congregations, who of late years
endeavor to honor themselves with the appellation of churches. Why all the
protestant churches, and more especially the church of Holland, is lugged into
this dispute, with which it has nothing to do, is hard to say, unless the
Benevolence of the heart of the American Whig, suggested it to him, as a
probable method of raising an odium against the church of England. -- The
churches of England and Holland, have always kept up the most friendly and
affectionate regard for each other, as might easily be proved by the testimony
of divines of eminent reputation on both sides. In this country, the members of
those churches have ever copied the good disposition of their brethren at home,
and have lived together in the greatest harmony. -- That the church of Holland,
is not episcopal exactly in the same manner that the church of England is
episcopal, is readily admitted; -- neither is it Presbyterian, in the same
sense, that the English dissenters are Presbyterian, as is evident from the
distinction that, I am told, in made in their ordination of a member of the
classis, and an ordinary pastor or presbyter. When a member of the classis is
ordained, the powers of ordination and government are committed to him; but
when an ordinary pastor is ordained, no such powers are conferred on him, but
only the powers of preaching the word and administering the sacrament.

National churches have a right to judge for themselves, with regard to the
modes and ceremonies of religion, so that all things be done decently and in
order. And the church of England, no more censures the church of Holland,
because it is not episcopal exactly like itself, than the civil government of
England quarrels with that of Holland, because it is not monarchial. Every true
Englishman esteems the civil government of his own country the most perfect on
earth; and of consequence must think the civil government of Holland less
perfect, without ungovernmenting that government. In like manner the members of
the church of England, may think their own church more perfect, and that of
Holland, less perfect, without unchurching that church.

But if the American Whig would know who they are who are unchurching the
church of Holland in this country let him attend to those who for many years
have cast a longing look at the revenues of the Dutch church in New York; who
have used every art to de^auch its members from their fidelity to the
established religion of Holland, and to convert their churches into
conventicles for English independents. -- Why all this begging, demanding,
coaxing, threatening, cringing, bullying, whining, blustering, entreating,
bellowing for a charter, to incorporate a thing by law and by nature
incorporatable, called a meeting house, but to put themselves into a capacity
of covering iniquity by law; -- into a legal capacity of holding the revenues
of the Dutch church, when once they could lay their griping paw upon them. --
Those are the people who are unchurching the church of Holland, or Dutch church
in New York; -- who Ahab like, first kill, and then take possession; first sow
divisions and animosities among the members of that church by which its very
existence is to be annihilated, that they may enter upon their vineyard; -- and
then like the whorish women described by Solomon in his Proverbs, they will
wipe their mouth, and say we have done no harm.

To answer the same pious purpose, of casting an odium upon the church, she is
represented by the American Whig as being inclined to popery; because Mr.
Houdin was admitted to officiate as a clergyman, without reordination. -- Mr.
Houdin, it is true, was born and educated in the popish religion, and ordained
by a popish bishop in France; he left Canada, and came to New York, where after
some time, he openly in the face of the congregation in Trinity-church, in this
city, renounced and abjured the errors of popery, and was admitted to officiate
in the church without reordination.

I would here beg the candid reader to observe, that episcopal ordination is
not looked upon as one of the errors of popery, either by the Lutheran, Danish,
or Swedish churches, any more than by the church of England; -- consequently no
particular odium ought to lie against the church on this account. -- Again, if
Mr. Houdin's ordination in France, was sufficiently valid to confer the powers
of the Christian priesthood, there was no nee^ of re-ordaining him. If Mr.
Houdin had embraced the religion of the meeting house, -- (what the present
name of this religion is I know not; formerly it was independent, since,
Presbyterian, and now it seems to be aping the denomination of, church;) of the
meeting house, I say, and had there renounced all the error^ of popery, would
they have re-ordained him; -- if not, why this c^amour against the Church?

If God saw good to preserve to us, the holy scriptures and sacraments of the
Christian church, through the corrupt medium of popery, why not the Christian
priesthood through the same medium? -- If the Christian priesthood was not
preserved in the church of Rome, it is extinct in the western world. Upon this
supposition, I beg the American Whig to try his abilities, -- and he may take
all the associations, con-sociations, presbyteries and synods, on the
continent, to his assistance, and the leathern mitten of Connecticut, and Dr.
Ram-Chicken of Boston into the Bargain, -- in fabricating a single Christian
priest; pardon the word, good Mr. Whig, Presbyter if you had rather; --

Another fountain of odium which our meek spirited Whig, who seems not in the
least tainted with the virtue of Christian charity, has opened against the
Church, is the imputation of a persecuting spirit. After a flourish about
"bleating of the Lamb," "howling of the wolf," "poor parson's head." "bishop's
hand," "pastoral staff," "arm of the magistrate," -- all this, gentle reader,
and as much more, is contained in one single sentence. -- he has frighted
himself, I fear, into a doleful pickle, with the vain imagination of "the
introduction of spiritual lords into a country, where they will find no layman
for their match." -- In what sense the word match, is here to be understood, I
am at a loss; I rather imagine he means a brimstone match, to light the sires
of persecution withal. Match as it signifies equality, cannot be his meaning,
for undoubtedly he is a man of more reading, than not to have taken a peep at
least, at a letter to the bishop of Land (...), wi^h the tremendous name of
WILLIAM LIVIN^S ON, stuck in terrorem upon the title page. In which calm,
moderate, gentle, polite, courtly, Christian, meek-spirited, benev^^^t,
cha^^table performance, THE AUTHOR, as he signs himself, has convinced the
world, that he is in his own opinion, though a layman, more than a match for
half the bishops in England.

Unluckily for our Whig, he has drawn his picture of a persecuting clergy,
(which he endeavors to put off upon the world for a true portrait of the
English clergy) from an original painting of the celebrated BUTLER, which was
done in the time of the grand rebellion, when "the glory of God, and the
salvation of souls," was made the pretense, for murdering the King, pillaging
the Churches, and piercing with spears the pictures of the Savio^^ of the
world. -- When the trumpets of sedition were founded from those sacred pulpits,
which were usurped by those vile, hypocritical, prostitute preachers whom St.
Oliver had manufactured out of tailors, tinkers, and cobblers.

"Whose religion, it was fit
"To match their learning and their wit:
"Such as do build their faith upon,
"The holy text of pike and gun,
"Decide all controversies by
"Infallible artillery;
"And prove their doctrine orthodox
"By apostolic blows and knocks,
"Call fire and sword, and desolation,
"A godly-thorough-reformation." etc.
HUDIERASS. When arguments fail, positive assertions are ready at hand for the
use of our Whig, by which he has proved over and over, that the English bishops
are by nature, by education, by principle, by practice, persecutors; -- by the
same kind of reasoning, he now again for the second or third time, proves it to
be impossible, as the law now stands, to introduce a bishop into America, who
will not have authority the instant he arrives, to set up an ecclesiastical
court, etc. This is a kind of reasoning Mr. Whig, that thousands and ten
thousands of sensible people in America cannot see the force of. Prove
therefore your assertion; and if you can make it appear, that this is really
impossible, all endeavors to obtain bishops will be suspended, 'till things
are put upon such a footing, as that bishops may come over without "portending
evil," to any person whatever. For it is the earnest desire of the friends of
an American episcopate, to obtain so great a blessing to themselves without any
detriment to others; -- they are willing to come to any reasonable terms to
satisfy all parties. But the thing itself, they never will give up. They will
use all prudent, reasonable and lawful means to obtain it. And if the American
Whig, and his confederates, think to stop the mouths of the advocates for
American bishops, at all adventures, let them know, they must first stop their
breath; for while they live they will not be silent. Let the American Whig
write on at the present rate, let him rage and foam, and swell and bluster, and
threaten and prophecy, 'till Doom's day, he will neither convince, frighten nor
discourage. But if he will come to sober argument, to candid reasoning, that
all probable cause of detriment to others, may be known, in order to be
removed, and the religious and civil liberties of every denomination explained,
that they may be secured to them, which was the very intention of writing the
appeal, let him say the word, and the friends of an episcopate are ready to
attend him; -- are ready to remove to the utmost of their power, every
reasonable objection that can be be made. It is a point in which they are
engaged from conscientious motives, (whether the Whig will believe it or not,
is nothing to the purpose) and as they have too lively a sense of the hardships
they at present endure through the want of Bishops to suffer them to wish or
desire to bring any hardships upon others; so be is known to all the world,
they have too high an opinion of their own rights, too great a regard to the
dictates of conscience, to let others, bring or continue any hardships upon
them, when it is in their power to prevent it.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE American Whig is desired not to forget to remember to remind his "gentle
readers," that there were between twenty and thirty clergymen in this city last
week, who undoubtedly met in order to make Bishops, write against Whigs, and
hinder Great Britain from nestling herself into the "spacious bosom of
America," to the great disquiet and dissatisfaction of all King Oliver's liege
and loyal subjects.

[From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, May 23. 1768]
Here follows the Whig No. XI. but being in Dutch, which few of our Readers
understand, it is omitted in this place, but if a good Translation of it can be
obtained, it will be added at the End of the Volume, together with the Whip in
Answer to it which is in the same Language.

The same paper contains the following Pieces, relating to the same Subject.

A Short way to end Strife now it is meddled with.
1. THAT the convention desire an American Bishop, is certain. 2 That they
declare that they only want a primitive Bishop, is certain. 3. That they really
mean what they declare, is uncertain. 4. That a modern English Bishop would be
dangerous ^o the religious rights and privileges of all the Non-Episcopalians
in America, is certain. 5. That they ought therefore in justice to themselves
and their posterity, and according to the rules of common prudence to be
alarmed about their religious liberty, and oppose the project of introducing a
Bishop into America; till they have sufficient security that he will be only a
primitive Bishop, is certain. 6. That the Tory scribblers, for representing
there as disloyal subjects, for taking such alarm; and as a faction against
religion, the church, and the clergy are extremely abusive, and rather
exasperate than allay the ferment, is certain. 7. That the convention, as
honest men, ought to give such, security before they can expect our
acquiescence in their project is certain. 8. That they have not hitherto done
it, is certain. 9. That until it is done, the opposition will proceed; and may
be attended with very disagreeable consequences, is highly probable. 10. That
when it is done, the controversy ought to cease, is certain.
A KICK for the WHIPPER. No. I.
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
Nec furtum feci, nec fugi, si mihi dicat
Servus; habes pretium, loris non ureris, aio;
Non hominem occidi; non pasces in cruce corvos.
HORACE.
WHEN a man unauthorised, assumes the arduous and honorable office of a public
Whipper, and yet performs the genteel business of flagellation in a blundering
manner; when he wastes much time and materials in the operation, and yet the
subject thereof, far from pushing a single cry (because the strokes of the
switch do not even tickle) seems entirely insensible of the fellow at his
posteriors; and when the sole effect of the unskilful operator's blows seems to
be the self-caused smart of his own back; what shall be done unto him? -- Shall
the Whipper himself be whipped, for undertaking the whipping business without
skill in the whipping art? -- No; that were too cruel a punishment -- the poor
fellow, while he meant to whip the Whig most unmercifully, has already most
unluckily whipped himself sufficiently; besides, who durst aspire to the
important task of whipping a professed Whipper? What then? -- Why -- let him be
KICKED.

Now this necessary, though less honorable office, I, Sir ISAAC FOOT, have
undertaken, and placing myself near the flagellator, shall give him now and
then a kick, as I see occasion, not without some very final hopes, that by a
few hints and admonitions a posteriori, he may be made to see his folly and
forswear the trade. Not that I bear Squire Tickle any ill will -- No; I could
with all my heart wish he were an artist in the way, and that he might be by
authority employed in this decent profession all his days; but alas! he is not
the man, and therefore I must and will kick him. This undertaking will give me
but little trouble, nor shall I spend much time or shoe-leather about it. And
although I Sir ISAAC FOOT have kicks for the Whipper in abundance, yet if any
gentleman for the sake of either pall^me or exercise, has a mind to give him an
handsome kick or two, I shall give him room, and take as much pleasure in
seeing justice done him by another, as if I Sir ISAAC FOOT had done it myself.

To the PRINTER.
He that loves his brother, abides in the light, -- but he that hates his
brother, walks in darkness.

St. JOHN.
SIR,
IT is really a thing of very malancholy consideration to every serious
Christian, and who truly loves his country, that so uncharitable, and even
malicious a spirit, so much the reverse of the most benevolent temper of the
gospel, should so much obtain in this country, and be so industriously
propagated by the American Whig, to the utter destruction of every thing that
is pleasant and amiable in society; and this without any manner of provocation
from Dr. Chandler, who only pleads the cause of liberty, with a Christian
temper, in an affair of great importance in religion and conscience, on the
side of the church, the enjoyment of which, if obtained, could not possibly (as
we desire it,) be of the least detriment to any other denomination. -- How can
it be, that he should so vehemently make it his business to sow discord among
brethren? For brethren we are, in so far as we are fellow Christians and
neighbors. -- I am sorry, indeed, that any of the church should suffer
themselves by however so bitter obloquy, to be provoked to return any thing of
the like kind, (though he makes it ten times as bad as it is,) but it is said,
tread on a worm and it will turn, and I hope it will be excused from the
frailty of human nature, especially, when the provocation is so very severe.
But for my part, I would rather say, Father forgive them, for they know not
what they do.

I cannot on this occasion but express my surprise, that so respectable a body
as the General Assembly of Boston, in their late letter to their agent in
England (in which they do well to express their solicitude for civil liberty)
should be so inconsistent and so uncharitably zealous, as, at the same time,
most earnestly to oppose ecclesiastical and religious liberty, with regard to
the church, when they say, We hope in God it (an Episcopate) may never take
place in America, and we desire you would strenuously oppose i^, And this though
we never desired any, nor can any obtain, that can ever have the least concern
with them.

Another thing that I beg leave to remark upon, is a passage in the Sentinel,
No I. which says, "One of the bishops, who is at the head of the society for
propagation of the gospel, (meaning the archbishop) was not ashamed to oppose a
plan for converting the Indians, because concerted by a denomination of
Christians that followed not with him. -- Now that he ever opposed it, or for
that reason, cannot be true, as is evident from his answer to those who asked
for countenance and contributions to Mr. Wheelock's Indian school, which may at
any time be seen in his letter to the Rev. Dr. Johnson, July 31, 1766, his
words are these, My answer was, that we heartily wished success to it, and
intended to set up one, not in opposition, but in imitation of it, that we
hoped the dissenters would sufficiently support Mr. Wheelock's, but could not
hope they would contribute to a similar one of ours; and therefore it seemed
requisite that churchmen should do their best for ours; though if any would be
kind to their's also, we should not blame them. -- Thus much I thought it
necessary to write in vindication of one of the best of men, and am Sir,

Yours etc. H.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, May 26th. The SENTINEL No. X.
-- Brethren, who came in privily to spy out our Liberty, which we have in
Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into Bondage.

St. Paul to Gal. ii. 4.
THE clergy whenever opportunity has offered, have appeared as apt to pervert
power as other people, and their conduct too plainly proves that "we have the
treasure of religion conveyed "to us in earthen vessels:" 2 Corinthians. iv. 7.
This should teach us to distinguish carefully between the schemes of ambitious
ecclesiastics, and the true interests of Christianity. If this be forgotten,
the laiety will soon be reduced to spiritual thraldom, and the ministers of
religion neglecting their proper duties, will become competitors with the
magistrate, for civil power.

These are far from being conjectures only; our own history, not to recur to
those of other nations, abounds with numerous instances of this temper in men,
who are by profession, abstracted from worldly business. Even the Monks, who
apparently renounced all intercourse with society and pretended to retire to
cells and deserts, could not resist the temptation of exercising the extensive
influence, which their sanctified character among the credulous multitude, gave
them.

In fact, this order has ever been found to consist of speculative men,
clear-sighted to their own interests, adhering closely together, and pursuing
their views with steadiness. As an incorporate body that never dies, they build
for ages, and their fabrics almost always affect, often endanger the welfare
of the state. The large revenues, Privileges, immunities and jurisdictions,
which they claimed and exercised in the days of popery, rendering them
formidable to the civil magistrate, and invested with excessive powers a body
of men, who never want a plausible pretense for making further usurpations.
That system had indeed been the work of many dark ages, when the ignorance,
barbarism, and superstition of rulers and people, afforded the most commodious
opportunity of putting their schemes of aggrandizement into practice. Whoever
looks into the history of those times, will be apt to conclude that the priests
had imagined all mankind were made for their advantage, and that the Christian
revelation was considered by them as a cunning fable, invented for the benefit
of the clergy.

Although popery has been abolished, still the clergy "are men of like passions
with others" Acts. xiv. 15.
. It does not yet appear, they have got above the temptations to pride and
arrogance, which are apt to be excited, and gratified by dictating the
religious faith and principles of the people. Ambition, and a lust of unbounded
rule, with the other passions and disorders of the human breast, are by no
means, in our days, confined to the laity: and therefore, the prese^^ ^^nisters
of religion have no better claim to extensive autho^^^^ ^^an their predecessors.

(...) ecclesiastical scheme that has been pursuing, as to the ^olonies, is
this; the leading clergy in England desirous of increasing their power, and of
building up a mighty Hierarchy in the British empire, are laboring to bring
the colonies under their dominion, by every device they can think of. Many
circumstances seem favorable to this scheme; most of the provinces south of
Pennsylvania, and the W. India Islands, have by their own acts of assembly,
provided a regular parochial maintenance for the episcopal ministers. The like
has been obtained by artifice in some few destricts of New York, and an attempt
has lately been made to extend it. In Nova Scotia, episcopacy according to the
church of England, is declared to be established; but as it might put a total
stop to the settling of that new province, no tax for supporting the clergy, is
yet levied on dissenters. Attempts have been made, more than once, to get a
legal assessment in the lower government of Pennsylvania, for the same purpose.
And as establishing lands for pious uses, is not restrained by the laws of the
colonies, as in England, and most other countries in Europe; and as the old
statute made against granting lands to the church, are not supposed to extend
here, measures are taken to advance the interests of the designed heirarchy, by
making acquisitions of this sort. Accordingly instructions have been procured
from the crown, to the governors of New Hampshire to grant a proportion of
every new township to the society for propagating the gospel; and a like
practice has been begun at New York. In that city and its Suburbs the lands of
the episcopal church are extensive and valuable; and if the place continues to
increase, they must in time become an immense estate. The Codrington plantation
in Barbados, which is vested in the said society, for the purpose of supporting
a college, is suffered to extend and accumulate in a most rapid manner. To
these might be added the funds of the colleges of New York and Williamsburgh,
the numerous glebes and manses of the clergy in America, and the designed
tracks of land for the future benefit of the Bishops, and for perfecting the
scheme; which hereafter may become of enormous value, when taken, with the
above particulars, into one computation.

That nothing may be wanting to perfect the spiritual kingdom, the most
vigorous attempts have been making for above half a century to episcopize the
middle and northern colonies, which were settled by non-conformists, and for
this purpose a large fund has been employed in sending out missionaries to
these people, as if they were heathen, and utterly void of all gospel
knowledge. But as it has ever proved a difficult matter to change an
ancestorial religion, This has been very much the case of Ireland, where,
setting aside the Scots and English settlers, the alteration among the natives
has been very inconsiderable, notwithstanding the protestant establishment has
subsisted above 200 years. Perhaps less precipitations and severity in this
business, had been better. Any nation, especially one claiming to be free,
would resent extremely an attempt to impose a new religion, to which there was
no pre-disposition in its people; but in that kingdom, on the contrary, the
rude uncultivated inhabitants, were to the last degree attached to a
superstition, from which they suffered the greatest injuries. No wonder
state-convulsions followed, and that when these were punished by confications
and capital penalties, general rebellions and massacres followed -- Thus was
the protestant religion discredited by its imprudent friends in the eyes of the
Irish, and its prospects effectually hindered. -- Is not the present policy
toward the Canadians wiser and more humane?
especially where prejudice and old debates stand in the way, the progress of
this part of the system, is by no means answerable to the expense and pains it
has cost; especially as these missionaries have had no superior advantages, as
to greater strictness of life, pungency of address in enforcing their
doctrines, or novelty as to the subjects of them; therefore two or three
Bishops with state appointment, and lordly revenue are now proposed in order to
forward this "grand affair." In appeal, page 49, The scheme of on American
episcopate, is so styled.
The well disposed people in England have been formerly amused with the design
of converting Indians, and by this argument, they were induced to contribute
largely to the fund of the society. They are now told, the reason, why no more
has been done in this important business, is the want of well endowed
bishoprics in the colonies One Chapter of the Appeal is wholly employed on
this Topie.
: Though it is evident they never engaged seriously in the matter. In short, though
the society has debarred others from doing it to purpose, the conversion of the
Indians in both cases is a mere pretense.

There are now upwards of five hundred and fifty parish ministers in
New England; suppose all the colonies settled equally with that country, and
equally furnished with religious teachers, and all these of the episcopal
denomination, with Diocesan Bishops, and a primate, subordinate to a patriarch
at Lambeth, what a mighty body would this connection form, what colony could
pretend to govern the clergy within its limits, whilst such an imperium in
imperio subsisted? At present, the episcopal colonies find it difficult enough
to oblige these people, (who interest the Bishops of England in their
pretensions on every occasion) to submit to any Acts of Assembly that may
affect them: The most remarkable Instances of this sort, that I now recollect,
happened in Virginia, some few years since, on Occasion of an Act of Assembly
commonly called the Two-penny act. It affected all Salary men civil and
Ecclesiastical: the civil Officers submitted to the Legislative Regulations;
but the Clergy revolted; and applying to England, by means of their great
Friends, the Bishops, got the Act Repealed, with expressions of Royal
Displeasure to the Governor for passing it.
but combined by a regular plan of discipline authorized by parliament, they
will no longer be subjects, but lords and masters ever every jurisdiction in
America.

It may pass with children and the blinded devotees of the order, "that no such
temporal powers will be exercised here, as have been claimed and exercised in
England; nay that the American Bishops, are even to be reduced much below the
standard there, to have no power over the episcopal laity much less over
dissenters; to have no courts, See Dr. Chandler's Appeal, Pages 79, 80, 81, 94,
95.
etc. But none who know the nature of man, or have considered the transactions
of past ages can pay the least regard to such declarations. Can it be believed
by any man in his senses, that the leaders of a body of men, who by their
offices, endowments, polity, connection and alliances must unavoidably have
great weight in public affairs, will be so mortified to worldly considerations,
as to renounce the influence and power their high stations must give them? No
such instance has ever happened in church or state, since the world began. Some
rare instances indeed may be quoted, of individuals, who being possessed of
high and dangerous authority, have had the magnanimity to renounce it; but of
bodies-politic, senates, or other combinations of men, we meet with none: Large
assemblies or orders of men, are not diffident of their capacity to exercise
power, or if some among them should be so, the more assured majority overruled
the few squeamish brethren; besides the odium of severe measures, being divided
among so many, it has less effect in restraining their proceedings.

The recapitulation of the temporal advantages, which the episcopal clergy have
obtained in the provinces, is not made with an invidious design; but merely to
alarm all people against the grand scheme of spiritual dominion, that seems to
be planned for this country. If Church discipline is to be regulated by the
legislatures here, I shall be in no great pain for civil liberty on this
account; though it might be prudent to put some limits to the Church-possessions
of all denominations. They neither serve any purpose to religion, nor
government; but often prove mischievous to both: Without these, the Clergy
could never be an object of much distrust to the magistrate; Mr. Hume observes,
that when the Abbey and Church lands, which had been seized by Henry the VIII.
and given to the nobility, were confirmed to them by act of parliament (1st and
2d. of Philip and Mary) the power of the papacy was effectually suppressed; for
though the jurisdiction of the ecclesiastics was restored, their property, on
which their power depended was irretrievably lost, and no hopes remained of
recovering it. See his Hist. Eng.
nor would it be worth his while to interfere in religious matters, as he often
does, to his own loss, and the corruption of Christianity, by debasing it into
a political engine. But when the church enjoys large revenues, her officers
becomes too important members of the community, to be suffered to go loose, and
unconnected with the state; and the magistrate, for his own safety, must
establish the prevailing sect, by which he offends and perhaps distresses
others, and loses the affections of many good subjects.

Can it then be prudent, or safe, or confistent with good policy, quietly to
suffer "this yoke of bondage to be put on our necks, which neither we nor our
fathers were able to bear?" Acts, 15, 10.
If the power of the crown, the weight of the nobility, and the national
influence collected in parliament, have scarcely been able on some occasions to
restrain the hierarchy at home, what must be the consequences of a like plan of
discipline extended through, and independent of the colonies; where, for want
of the constitutional balances of the mother country, the influence and weight
of the clergy, must enable them to enforce every claim to power and
independence, which Laud, or the highest flyers of the church of England have
ever started.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Monday May 30th. A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG, [No.
IX.]
By TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
To Timothy Tickle, Esquire
SIR.
I was much diverted with the humor and wit discovered in the plea, Demurrer
and answer, to Doctor Chandler's Appeal, published under the American Whig, No.
VII. but upon reading it attentively, I found the arguments which the author
intended to enforce by it, were rather specious than solid. I am indeed a
churchman, and one of the moderate ones too, with whom it seems the American
Whig would have no controversy. I was bred to the profession of the law, from
which I have retired for some years, and enjoyed the repose of a country life,
where I find a refuge from the literary broils and battles that pertain to the
great, political world. The avocations of my farm have taken me off from the
study of the science which employed my youth, so that my law knowledge is not
only become rusty and dull, but almost obsolete. However, though I am averse to
controversy, and have as little disposition to quarrel with the Whig, as he has
with me; nay, though I never will quarrel with him, or any other man, about
religion, or polities; yet I have undertaken, (it being somewhat in my own way)
to send you a replication to the beforementioned answer, etc. Perhaps the
law-style and forms, may not be strictly preserved as I have few precedents to
consult; and I am pretty sure from the specimen which the Whig has furnished,
that I must be defective in the superabundant effusion of words which
distinguish law proceedings. If nevertheless, you shall think it worth
publishing, with all its imperfections, I shall expect it to appear in your
next paper.

Duchess County, May 9, 1768. Yours, etc. PLEADWELL.
Thomas Bradbury Chandler, APPELLANT. Versus, Some of the People of North
America, called Presbyterians, APPELLEES. On the Appeal in the Case of Bishops
or no Bishops in America.



THE REPLICATION of Thomas Bradbury Chandler, Doctor of Divinity, to the Plea,
Demurrer and Answer of the People of North America, Appellees;
THIS repliant, insisting as before, on all and singular the matters and things
in the said Appeal contained, in the manner and form as the same are therein
set forth, protesting, that the matters in the appellees said plea contained,
are not sufficient in the law to be replied unto, nor to bar the right of the
appellant and his associates, the Episcopalians in America, to such a bishop as
they pray for by the said Appeal: And protesting further, that the matters and
things in the said answer contained, are very untrue, imperfect, and
insufficient to be replied unto; nor is the appellant by the law of the land,
held to make any answer thereto: Nevertheless, for replication to such parts
thereof as this repliant thinks may be worth answering, he replies and says,
that he does deny all and all manner of combination and confederacy with the
convention, or any other person or persons for commencing and prosecuting the
said Appeal "merely for the aggrandizement and exaltation of the episcopal
churches, on the ruin of all other Christian denominations in his Majesty's
American dominions," as in the said answer is untruly suggested: but this
appellant does aver and insist that the said appeal was instituted and
prosecuted with the good will, liking and approbation, not only of the members
of the said episcopal churches in general, but that the same was thought just
and reasonable by the moderate dissenters, many of whom did declare, at diverse
times and places, that there could be no objection thereto.

And this appellant does also aver and insist, that the said Appeal was brought
to be delivered against a real grievance and oppression, and not for the cause
aforesaid; which said grievance and oppression, consists in, and is
compounded of diverse great perils, labors, troubles, disappointments,
expenses, and other hardships, obstructions, difficulties and inconvenience
which hitherto have attended, and always hereafter must and will attend the
crossing the Atlantic ocean, and making ingress into, and egress and regress
out of that part of Great Britain, called England, to procure ordination for
every clergyman that has already been, or hereafter shall be called to preach
the gospel in the church of England in America; which this appellant conceives
does tend to the manifest injury, oppression and impoverishment, as well of
great part of the members belonging to the said church, as of their clergy, and
also does tend to impede, hinder, and obstruct the growth, increase and
advancement of the said church of England, and of religion in general, in these
his Majesty's colonies; the perpetuation and continuance of which obstructions
and impediments, this appellant, without a forced innuendo, verily believes in
his conscience, is an object that does powerfully move, instigate and impel the
said appellees, to stir up strife and contention with this appellant and his
associates, upon the subject matter of the said Appeal.

And for as much as every reasonable man and catholic Christian, whether
churchman or dissenter, cannot but think it very unreasonable, cruel, and
oppressive, and against equity and good conscience, to deny their Christian
brethren any of the rights and privileges which they conceive to be essential
to the good government and order of the church to which they belong, this
repliant thinks he has good cause to complain of being treated with an
unchristian temper, in the manner of the opposition made to the said appeal; it
being manifest that this repliant wants no other bishop than such an one as can
in no sort endanger the civil or religious liberties of any denomination
whatever, and only for the purpose of ordaining and governing in his own
church, and confirming such of his members as choose to be conffirmed.

And this repliant does, and will maintain and prove his said charge of
unchristian treatment, of and from the said appellees, and that it is manifest
that they, by and with the advice of their council, have misrepresented the
true sense, purport, and meaning of the said Appeal, in alleging that this
repliant and the convention, do seek for, and endeavor to obtain and procure a
bishop with all his temporal and ecclesiastical powers and digninities. Whereas
this repliant in behalf of himself, and of the said convention, and of all the
members of the episcopal churches in America, does hereby renounce, abjure,
relinquish, and disclaim all pretense of right, title, and demand to any such
bishop.

And the said repliant further says, that he is well satisfied that the
council of the said appellees, must, for diverse good causes, and considerations
him thereunto moving, have found it expedient and necessary for the undue
prolixification. prolongation, and procrastination of the said suit, and for
the abasement and degradation of the said church, to suggest diverse pretenses,
devices, and diabolical projects and machinations, to have been formed on the
part of this repliant and the said convention, which he does declare, it never
entered into their hearts to conceive.

And this repliant further says, that he will prove and make ^^clear to the
tribunal of the public here, that the council of the said appellees, has
surreptitiously, wilfully, and corruptly, contrary to law, taken upon himself
to appear as council for all the people of America, in opposition to the said
Appeal, when at least one half of them never retained him as council for that
purpose, and are parties in favor of the said Appeal; for which this repliant
conceives, he ought to be prosecuted, as being guilty of gross and palpable
maintenance which he is advised by his council is highly criminal. And these
several matters this repliant has set forth as materially appertaining to the
premises in question, and preparatory to the particular matters of his said
replication, which are as follows.

And so far forth as the appelle^s said plea is taken in bar to the said
Appeal, this repliant says, that the said act of parliament, made and passed
in the reign of King Hen^y the VIII. and in the year of our Lord 1533, had
relation to the clergy of England at that time, and that if it be true as the
said appellees allege, that the same was enacted to get rid of the exorbitant
claims of the clergy of the realm of England, and of their ill gotten wealth,
and ill-used intolerable power, the said act, as this repliant is advised, can
by no reasonable construction, have relation to the state of the clergy in
America, where no such exorbitant claims exist, and where there is no cause for
complaining, either of their Wealth or Power; neither of which, but rather the
contrary, are peculiar and incident to the clergy in America. And this repliant
further says, that there being no Dean and Chapter in America, the provision
made for a bishop by the king's Conged' elire cannot obtain, and therefore that
he must be appointed in some other way than is directed by the said statute,
wherefore for the manifest incongruity of the said statute to the subject
matter of the said plea, and for that it has no more relation thereto than to
the establishment of an ecclesiastical court in a presbyterian synod in
America, this repliant does demur in law to the same, and prays judgment
thereupon.

And this repliant for further application to the said plea says, that as
touching the matters referred to in the 26th and 27th years of the same king's
reign, and in the 1st of Queen Elizabeth, declaring that the king is supreme
head of the church, and vesting him with all the ecclesiastical power, this
repliant conceives and is advised, that no part of the said statutes can have
any force respecting such ecclesiastical power in the colonies, except what
concerns the king, as being supreme head of the church: and that as religion is
necessary to all States, there is a manifest propriety and fitness in point of
policy, that the king should be the head of the established church in all parts
of his dominions where the same is established by law. but forasmuch as the
said appellees themselves do maintain and give our in speeches, that the church
of England is not by any ways or means whatsoever established in the colonies,
it is therefore manifest from their own showing, that the said statutes, nor
either of them, can or do extend, or have reference to the church of England in
the colonies: for which reason this repliant does also demur to all the said
last mentioned statutes as insufficient in the law, to prove what by the ^^^d
plea they were advanced to prove, to wit, that because the c^e^gy within the
realm of England, have a connection with the state and derive certain powers
from human laws, that therefore there can be no right of episcopacy exclusive
and independent of those laws; and for that further, if the said appellees do
deny all manner of divine right to episcopacy, except what is derived from and
under the said statutes and ridicule it as being equally nugatory with the
divine right of geography, this repliant conceives that the said appellees
might, for the same reasons, ridicule the divine right of ordination, and that
such a principle taken up in its full latitude, extent and operation, would
prove that the gospel is preached without authority, and that there is not, nor
ever was, since the apostles time, any divine right of preaching at all.

RICHARD PLEADWELL, Of Council for the Appellant and his Associates.

A RULE of COURT.
IT appearing to the court that the pleadings in this cause are to be published
in a weekly news-paper, and that the aforegoing is of sufficient length for one
paper, it is ordered, on motion of Mr. Pleadwell, council for the appellant,
that he have time to perfect and bring the said replication into court, until
eight days next after publishing the aforegoing part thereof: And it is further
ordered, that upon service of a copy of this rule (by publication thereof in
the New York Gazette, and weekly Mercury) the said appellees, or their council,
do not on any pretense whatsoever, presume to declare, either by signs, words,
or writing, that the said plea and demurrer are unanswerable or that they of
right ought to have judgment thereon against the appellant, until the said
replication is perfected and filled, and the same be fully heard and considered
by the council and judgment be pronounced thereupon in due form of law. And
whereas it appears that the council of the said appellees has, in contempt and
derogation of the authority of this court, taken upon himself to pronounce
judgment on the said Appeal, it is ordered, that an attachment issue against
him to bring him before this court to answer for his said contempt.

A true COPY. examined by WILLIAM FITZ BOHUN. Register of the Court of Appeals
in Case of Bishops or no Bishops, in America.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Monday May 30th.
The AMERICAN WHIG [No. XII.]
THE contumacious and refractory spirit of our high church clergy, in
endeavoring to inflame the populace, by harranguing on their imaginary
distress in being deprived of what they never possessed, that is a mitred
generalissimo, to head their army in stripping us of our religious liberties,
has been taken notice of in a former paper. The unreasonableness and immodesty
of their claim, considering that the mother country has done for them a
thousand times more than they deserve, shall be the subject of some future
speculations. For this day's entertainment, I shall endeavor to show how
extremely impolitic it would be in his Majesty's ministers, to encourage so
dangerous a project, considered as naturally tending to introduce a state of
independence on Great Britain.

It is not a bare address in a present emergency of affairs, that constitutes
the wisdom of a politician. To deserve the character of a wise and able
statesman, one ought to penetrate into futurity and from the contemplation of
causes, to look into effects and foresee consequences. These colonies have
frequently been charged by their enemies at home, with aiming at a design of
throwing off their dependence. This aspersion is equally false and malicious.
The North-Americans of all denominations, except high churchmen, prefer the
constitution of their mother country, to any mode of government that was ever
devised by the art of man. They have always revered every one of their princes
of the illustrious house of Hanover, not only as their lawful sovereigns, but
as monarchs, from principle and affection attached to their constitution; and
averse to the infernal doctrine of the uncontrollable power of kings, the power
of injuring and oppressing those, of whom God and the laws have made them the
guardians and protectors. Hence, without the most glaring partiality of a
British parliament in favor of their brethren at home, they will always reject
the thought of shaking off their subjection, with indignation and horror. As
they bear Great Britain the same affection, and can boast equal fidelity; they
think themselves entitled to equal good treatment. With the duration of such
usage their dependence will, without some unimaginable concurrence of of
circumstances, be unquestionably commensurate. But should a future ministry be
weak enough to be deluded by such a dolorous ditty, as the convention has
lately groaned out, with lamentation loud; or be inveigled by clerical
artifice, to gratify the ambition, the insatiate ambition of some of our
rampant highchurch clergy; nothing is more probable than that these colonies
will be debauched from their loyalty, as soon as this set of men shall be
sufficiently powerful. The spirit of high churchmen is absolutely incompatible
with that of our excellent constitution; and was their power equal to their
wishes, they would neither eat nor sleep before they had turned a limited
monarchy, into an absolute one. Whenever they boast of their attachment to
monarchy, they mean an unlimited monarchy, which they love, because it would
assist them to render the church absolute: But to the government of
Great Britain, which ^^ay indeed be called a monarchy, because it has a king at
its ^^ad; but at the same time essentially participates of the republican form,
because such king can make no law without the c^^ent of the people, they never
were nor ever will be friendly. Nor are they greater enemies to civil, than to
religious liberty: and in what hostile manner they have appeared against the
latter, may be read in the ecclesiastical history of England, in characters of
blood. Their hearts are not at present meliorated because their hands are tied.
When they talk of moderation, we know they mean want of power. What has of late
years restrained, and at present checks, their fury in England; is the
moderation and humanity of our present sovereign, and his predecessors of the
house of Hanover. What restrains them here, is their dependence on
Great Britain as a body ecclesiastic. Having no affection for a constitution
limited by law, as the colonists of all other denominations have; nothing can
secure their allegiance but their subjection to the church. As this has some
place in their affections, at least so far as it flatters their pride and
vanity, by its external grandeur; they will, while kept dependent for their
religious emoluments, be tolerable good subjects. But give them bishops and an
hierarchy of their own; and destroy their present necessary intercourse with
the mother country, which would be the consequence of granting them an
independent episcopate, and you dissolve the principle band of union between
them.

They are at present maintained by contributions and charities from England:
This with men of their turn is one of the strongest ties in nature. But an
American episcopate cuts asunder this cord. Let them have funds of their own by
the management of their spiritual father the bishop, and adieu forever to their
political mother Old England.

They must now, to obtain orders (a cargoe of manuscript sermons they might
procure without going in person) take a trip to London. There they are ravished
with the wealth and magnificence of the church. Transported like the Queen of
Sheba, they confess, that she exceeds the same that they ^eard, and that the
one half of her greatness was not told them. They are dazzled if not with the
wisdom of the English ecclesiastics, at least with their apparel, and
especially with their ascent by which they go up into the house of the Lord. So
dazzled that St. Paul's Church will be fresh in their memories, twenty years
after his doctrines are utterly obliterated. So dazzled, in a word, that were
they to live in their native Canaan for a thousand years after, they would
never forget the onions of Egypt. But give them all this grandeur, with all the
Doctor's political appendages in America; and a fig for Egypt, and all her
onions into the bargain.

These are thoughts, that in my opinion deserve the serious consideration of
the British ministry; and was there no other reason (though I hope to produce at
least one hundred and fifty) against countenancing the pernicious claim of a
few aspiring priests, in an affair so extremely unfriendly to the preservation
of their loyalty and, dependence, and so generally disagreeable to the serious
and worthy part of their own communion; this were alone abundantly sufficient
to reject it with ignominy and contempt.

Q

To the AUTHOR of the AMERICAN WHIG.
Zur,
CHE wud beg your worship's diversion for zaying what cham going to convorme
your worship conzarning. You must know that che was born in Taunton Deane in
Old England, and az che waz an only cheeld, hiz vather had broughten him up a
schollard, and had thoft vor to zend'n to the varsity of Kambridge, but hiz
mother cud not spare the buoy vor that. But he puten'm him to Latin, and he
gotten az var az ass in per centum, and property que maribuz, and Queen Janus.
Now may hap zur, you will zay, what does all thiz magnify? Why, che will tell you
what it magnifieth. I was broughten up a diz enter az waz hiz grantvather
bevoo^ him. And the bishupz did plage uz a woondy deal conzarning the tenthz
of our kowz, and zowz, and goozy chickz, and aul our zubztantz. Zo, voor to get
az var vrom the bishupz az che cud, che came with her only zon, who iz kaul'd
Obie, and zetten uz dawn near the tawn of Gozhen. But now che haz heard Squire
Wimbleton zay, az how that a bishup iz zoon vor to kome after chim. Wherevors
and therevore, I and my zpouze Joan, wad give you a bribe vor to put in a Gavie
against thiz bizhup, vor to zave our kowz, and zowz and zo vorth; and Squire
Wimbleton will give you hiz young horz Nimblesoot, who will be vour year auld
next graz, and Joan will ni^ten you too pair of hoze against next husking time,
and we with the buoy Obie, rezentz our zarvice to you, and are with aul our
heartz and zoulz

Your Zarvant OBEDIAH WHEELER.

To the AUTHOR of the American Whig.
The difference between our Church, and the Church, considered; or the modesty
of the Doctor and his brethren.
THE Spectator in one of his papers, publishes a process of the relative which,
and who, against the particle that. The plantiffs bring an action against their
neighbor, for entering too often upon their premises, and committing trespass,
for taking possession of and occupying the place that belonged to them, and for
many other misdemeanors. I appeal to the world, whether the appropriative our,
has not a right to bring an action against the emphatical the, in the writings
of Doctor Chandler and others. Surely he and his brethren are not ignorant,
that the particle the, when placed before the word church, determines its
signification, and leads us to understand him in the highest sense. The church
in America, if it has any sgnification, means all those of whatever
denomination, or in whatever place residing throughout the continent which
Jesus Christ owns as his people. When I say our church I mean to distinguish
that denomination of Christians to which I belong. Now if this writer speaks
with propriety when he talks of the church, what he says of her is false. If he
intends only the denomination to which he belongs, the style is supercilious
and illiberal. He at least grants, that the English plan of episcopal
government is disputable; and that the other protestant churches, of which
there are so many in this country have some appearance of argument to support
them: Whether he will or not, his betters have granted it a thousand times.
Since then it is disputable, a writer of candor and modesty, should treat the
other churches with some degree of respect; nor suffer any expressions to drop,
that seems to unchurch all other denominations. It is an argument of littleness
of mind to think that there are none but ourselves in the world. When this
writer, with some others of his stamp, calls his denomination, by way of
distinction the church, as if there was none other but that which conforms
itself to the establishment in England, as if the church of Christ in this wide
continent, was confined to that minority, who take for ordinances, the
commandments of their ecclesia^tical superior, on the other side of the water;
I strive to impute it to mere habit, or to the power of dignified precedents,
or to any other cause, any way consistent with real sense. But all must
confess, that it has at least the appearance of either arrogance, or narrowness
of mind. If by it they mean, that the conformists are the greatest church in
America, it is false. -- If they mean that they are established here, it is
false. -- If they mean that their denomination includes all, it is false. -- If
they mean that the Dutch and English presbyterians, the congregationals, and
other professing Christians here, are not the church as much as the conformists
to the English church, it is narrow.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, May 26th The SENTINEL. No. XI.
IT was remarked in a former paper, that if the jurisdiction of parliament to
interfere in the internal police of the colonies, was ever so well established,
yet it would be extremely dangerous for us to have so very delicate a part of
it as church-policy, regulated by that respectable body; especially as the
proposal has come from the clergy, speaking as they pretend, in behalf of a
million of American Episcopalians. The members might indeed afford it as much
attention as they usually give to American business Witness the success of
Captain Cole, in getting the free exportation of rice restrained, for his own
purposes; the blunders in the late regulating statutes, concerning the word
Ireland; as mentioned in the patriot Farmer's Letters.
; and whilst they incautiously adopt the financiers schemes for taxing us, they
might as readily receive from the clergy, a system of faith and discipline for
the American church. If it had the outward appearance of the religious
establishment of England, they would scarce examine further, but agree to it
without a Vote; and however unsuitable and inconvenient to the circumstances of
this country, they would doubtless consider any complaints from America, as
humoursome, if not factious, and highly inconsistent with the submission and
reverence due to the supreme legislature.

However highly we may think of the wisdom and justice of the British senate,
yet we cannot but see strong marks of their sustaining a quite different
character in considering home affairs, from what they do in providing for us.
It is easy to perceive, that when the subjects within the realm, and
consequently the individuals of the legislature, are to be assected by the
parliamentary proceedings, the debates are serious and lively; the scrutiny
into the consequences of the business proposed, strict and curious; and the
appearance of interest and feeling visible to all. Hence their statutes in
these cases being penned with care, and corrected with caution, usually become
lasting monuments of the prudence of the national councils How different the
late regulating and revenue laws for America! hence the several repeals; the
inconsistencies and w^^^ of precision, observable in most of them.
.

But this is by no means the case, when a bill is brought in to bind the
subjects without the realm, for the benefit of those within it. Here the
character of the watchful Representative no longer appears; the business if at
all attended to, and not treated as a thing of course, is only regarded as it
affects the superior kingdom. Whilst the people in the subordinate states and
districts of the empire, are left to learn their inferior situation from the
crude and mistaken provisions of the new statute; which without really serving
the real interests of any part of the British dominions, tend to distress and
enslave the distant subjects.

There is a most remarkable instance of this, in the very different conduct of
the parliament toward the admiralty jurisdiction in England, and in America.
The proceedings in this court, being before a single judge, according to the
course of the civil law, have ever been looked on, and treated as repugnant to
the free constitution of England, which making the people judges of one
another, has provided in the best manner for the liberty and safety of the
subject. Trial by jury, is indeed that happy mode of administering justice,
which having survived the various changes and convulsions of the state, has
been preserved and handed down to us; and God grant we may be able to transmit
it to our children! To the admiralty law therefore, the temper and policy of
our ancestors have always shown aversion and jealousy. They seemed ra^^^r of
necessity to endure, than of choice to encourage it.

According to the common law is the law of the land, and the civil and canon
law are no further permitted than to give relief in cases to which the other is
wholly inapplicable, or which it does not provide for Burn's Eccles. Law.
Preface.
, They who would draw any thing out of its jurisdiction, must entitle
themselves well, says Lord Raymond. If the admiralty undertakes to judge in
matters manifestly without their limits, the judge and party If one Libel in
the admiralty for a Thing done on the Land, and it appears upon the Libel to
be so, and they notwithstanding hold Plea of it, a praemunire lies on it; but
if the same do not appear on the Libel, then a prohibition only shall Issue. --
2 Leonard, 183, Sir Richard Buckley's Case 13th Richard II. Cap. 5th. 15
Richard II Cap 3, 2d. Henry IV, Cap. 11.
prosecuting, are treated as offending against the statutes of Praemunire
devised against the foreign jurisdiction of the Pope, by which they forfeit
their lands and goods and the protection of the law, and are to be imprisoned.
But if this court takes cognizance of a matter of a mixed nature, partly within
their jurisdiction, and partly not; or should ever so little trespass their
boundaries, a prohibition will be issued from the King's court, to correct, or
wholly stop further proceeding. 1 Rolls Abrid. 532, 533.
It may not be amiss to remark here, that the courts of the clergy, the
spiritual courts, are under the same wholesome restraint Henr VIIIth.
encouraged the judges on all occasions, to interpose in Ecclesiastical causes
wherever they thought the law or Royal Prerogative concerned. A happy
innovation says Hume, though at first invented for arbitary Purposes. See his
Hist. Eng. -- The Clergy objected afterward that since all Church as well as
state jurisdiction flowed from the king, it was strange he should correct his
Ecclesiastical Power by his Civil; not considering the difference between the
law of the land, and arbitrary Nature of the other. Archbishop Laud frightened
the Judges in his Time from this Practice.
, and the canon law is suffered to operate no further than the law of the land
has adopted it; Burn's Eccles. Law. Preface.
which is extremely necessary, as otherwise we might be led into the endless
mazes of that arbitary system.

Not content with this, sundry acts of parliament have been passed to
circumscribe, and as it were to naturalize this jurisdiction. It is by mere
indulgence, that mariners are suffered to sue, in the admiralty, for their
wages; it being expressly against an old statute, which had rather too severely
forbid it. lord Hale contends, that the court of King's Bench, had certainly a
concurrent power with the admiralty in cases of felonies done upon the narrow
seas, or coast, though it were high seas, because within the King's Realm of
England; but says this jurisdiction of the common law, was interrupted by a
special order of the King and council, 35 Ed: 3d. and that since 38 Ed. 3d, it
does not appear, that the King's courts have taken cognizance of crimes
committed on the high seas His Pleas of Cr: Vol. 2, Pages 14 and 15.
. However as trade began to extend, and trials for capital offenses, before
this unconstitutional jurisdiction, more frequently to occur, the nation would
not endure it; and therefore, by two statutes of Henry the eighth Stat. 27,
Henry VIII, Cap: 4 -- 28 Henry VIII, Cap: 15 -- These Statues do not alter the
Offense or make that Felony which was not so before, but leaves it as it was
before the Statute, viz. Felony by the civil Law, but give a mean of Trial by
the common Law: Molloy, 74.
, a commission of Oyer and Terminer was ordered to issue out of chancery,
directed to the judge of admiralty, and others, to enquire of, and punish all
traitors, pirates, robbers at sea, and other marine felons, according to the
course of the common law; which practice continues to this day. Again, by a
modern statute, Stat: 2, Geo. II. Cap: 21.
it is provided, that if any one be feloniously stricken, or poisoned upon the
sea, and dies at sea, or beyond sea, the fact shall be triable in any county,
according to the course of the common law.

Thus have the legislature, and the judges of the land, wisely concurred, in
curbing and qualifying this arbitrary mode of judging, as far as it relates to
the mother country. If we enquire what has been the conduct of parliament
toward admiralty jurisdiction in the colonies, we shall find it has been quite
the reverse; and that a court, whose powers have ever been carefully
circumscribed within the realm, has been favored with new and extraordinary
jurisdiction in America; that matters quite foreign to its nature are made
cognizable there; and all restraint and superintendency of the common law taken
away.

As to pirates, and other sea-felons, they and their accessaries are to be
tried in the colonies, before a bench of judges, appointed by commission under
the great seal, or seal of the admiralty, Stat: 11 and 12 Will. III. Cap: 7. --
6th Geo. I. Cap. 19 -- 8. Geo. I. Cap: 24.
according to the course of the admiralty, that is without a jury; and the
charters of the provinces are set aside as far as they interfere with this
court; which is the more extraordinary and dangerous inasmuch as the judges are
the respective governors and council, who in case of the absence, or want of
members to make up a competent number, are directed to associate such Captains
in the navy, masters of Ships, or merchants as they see fit; contrary to the
very nature of the office of a judge, which is a trust of personal confidence
and skill, and may not be put over to others. How arbitrary is this revival of
the admiralty jurisdiction toward Americans! How loose and dangerous the
exercise of it!

This, it may be said, was only restoring the proper jurisdiction of the
admiralty. But why should a jurisdiction be revived in the colonies, which had
been found intolerable in the mother country? The laws of trade have however
introduced a new one; which was first craftily slipped into the act of
navagation, by directing that vessels seized by ships of war for breach of that
statute, should in the colonies, be proceeded against in this court: Stat. 12.
Car. II, Cap. 18.
other cases were left to the cognizance of the law of the land. By an act of
William the third, Stat. 7 and 8 W. III, Cap. 22 -- 5 Geo. II. Cap. 24 -- 6
Geo. II, Cap. 13.
this new authority was extended; and ever since it has been the usual course
for the parliament to refer the execution of any new statutes, passed for
regulating our trade, to the same judicature; so that heavy penalties, even the
forfeiture of ships, and their cargoes, are often adjudged here.

Yea, such a favorite is the American admiralty, that the British legislature,
on assuming a power to tax the colonies, has given much of the business of the
court of Exchequer, which is a court of common law, to this arbitrary tribunal.
See Stamp Act, etc.
And, not content with bringing it a shore at our seaports, and enabling it to
scourge our merchants, they have sent it up into our forests, and directed
that the penalties imposed on such persons as shall destroy his Majesty's
pine-trees in New England, New York, and New Jersey, shall be recoverable in
the admiralty. Stat. 8 Genesis I. Cap. 12 -- 2 Geo II. Cap. 35.


Can any thing more fully manifest the difference between a virtual
representative, and a real one? does it not sadly expose the hardship, the
authors of that ideal character, were reduced to, when they seriously advanced
such a wretched argument for binding America by acts of parliament? Is there
any sympathetic affection in these suppositious delegates, for the subjects
without the realm? or the least attention shown to their interests! Or, is it
any wonder, that ministers of state, are able to procure the parliamentary
sanction, to whatever they draw up for the colonies, without enquiry or debate?

This may account for a most extraordinary statute, that has been passed the
very last ^c^ions of parliament, which gives a new blow to our rights as
Englishmen. By this, provision is made for erecting three or four admiralty
courts on this continent, each to have jurisdiction over two or more provinces;
by which the constitutional and wholesome super-intendency of the common law
over the civil, is wholly evaded, as there is no court of King's Bench in
America, of equally extended Jurisdiction.

The pretense for this new measure might be, that the multitude of judges of
admiralty and their officers, lest without salaries to sponge upon the colonies
for a living, had been a long and just subject of complaint, and could not be
well remedied, except by lessening their number, and giving proper appointments
to those which remained. Suppose the matter placed in this light, and what
member, not well acquainted with the internal affairs of this country, could
have any objection against a regulation, in appearance necessary, and for ought
he could see, attended with no dangerous consequence, nor even the least
inconvenience.

It is scarce necessary for me to remark on this indignant treatment of a
loyal, a useful, and numerous body of British subjects. But can any good man in
his right senses think of an application to "our superiors in England" for an
ecclesiastical constitution, after this view of their conduct toward us in the
important business of admiralty law.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Monday June 6th.
A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG, [No. X.]
By TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
Thomas Bradbury Chandler, APPELLANT. Versus, Some of the people of North
America, called Presbyterians, APPELLEES.
The further Replication of Thomas Bradbury Chandler, Doctor of Divinity,
Appellant, to to the Plea, Demurrer and Answer, of the People of North America,
Appellees.

AND this repliant further says, that as touching the said several causes of
demurrer, alleged by the said appellees, the same are not sufficient in the
law to preclude this repliant from the relief sought for by the Appeal; for
that the present cause of demurrer assigned, is frivolous, equivocal, illusory,
and evasive, in that it denies all equity whereon the people can ground a
decree, and referrs the same as being only cognizable by the parliament of
Great Britain, whereas this repliant avers, that there is great equity
contained in the matter of the said Appeal, and that all people who are not of
a gainsaying, gain-writing, gain-reasoning, oppugning and contravening spirit,
might and do easily see the justice upon which the said Appeal is grounded.
That nevertheless, this repliant is willing and ready to submit the same to the
parliament of Great Britain, who he doubts not, in their great wisdom, will
provide a sufficient remedy for him in this behalf.

And this repliant further says, That the said appellee's second cause of
demurrer, is ill taken, for that it supposes a claim to have been made by this
repliant, in behalf of the bishops, of one tenth of the lands in America; when
in fact, and truth, this repliant never did make any such claim^ but in and by
the said Appeal, has demonstrated to the court here, that a bishop can have no
such right or claim, as necessarily incident and appertaining to his office in
America, as by the said Appeal, reference being thereunto had, may more fully
and at large appear, and to which this repliant, for greater certainty, does
refer. -- And this repliant is advised that the said second cause of demurrer
ought to be overruled, for that if the said claim had been really made in
behalf of the bishops, yet it being of spiritual cognizance, could only be
tried in the spiritual court, and not by an ejectment at law, as the said
appellees allege.

And as touching the third cause of demurrer, this appellant says, that the
same consists only of words without any meaning, and that it is also
manifestly defective in form: For that he is advised by his council, that to
talk of pros^rt of witnesses and oral testimony, is not warranted by the books,
it being a term not known in the law, save only as to matters of written
evidence; neither o^n this repliant conceive any idea connected in the terms
West India Negroes, Infidelity, and virtual churchmen, which to this repliant
appear insensible, repugnant and contradictory.

And as to the fourth cause of demurrer, which asserts, That a harmless bishop
is not known in the law, this repliant does charge, that the said appellees do
only thereby discover their aversion to bishops as they are connected with the
state, and this repliant verily believes, that the said assertion is false, so
far forth as it respects them. But for as much as this repliant and his
associates, want only a primitive bishop, he conceives it would be sufficient
for overruling the said demurrer, if it were found that a harmless bishop is
known in the gospel; and this repliant avers, that from the gospel it does
appear that a bishop may be a harmless, blameless, inoffensive creature.

As to the fifth cause of demurrer, this repliant says, as he has already said
in answer to the second; with this further. That the title claimed by the
uninterrupted succession, was not to the one tenth of the premises, nor to any
temporal powers, as an unalienable appendage to the bishops office in America;
and that the said appellees, whose clergy support their right of ordination,
in, by, and through the same uninterrupted succession, are deriding their own
order, while they are laughing at that of the church, who only place the
succession in bishops, in stead of presbyters.

As to the sixth cause of demurrer, wherein it is said the appellees are
charged with blowing the trumpet of sedition, this repliant says, That he is
conusant of no such imputation against them in the said Appeal: and that he
cannot conceive by what strange tergiversations, sophistications, and
twistifications, his words have been so tortured, perverted, and
transmogrified, as to give color thereto. And forasmuch as the said Appeal
sought not a discovery in any such matters that were criminal in their nature,
or which would expose the appellees to corporal Punishment, or Fine, the same
cannot by any pretense be made the ground of a demurrer to the said Appeal,
which aimed at no more than discovering the true principles upon which an
American episcopate was desired, and the ends proposed for the church of
England thereby.

And ^s touching and concerning the appellees seventh cause of demurrer, this
repliant says, That it is not drawn secundum artem, nor is the same consonant
to, but tends to confound the several parts of good pleading which is manifest
in that it does per saltem, as it were, award the sentence and decree of the
court; which sentence is premature, being pronounced before the issue between
the parties were duly joined: And this repliant says, that the said decree is
partial, unjust, illegal, and unconstitutional, and therefore it is of no force
either of law or equity; and this repliant is ready to aver, maintain, and
prove, that the same is, to all intents and purposes, null and void.

And for further replication to the said answer of the appellees, this repliant
says, That from time, of which there is no memory of man to the contrary, it
has been plain and manifest that some persons who do advise, council, and
direct the said appellees in all matters and things wherein the interest of the
said church of England is concerned, ever have done, and ever will Disapprove
of all and every proposal made for the advancement of the said church, and
would at all times endeavor to molest, disturb, expose, des^a^, resist, and
repulse all reasonable device and devices made on the part of, and for the
benefit of the said church: Wherefore this repliant as concerning the matters
of discovery sought for by the said Appeal, did not aim to discover Matters and
things so luminous, apparent, and notorious to all the good people of this
province: and therefore he does, as to the DISAPPROBATION of the said
appellees, set forth in their said answer, charge that the same is impertinent,
and not material in the premises; and prays his costs in this behalf, to be
adjudged to him, for the unnecessary charge he has been put to thereby.

And this repliant further says, That if the said appellees have seen or heard
of any paper or papers, writing or writings, said to be copies of petitions
sent by the convention to Great Britain, wherein any defamations, aspersions.
and misrepresentations, etc. are contained, this appellant does charge that the
said pretended copies have been fraudulently, and deceitfully made, fabricated,
and constructed by the said appellees themselves, or some of them, or by and
with their, or some or one of their privity, knowledge or consent, in order
thereby to give colorable pretext to their opposition against the said Appeal;
which this appellant conceives to be very unfair, unjust, unrighteous, and
iniquitous, if the same be true. And as this repliant is very certain that no
such defamations, etc. are specified and contained in the said original
petitions, he is constrained to believe, either that such surreptitious copies
have been made and given out as aforesaid, or that in default thereof the said
appellees, or rather their council, have taken upon themselves to surmise, and
publish what they had not the least evidence of any kind to believe.

And as for and concerning the said appellees denial of ever having persecuted
the church in America, or that she ever was persecuted by any other person or
persons, this repliant does aver, and will maintain and prove, that in times
past, the appellees, or their ancestors in America, or in some parts thereof,
have been known to use and exercise cruelty and persecution toward the said
church; and by all the ways and means in their power, to make and render her in
very deed, a church militant; and true it is, that in these latter days, the
said church has in such sort become triumphant, as to preserve herself free
and clear, and freely and clearly indemnified, exonerated, and discharged of
and from all former judgments, Fines, Amerciaments, impositions, Troubles, and
Encumbrances, made and executed by the ancestors of the said Appellees, or any
person or persons claiming the right of persecution, by, from, or under them,
in America: But this repliant does nevertheless believe, that there are diverse
causes, grounds, and reasons, upon which the said exemption may be accounted
for, other than that of a thorough change in the principles of the said
Appellees, which this repliant cannot admit to have been effectually wrought in
them.

And this repliant further says, that he does admit it may be true, that the
said Appllees have not now in their custody or possession, the charter of
uninterrupted succession, mentioned in the said appeal; for that he conceives
there might be, and really were good reasons against entrusting the possession
thereof with them; it being manifest that the said Appellees have not, nor ever
had that cordial love, affection, good will, or benevolence toward the said
church of England, which would have rendered this fundamental right of here is
safe in their hands. And this repliant is rather inelined to believe, that had
the said charter ever been entrusted with the said Appellees the same would
have been kept socret, privy, spoke, covert and occult, or otherwise destroyed,
so that this repliant and his associates, never could at any time or times
hereafter, have had or gotten the same again; or if the said appellees ever had
the said charter, and the same has not been so secreted or destroyed, this
repliant doubts not but that it has been either so obscured, altered raised,
obliterated, interlined and defaced, or so changed by false glosses, forced
innuendos, perversions, evasions, prevarications, subtilties, and unscriptural
interpretations, that it is now become not the same charter whereof mention is
made in the said Appeal, but other and diverse. Wherefore this repliant does not
deny but that the said Appellees may possibly, from one or other of the causes
before mentioned, be well satisfied either that they have not, nor ever had the
said original charter: or if they had, that the same is altogether become
forfeited, vacated, and repealed by the means, devices, and artifices aforesaid.

RICHARD PLEADWELL, Of council for the Appellant and his associates.

SIR,
If the enclosed can be of any service to the cause of truth, it is at your
disposal: The inserting of it in your next paper will oblige many of your
customers. It Is time to reverberate some of that dir^, with which the enemies
of the church have plentifully bespattered the advocates for a bishop. -- to
attack them with politeness and gentleness, is as inconsistent as it would be
to endeavor to defend ourselves with a razor, when an adversary approaches us,
armed with a cleaver.

I am, yours, ENTELLUS.

Impiger, Iracundus, inexorabilis, Acer,
Jura neget sibi nata, nihil non a^roget armis.
HOR. ARS. POE. Avoid the Politic, the factious Fool,
To busy, buzzing, talking, hardened Knave,
The quaint smooth Rogue, that sins against his Reason;
Calls saucy loud Suspicion, public Zeal,
And Mutiny, the Dictates of his Spirit.
OUTWAY'S ORP.
A DIALOGUE JACK-KETCH, and the AMERICAN WHIG.
Whig. WELL cousin! what success attended our last plan? How did your dress
become me:


J Ketch. Admirably! why, you may remember, I always told you, it was a
profession you was formed for by nature, for besides exercising that sourness
of temper, which, if it cannot prey upon others, torments itself, you might
have daily opportunities of feasting your misanthropy on the sufferings of
others.


Whig. You mistake it entirely cousin. I can now raise nobler pleasure than
your sphere of action affords. Your employment indeed is inflicting corporal
punishments: but there is a part in man, whose wounds as they are more painful,
so can never be healed. Heavens! what pleasure I feel, when secure from danger;
I shoot out a poisoned arrow, and wound the peace of some useful member of
society, bending under the infirmities of age, and unable to defend himself,
from a Tremor in his hand, or a torpor in his head. I Can behold the picture
with satisfaction, and "grin horribly a ghastly smile."


Ketch. The pleasure indeed must be exquisite! but certainly a person of your
abilities, must sometimes exercise his talons on nobler prey.


Whig. You Have hit my taste exactly, "I Am a nonconformist to order and
established Method; I therefore endeavor to introduce as much confusion as
possible, -- I Am the Goliath of our fraternity, -- I rush in on the armies of
the Levites, fall directly on their center, move toward front and rear, "lay
waste high places," and dispatch institutions of Christianity at a stroke.
'Twas I, the mighty I, that defended the rights and liberties of my country
against the stampt-act; -- 'Twas I that stood forth in that juncture, defeated
all attempts to enforce it, and obtained its repeal. -- 'Twas I who founded a
Watchtower and Reflector, to frighten men, women and children into fits. --
'Twas this arm that crushed a college in embryo.


Can none remember; Yes, I know all must!
When calumny, inflamed with party rage,
Poured her fell poison from my bitter page,
When envy's self, my standard trembling bore,
And pale religion bled at every pore;
When at my breath proud spires would totter down,
And churchmen shrink to nothing at my frown.
J. Ketch. I must confessed, cousin, your superiority to any of our tribe; but I
am, as yet unacquainted with our reasons for so strenuously opposing a bishop.


Whig. Unacquainted! Why, can you be ignorant, that the same reasons which made
us enemies to the church, engage us to be equally so to bishops. As we are fond
of contention and disorder, so it must be painful to see harmony and peace
among others. The church will be a wall between us and power; we must therefore
break through it, or rise over its ruins. -- I say then there shall be no
bishops, they are Holy tyrants, Apostolical-Monarchs,
spiritual-Generalissimo's, law-dignified, court-favourred blood-suckers; they
have drank of the cup of the whore of Babylon. If the clergy desire such
bishops as they desire, they shall have them, "it would be unreasonable to deny
them what their salvation depends on," -- but they do not desire what they
desire, neither shall they have any bishop at all, for a bishop will persecute:
If he touches a meeting house, it will turn to a cook's shop, -- He Will swallow
down for his breakfast lands, tenements, with all and singular the possessions
of independants. -- His breath will blast the fruits of the field. -- His urine
will occasion inundations, and the wind from his posteriors, blow away our
synod-men like locusts to the Red Sea. -- He Will dig up the bones of our
forefathers for his food, and drink the wine of fornication out of their scull
bones. I say, I am a friend to the rights of private judgment, therefore,
though the church thinks the ordination of bishops necessary, she shall not
have it here, because I think it is not, I say it is not. If they asked a
primitive bishop, that is, a bishop suffering persecution, and exiled from
place to place. I could wish them good speed, because there are no such. They
appeal for a bishop, that shall have power only over his own clergy, but I say
they don't ask for such a bishop, and whoever doubts what I say, is a
superstitious bigot; and if he is a clergyman, I Will tell him he lies, to his
face.


Ketch. Right cousin! you now speak in character. I wish from my soul, the
first cargo of spiritual carnalities, that are imported here, may meet the fate
of the stamp papers; and I join in your threatening, that I would not promise,
but should the most pious bishop in England (not excepting any restrictions)
come over here, he would be trea^^d worse than the commissioners in a late act.
I for my part, will be ready, at the head of a well-chosen, down-looking,
stern-browed, harpy-claw'd crew, to give his body to the fowls of the air, and
his flesh to the beasts of the field.


Whig. On the success of this one attempt, my future schemes depend. -- If I
can once get this "scarlet whore, the church." bound in the chains I have
prepared, I Will strip her by degrees of her covering, give her to penury and
want, and turn her, naked, to the insults and contempt of the world. -- Nay, I
doubt not, after such a precedent, (in imitation of him who set fire to the
temple of Diana,) I shall be able to establish my reputation on the ruins of
all religion. My first attack, after levelling the notions of an hierarchy,
should be made on all the priesthood: I could assert, (to the great comfort of
all deists) that the clergy of all denominations have been of more disservice
than advantage to religion, bringing the understandings of men under
ecclesiastical bondage, placing devotion in wigs and starched bands, piety in a
mortified face, and prayer in harmonious gruntings from the throat, and
melodious twangs from the nose: That they darken the truth, by teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men, and never fail, when they have it in their
power, to pillage and butcher mankind. -- Then I could proceed to aim at
Christianity, as occasioning wars and dissentions, and the most bitter rancour
among men, and I doubt not (as the clergy, its desenders, would be
exterminated) but I should find it an easy task, to prove its use less than its
disadvantage to mankind. Here will be a state unmolested by priests, or public
worship; then will commence the foundation of a regular American constitution;
a phoenix government, rising from the ashes of Great Britain; omnipotence
contends for it! Who can retard its structure?


Ketch. A very noble plan truly! worthy its author! you are the only builder,
cousin, able to raise this babel! the only Hercules fit to cleanse this Augean
stable!


Whig. I am the Atlas, that sustain on my shoulders the interests of the
colonies; I Am the defender of the civil and religious liberties and privileges
of all protestant denominations. I am the grand critic and word-catcher of
America, and I grow so powerful and terrible, that I am almost afraid of myself.


Ketch. Go on then manfully, thou hero of our cause! mow down the Philistines
with thy two edged sword. -- Silence the clergy with the thunder of thy mouth.
-- call them persecutors, retailers of unintelligible jargon, spinners of airy
cobweb divinity, sowers of discord, enslavers of their native country,
conceited, contracted, obstinate book-worms, pillagers and butchers of mankind;
and if ever you should want severe epithets, turn over the pages of your
immortal predecessors, the independent whig, and other deists of the age; from
thence descend (if you would have the same bitterness expressed in a lower but
more rancorous style) to the watchtower, and reflector; by the help of whom,
you may pull down dagon, hinder this abomination from coming among us; and
instead of them, raise up our own profession, emblematically prefigured by the
brazen calf at Horeb. -- Then shall another Mathers hand down your life, for
the imitation of posterity -- Our churches shall be called after your name, and
I myself will fix this epitaph over your remains. --


EPITAPHIUM.
Here lies, renowned CHAMPION PERT,
The Giant-Son of Scandal;
Plunged six soot deep, in that vile dirt,
He loved so well to handle.
Born foe to man, through lise he past
A ghastly visag'd elf:
He frowned at all, and died at last
With snarling at himself.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Monday May 30th. To the Printer of the KICK.
DOCTOR Chandler informs us in his Appeal, p. 57. that there are about eight
hundred and forty four thousand blacks in our islands and colonies, who are
known chiefly to belong to the professors of the church of England; and who
according to his representation and reasoning, must be reputed to belong to
that church, and that therefore there is great need of an American Episcopate,
etc.

Now this part of his scheme may be greatly improved, by showing the propriety,
that the bishop, or bishops so devoutly requested, should be of the same color
and nation. It is allowed by all parties, that bishops should be grave; and it
is equally well known that by the consent of mankind in general, black is an
emblem of gravity, Thus bishops, and even, clergymen of all denominations,
commonly wear black cloth of one kind or other, Hence it is obvious at first
sight, that a bishop who was really black would have a great privilege in
respect of gravity, which is an essential qualification of an Episcopate. This
would conduce much to his venerable appearance.

And since there are so many blacks who are churchmen, there would be a great
congruity in appointing over them bishops of their own color and nation. For
negroes have their national pride and prejudices, as well as other nations, and
on many accounts have aversion to the whites. They would therefore be much more
likely to receive the instructions of religion from one of themselves, than
from one of another nation. This is so plain, that it would be to suppose too
much dullness in the reader not to perceive it. And thus the great and good ends
proposed by Dr. Chandler, cannot be obtained, but by having a black bishop sent
to America. And in the next edition of the Doctor's Appeal, he will doubtless
improve this important thought, and amplify it by his fruitful genius into a
pathetic section; especially since without it his scheme is far from being
uniform and complete.

There are many precedents of Africans being bishops; was not the famous St.
Austin an African? And he informs us, that there were nine hundred bishops in
Africa, in his time. August. Tom. VII. de gestis cumemerit. And since there are
so many hundred thousands of blacks who are churchmen, why should they be
denied the great privilege of having a bishop of themselves.

It cannot be pretended, that it will put the nation to more expense to appoint
negroes for bishops, than other men, or that it will give more umbrage to other
denominations; but it would be easy to show, that both these would be greatly
removed by this measure, as every one must be convinced by his own candid
examination of the case.

Tho much has been said about the uninterrupted line of succession, yet it has
never been pretended that it was necessary it should be confined to men of a
certain hue or color. It will be readily granted, that a negroe can take as
fast hold of this rope, as any other man, and make as good use of it as others
have done. -- It is also certain, with regard to ordination by the imposition
of hands and confirmation, that black hands will be as communicative of divine
ministerial authority and holy impressions, as white ones. If any deny this,
let them show that the validity of divine institutions is limited to a certain
particular color; or that there is not as much weight in the hands of a black
diocesan, as of any other.

And thus there are many reasons for a negro episcopate in the colonies, and no
objections have as yet been offered against it, nor is it easily conceived that
there can be any of much weight: But if there should be any, let the objectors
propose them with modesty and candor, and they shall receive a due
consideration from the public's most humble servant

NIGRICOLA.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Monday May 20th. A KICK FOR THE WHIPPER. [No. II.]
By Sir ISAAC FOOT, ESQR
Clodius accusat maechos.
AS Squire Tickle has given me a surfeit of words, in my animadversions I shall
be as laconic as possible.

He would fain persuade us, that showing from what quarter they come, will go a
good way to confute the Whig's compositions, i. e. if Tim. Tickle, Esquire calls
the Whig a rascal, or a Preshterian, (and that without proving him either, he
in a great measure confutes his arguments. Compare paragraph 1st, 2d, 3d, and
4th, of No. I. (Compendious reasoning, this!) Thus the appellation old woman,
has already half confuted Dr. Ch -- y; alas, for the poor boy of 17!

He makes great use of the word faction, (in No. VII. no less than four times
in three lines) to denominate anti-episcopalians. Quere. Which does this title
suit best, a small number who disturb the public peace, by attempting dangerous
innovations, or the body of the people, who oppose them?

He undertakes (par. 5th) to check the insolence of this faction. How? -- by
vapouring, and brandishing a bundle of verbage, called a whip, in his hand over
the whig, presbyterians, etc. But what insolence? -- why -- in abusing the
lenity of the church of England; lenity! what lenity? -- Oho! in tolerating and
protecting them. No. II. par. 2d, and No. IV. par. 7.) ha! ha! ha! -- Quere. Is
it the Pope, or the King, the Convocation, or the Parliament, that tolerates
and protects dissenters? Oh! how much brass there was in the forehead of the
Colossus! -- but I forget myself; the state and church of England are so
blended, that what is done by one, is (it seems) done by the other. In the same
par. Squire Tickle, with the most delicate touches of art, draws a picture in
miniature, which his brother Jack Catch has copied at full length; whose should
it be? Let Us view it nearer; -- O my stars! am I mistaken? I took it for the
Whig's, surely it cannot be Squire Tickle's; and yet every body fays it is an
exact likeness. Well! who would think that a man could draw his own picture so
well? -- but in this part also. (as on every occasion afterward) Squire T.
nobly distinguishes himself by his pertinent criticisms on the Whig's language.
Why don't you mind words more, Mr. Whig? surely you don't consider, that a
fault in style, may ruin a good thought, and confute one of your own arguments.
If you don't take care, the Whipper will wear out your coat by beating the dust
out. -- Quere. Is not Squire T. a clerical padagogue?

Par. 6. The Appeal is written with great moderation -- so acts a cat in
ambush; what of that Squire Tickle? Par. 7. and alibi. Erratum, for asks, read,
appears to ask; vide. 2d and 5th strokes of the minature painting; par. 8 and
9, etc. Squire Tickle pursues his argument, by showing (as he dares say) from
what quarter the Whig's compositions come; -- his reasoning (which he loves
dearly) is unanswerable, and his borrowed, and often repeated hints at the
reason no earlier opposition was made to an episcopate, must needs have
irresistible force; for many strokes of a Whip in the same place, must surely
hurt. How is it, Mr. Whig?

Par. 11. The Whig pragmatically assumes to be desender-general, etc. but who
dares say Squire Tickle pragmatically assumes to be Whipper-general, when he
assures us, No. II. that he hates controversy, and was dragged (to the
Whipping-Post,) to do what he owns it were criminal not to have done. N. B. He
makes a very cunning remark, about knowing secret attempts, etc.

Par. 12 and 13. Ha! criticism again! well, I must needs own, Squire Tickle,
you always act consistently, i. e. just like -- yourself. But what a Quixote
this Whig is! he surely has a windmill in his brains. Danger! poh! there is not
the least danger either to dissenters or churchmen from an op^scopate; but hark
ye, Squire Tickle, -- a word in your ear -- between you and me, when people are
needlessly terrified, we ought to pity not blame them, nay more,

Folix quem saciunt alien^ pericula cautum, but you really go a little too far
in insisting upon proof to justify caution. Only prove on your side that there
is no danger, and this poor crackbrain'd fellow the Whig, will recover his
senses again.

Z.

[From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, June 6.]
The AMERICAN WHIG [No. XIII.]
To the Author of the American Whig.
SIR.
I THANK you for the publication of my former letter, signed an American
Churchman, and as I now renew the correspondence with the same design of
vindicating our church from the odious imputation of a design to introduce
bishops into America, you have leave to make the same use of it. I call the
imputation odious, because as the law now stands, we cannot have an Episcopate
in this country, but upon terms more mischievous than beneficial. I have
already shown, that bishops will necessarily bring with them the ecclesiastical
courts, and subjugate the colonies to the pride and tyranny of the clergy;
evils of all others to be most dreaded; and which to prevent and abhor, I hope,
is as consistent with the character of a churchman, as of any other
denomination. All who expect to better their circumstances by his lordship's
favor, will fret at the opposition, and be apt to deny the moderate
episcopalians, who disapprove their ambition and indiscretion, to be true sons
of the church. This was a stratagem of the papists, and is now imitated by the
tories, who to catch the vulgar, cover their real designs, under the cloak of
zeal for the cause. But her glory never depended upon the furious devotees who
crowd into her bosom: She acquired honor at the reformation, by the
catholicism of her chief leaders; and those who have preserved it since, have
always been distinguished by the holiness of their lives, the charitableness of
their tempers, their prudence, their love of liberty, and detestation of
bondage. Our characters of renown, are such as Cranmer, Ridley, Burnet, Hoadly
and Tillotson, who were as eminent for their meekness, as for their piety and
erudition. Laud, Manwaring Sibthorp, Atterbury and Sacheverel, are their
contrasts; and with pride in their hearts, the church the church, on their
tongues, and a faggot in their hands; were ready for every project, which
savage intolerance, and the execrable principles of passive obedience, and
non-resistance, could dictate. All societies are exposed to hot and designing
spirits, who would be willing to turn the world up-side down; and men of cool
heads sind often more difficulty ^n guarding the church against the rashness of
her friends, than the open attacks of her enemies. It was the violence of a few
bigots that obliged the government to shut up the convocation, and deprive the
church of England of the privilege of meeting in synods and councils; a
privilege infinitely more important to her, than the presence of bishops in
this country can be to us, -- a privilege, or to speak more properly, a right,
perhaps essential to the well-being of the church of Christ, and certainly
agreeable to the usage of every other Christian church, in all countries, from
the apostolic age, to the present day. Let those who consider the distance of
our bishops as an unparralleled hardship, reflect upon this loss, which the
church of the mother country has sustained, and by which she is become
disagreeably distinguished from every Christian church in the world. It teaches
a good lesson to us all; she submits to it, and her best friends submit
willingly, because more evil than good, probably would continue to be the
consequence of the assembling of her clergy; and if such is like to be the
case, upon our establishment of a hierarchy in America, we shall approve
ourselves good Christians, good subjects, and good churchmen too, by a
peaceable demeanor, under the trifling inconveniences, comparatively speaking,
which we feel from the remoteness of the bishop of London, to whose care our
churches are more particularly entrusted.

But whether it was our duty to be content with our present state, or not; yet
since the establishment of bishoprics in America, will make a vast change in
our ecclesiastical state, and naturally introduce a long train of alarming
consequences; I cannot help thinking, the very manner in which relief has been
sought for, subject to severe censure; and, that the people of our denomination
ought to be the first to complain.

From the best information I have been able to obtain, the clergy of Maryland,
Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and the West India islands,
had no concern in the late petitions transmitted on this subject; they seem to
have been hatched by a few warm missionaries in the provinces of New York,
New Jersey, and Pensylvania; and propagated to the Eastern colonies by the help
of the frequent unconstitutional assemblies, latterly convoked under the name
of the convention. It is a rash enterprise of the clergy, without the
intervention of the laity; and therefore ought not to be charged upon the
church in general. I venture to affirm, that the majority of their hearers,
^^y, that some of the most respectable members of the churches, uncer the care
of these very missionaries, knew nothing of the design, till the petitions were
actually transinitted. In so important a transaction, affecting every episcopal
church in America, all the clergy, and such of the laity, as were most
distinguished for their rank and abilities, ought, doubtless, to have been
consulted: And had the projectors been as eminent for their prudence, as they
have signalized themselves for their heat and precipitation; the public would
not have been exposed to the anxieties, jealousies and animosities, with which
the whole continent is now disquieted and alarmed.

Admitting all that Doctor Chandler has alleged, to be true, yet a novelty was
to be introduced; and though the whole convention assisted, still the state of
this country, as opposed to a hierarchy, the dignities and privileges annexed
to the order of bishops, in that from whence they are expected; the effect the
law might have upon the claims of the new bishops, and the manner of guarding
against powers, of which we ourselves are fearful, and which the Doctor himself
will not permit them to enjoy; all conspired to dictate a proceeding in a
matter of this weight, with the utmost deliberation. It is in vain to attempt a
vindication, by alleging, that all men were consulted by the Appeal; because
the machination was already begun to be carried into execution; the petitions
being actually preferred: The Appeal was a second step toward it -- and the
very question whether an alarm of the colonies at this juncture, was proper or
not, deserved the previous consideration of all the friends of the church. The
publication of the Appeal, was itself therefore a great error, and cannot
justify the first; so that there has been a contempt in this process of the
greater part of our clergy, and of the whole laity, except a few, from whose
insignificancy, the projectors perhaps, expected neither aid nor opposition.
But this not all, their conduct is as exceptionable for their shameful neglect,
both of the government and the bishop of London.

Seven addresses intimately assecting all the episcopal churches upon the
continent, and to personages, and bodies of such rank as the sovereign himself,
the two archbishops, the society for propagating the gospel, the bishop of
London, and the two universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and upon a subject of
the most delicate nature; ought to have been laid before the governors of those
provinces, at least, where the petitioners resided. If the design was good,
their aid was expedient; and it might be expected from them, as representatives
of his Majesty, who is by law the supreme head of the church -- Add to this,
that being interested as ordinaries in their provinces, there could be neither
decency nor justice, in soliciting an enterprise, in which they were, or might
be deeply concerned, by a diminution of their perquisites without their privity
and concurrence.

And as to his lordship the bishop of London, their sa^s pus is equally
astonishing and repuchensible. Surely they could n^^ be ignorant of the King's
instructions to our governors, relative to the churches in this country. In
these, while the rights of conscience are secured to all protestants, due care
is taken for the better government of our churches, by an order to the
governors, to give countenance and encouragement to the exercise of the
ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the bishop of London. The standing instructions
to the governors, are nearly similar in all the provinces, not chartered, nor
granted to proprietors. These following were given to Col. Montgomerie, the
governor of New York, with his commission, and are dated the 20th of October,
1727. 57. You are to permit a liberty of conscience to all persons, except
pupists, so they be contented with a quiet and peaceable enjoyment of the same,
not giving offense or scandal to the government.

64. And to the end the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the said lord bishop of
London, may take place in this province, so far as conveniently may be; we do
think fit that you do give all countenance and encouragement to the exercise of
the same, excepting only the collating to benefices, granting licenses for
marriages, and probate of wills, which we have reserved to you our governor,
and to the commander in chief of our said province for the time being.




The episcopal church in the city of New York, was incorporated by a law of the
colony, in Queen Anne's reign on the 27th of June, 1704; and the institution
and induction of the rectors is enacted, to be "in such manner, and always, as
shall be most suitable to her Majesty's instructions to his Excellency the
governor of this colony, for the time being, and that canonical right and
authority which the Right Rev. Father in God, Henry lord bishop of London, and
his successors has, and shall have, over the said church." With whatever
contempt therefore, some may think and speak of the authority of this prelate
in America; the missionaries ordained by him, ought above all others to have
treated his claims, so honorably guarded, with peculiar respect. I speak as a
churchman; our clergy, in my humble opinion, ought, not only to have acquainted
his lordship of the design of erecting one or more dioceses, within that which
he claims for the Sea of London. before any petitions were presented to others;
but to have had his express approbation for holding the conventions in which
they were contrived. That any applications to this end, were ever made to him
before the commencement of the execution of this plain, I have never heard; nor
without good proof will be induced to believe. Had such been the case, their
success could not well have remained a secret to this day; nor is it
conceivable, that his lordship would have countenanced conventions or
assemblies of the clergy in America, not allowed of in England; or formal
addresses to the throne, upon a subject so new and important, without bringing
his majesty acquainted with the design; who, would doubtless have suspended his
royal concurrence, till the governors of the provinces had been ordered to
report upon the expediency, both of the aim of the petitioners, and the manner
proposed for carrying it into execution.

But this censure upon the mode, will fall with so much the greater weight, as
the project itself is to the last degree dangerous. -- It Is granted, that the
introduction of bishops will give us some advantage of which we are now
deprived; but the question is, whether greater evils will not ensue, than those
we now complain of. Because the church in America is not so completely
organized as we could wish, are we to be regardless of consequences injurious
to our country, and perhaps to the laws of religion itself? Gold, as the old
saying is, may be purchased too dear. I acknowledge that more discipline is
wanting; but to the honor of our missionaries, the necessity in this respect
is very far from being urgent, except in Maryland, and the islands. The expense
of a voyage to London, for ordination, has its advantages and disadvantages;
and confirmation is a rite which is undoubtedly rational, and has its uses; but
I can trust the mercy of God without it; and after all, who will dare say we
are a church without a bishop. We are under the pastoral care of the bishop of
London; and if his lordship's distance is in some respects to be lamented, yet,
to be honest, we must confess, that he has the whole society for propagating
the gospel to assist him; an advantage this to him, and to us, never to be
concealed, but freely mentioned, and with the utmost gratitude. As our
missionaries are dependent upon their generosity, they hold the power to govern
them with ease; nor can we reproach the society with any instance of their
neglecting to withhold their allowance from a single clergyman, duly convicted
of immoral behavior: So that in point of discipline, instead of magnifying our
distress, we can beast a superiority to any part of England; for there, a
wicked priest, by a less precarious subsistence, and the interest of powerful
patrons, often out-braves the pastoral authority of his spiritual father. This
is a grievance the bishops greatly lament, and from which the church cannot be
relieved, till the parochial incumbents, by a change of the law, are become
more dependent upon the people, or their ecclesiastical superiors.

Happy, therefore, as the circumstances of the churches are in America, there
is really no foundation for adventuring upon the innovation, for which some men
affect to be so vehemently concerned. The benefit sought for, is not worth the
expense of the trouble and disgrace already brought upon us, by the jealousy of
the rest of our countrymen. I speak for myself, (and anxious for the honor of
our church, I am happy in being able to say, that I know it to be agreeable to
the general voice of the most distinguished and reputable persons of our
persuasion,) that I had rather there we should be under the Sea of London,
distant as his lordship is, with the aid of the society to support him, while
the world lasts; than run the most distant risk of exposing this country to the
unchristian chastisement of the spiritual courts, for the space of a single
year. And yet, that is not the only evil which will follow from the erection of
episcopates in America. -- An increase of the power of the clergy of any
denomination, where we are split into so many, will disturb and depopulate the
continent, and spoil the fairest prospect of establishing a glorious, rich, and
happy empire, which the world ever saw. I love Christianity for its
philanthropy; and its friendliness to mankind, I esteem as one of the best
proofs that it came down from our benevolent father, who is in heaven. -- It
was said by a great personage in the last reign, that it was the peculiar
felicity of the plantations, that all protestant sects were upon a par; and
that the crown unembarrassed by any persecuting laws, was at liberty to reward
every man according to his merit. A speech this, that would have become a
philosopher, and which, disgustful as it may be to the sour soul of a bigot,
would have been approved by LOCK, that prince of philosophers; and who was at
the same time, one of the brightest ornaments of our church and nation. The
principle is besides as politic, as it is Christian. Consisting of but a
handful, what could England have done toward the settlement of this continent,
which is now become so great a magazine of her wealth, had she not given into
the most liberal toleration. What matters it to the nation by what blood, or by
what persuasion she is served, if she is but well served: And has not the
experience of more than a century evinced, that the Americans, who consist
chiefly of foreign protestants, Scotch and Irish presbyterians, and English
dissenters, breathe a spirit of loyalty, perfectly free from the Jacobitism and
Toryism of those Sacheverelian bellowers, for the church, the church; who are
so scandalous to her, so dangerous to the government, and so rampant in Oxford,
and numerous in other parts of the mother country.

Besides, it is not only agreeable to the principles of sound policy, to give
no sect an offensive pre-eminence in the colonies, (which an episcopate tends
to promote,) but it is really what the nation with which England has connected
herself, since America was explored, may with justice expect; and to prevent
which, the Americans themselves will proceed to the greatest extremities. For
as to Scotland, since presbyterianism has as lawful, and national, and
reputable an establishment there, as episcopacy has in the southern part of the
island; and this continent is peopled by emigrations from both, no reason can
be assigned for any odious distinctions to the prejudice of the sons of either
of those churches. As to the Americans, what is the language of their charters,
the commissions and instructions to their governors, the statute of
naturalization, and the colony laws unrepealed, with the constant usage of
government, in appointing persons to places both of trust and profit, without
any religious discrimination; but that if they are protestants and good
subjects, nothing more will be expected? Depending upon this, people of
different nations came out, and settled this wilderness; and thereby acquired a
dominion for Great Britain, which, if she had been left to herself, she never
could have people. The Americans have therefore a compact to plead for their
immunities: And all the benefits which flow from this country, whether they
respect extent of commerce, wealth, or the augmentation of the number of
British subjects, even in Europe; to which last, the growth of the colonies has
greatly conduced; are what we bring in our hands in return for the privileges
we enjoy. Away then with every ill-policied intolerant, contemptible, priestly
project, contrived in a conclave, convocation, convention, or any other nest of
narrow minded, proud, ignorant, inflammatory parsons. No bishop without a
spiritual court. It Is by this rod, the church of England, according to the
present state of the law, corrects her disorderly professors. And if a number
of these judicatories are once set up in America, farewell to those emigrations
from Europe, which have proved such fruitful nurseries to this country. The
bare apprehension if it spreads across the Atlantic, will do us more harm than
many are aware of. Assure yourself, Sir, that it is not the church, nor even
the majority of our clergy, that wish success to this silly scheme; to those
only who are in the pay of the society, and of these, to such as are
discontented with their allowance, it is to be imputed. All the rest of the
episcopal clergy are quiet, and the body of the laity wish the missionaries had
been so too. For the satisfaction of the weaker sort, who think otherwise, I
shall in some future letters abundantly show, that, whether the
non-episcopalians are right or wrong, in this controversy; we shall be wrong,
if we persist in teazing the government to patronize a scheme, that may, if it
proceeds, involve us either in the calamities of a civil war; or by driving the
present inhabitants out, or stopping further importations into the country,
prevent the settlement of our lands, and by sinking their value, plunge us into
ruin, and perhaps drag the nation after us into the same pit of destruction.

AN AMERICAN CHURCHMAN

THE Author acknowledges the receipt of an anonymous letter, on
unconstitutional, and unchristian proceedings of the Convention, in embarking
in a late hazardous, and most important enterprise, without consulting the
members of their respective churches; which shall be published in due time.

I am also very greatly obliged to a very sensible member of the Dutch Church,
for his excellent letter, disproving in the most masterly manner, the late
scandalous aspersion of those churches being in any sort episcopal; and
ingeniously exposing the low arts of those, who propagate such notorious
falsehoods; which shall also be inserted as soon as possible.

The judicious composition exposing Dr. Chandler's considerations of church
discipline, and the false idea he has given of that of his own church, is also
come to hand, and well deserves a place in the American Whig,

A KICK FOR THE WHIPPER, By Sir ISAAC FOOT, [No. III.]
Cum tua pervideas oculis mala lippus inunctis;
Cur in aliorum vitiis tam cernis acutum,
Quam aut aquila aut serpens Epidaurius?
HOR.
SQUIRE T. hates controversy -- especially with an unfair, abusive adversary;
No II. par. I.) it is natural; even a man, who loves dearly to play tricks and
seold, hates abominably to be tricked and scolded at himself. But who is this
unfair and abusive adversary of Squire Tickle's? The WHIG. Why, Jack Catch
never dignifies the malefactor with this appellation. Alas! Squire T. (the
Whig's Whipper) certainly does not consider, that he does too much honor to a
rascal (who, taking no notice of his blows, says not a word to him, and whose
backside only is toward him) in calling him his adversary.

The general observations in par. 2d. and 4th, all the world must allow to be
just; but their particular application must be submitted to the tribunal of the
public. So that par. 2d, 3d, 4th and 5th, I shall truss up like two brace of
snipes on one and the same spit; only basting them with this observation, that
I Have often heard of a calf's, but never of a bull's being begot; nor did I ever
before dream, that one single bull could be begot upon two dams, and those so
different as a sheep and a wolf. -- Squire Tickle's very good friend, etc. JACR
PUNLOVE, must needs be a very cunning fellow!

Par. 6th. Squire T. declares, that the Whig and his faction, have written, and
done NOTHING AT ALL in behalf of their country, to avert impending mischiefs.
How he knows this, I know not; but this one thing I know, that, if the late
scribbling about bishops has occasioned divisions and distractions, Squire T.
acts very consistently (with himself) in charging all to the Whig's account;
for who does not know, that the Whig wrote against bishops, long before Dr.
Chandler wrote for them.

Par. 7th Squire T. commends some late patriotic writers, and that not without
reason, any man readily commends another, who exerts himself to preserve that
property, which he hopes one day will be his prey; and no Tory will in any case
quarrel with even a Whig, while his views are not inconsistent with his own.
However, I fancy Squire T. little suspects, that even that Whig, that champion
for liberty, the FARMER himself, is one of the best writers against an American
Episcopate; had he known this sooner, his 7th might have been of the same
complexion with his 8th paragraph.

That the reader may discover the merit of par. 9th I beg leave to refer him to
Dr. Ram-chicken.

Par. 10th. Squire T. points out the Whig's self contradictions, the grossness
of which every one must needs see, who considers, that in, by, and through the
church, and so far as she is concerned in the premises, Dr. Chandler 's Appeal
seems to breathe a zeal for religion, signifies precisely the same thing as Dr.
Chandler breathes a zeal for religion; and that ASKS, without a condition,
expresses no more than SEEMS TO ASK, with one. If in the other instances the
reader, on again examining the Whig, should be at a loss to find the
inconsistency, he, will no doubt wonder at the acuteness of Squire T's.
eyesight, which enables him to discover what no body else can.

What a fool the Whig was to talk of Bellarmine! Bellarmine and Dr. Ch -- r,
however similar, were absolutely, utterly, and entirely different persons. (
Compare WHIG, No. I. par. 2, and WHIP, No. II. par. 2.)

Par. 12th, is full of criticism (which Squire T. loves dearly) and par. 13th
suggests a reflection on the vast force it has to knock down argument.

In par. 14th, Squire T. scolds at the poor Whig, and his party, most
vehemently, though he had done the same several times before. So have I heard
an old woman scold herself out of breath -- then puff -- and blow -- and then
scold again. Squire T. charges the Whig with misrepresentation, (what was it a
late writer said about Joseph, and Potiphar's wife?) and if any man dares say
it is an unjust charge, or that there is one single misrepresentation in par.
10th, No II of the Whip, he will be scolded at as an enemy to the CHURCH, and an
adversary, -- an abusive adversary, (oh! dreadful!) to Squire Tickle.

Par. 16th proves Squire T. a master indelicacy of composition; I dare defy the
whole world to produce his equal. Let scribbled, slandered, reviled, SNIVELLED,
SNORTED, ROARED, RAVED and SPIT, serve for an example of his abilities in this
way. With this foliage of his VERBAGE, I therefore twine a wreath; and in spite
of the number of his competitors, after saluting him with a kick, present
Squire TICKLE with the laurel.

Z.

FACTS -- proposed to the WHIG.
To the PRINTER,
Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.

CHRIST.
SIR,
I AM glad to find at last the appearance of one in your paper of the 23d of
May, who seems as if he was willing to come to the merits of the cause in his
short way to end strife: To whom I beg leave to answer in the order of his
particulars, which, N. B. it may be well for the reader of this to have under
his eye.

1. That it is indeed certain, that the convention do desire an American
bishop, and that very earnestly.

2. It is no less certain, that they do want, and desire only a truly primative
bishop, meaning such a one as Dr. Chandler describes, whose business shall be,
(besides what is common to the other orders) only to ordain and govern the
clergy, and confirm the laity, which they are persuaded the most primitive
bishops always did.

3. However uncharitably incredulous Mr. Whig is, it is also most certain, that
they mean as they say, and that without the least equivocation, or mental
reservation.

4. It is by no means certain, as the writer says, that a modern English
bishop, would be at all dangerous to the religious rights and privileges of any
non-episcopalians here; nay, the contrary is at least highly probable, because
they are not so now in England, nor have been for almost a 100 years, nor I
believe ever will again. -- However, bona fide we desire no bishops that can
ever, by the constitution, have any concern with non-episcopalians, any other
than Christian good neighborhood: -- We would not by any means, have them have
any concern with any temporal or civil matters, nor hold any spiritual courts,
only such as relate to our own clergy; let therefore our non-episcopal
brethren, henceforth, for the future lay aside all terror about them.

5. We do therefore aver, that neither Mr. Whig nor any one else, have any
manner of occasion to be alarmed about their religious liberty, of which we
don't know how indeed, they can be more secure than they are. -- We do not
blame them for being concerned for religious as well as civil liberty, in both
which we agree with them; it is only the cause of liberty we plead, and whether
they will believe it or not, we are as heartily desirous of their liberty as
our own. -- We only want to be upon as good a foot as they are, i. e. to have
ordaining and governing powers of our own within ourselves, as they have, in
which we would by no means molest them,

6. It is therefore plain, that these Tory scribblers among the presbyterians,
(for the gentleman that calls himself a Whig, is really a most violent Tory,
for the true old Whigs were always reasonable, moderate, and charitable men,) I
say, these Tory scribblers, for representing us as a faction, against the
liberties of the country, and a set of designing men, that aim at introducing
ecclesiastical tyranny are, indeed extremely abusive to us of the church, not
to say outragiously so.

7. I know all the gentlemen of the convention very well, and have all the
reason to believe (that men can give) that they are honest men, and mean no
more than I have represented; and that they are ready to give all the security
in their power; that they desire no further. And

8. I beg any reasonable man, or body of men, would tell us in the spirit of
Christian meekness, what further security they would desire, beyond our solemn
asseverations, that we may, if possible, satisfy them. And

9. I beg in the name of all that is good, to know, why till this is done, the
opposition should not be, at least, suspended, and opportunity be given to
attend to this single point. And

10. When this is adjusted, I hope all controversy, and every unchristian
temper will forever cease, and be no more.

I am, Sir, yours to love and serve, HIEROCLES.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, May 9th. The SENTINEL. No. XII.
IN my last Publication, I stated the Conduct of Parliament toward the
Admiralty Court in England, and compared it with their very different Behavior
toward it in America. I think it a very remarkable and alarming Instance of
the mischevous Effects, that must follow from "our Superiors" in England
undertaking to make internal Regulations for the Colonies. If they should
listen to the Missionaries, and attempt to provide for us a religious
Establishment, they would probably do as much more Harm, as the Subject is of
more Importance. Every Circumstance leads to this Conclusion.

No Body of Men is interested in supporting undue Stretches of Power, or Abuses
in the Admiral's Court, and it is not improbable, that on proper and reiterated
Representations, the Ministers of State might do us Justice, in Respect of that
arbitrary Judicature, or other Instances wherein our Rights have been violated;
at least it would be in their Power to do it. The Success of the People of
Ireland, in procuring the Limitation of their Parliaments, and the Independency
of their Judges after long Endeavors, ought to inspirit our Attempts, and
never suffer us to despair of recovering our Rights.

But if the clergy once gain an advantage, let the inconveniences, or
oppressions it brings on the laity be what they will, there is no coming at
redress. These people have the artifice of making a zeal for orthodoxy, and a
regard for their own interests go hand in hand. By asserting their claims and
encroachments to be of divine right, under establishments they tie up the hands
of the magistrate, and make it dangerous for him to reform the most
acknowledged and most pernicious abuses. I do not recollect any Instance in
History since the Days of the Apostles, where the Reformation of Religion, in
any material Point, has been brought about by the Clergy in general. Essay on
spirit, pref. -- said to be Dr. Clayton's, late bishop of Ireland.
Thus, when other arguments have failed, forms of church government,
particularly diocesan episcopacy; Dr. Bancroft in 1588, first preached up, in
the church of England after the reformation, that bishops were of divine right,
an order superior to presbyters. It surprised his hearers. Archbishop Whitgift
said, he rather wished, than believed it to be true.
the uninterrupted succession of bishops; In the debate between Dr. Hoadly,
then bishop of Bangor, and the nonjurors, the Doctor, with great success,
resuted this whim.
tithes; When the quakers sought for some relief from parliament, concerning
tithes, the clergy set up a claim to them on this ground.
exemption of the clergy from civil authority, etc. Thomas a Becket, Archbishop
of Canterbury, in a letter to the Empress Matilda, told her, "that an exemption
for clergymen from all civil justice, was one of the privileges purchased by
the blood of CHRIST for his church." Lord Littleton 's Hist. Hen. II.


have, at one time or another, been stiffly maintained to be of divine right:
and this, when once instilled, into the zealous, but ignorant and more numerous
part of their flocks, has generally enabled them to support the most
unreasonable usurpations, and to baffle all attempts at reformation.

The risque we should run, would be heightened by another circumstance: The
successors of the Apostles in England, whose power over their inferior clergy,
whose revenues, dignities, and seats in parliament, necessarily give them great
weight, would find themselves interested to have every power, every privilege
they enjoy as far as possible, extended to their brethren, the American
bishops. The example of a reduced episcopate in the British dominions, they
could not but esteem dangerous to their own jurisdiction, and they must of
course be induced to exert all their endeavors, and to watch every
opportunity, which a weak administration, or other favorable conjuncture,
might afford, to advance and aggrandize the American hierarchy: in which, from
the experience we have had of the disposition of some, and the inattention of
most of our virtual representatives, there is too much reason to fear they
would succeed to their wishes; at least no argument can be drawn from the
watchfulness of the laity of England, over the clergy there, that a like
caution would subsist as to the clergy of the colonies: Witness the case of
admiralty jurisdiction.

Let us for a moment suppose that Dr. Chandler's scheme, as exhibited in
Italicks, in the 79th page of his Appeal, is without reservation or
equivocation, the exact plan of an American episcopate, as it has been settled
at home. viz. That the bishops to be sent to the colonies shall have no
authority, but purely of a spiritual and ecclesiastical nature, such as is
derived altogether from the church and not from the State -- That this
authority shall operate only on the clergy and not on the laity, nor dissenters
of any denomination -- That the bishops shall not interfere with the property
or privileges, whether civil or religious, of churchmen or dissenters -- That
in particular they shall have no concern with the probate of wills, letters of
guardianship, and administration or marriage licenses, nor be judges of any
cases relating thereto; but that they shall only exercise the original powers
of their office as before stated, i. e. ordain and govern the clergy, and
administer confirmation to such as desire it. let us suppose, I say, that the
word of Dr. Chandler, a private missionary, is to be taken in this most
important affair; and that the bishops would, at first, be sent over with such
limited Powers, what Security have we, that they and their Successors, for any
long Time, would remain contented with such Limitations: In a Word, that they
would continue such harmless, inoffensive People, as the Doctor represents
them? Has this order of men been remarkable for such quiet unambitious conduct?
Or have they usually been free of a disposition to intermeddle in worldly
matters? Does not their apologist Dr. Chandler intimate the very reverse, when
he says, Page 110, Should the government see fit hereafter to invest them with
some degree of civil power, worthy their acceptance, none would be thereby
injured? Is it reasonable to think that the American prelates, would ever be
easy whilst in a Condition inferior to the superb, court-favoured,
law-dignified bishops of England? especially, as the connections between them,
would always keep alive the hopes of the former, of arriving at the same
authority and Importance.

A late writer (said to be of high spiritual dignity beyond the Alantic)
assures us, that as the bishops intended for America, are "to be appointed by
the crown, the smallest attempt toward an oppressive enlargement of spiritual
power would be immediately crushed with indignation by the legislature; and
that the moderation of the clergy and the watchfulness of the laity over them,
is much more likely to increase than diminish." Answer to Dr. Mayhew's
observations on the charter and conduct, etc.
This is plausible, but not solid. However, at present we shall suppose, that
under such directors of the national councils as have of late presided, there
has been a discovery of so much wisdom and integrity; of so tender a concern
for the interests of the colonies; of so cautious, so delicate an apprehension
of injuring their constitutional rights, as leaves no room to fear any
oppressive enlargement of spiritual or any other power, during the continuance
of such an happy guidance of public measures: Yet times may change; men of a
different stamp may be employed; who knows what another reign may produce?
Whatever may be promised now, yet reasons of state, (which Dr. Chandler already
holds out to our superiors) it may be said, require more to be done for this
newfangled hierarchy; for a bishop without authority over the laity, is really
a novelty, which no denomination of Christians, that allowed of a regular
Ministry, ever before thought of. Either sole or assisted, the bishops or
pastors of all sects have exercised it as of scriptural and unalienable right;
nor can there be any church of Christ on earth, without this, or somewhat
equivalent to it.

When the bishops (to carry on the supposition) shall be once quietly settled
among us, we shall be told by Dr. Chandler, or some equal advocate for the
order, "that the church in America is in a most wretched and deplorable
condition, perishing for want of common necessaries, and under such diseases,
as must prove fatal to her, if much longer neglected; that she only requests,
that proper remedies may be provided for her sufferings, leaving it to the
wisdom of her superiors, whether any thing further is to be done, to strengthen
and improve her interests." See Dr. C's Appeal, P, 40, and 59, for these
Quotations.
In short, she only asks, what cannot be denied by Christian rulers, to a
Christian society connected with the state; what all other denominations enjoy;
a power to exercise discipline over the laity. "The people are sensible of the
want of this power over them, and find themselves free from all restraints of
ecclesiastical, authority: And though the church, as far as it has relation to
civil power, is in the nature of it a free society, yet after men become
members, the laws of the church are in force against them." Appeal, P. 29.
It is true, this was at first given up, but we find, we "are a body without
strength, liable to be destroyed by innumerable accidents; Ibid. 30.
in short, we are under an "unprecedented hardship" Ibid 77. --
without it.

This granted, (how can Dr. Chandler talk of giving it up) the necessity of
civil co-action, or the aid of the magistrate to enforce the censures of the
clergy, may be easily urged." Those, who are rejected by one "church," it can
be said, "are received by another." A disposition to slight excommunication,
"the highest punishment the church can inflict, has become general; in this age
the voice of reason will not be heard," Appeal, 30, 31.
Civil incapacity, and the writ from the King's court for imprisoning the
excommunicate persons, This writ issues in 40 days after excommunication, in
case the offender continues obstinate.
are the only remedy; and why should not the American church be enabled to
reduce obstinate offenders to obedience, as well as the mother church of
England?

Suppose the hierarchy invested with this support, which by virtue of her
aliance with the state, she will claim as her right; Dr. Warburton insists on
this, as the just claim of every established religion. -- Div. Legate. Book ii.
Sect. 5.
the next demand will be, that all dissenters be considered as virtual
churchmen, and made liable to censures accordingly; for discipline is evaded
and the church undermined. Then "a tax on the country to support the bishops
will be wanted;" for their rank requires greater revenue than can be raised by
charitable contributions, and it cannot be expected that the mother country
will maintain the clergy of America. And if a tax can be justly levied for the
prelates, why not for the parish ministers? "it would be no mighty hardship,
nor can he, who would scruple to pay a tax for this or any use the legislature
of his country should assign, deserve to be considered in the light of a good
subject or member of society." Appeal, page, 107.
nay the security of the church, in a country abounding with dissenters,
indispensibly requires, that the sacramental test should be extended to
America; the argument is much more forcible here than in England, where the non
conformists are not thought to exceed one eighth of the people. "This can be no
hardship on dissenters, as indeed they have no natural right to any degree of
civil or military power." Ibid. 109.


What parliament could have the conscience, "after such signal displays of the
divine favor toward the British nation, whose arms in America have triumphed
over all that opposed them, to refuse to erect on that ground some suitable
monument of religious gratitude; and what so proper, as the further security
and support of the true religion in America? Other nations have taken equal
care for the establishment of ecclesiastical, as of civil government in their
most distant colonies. In the French and Spanish colonies, we find bishops; and
in Canada a complete ecclesiastical establishment under an episcopate." See
Appeal, page 45, 58, 59. for these quotations.
These things will not cost the members any thing, nor in the least injure
them: They are constitutional; agreeable to what is allowed at home, and if
they had been wrong, we should doubtless have given them up.

How insiduously, how easily might priestly dominion thus steal in upon us and
advance, is too manifest from church history. The reader will see, that Dr.
Chandler has helped me to make out the progress of the scheme, by a number of
seemingly useless expressions dispersed through his Appeal. These are prudent
reserves for another day; when the words, if, now, Page 110.
at present, in the present state of things, Ibid. 105.
and hereofter, Ibid. 110, 111.
may be of great use, however unmeaning they may now seem to a careless reader.
This scheme of our missionaries reminds me of the instructions, which pope
Boniface gave to Austin and his Fellow-missionaries, sent to Britain to convert
the Saxons to Christianity, and the Welsh who were Christians already, to a
proper sense of the Pope's supremacy, (an essential article, it seems they had
unfortunately left out of their creed) "you are," says his Holiness, to move
cautiously, let them not see all we aim at, lest we gain nothing.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Monday June 13th. A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG, [No.
XI.]
By TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
HOR. -- Hic niger est; hunc tu, Roman caveto.
The gloomy Whig has dark designs, --
American! beware, --

To Timothy Tickle, Esquire
SIR,
THAT an insidious faction has long endeavored to crush the CHURCH of England
in America, in order to erect a spiritual tyranny, when that great obstacle is
removed, will, I believe, be apparent to every one who considers the steps they
have taken. Every engine that malice could invent has been set at work. The
characters and conduct of her clergy, however innocent or respectable, have
been traduced. -- Her doctrines misrepresented. Her decent ceremonies exposed
to ridicule, and her sons, besides other opprobrious Names, branded with the
odious title of Persecutors; when, by all men of candor, it is acknowledged
that the CHURCH of England is not only the bulwark of the reformation, but
possessed of a truly Christian spirit of meekness and toleration.

But notwithstanding these base arts might prejudice the weak and unwary, still
there was great danger, least the rays of truth should dispel the cloud of
misrepresentation, and crafty politicians fail of their desired success. --
Under this apprehension, it was necessary to persuade all denominations of
Christians to unite against the CHURCH, as a common Enemy: And at the same
time, lest any should be hereafter competitors for dominion, it became
expedient to sow the seeds of dissension among them, that by their intestine
divisions, they might become an easy prey to these designing Incendiaries. For
Prosecution of the latter part of so notable a scheme, they have already rent
to pieces the Dutch church within this province, which next to the church of
England, bade the fairest to oppose them) and introduced such heart burnings
and enmity among its members, as time can never remove. -- The French church
has also been practiced upon, and ruined by them. They have not been content
'till they introduced a creature of their own to preach there; one connected
with them both by affinity and a similarity of interests. -- All this mischief
has been done under the mask of friendship; and so great is the blindness of
many well-meaning persons, that I make no doubt their eyes will not be
thoroughly opened, 'till this subtle sect, like Aaron's rod, swallow them all
up.

Quod procul a nohis fortuna gubernans avertat. As to the former part of the
scheme it must be obvious to every one, who has perused the elegant
performances composed in these boasted times of moderation and candor. by the
celebrated and incomparable triumvirs of this inoffensive party, under the
glorious titles of the Independent Reflector, the Watch Tower, and the American
Whig. Frequent use occurs therein of the term dissenters, which is supposed to
include all that differ from the established church in the most minute
circumstances, however opposite they may be to one another, both in principles
and interest. They are called upon to defend those liberties which are not
attacked, and maintain those rights which are not disputed: And as fraud and
falacy, are usually practiced in such cases, every method, however dishonest,
is taken to infuse groundless fears, and and unreasonable prejudices;
particularly in No. IX. of the American Whig, a letter is sub-join'd as from a
Quaker, (for I suspect a Forgery) evidently to induce that respectable body of
men, who are known to have a regard for the church, to join with its enemies,
the insidious faction, who arrogantly assume to themselves the name of
presbyterians; with your permission, therefore, Sir, as a means of obviating
the ill consequences that may arise from that letter, and opening peoples eyes.
I will briefly consider an assertion it contains, so notoriously false, that I
wonder it could drop even from the pen of the American Whig; who, as well as
some others of his party, is known to assert roundly.

The Passage I mean, is couched, in the following terms, since our fathers came
out from their Babylonish captivity, into this peaceable Zion, they, and we,
have set down under our own vines and our own fig trees, and have had none to
make us afraid.

The Whig would undoubted intimate by the words peaceable Zion, that the
quakers have enjoyed full liberty of conscience since they emigrated to the
continent of America. -- But alas! how far is this from being the case? For no
sooner were the Independents (who would fain be called presbyterians) fixed in
the northern colonies, to which they fled, (some few perhaps, for conscience
sake, others to avoid the punishment due for the murder of their king, and the
overthrow of the constitution) than they exercised a most illegal and despotic
authority in the matters of religion. But their rage was chiefly against the
people, who (we are now told) since they came into this peaceable Zion, have
set down under their own vines and their own fig trees, and have had none to
make them afraid. With respect to the Quakers therefore, this Zion has not been
quite so peaceable as the Whig would persuade us. The fires of persecution,
were lighted in it by the same persons, who, if we may believe Mr. Livingston,
in his modest letter to the Bishop of Landaff, "had forsaken houses and lands,
and the most tender connections with every thing dear and estimable amongst
human kind, for the undisturbed fruition of the rights of private judgment,
sacred by the laws of God and of nature." Influenced by this motive as that
gentleman supposes, and sensible that the rights of private judgment were
sacred, they nevertheless became more sanguinary than the sanguinary savages of
the desert with whom they had to encounter. The Quakers, contrary to the
principles of justice and equity, were severely fined and imprisoned, and their
persons treated with the most shocking barbarity. They were banished by a law,
so called, under pretense that they withdrew from orderly church fellowship,
allowed and approved by all orthodox professors of the truth, (a ready pretense
for persecution at all times, and upon all occasions) and some of them were put
to the most ignominious death for conscience sake, contrary to the rights of
private judgment, sacred by the laws of God and of nature. Nay, so wantonly
were these usurpations over the consciences of men exercised, that prisoners
were refused a trial by jury, the undoubted right of every free born Briton and
American; the dead bodies of those who fell a sacrifice to the rage of bloody
bigots, were stripped, and deprived of a decent burial; and the exulting priest
of so virtuous a people, composed a ludicrous ballad upon the occasion; for
which his character, with that of his worthy compatriots, will, as Mr.
Livingston judiciously observes, make a bright figure in history, and be handed
down with honor to the latest posterity.

Thus much may serve to show that this peaceable Zion has, in reality, been to
the Quakers, a vale of tears; and as to the vine and fig tree, (a scriptural
metaphor intended to represent the security that the Quakers enjoyed in the
Whig's imagination, I suppose, as to property and person) the above remarks
will suffice to show, that they also are inapplicable to such a state of
sufferings and persecution; for surely a people banished by law, under pain of
death, who, like Noah's Dove, could find no rest for the soals of their feet,
can hardly with any propriety, be said to have set under their own vines, and
their own fig trees, and have had none to make them afraid.

But if it should be asserted that the case was not so within this province; I
observe, first, that these fanatical independents never got firm enough footing
here for that purpose: And secondly, That though for the above reason, they did
not persecute the Quakers themselves, yet by their artful and false
suggestions, they prevailed upon the Dutch to do it; who, I believe, would have
been averse from the measure, had they been rightly informed; and even
prepossessed as they were, burnt not with that fiery real which enflamed their
neighbor colonists.

I have thus, Sir, exposed the designs of the independents, and of their
doughty champion the American Whig, and shown that that the grossest falsities
are advanced by them to gain the most dangerous ends. I shall conclude with
remarking, that if the church of England has ever entertained persecuting
principles, she has renounced them with detestation, in the height of her
power; whereas the independents have never had the upper hand, but they have
ruled with the iron hand of oppression, and openly practiced that persecution
which they before affected to abhor; like Proteus, continually changing figure,
and becoming, as occasion required, one while the gently murmuring stream; and
another, the ferocious Lion, or the bloody Bear.

I am, with great Respect, Sir, Your Most Obedient Humble Servant, AGRICOLA.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Monday June 13th. The AMERICAN WHIG, [No. XIV.]
THE following letter came to my hands as the genuine production of a member of
the Dutch church, who has had sufficient provocation for the resentment he
discovers against the shameless scribblers employed for the convention:
Scribblers, who in open defiance of all modesty and decorum, are engaged in
preverting truth, propagating falsehood, out-raging common sense, and abusing
without offense given the most numerous denomination of Christians in this
province. I have only to apologize for altering those parts of the letter, that
would have necessitated me to mention a name, with which I cannot by any means,
consent to disgrace my paper; and having given those passages such a turn, as
does equal justice to my correspondent's arguments, I doubt not he will readily
excuse the liberty I have taken.

To the Author of the AMERICAN WHIG,
SIR,
I FIND that the advocates for an American Episcopate (how agreeable to truth I
leave the world to judge) not being able to make the church of Holland
episcopal, endeavor to divide her as being neither episcopal nor presbyterian,
but something between both; a conduct, in some measure, similar to that of the
false mother, who said, "let the child be neither thine nor mine, but divide
it." Agreeable to this absurd conceit, equally groundless and impudent, we have
lately been told, That the church of Holland is not episcopal exactly in the
same manner that the church of England is episcopal; neither is it presbyterian
in the same sense that the English dissenters are presbyterian, as is evident
from the distinction made in their ordination, of a member of the classis, or
an ordinary pastor or presbyter. When a member of the classis is ordained, the
powers of ordination and government are committed to him; but when an ordinary
pastor is ordained, no such powers are conferred on him, but only the powers of
preaching the word and administering the sacrament. [I suppose they mean
sacraments.]

From this, one would be apt to conclude, that we of the church of Holland in
America (to use a parallel phrase with Dr. Chandler) are a kind of mongrel,
neither episcopal nor presbyterian, but something between both. But what kind
of constitution that something is, or ought to be called, is not so much as
hinted. -- I therefore think it my duty to inform those who want information,
what the constitution of the church of Holland is; and that not from what I
have been told, but from what I know to be the case, as an old member of that
church, who have not lately, but many years since, made it my business to
examine several church constitutions, and especially that, of which I profess
myself a member.

I therefore affirm, and hope to prove beyond all question, that the church of
Holland is as little episcopal as any presbyterian church on earth. This
appears from the 30th and 31st articles of her confession of faith; an abstract
of the 31st is as follows. As for the ministers of God's word, they have
equally the same power and authority wheresoever they are, as they are all
ministers of Christ, the only universal bishop, and only head of the church. Is
it in the power of language more clearly to deny episcopacy; or to assert
presbyterianism? Pray what is properly presbyterianism? I answer it is that
form of church government, wherein no higher authority is allowed, than that of
elders, or, which is the same thing, presbyters. Therefore the word rendered in
English Presbytery, is in Dutch translated by that of Eldership -- 1 Timothy iv
^4. Hence it appears, that not only the reformed churches of Holland, Scotland,
Geneva, and many of the German churches are Presbyterian, but that the
congregationalists and Baptists are also Presbyterian. -- The difference lies
only in this, that the former extend their jurisdiction further than the
congregationalists and Baptists, who respectively confine their jurisdiction
within the single congregation, of which they have the pastoral charge; whereas
the other churches have their consistories (or kirk sessions) then their
presbyteries or classis, next provincial synods, and last of all a general
assembly or national synod. The first consists of the minister or ministers,
elders and deacons of one congregation; the next of two or more of the
ministers a^^^^^ers of neighboring congregations, or such a number (...)
deputed by those congregations for that purpose; the (...) consists of the
deputies of the several presbyteries; and the last of the deputies of the
provincial assemblies. -- Persons aggrieved in any of the lower judicatories
can appeal to the higher. So that there is the greatest harmony and similarity
in the presbyterian church government of the church of Scotland, church of
Holland, and the presbyterians in North America, that could possibly be
expected, considering the circumstances of two different national churches, and
the great distance and non-establishment of the last mentioned, in America;
who, nevertheless, have their regular church-sessions, presbyteries and synods.

But perhaps some may object, that those of the church of Holland are not
called presbyterians, neither have they presbyteries.

As to the first, it is true, that they are not usually distinguished by that
appellation as a denomination; neither was there ever any occasion for it, they
being distinguished by the reformation of their doctrines, in opposition to the
church of Rome, and other heritics, by the name of 'The reformed church of
Netherland.' -- But the church of Scotland, and those of their persuasion in
England, having, from time to time, had many struggles with episcopacy, they
being zealous for presbyterian government, were, in contradistinction to
episcopalians, called presbyterians.

The church of Scotland however (and those who hold to the same constitution in
other parts of the world) from her doctrines contained in her Confession of
Faith and Westminster Catechism, have as good a claim to the title of reformed
church as the church Holland. On the other hand the church of Holland may as
properly be called the presbyterian reformed church, as the church of Scotland.
But should this not sufficiently satisfy some prejudiced person, I hope he will
allow the testimony of an episcopalian historian; I mean Mr. Salmon, who in his
historical geographical grammar, in his description of the established religion
of the united Netherlands, says, 'Their church government is presbyterian.'

The other objection (if any one is weak enough to make it) that the church of
Holland has no presbyteries, is altogether groundless; a classis and
presbytery being synonymous terms, when applied to their second ecclesiastical
judicatory, which consists of a number of presbyters convened to represent
several congregations, they are a classis of presbyters, and therefore in
effect a presbytery: Nay, it appears from the proceedings of the assembly of
Divines, who met at Westminster, about 115 years ago; that the church
judicatory, now called a presbytery, was then called a classis. Words in
themselves are arbritrary; it is the ideas affixed to them that determine their
signification. It Is well known, that the Dutch call their Kerken Raad, or
Church Session, a consistory; yet it is obvious, that we do not by this mean a
consistory of cardinals, (as among the Papists) So also the word assembly, when
preceded by the words a wicked or a pious, convey very different ideas.

From all which it appears, that the church government of Holland, Scotland,
and the Dutch and presbyterian churches here, are essentially the same; and
that the term Dutch and English presbyterians, may be used among us with the
greated propriety; though the term may at present sound a little strange for
want of the sanction of custom. But in order to render the matter if possible
still plainer, I present the reader with the whole, in the following short
view, viz.

The church of Holland call their first, or lower church judicatory, a Kerken
Raad, or Consistory, their 2d a classis, their 3d, a Provincial Synod, their
4th or highest, a National Synod. Can. Synd. Dort Art. 29.


The church of Scotland call their first or lowest church judicatory, a Church,
or Kirk Session, their 2d, a Presbytery, their 3d, a Provincial Synod, their
4th, or highest, a General Assembly of the church of Scotland.

But what similarity is there between the church of England, and the church of
Holland, in their several offices, judicatories, etc, etc? It is pretended,
that the church of Holland makes a distinction between a mere presbyter, who
has only power to preach, and administer the sacraments, and one who is
ordained a member of the Classis, to whom the powers of ordination and
government are committed.

This is a mere pretense; for the reader may be assured, that nothing like it
is either known, or practiced in the church of Holland. -- Candidates for the
ministry, after they have gone through their necessary studies, are presented
to the classis; there they are examined not only by the proeses or moderator,
but also by a certain number appointed for that purpose, or sometimes by the
members in general: When they have given sufficient proofs of their ability,
they are licenced to preach in a kind of itinerant way, (but not to administer
the sacraments) to exercise their talents: When they receive a call for any
particular congregation, they are to pass a second examination; and after that
they are solemnly ordained, each one in the presence of the congregation of his
charge, by prayer, and the laying on of the hands of the classis, thereunto
appointed.

By virtue of this pastoral charge, he is qualified for a member of the classis
to which his congregation does belong; and where a congregation has more
ministers than is thought needful to send to the classis, the congregation or
consistory send whom they think proper, from whom they or he must have proper
credentials.

It sometimes happens, that a person is ordained before he is called to a
particular charge, or for a foreign place where no classis is erected. Then,
indeed, he is no member of the classis, not for any defect in his ordination,
but because he has no congregation to represent, or no classis near the place
of his ministry.

Nor can I by any means adopt the parallel of monarchial and episcopalian,
republican and presbyterian, or if you please church of Holland, church
government. It has pleased God to tolerate several forms of civil government on
earth, and in his word to enjoin obedience to magistrates in general; but it is
hard to prove, that he has given so extensive a toleration in the government of
his church, respecting essentials. It does not therefore follow, that there may
be as different church governments in different countries, as there are
different civil governments. Neither we of the Dutch church, nor the church of
Scotland, blend civil and ecclesiastical government together, as the church of
England does; according to such parallel it must follow, that every magistrate
of a city, town or village, in Holland, must be of equal rank with their higher
order (for I have shown that there is no superiority in point of ordination and
government in their clergy) and that all, without distinction, were fit to
compose their council of state; their provincial states, and the states general
of Holand West Vriesland; but this it is obvious is not the case.

Nor can I help observing how fruitless the efforts of your opponents, to evade
the charge of the episcopalians unchurching all the rest of the reformed
churches, by pretending that, as the esteeming republican civil government,
less perfect than monarchical, is not ungoverning them; so the esteeming the
government of the church of Holland, less perfect than the episcopalian, is not
unchurching them. -- The parallel here will not hold; for no man in his senses,
will pretend that monarchy is essential to the very being of government: But
the advocates for episcopacy insist, that the ordination, by an uninterrupted
succession of bishops, is so necessary for the ordination of gospel ministers,
that, that being once broke, not all the men on earth, nor all the angels in
heaven, without an immediate commission from Christ, can restore it. -- Another
says, there are three orders in the church of Christ, bishops, priests and
deacons; and wheresoever any of these are wanting, there can be no church. A
hard saying indeed, though said to be uttered by St. Ignatius; let us hear,
believe, and practice what the saints or fathers tell us, as far as is
agreeable to unerring truth, contained in holy writ; let us be followers of
them, as far as they are followers of Christ. Now an inspired apostle tells us,
that Christ having ascended on high, has given some for apostles, and some for
prophets, and some for evangelists, and some for pastors and teachers. Ephesians. iv.
11. The three first were evidently extraordinary ministers, and ceased with the
first age of the church, and were designed for no longer time, otherwise the
spirit of God would have continued them. -- Between these extraordinary
ministers, and pastors, and teachers, we find none others, consequently no
other kind of bishops or overseers, but pastors and teachers were ever
designed; and as for Christian priests, as some people affect to call the
presbyters of the church of England, we know the word priest is no where
applied to any minister of the new testament, but only to all real believers in
general, as a royal priesthood in a spiritual sense. 1 Pet. ii, 5, 9. Rev. i.
6. Let any episcopalian produce a single text to the contrary if he can.


Consequently as we do not hold episcopal ordination necessary, we must be
without ministers of Christ; we are unbaptised; we have never partaken of the
holy supper, according to Christ's appointment. In a word, we are almost in a
state of heathenism, and in respect to ordination, the church of Rome is right;
and we indeed, without any peradventure, all in the wrong; and can be no church
on earth, whatever some of us may be in heaven.

In respect of the late Mr. Houdin being received as a priest of the church of
England without reordination; it is demanded, by your adversary, whether on
his renouncing the errors of popery, and embracing the doctrines of the
meeting, they would not have done the same? Before I answer this, I must
examine what the religion of the meeting is. To know this, I must examine what
meeting they mean. If they mean a meeting house, I believe the materials of
lime, stone, wood, etc will not effect the orthodoxy of the house; whether they
be episcopal or presbyterian, or even popish, in regard to the persons of whom
purchased, or even by whom fabricated; but if by the meeting, they understand a
denomination of Christians meeting together; then I ought to know, whether they
mean Lutherans, Moravians, Baptists, French or Dutch Calvinists,
congregationalists, quakers, or presbyterians. -- I only know that they do not
intend a meeting of episcopalians. -- I shall therefore take it for granted, as
the most probable that they mean, the meeting or church of presbyterians here
or elsewhere; whom, from a spirit of the most shameful bigotry, they cannot
deign to call any thing else but meeting independants, dissenters, or the like
-- any thing but a presbyterian church. But to return to the question, I answer
that I sincerely think they would not, or at least, it is my humbly opinion,
they ought not to receive such a one, without reordination, because that the
church of Rome is so very corrupt and superstitious, as to cease to be a church
of Christ, but is rather a synagogue of Satan, and consequently it were better
to ordain twice, than not at all. Were an English episcopalian to become a
proselyte to presbyterianism, it is well known that his ordination would be
allowed valid, not because he was ordained by a diocesan bishop merely as such,
but because he had what we deem the essential powers of ordination, as any
other lawful minister, pastor or overseer, which in scripture language are
synonimous terms: That every presbyter appointed to the charge of a flock is a
bishop, or overseer, I could easily prove from scripture, did the limits of
this paper permit.

As the episcopalians themselves say, that a bishop is also a presbyter, they
cannot reasonably fault the conduct of the presbyterians, for allowing the
validity of their ordination; seeing they have a right to view the bishops in
the light of presbyters.

But how uncharitably does that boasted charitable church act toward her
protestant brethren in Scotland, Holland, France, Germany, Geneva, and this
extensive continent of America! For if any one of them; however orthodox and
learned, is by any means inclined to become a preacher in their church, nothing
else but a formal reordination will qualify him for the ministry in the church
of Christ: What is the language of such a conduct? Actions speak louder than
words. -- Therefore I don't ask what apology they can make, or what charitable
construction they can put on non-episcopal ordination, but what is the language
of their actions? It Is not that it is at least imperfect, irregular and
defective; though Doctor Chandler is pleased thus to evince the matter, for he
says, that the line of succession once broke, and the powers of ordination once
lost, is not to be restored without an immediate commission from Christ. --
Neither need the episcopalians (whether really or under color of charity) to
say, "that the non-episcopalians are in the dark in these things:" No, we have,
blessed be God, among us, both of clergy and laity, at least as clear heads and
honest hearts, as there are among the episcopalians (and doubtless in greater
numbers) who attend to the sure word of prophecy of the old and new testament,
and give heed thereto, in preference to any fallible sayings of the pious
fathers, or traditions of men. The language of their actions then is this; the
person, or persons, who pretended to ordain you, had no legal authority from
Christ so to do, neither you nor they, were lawful ministers, but intruders and
usurpers; the people you ministered unto were no church, but an unlawful
meeting or conventicle. -- Though your pretended minister warned you of the evil
of your ways, God sent him not; and woe to him that runs not being sent.
Thus the episcopalians do as much as in them lies, grieve by their conduct the
hearts of those whom God will not have grieved; however soft their words;
however genteel their apologies. Let us suppose, for instance, a person to be
accused of house-breaking, and taking thence things of great value; whether the
accusation is true or false, will it be deemed a proper apology to say, I did
not design to call you a thief; your action was only imperfect, irregular and
defective -- you only was in the dark. The application is easy; all
non-episcopalians are guilty of the worst of thefts, even of sacrilege, by
laying hands on an ordinance, to which (we episcopalians being judges) they
have no right; on the contrary they harden, by the same conduct, the hearts of
many formalists and hypocrites, who, as the Jews of old, called the temple of
the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, are these; so they
are ever vainly boasting, of, " the church of England, etc. etc. are we. But,
blessed be God, we have a better testimony of the lawfulness of the ministry,
and the other ordinances among us, than can possibly be derived from all the
episcopal churches on earth, even the undoubted operation of the blessed spirit
of all grace, on the hearts of many to their conversion and confirmation in
their most holy faith; and if the episcopal church can boast its thousands in
this respect, we may say we have our ten thousands.

Before I conclude, I beg leave just to mention the absurd notion, and
unparall^d bigotry, of using the word church, as the name of a particular
denomination. The least that can be said, of such people, as that they appear
extremely ignorant of the true meaning of the word church, by their constant
affectation of calling some places, dedicated to the public worship of God, by
the name of meetings and others by that of churches. If they mean, by this
term, the buildings where people assemble for divine worship, they may may be
called either churches or meetings, whether the assembly consists of
episcopalians, or of any other denominations of Christians. Thus the building
called TRINITY CHURCH, is one of the houses in which episcopalians meet, and
consequently it is an episcopalian meeting house, as well or rather more
properly than an episcopalian church. But no building strictly speaking can be
called a church, being improperly so called, from the members of the visible
church of Christ, who there assemble for the public worship of God. -- If
therefore they will not allow the meeting houses of baptists, presbyterians,
etc. to be called churches, in the sense just mentioned, as well as the
episcopalian meeting houses, they unwarily (even in an external sense)
un-church all those other denominations; who, no doubt, are ^o small part of
the visible Christian church. Now as to the Dutch church, which I have shown,
may, with the greatest propriety, be called presbyterian, they as effectually
unchurch it with the rest; because no charters, constitutions or connections,
can constitute any denomination, a church of Christ. They can only deserve that
appellation, as being professors of Christ and his doctrines, agreeing in the
unity of says.

Those members of the Dutch church, who have a tolerable understanding of their
constitution, want no such apologies. We know that the unchurching of any
non-episcopalians whatever, who profess themselves part of the visible church,
is in effect to unchurch us, as has now been made fully to appear.

How well the holy scriptures have been preserved to us, through the medium of
the church of Rome, together with the sacraments and ordination, (or according
to the popish episcopalians phrase, Christian priesthood, already refuted)
appear by their perverting the first by many corrupt translations, adulterating
baptism by human inventions, turning the Lord's Supper into the sacrifice of
the mass, the idolatrous doctrine of transubstantiation, and making ordination
one of their sacraments. But the truth is, that God, even in the midst of
popish darkness, raised up witnesses for the truth both of doctrine and
discipline, who sealed the truth with their blood. But probably this set of men
have never read the book of Martyrs.

Here I thought to have finished, but I cannot help observing on the despicable
attempt of persuading the public, that English Presbyterians are for
unchurching the church of Holland, etc. etc. It is a base insinuation without
the least foundation, and will be treated by every judicious member of the
Dutch church, with the contempt it deserves. What do they mean by turning the
Dutch churches into conventicles for English independents? if they are men of
spirit, let them explain themselves if they dare. We of the the Dutch church,
know of many episcopalian bigots, who have stirred up some of the weaker
members of the Dutch church, against the salutary method of preaching the
gospel in the language of the country; and enticed away several of its members;
but in spite of all their art, our gain is more than 10, perhaps 20 to one, to
our loss.

A. M. O. I. D. C.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, June 13th. A KICK FOR THE WHIPPER. [No. IV.]
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
Nequicquam ingeminans iterumque iternmque petivit.

VIRGIL.
SQUIRE Tickle justly observes (No. III.) that he has gently corrected the
Whig. Gentle indeed his corrections have eventually proved; his flagellations
could scarce have awaked a sleeping man, or tickled so much as the bite of a
bug or a flea. bless him! he is a gentle fellow. But what a booby this Whig is,
to make such a-round about pedantic harangue, upon so plain a subject as
Liberty, and to employ 42 lines to express what our laconic Squire Tickle has
comprehended in 19 Words! Vid. No. III. par. 2. ( Aside. However I fancy the
Whig has expressed in his two stiff clumsy paragraphs, at least 42 times as
much as Squire Tickle. (for N. B. he is a grammarian) is willing should be
seen, felt, heard, or understood) Besides, what has a Whig, to do with liberty,
who understands not its elements? -- for Liberty is not only a goddess but a
Science: Who has nor heard of the SCIENCE of Liberty? A Whig talk of Liberty!
and of postponing it to life and property! O fie! -- he ought to have left this
Science to Tories, who understand it so well, and are so animated when liberty
is in question, that they will risk both life and property to obtain only --
the ruin of it.

What a blunderbuss was the Whig also to argue thus, Liberty is a very good
thing; ergo, men in general ought to be careful to preserve it! How much more
logical is Squire Tickle's conclusion; ergo, The Members of THE Church in
America (what church?) are right in seeking to obtain it. Hunters know that
game possessed is often worth little; but obtaining it during it is struggles
for self-preservation is a clever trick.

Squire Tickle's maxims likewise are incontestible, where he says, "Every
sincere friend of real religion is impartial in his esteem for it, and wishes
it an universal dominion. He that wishes real religion universally to prevail,
will endeavor to promote it in all cases, without respect to religious
distinctions. He that endeavors to promote it in all cases, will be careful
not to oppose it in any" Squire Tickle's maxims are not about real religion,
say you? Very true, gentle reader; and surely you don't imagine Squire Tickle
would by any means reflect upon those prelates, who prevented the grant of the
New York Presbyterian charter, or procured the repeal of the act incorporating
a society in Boston, for the purpose of Christianizing the heathen!

His reasoning is no less judicious, and his wit no less brilliant, in his 6th,
7th, 8th, and 9th paragraph; for who is so stupid as not to see, that knowledge
of the rejection of any proposal in many, is absolutely, utterly, and entirely
inconsistent with the sanguine expectations of it is success in a few? A -- h,
this WHIG is a blockhead.

In par. 10th, Squire Tickle, shows a great deal of merit (I mean what I say)
in drawing parallels. Though I Have consulted a copious concordance, I can find the
number seven, in scripture, prefixed to nothing so much like the conventional
petitions, as the seven horns, seven headed dragon, seven abominations, and
Mary Magdalen's seven devils. How readily Squire Tickle, saw the resemblance!
-- as to that poor stupid mortal the WHIG, I dar^ say, he never thought a word
about it.

In par. 11th Squire Tickle, very justly ridicules the notion of American
manufactures, as he had (par. 3d) American economy. What business has America
with economy or manufactures? A late Tory minister Lord Bute.
indeed, talked much of economy in Great Britain, but never said a word about
either economy or manufactures in America.

On par. 13th, I must needs observe, that it is very unfair to blame Tories for
boasting of loyalty, etc. etc. etc. under a mixed, i. e. under a Whig monarchy.
We can have no more of a cat than her skin. (an outside thing!) and to blame
her for that, is -- is -- is -- very hard.

How much the Whig may have misrepresented the rest of the conventional
addresses, I know not; but for my own satisfaction, I should be glad Squire
Tickle would inform me, whether or not Dr. Ram-chicken has misrepresented the
conventional address to the university of Cambridge.

Whether or not the ministry have rejected the proposal of an American
episcopate, I hope the Whig knows; however, what they ought to do, I Sir Isaac
Foot very well know, and so does Squire Tickle.

Par. 16th Is too learned for me. From what ever quarter power comes, and
whatever may be the meaning of the word Appeal, I must beg leave to ask Squire
Tickle whether (in case Dr. Chandler's had met with little or no opposition)
American complaisance was not designed to remove European objections, and serve
as oil to facilitate the stiff clumsy motion of the wheels of the projected
episcopal machine?

As Squire Tickle advises the Whig to remember, that a whip is prepared for his
flagellation; so I beg he would be kind enough to remember, that there will be
a Kick ready for him (not so very often as he deserves it, but) as often as I
Sir Isaac Foot think proper.

Z.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, June 16th. The SENTINEL. No. XIII.
THERE seems to be something perverse in human nature, that prompts men to give
partial and unfair representations, when it suits their purpose. They conceal
truths, extenuate faults, and diminish or magnify difficulties as it serves
their turn, or contributes to carry their designs into execution. The client
loudly proclaims his wrongs, and magnifies his pretensions, while he
industriously conceals from his lawyer some of the strongest circumstances that
operate against him.

Doctor Chandler seems in his Appeal, to labor under this infirmity: he
complains that the episcopal church in America suffers unparalleled hardships:
he insinuates, that the complaints which he makes are the complaints of a
million of British subjects in America, suffering under unprecedented
hardships; and that all the episcopal clergy and laity are joint petitioners
with him and his friends for an American Episcopate, on the plan he has
mentioned. Whereas, in fact, the people were never consulted on the measure,
nor were they ever heard to complain. The whole was concerted and curried on by
a few missionaries (whom the Doctor styles the clergy) of New York and
New Jersey met together in a voluntary convention. By what right they assume
such power it may be well to enquire.

According to the English constitution, every part of his majesty's extensive
dominions, where governments are established, has a power to take care of
religion in a way suited to the genius and persuasion of the people. At the
reformation, the English parliament formed their articles of religion, and
invested their king with all power, as well ecclesiastical as civil, and
modelled church government according to their pleasure. They afterward by the
Act of Toleration made provision for dissenters from the established church.
The legislature of Scotland, (after that kingdom became a branch of the British
empire) took care of religion in their own way, and established church
discipline on a plan different from that of England, which plan was afterward
confirmed by the British parliament when both kingdoms were happily united. In
Ireland, though the religious establishment be nearly the same as the English,
in worship and government, the legislature claim the sole right of establishing
articles and canons, and of regulating the affairs of their church as to them
seems best. In some of the British colonies in America, one religious
denomination, in others another denomination of Christians have been the
peculiar care of the government; while in some, by the constitution of the
state, all enjoy equal privileges.

I would therefore be glad to know by what authority the missionaries of
New York and New Jersey, in violation of the constitution of the British
governments, and of the rights of their fellow subjects, usurp a power of
acting for all the episcopalians in America; of forming a new plan of
episcopacy for them, and of petitioning "our superiors" in Britain, that this
plan may be established in his majesty's American colonies by the British
legislature? Who commissioned them to act? They will not pretend to say, they
exercise this power by Divine Right, or as inherent in them? Who then,
entrusted them with the care of religion in America? Or who, for instance,
empowered them to intermeddle with the state of it in the West India islands?
Do the people ^^per clergy or laity there complain of "unparalleled hardships?"
With regard to the clergy in the islands, an honorable provision is made for
their support by the respective legislatures. And if the people think
themselves aggrieved, they know where to apply for redress. They have governors
and assemblies, in whose power it is to regulate the affairs of the church in
their respective districts, and to rectify what they think amiss in its polity.
Or, if they had not this power, is it to be imagined that so respectable a body
of his majesty's subjects, were they groaning under intolerable grievances, as
the Doctor represents, would not have addressed his majesty, for relief
themselves rather than have entrusted so important an affair with a few
missionaries in North America, who are ignorant of their laws and
circumstances? Let the world then judge whether the petitions sent home by the
missionaries of New York and the Jerseys, and the Appeal published by Doctor
Chandler, as far as they respect the islands, are not an insolent invasion of
the rights of others, and a busy intermeddling with their laws and
constitutions without their consent or approbation.

The same may be said of Virginia and Maryland. Have the clergy or laity of
these provinces ever complained of 'unparalleled sufferings' or empowered the
'missionaries met in a voluntary convention' to complain in their name? Are
they not the best judges, when an episcopate is necessary, and what plan of
episcopacy will best suit themselves? At least are they not as good judges as
the members of the convention at Amboy? If an episcopate be necessary to
"ordain, and govern the clergy and to administer confirmation to such as shall
apply for it," the common appendages of episcopacy are not necessary; but may
and must be varied, as the laws and constitutions of different governments may
require. And to the body of the people, to the assemblies and governors does it
belong to regulate these appendages. These governments have provided for the
maintenance of the clergy, in a way most agreeable to themselves, and when
they think it necessary to have a bishop, they will, doubtless, fall upon
measures to have one. But what right the missionaries of New York and
New Jersey have to publish complaints in the name of these people, while they
themselves are silent, or to represent their sufferings as intolerable and
their grievances as unparalleled, while they themselves express no uneasiness,
I cannot well comprehend.

But the presumption of the convention which voluntarily met at Amboy, and took
upon themselves to act as representatives of all the members of the English
episcopalians in America, seems greatly heightened when we consider, first,
that it was illegal according to the canons of their church; secondly, that
none of the laity met in it; and, thirdly, that it was composed of but a part
of the missionaries. Not above one, or at the most two of the episcopal clergy
in Pennsylvania (if I am well informed) met in convention, or were taken into
their consultations; and very few from New England. The episcopal clergy in
Pennsylvania are men of too much understanding to complain without reason, and
too well acquainted with the charter and laws of the province, not to know that
they enjoy the same liberty as any other religious denomination. They claim no
superiority over their fellow Christians, nor do they consider themselves in a
state of persecution, merely because they are not established by act of
parliament, and their opinions and practices made a state religion in
preference to all others. They know that a difference in religion does not
deprive a subject of his 'natural right to any civil or military power.' And as
to the laity they are contented with the privileges which they enjoy in common
with their fellow subjects.

Should any one ask who these gentlemen are that met in this voluntary
convention, and assumed to themselves such mighty powers; I blush to think of
the answer that must be given. Certainly some respect should have been had to
governors, to the members of his Majesty's council, to the representatives of
the people in assemblies met. They at least ought to have been consulted;
before application was made to his Majesty for an episcopate, and before a plan
was concluded on different from what was ever known in the Christian church.

It might have derogated too much from the dignity of this voluntary
convention, to have consulted with dissenters on the occasion, yet where those
who reject episcopacy are more than thirty or forty for one that prefers it --
as is the case in some of the Eastern governments, thinking people will admit
that some regard should be had to them.

Upon the whole, then, it is evident, that neither the addresses requesting an
episcopate, nor the bitter and indecent complaints, of unprecedented hardships
and unparalelled sufferings are the voice of the clergy and laity of the
episcopal churches in America: Neither do they complain of a want of government
because they have not a bishop residing among them. Agreeable to the
constitution of their church, they consider themselves under the care of the
Bishop of London as their pastor, and the king as the supreme head of their
ecclesiastical polity. Their worship they regulate by the canons and rubries,
their discipline by the laws of the community to which they belong, and their
faith by the articles of the church of England. The distance of their governors
does not in their opinion destroy the regularity of their government, nor tempt
them to demand a change; and until the Doctor convinces us that near a million
of British subjects in America have commissioned him and his associates to
petition and complain, we must vindicate so respectable a body from the
proceedings of the convention, who by assuming an authority and power never
delegated to them, would pass themselves upon the world for men of importance.

Burlington, May 29, 1768. Messrs. BRADFORDS.
FROM that general freedom of the press, which you are said to have maintained,
I have reason to expect that the enclosed will obtain a place in your paper. I
shall not attempt to follow the Sentinel through all his meanders, nor shall I,
like him, be on duty every week, but propose to continue this paper as often as
it may be found necessary, always keeping a look-out, lest the Sentinel should
misrepresent any thing that has been advanced by Dr. Chandler, in his Appeal to
the Public, taking care to point out the true meaning of the ORIGINAL, as often
as it seems to be perverted either by the Sentinel, or any other of his
anonymous accomplices.

I am, Sir, etc. A CHURCHMAN.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, June 16th. The ANTI SENTINEL. No. I.
Audi and alteram partem. -- Keep both Ears open.
THE person who is injured and persecuted, naturally becomes the object of
attention and pity. -- The man who will not support and succor afflicted
virtue, deserves to be afflicted without succor or support. Such
considerations as these may plead my excuse, while I take the liberty to
address the public in favor of the Rev Dr. Bradbury Chandler, who has been
mal-treated and cruelly abused and persecuted by a certain writer, who styles
himself the SENTINEL. Not that I have any doubt of the Doctor's Appeal to the
Public carrying conviction wherever it finds its way; but as many people may
read the Sentinel who have not seen the Appeal, and may thence form prejudices
against the gentlemen who have been promoting a church establishment in this
country, it seems proper that they should be presented with the sum of those
arguments, which may be offered in favor of an American bishop.

After so eminent a writer as the Rev. Dr. Chandler, the reader is not to
expect that I should offer any new arguments on the subject. Mecum habito and
Novi quam sit mihi curta supellex. I shall be contented with treading
faithfully in the Doctor's footsteps, taking his arguments as they stand, or
sometimes abbreviating, at other times enlarging them, so as to place them in
the clearest and strongest light, and upon these arguments we are determined to
rest our cause; they are the sentiments of a general convention of our clergy,
published after the maturest deliberation, therefore as we do not think any new
arguments are necessary to support our cause, so are we determined not to
desert one of those which we have already advanced. -- The prayer of our
petition is to this import, "That his majesty and the British parliament would
graciously be pleased to send over to America one or more bishops of the church
of England, and make such establishment for their maintenance, etc. as may be
suited to the rank and dignity of their office." Who could have imagined that
any objection would have been made to a scheme so moderate and reasonable as
this? a scheme which must be equally profitable to church and state. It may be
of great use toward preserving the obedience and loyalty of his majesty's
subjects in North America, and is absolutely necess^ry toward the very
existence of Christianity in this part of the world. That such is the
importance of an American episcopate, Dr. Chandler has effectually proved to
every person, who is not hardened against conviction by the obstinate
prejudices of education.

It is absolutely necessary toward the propagation of Christianity in America,
that bishops be immediately sent over to these parts. "for it is (says the
Doctor) an essential doctrine of the church of England, that none can have any
authority in the church of Christ, but those who derive it from Christ
immediately or mediately. They who receive the authority immediately must prove
their mission by working miracles. Those who receive it mediately must derive
it from those persons whom Christ has authorized to convey it, i. e. they must
receive it by regular succession. Men may ridicule the notion of uninterrupted
succession as they please, but if the authority of the clergy is derived from
Christ, (and if it is not, they are no ministers of Christ) they must receive
it in one of the ways already mentioned, and if the succession be once broke,
and the power of ordination once lost -- not all the men on earth, not all the
angels in heaven, without an immediate commission from Christ, can restore it."
p. 4th.

All persons therefore who call themselves ministers, unless they be truly
originated from this immaculate, uninterrupted line, are impostors and no
ministers of Christ. 'It is as great an absurdity on St. Paul's principles, for
a man to preach the gospel without being properly sent, as for a man to hear
without a preacher, or believe in him of whom they have not heard.' Therefore
as the teachers who are not ordained by a bishop, or sent by him cannot
possibly preach the gospel, so neither can the people hear the gospel from
them. And where there are no preachers of the gospel, nor any hearers, there
can hardly be any Christianity. It there be any nations then who have no public
teachers duly sent by apostolic bishops, we are not to think that Christianity
subsists in those nations. Hence we see the singular propriety with which
Doctor Chandler distinguishes his American episcopalians by the name of the
Church, the American Church, the Church in America I confess he might have
avoided this seeming tautology, by calling them at once the Christians in
America, or the Christian church in America; not that he has entirely neglected
this accurate distinction, for page 113 he tells us, 'that the cause of the
church of England in America is the cause of Christianity,' and who else are
entitled to the name of Christians? What other church (that of Rome excepted)
has a Christian ministry? The churches of Denmark and Sweden, the Lutherans and
Calvanists in Germany, the churches of Geneva, Holland and Scotland, are
nothing but shadows of churches; they have forsaken, they have shut out the
light of Christianity by rejecting the gospel ministry through the only channel
of conveyance, the unbroken succession. When I think of those millions of souls
who in this enlightened age, suffer themselves to perish without benefit of
clergy, my compassion is stirred up, my heart is moved within me.

The pious Mr. Dodwell in his one priesthood, expresses himself in this elegant
manner, 'It is,' says he, 'the most dreadful aggravation of the condemnation of
the damned, that they are banished from the presence of the Lord, and from the
glory of his power. The same is their condition also who are disunited from
Christ by being disunited from the bishop, his visible representative.'

Some people who abound in a kind of false charity, such as would presently sap
the foundations of the church, will here ask, What then do we make of all
Protestant nations besides the Engglish? Do we in very deed deny them the
gospel ministry, and consign them to the blackness of darkness forever? To this
we shall only answer by repeating what the Doctor has already said, The
necessity of episcopal ordination is an essential doctrine of our church.
--.They who have it not are no Christian ministers: As this is the truth, we
are bound to maintain it, let the consequences be what they may; we are not
accountable for those, more than for the fate of the Mahometans, since they
also have Christianity in their offer, but obstinately resuse to accept of it;
and if the Protestant nations in Europe suffer themselves to perish without the
ministration of the gospel, they are so much the more unpardonable, as a very
little care would render it universal. We do not say that those people are
deficient in a general acquaintance with the Christian religion; nor that they
fail in piety, benevolence, charity, or any other moral or Christian-like
virtue. But they have rejected or lost episcopal ordination, which alone can
restore them to the fellowship of the church, and entitle them to her
blessings. But how shall they who live in darkness, shut out from the benign
influence of a gospel ministry, receive this invaluable blessing? Their duty is
plain; they may readily obtain from England suppose it were but one or two
bishops, and even as a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, so will these
bishops in a short time convey genuine ordination to all the clergy in a whole
kingdom.

Having thus proved the general necessity of bishops, toward the existence of
Christanity, I shall next show that they are peculiarly necessary in America.
For since there can be no Christian ministers without episcopal ordination, it
is plain that our clergy must either have bishops to ordain them here, or they
must go to England for ordination; but the latter is absolutely impracticable,
considering the dangers of the seas. -- It has happened, I don't know by what
fatality, ever since the affair of Jonah, that the clergy have been singularly
unfortunate at sea. This is also a general observation of seamen, who doubtless
are the best judges in that case, There have gone home for ordination from the
northern colonies fifty-two; of those, forty-two have returned safe, and ten
have MISCARRIED. Page 34. What a melancholy loss is here; little less than 20
per Cent. which is eight times as great as our loss on the several kinds of
merchandise which we generally import. This plainly evinces the necessity of
having an American bishop. The winds and seas forbid our continuing any longer
on the present footing.

But the care of the Negroes, the Indians and the white people in general,
furnishes us with so many distinct arguments in favor of an American bishop.
-- We shall consider them apart. -- The cause of an American episcopate derives
a powerful argument from the state of the Negroes, who constitute the majority
of those numerous souls, that fill up and adorn our list as members of the
church in America. The number of blacks in the islands and colonies is above
eight hundred and forty thousand. These Negroes may be faid in an imperfect
sense to belong to the respective religious classes of their owners with whom
they are connected, and by whom they are governed. So that whatever is the
religion of the master, that also may be called the religion of the slave. But
the masters are chiefly known to be churchmen; consequently above half a
million of Negroes belong to the church of England. Such have been the fruitful
labors of our missionaries, such the rapid increase of our church in this part
of the world. Now though it is generally known that these slaves are brought up
in ignorance without any ray of religious hope to cheer them, and to the
eternal disgrace of teachers and masters are no Christians at all, yet as the
sense of religion will certainly increase in their masters by the presence of a
bishop, so it will also increase in the slaves, and the good work which we have
so happily begun, will then be carried on to the desired persection. Page 57.
To illustriate this, let us suppose a bishop settled in Philadelphia, his pious
influence would soon diffuse a spirit of religion, as well through all the
neighboring provinces as this city. Then we might expect in a short time to
equal that purity of morals, and that religious disposition, which is generally
observed in London and other great cities, that have providentially become the
residence of a bishop. Suppose then a bishop were settled in Philadelphia, the
planters in Jamaica and the other West India islands, being under his
Lordship's immediate observation, would soon become very sober and religious,
and consequently their Negroes, who are in general a discreet, intelligent sort
of people, would, in imitation of their masters, become religious and good
Christians. Whoever is well acquainted with the condition of slaves in our
Southern provinces and the West India islands, and has observed the
compassionate manner in which their masters express their desire of seeing
those outcasts of humanity instructed in the Christian religion, must readily
see the force of this argument, and though illiterate Americans in general may
not be able to comprehend it, yet we are persuaded that our superiors in
England, for whom, by the way, Dr. Chandler's Address was chiefly designed,
will easily perceive its weight, and will see that so glorious a prospect of
adding half a million of churchmen to the Christian church, proves beyond all
doubt, the necessity of an American bishop.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Monday June 20th.
A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG, [No. XII.]
BY TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
Adder's Poison is under their Lips.

DAVID.
IT is not a little surprising, that a writer of a weekly piece, who confines
himself to no order, spurns at truth, and despises reason and argumentation,
should be so soon obliged to recur to a figure of rhetoric, called, repetition,
to fill up his abusive paper: That this is a fact, is evident to every
impartial reader, of Number. VIII. of the American Whig, in which there is nothing
but what he said before, except his historical account of the reformation, and
the origin of the dissenters in England; -- this I must confess is new, very
new, so entirely new, that I am confident it owes its existence to the fruitful
invention of the American Whig. To evince this assertion, I shall now exhibit
to the public an account of the occasion and rise of the English dissenters,
not indeed quite so new, but rather more true; and dare appeal to all the
English historians, (except Neil, whose veracity stands upon no better
foundation, than his friend's, the American Whig,) for a confirmation of what I
advance.

Henry the VIIIth, was so far from being a reformer, that he continued a
zealous, and persecuting Papist to his death. He aimed at nothing more than the
gratification of his lust and ambition; -- and in order that he might indulge
himself without control, he shook off the Papal authority, and enriched
himself by seizing the revenues of the church. Under his son Edward VI. the
reformation made a very considerable progress, but was far from complete, when
it pleased God, who is unsearchable in his judgments, to deprive the nation of
so pious and aimiable a prince, and the Romish religion was again introduced,
under the influence and power of the bigoted tyrant Mary; who raised a
persecution against the reformed, equal to any that the primitive Church
suffered from the Heathen emperors. Many pious and learned clergymen of the
reformed church of England, as well bishops as presbyters, were put to the most
cruel death; and many clergymen whose courage was not equal to their piety and
learning, left the kingdom and sheltered themselves in various parts of Europe,
especially at Geneva, where they contracted a love and esteem for the Genevan
discipline, etc. -- When Queen Elizabeth, of glorious memory, came to the
throne, a sufficient number of men of abilities and learning, to supply the
parishes that had been vacated by Mary's persecution, was not to be found;
which occasioned the temporary institution of non-preaching ministers. Those
that had left their livings, which were now filled in the best manner the times
would permit, finding all easy and quiet at home, returned, and demanded to be
restored to their old parishes. But as they had deserted their flocks in the
time of danger, it was thought unjust to turn out the present incumbents, to
make room for them. Thus disappointed, they became discontented, and began to
set up for a more pure and thorough reformation, and took the name of Puritans.
In a little time they became somewhat troublesome, but were too plous and well
disposed to separate from the church.

While things were in this situation, the Roman Catholics at home and abroad,
especially the Jesuits, were very industrious in making use of every means in
their power, to obstruct and disgrace the reformation. Always fruitful in
invention, it occured to them, that they might avail themselves of the
instrumentality of the Puritans, to sow divisions and animosities among the
reformed in England. A swarm of Jesuits therefore embarked in the artful design
of fomenting the discontent of the Puritans. These adepts in art and cunuing,
first broached the novel scheme of a parity of ministers; and all the other
peculiarities of the dissentors. These were the hopeful heads under whose
banner they listed; the "variety of leaders," under whom they "split into all
that diversity of persuasion," which has been "so favorable to liberty and
philosophy."

The Whig in this same number, with his usual good nature, still affects to
treat as trifles, the hardships under which the church in America labors; --
the danger of crossing and re-crossing the Atlantic, is nothing with this
heroic gentleman. -- The expense is an advantage; and if it was greater "the
church would be better secured against an old complaint of the Jews; that
priests were made of the meanest of the people" -- The Jewish priesthood was
confined by divine institution to one family, viz. Aaron's. No person of this
family was too mean to make a priest of. Jeroboam, indeed, who, by his schism
and idolatry made Israel to sin, did make priests of the meanest of the people.
He, like some in these days, paid no regard to the institution of God, but set
up a parity of families. Let this wicked proceeding be attended by those whom
it concerns.

In the Jewish church, by God's express appointment, there was a disparity of
clergy. -- High priests, priests and Levites; and as the Jewish church was
typical of the Christian, possibly no great absurdity will follow from
supposing that God has done the same in the Christian church; and that bishops,
presbyters, and deacons, are of divine institution. If the American Whig, and
his associates, are so wilfully blind, that they will not see this, I cannot
help it: however I can pray for them, that they may have eyes that can see --
ears that can hear, and hearts that can understand; -- that they may be
converted from the error of their ways, and that God may heal them.

Our sagacious Whig supposes, either the presbyterian form of church
government, was instituted by the Apostles; or else that every community of
people were left at liberty to take such a form of church government as they
thought most convenient for them.

Upon this last supposition (which seems to be his real opinion) he cannot
possibly have any just ground of quarrel with the church of England, for
preferring the episcopal form; for had they not the same right to take this
form, that the church of Scotland had to take the presbyterian form? For this
writer then to oppose and calumniate the church in the shameful manner he does,
is real and direct persecution.

But if his opinion is, that the presbyterian form was instituted by the
Apostles, and that episcopacy is an abberration from the truth; I beg the
candid reader to consider, that the American Whig admits that episcopacy
"prevailed" (if he had said universally, he would have spoken the truth for
once) from "the days of St. Ignatius to Calvin; an interval of not less than
1400 years." He also admits "That the first ages of the church, before the
Scarlet Whore had defiled the Nations," furnished "instances of martyrs and
confessors," who "considered a priest as a bishop's inferior." -- How came
these holy men of old to consider a priest as a bishop's inserior, unless that
was really the case by Apostolic institution? Did not these primitive martyrs
and confessors understand the constitution of the Christian church as well as
the Whigs and Independents of our day? -- How was it possible that the whole
church, which even in the Apostles time, was dispersed over a great part of the
Roman empire, should at once forsake the presbyterian form of church government
(if that was the orginal form) and become episcopalians, within so short a
period as the time of St. Ignatius; and not one honest presbyterian to oppose
the abominable corruption and apostasy? How comes it to pass, that this
universal degeneracy should never be noticed by one single historian of those
times, who have been minute enough to transmit affairs of much less importance?
-- As to Lord Chancellor King's scheme which is so often and audaciously
referred to by the advocates of the presbyterian form of church government, it
was fully confuted by the Rev. Mr. Slater, in a book, entitled -- An Original
Draught of the primitive Church, to which neither Lord Chancellor King (nor any
one else, that I recollect) ever made any reply. These two valuable books --
King's Inquiry, and Slater's original Draught, I would recommend to any person,
that has a mind to examine into this Controversy. Truth fears no examination; I
therefore heartily wish every candid and impartial person among us, would read
and search for himself; and then I am confident, he would be convinced,
whatever such paltry scribblers as the American Whig, and his whole band of
auxiliaries, may say, or write, that episcopacy is of Apostolic institution;
and consequently, that it is their duty to submit to it, as an appointment and
ordinance of God.

To TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
SIR,
FINDING that neither argument, truth or decency, are to be expected from your
doughty antagonist, the American Whig, I beg leave to exhibit to the public
(with your permission) the following very plain truths; not being in the least
afraid of his feeble pen, or his malice, however conspicuous it may appear.

Yours, PLAIN TRUTH.

I. THAT the American independents (ever fond of opposition) do every thing
(though they labor in vain) to prevent an American episcopate, -- is true.

II. That neither their weak arguments, their false assertions, or feeble
efforts will prevent it, -- is true.

III. That a truly primitive bishop, such a one as Dr. in his Appeal requests,
would greatly promote the interest of religion in general, and of the
established church in particular, is -- so true; that even the American Whig,
though mad with passion, must advert to it: -- Consequently, that he will avail
himself of every falsehood and subtilty he is master of (and he has a large
budget) to impede and retard so great a blessing, is, -- a truth that cannot be
denied.

IV. That all abusive scribblers, republicans in principle, -- stirers up of
strife, -- and pests to society, ought, by every well-wisher to our happy
constitution in church and state, to be treated with contempt, and most
heartily despised, -- is true.

V. That a particular abusive Junto, justly celebrated for their arrogance,
false assertions, and abusive papers; viz, the Independent Reflector, Watch
Tower, etc. -- (to say nothing at present of some other performances, which
contain many scandalous falsities, as will ever long appear) have been, and now
are endeavoring to spread their poison, and debauch the principles of his
Majesty's liege subjects in America, is a truth well known to the most
considerate and principal inhabitants of this city.

VI. That said Junto never yet did, and it is to be feared never will, act an
honest and upright part; -- or, confine themselves within the bounds of truth,
decency, or good manners, -- is true.

VII. That the friends to episcopacy most heartily despise the low despicable
threats; -- the paultry performances of a dejected, disappointed, and tottering
faction, -- is true.

VIII. That the Whig, and his party, public incendiaries, have by far, more
reason to dread disagreeable consequences, than honest friend Tickle, -- is
true.

IX. That the present controversy, begun by those that are enemies to peace,
will be dropped, as soon as restless, despised, malicious faction will cease from
their hostilities, and be quiet, -- is true: But, not 'till then.

X. That the Whig, No. IX. was designedly wrote to blind the eyes of a worthy
member of the ancient Dutch church in this city, is -- very true. -- That it
was also wrote in the Dutch language, for fear of an answer, the Whig knows to
be true; but that the author will be disappointed in this, I know -- is true.

XI. That if the Meagre Whig, or any of his associates, (I will not exclude
even Dr. Ramchicken,) will oblige the public with a piece (they are all learned
men) in Hebrew, Greek, or Latin, they shall be honored with an answer, in the
same language, by honest Timothy Tickle, Esquire or one of his correspondents, --
is true.

XII. That it is the duty of every good Christian, -- of every friend to
religious liberty, -- of every well-wisher to our happy constitution in church
and state, to use his best endeavors, his interest, and abilities, to procure
an American episcopate, is a truth that cannot be denied by any but those who
are enemies to that liberty wherewith Christ has made us free.

N. B. The Kicker, I mean, that conceited scribbler Sir Isaac Foot, shall, in
due time, meet with a Cuff; -- and the elegant and polite performance of the
pretended Dutch man, in the last Whig shall be properly noticed; -- not by a
discarded P -- n.

To the Whipper of the American Whig.
O magna vis Viritatis, quae contra Hominum Ingenia, Calliditatem, Solertiam
facile se perseipsa Defendat

CICERO.
SIR,
I Have had the opportunity of perusing some of your remarks on the American
Whig. -- I beg leave, Sir, to assure you, that I neither belong to the church
of England, nor the English dissenting meetings, but am a member of the Dutch
reformed church, in America, firmly attached to the church constitution
established in the united Netherlands, as far as it is merely ecclesiastical.
Thus I flatter myself, I may lay a claim to impartiality in any dispute, having
a particular relation to the aforesaid parties as such. I am resolved not to
interfere with the present encountering Batalias. I am confident none of the
able pens employed on either sides, need my aid; but whenever either of them
shall make bold to rush into a foreign territory I have a particular concern
in, not so much to crave her aid as to plunder her treasure, and ravish her
ammunition, I will think it my duty, as far as my ability will admit, to stand
in her defense.

Sir as I have hitherto had an opportunity of seeing only a few abrupt pieces
on the subject of the present grand ecclesiastic debates, I am obliged to
suspend my judgment; but yet I cannot help informing you of my extreme alarm at
some expressions presented to my view in reading your No. VIII. Did I say
alarmed! yea, I was amazed! I was stunned! -- As I have as yet had no view of
No. VI. referred to, I must leave the propriety of accusing Mr. Whig with
lugging the church of Holland into this dispute, when in fact Mr. Whipper
forces it in between two contending armies, there to defend ^^^lf and fight its
way through. or perish: I say the propriety of such a procedure, I must leave
undetermined for the present. -- Since I presume that your assertion which
readily admits the church of Holland not to be exactly episcopal, in the same
manner that the church of England is episcopal, entirely depends upon a bare, I
am told. I will now pass it by without any remarks; but I do sincerely assure
you, from my own better knowledge, that the whole of your information is
absolutely false. Your informer must certainly have been either an idiot with
respect to the true constitution of the church of Holland, or else a perfidious
betrayer of its real interests; therefore I heartily desire, yea as a lover of
truth, I positively demand, that you would be pleased, either to insist upon
sufficient proof of what your informer has been pleased to tell you. You know,
Sir, no doubt, affirmanti incumbit Probatio; and being obtained, to communicate
them to the public; -- or, else openly to recall the said assertions, as being
founded on false information. In case of a refusal to bow, I will be under a
necessity of taking you, Sir, for the defendant of the assertions founded upon,
I am told. In complying with my reasonable request, you will leave me room to
animadvert on the future product of your pen, with becoming impartiality, and
oblige your humble servant,

PHILALETHES.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, June 20th. The AMERICAN WHIG, [No. XV.]
SUCH is the nature of human actions, that their secret springs are not always
knowable, save only to their authors, and the great Searcher of hearts; the
sole rule for judging of other men's motives, is by arguing from the effect to
the cause, and by examining an action, to trace it, if possible, to the
principle which inspired its agent. -- But though the characters of human
actions are seldom so clear and distinct, especially when disguise is used, as
to express with certainly, the real sources from which they flow; there is
nevertheless a material difference, between a good and a true reason; not only
as actually existing in the nature of things, but as discoverable by
experience. And though it is often difficult to distinguish them, yet a
discerning eye will frequently mark their discriminations, with sufficient
certainty. This, however, is a task rarely to be performed by common observers.
Hence the widest door is opened for deceit, on almost every subject in life.
But religion, above all others, furnishes the most ample field for abuse. F^^
how much soever the corruptions of human nature may have warped our hearts and
practice from virtue, it still recommends itself to the understanding; and with
those who are unable to distinguish, it is enough that a scheme is urged by
religious motives, to gain a ready, and often times, an implicit assent. True
it is, that as the world is grown more enlightened, impostors must put on
better disguises than formerly. -- When in times of Yore, a cry was raised for
the heathen goddess Diana of Ephesus, against the pure and undefiled religion
of Jesus, it was attended with an express avowal of the true reason for which
it was raised, "by this craft we get our wealth." But our modern God-makers,
find themselves obliged to conceal their real motives; and when my Lord Bishop
is to be the Idol in America, when the seheme is to aggrandize the church, and
to introduce prelacy, from which our ancestors fled as from a devouring
monster, we are told it is the cause of religion; and are excited to a
compliance, by an address to our gratitude, in behalf of the great Author of
all our benefits. Of this priestly cant and jargon, Dr. Chande^, in his appeal,
has furnished us with a rem^^kable instance. Let him speak for himself. "As
America is the region, wherein the divine goodness has been more remarkably
displayed, in favor of the British nation; so America is evidently the very
ground, on which some suitable monuments of religious gratitude should be
erected." To be sure ^^^enial of this proposition, would be a flat rejection of
all obligations to the deity. Nor will he be contradicted in the assertion,
that this monument of religious gratitude "should be made visible to the world;
that the honor of the supreme ruler of events may be thereby immediately
promoted." These sentiments would afford just cause, in the judgment of every
man, for applying to those who are entrusted with the directions of our public
affairs, for establishing an anniversary thanksgiving, to be celebrated in all
the episcopalian and non-episcopalian churches in the nation. But a person of
less sagacity than the Doctor, could never have investigated so singular a
reason, for the establishment of episcopacy and spiritual bondage, in this land
of religious liberty, as the smiles of providence, in the reduction of Canada
and Louisiana, and "the total annihilation of that power on this continent,
whereby our former safety was chiefly endangered." Nor will he meet with any
opposition to his other general assertion, that every wise nation sees and
acknowledges the hand of God, in the production of such events; and that every
religious nation will endeavor to make some suitable returns, for such
extraordinary favors." But whether those returns ought to consist in the legal
establishment, of any religious denomination in particular, is a matter which
must undergo all the freedom of enquiry. If there be any force or conclusion in
his argument, it plainly consists in this position, that episcopacy and not
Christianity is the national religion. This is evidently implied in that bright
chain of reasoning, which, to do it full justice, my readers shall have in his
own words. After having excited our gratitude, and called for public
testimonials, in honor to the deity; he argues thus; "as this honor is most
directly promoted by public worship; as that worship must be most acceptable to
him, wherein the praises and adorations of his creatures are regularly offered
him, in the solemn offices of the purest and best religion; and as the national
religion must be supposed best to answer these characters, in the national
opinion;" it necessarily follows, (mark the conclusion) that the state of the
"national religion here, has a right on this occasion, to the peculiar
attention and consideration of those, who are entrusted with the direction of
our public affairs." The same argument would doubtless be as conclusive, in the
mouth of a musselman, and in an address to the Grand Signor. It is not a plea
for Christianity. It is a claim for distinction, in favou^ of the national
religion. For it cannot be denied that all other religious denominations among
us, except Judaism, are at least as zealous professors of the religion of
Jesus, as those of the Doctor's persuasion, which he is pleased to call the
national religion; that the doctrines they profess are as pure Christianity, as
those which the surpliced clergy most solemnly subscribe and seldom preach will
require no other proof than an attendance at their numerous places of publie
worship; and that they are far from being less remarkable for promoting the
honor of God by a stated attendance at publi worship, than their episcopal
brethren in England and America, is an undoubted fact. There cannot therefore
be a defect of public testimonials of gratitude, to the God of all our mercies,
arising from the want of a stated and regular support of Christian worship
among us. Hence also it is clear, that the reason for establishing episcopacy
in America is not, that its doctrines are more pure, the practice of its
professors more virtuous, or their attendance at public worship more regular
and unterrupted, than those of other denominations; or in other words, that the
church of England, is properly, and exclusively the church of Christ; in which
alone, all true Christians must allow the honor of God can be duly promoted;
but because it is, as the Doctor asserts, the national religion, that reli^^on
which is so far at least removed from Christian purity, that by his own
confestion, her ecclesiastical laws, liturgy, and public offices, require a
review, and would have had it ever now "were the body of the nation possessed
of good sense enough to admit of it."

But at all events the Doctor is involved in this dilemma; he must either be
understood, as asserting, that the honor of God cannot be duly promoted in
America, for want of that Christian purity and perfection, to which we are now
strangers; and which cannot be introduced among us, but by the means of
episcopacy; or, that the honor of God is not so much promoted by the purity
and perfection of a Christian church, as by a national establisament of
religion, however corrupt it may appear to be, if tested by the sacred oracles,
the divine canon of Scripture. With respect to the former of these
propositions, I shall think myself justified in supposing that he rejects it,
until he shall think proper expressly to maintain it; that he avows the other
cannot be denied, while, though he admits, that the national church stands in
need of a review, to bring it to the standard of true Christianity; he,
nevertheless, attempts to erect his public monument of gratitude, upon that
national basis. Now, to consider his reasoning in a just light, it evidently
amounts to this; it is the duty of the legislature of a country, to promote the
national religion, whatever it may be; in Turkey, therefore, the lawgiver
should advance Mahometanism, in France, Spain, and Portugal, Popery; in the
British Empire, Protestant Episcopacy, in China, Idolatry: All which in their
several places are calculated to promote the honor of God; because, in the
national opinion, they must respectively be supposed best adapted to that
purpose. This is certainly most excellent doctrine, from the pen of a church of
England divine, and a Doctor too.

But upon this plan of reasoning, let us see what becomes of primitive
episcopacy. If the "national religion has a right on this, or any other
occasion, to the peculiar attention and consideration" of those in power, so
far as to justify the introduction of that national religion, or in other words
episcopacy into America, how does it sollow, that primitive bishops ought to be
introduced? Are the English prelates such primitive bishops as the Doctor
requires? Or rather did the world ever know a bishop whose powers were
consined, purely to ordination, the government of the clergy and confirmation?
Surely not. Such a harmless creature, however, cannot be found in the English
hierarchy. If, therefore, the argument drawn from the national opinion, and the
national religion, has any weight, it ought to command the peculiar attention
and consideration of our superiors, in the erection of a Babel, exactly upon
the plan of an English hierarchy; because, according to the Doctor's mode of
reasoning, it is best adapted to the national opinion. But if it is the duty of
our superiors, thus to establish the national religion in America, it is, of
course, a part of the same duty, to enforce it by the same means, by pains and
penalties. For, in truth, every establishment of religion, if such
establishments are in themselves justifiable, ought to be maintained, as well
as those which are merely of a civil nature, by the infliction of temporal
punishments on transgressors of the law. Nor, indeed, can its efficacy, as in
establishment, consist in any thing else. Hence therefore it is as evident, in
the Doctor's judgment, or at least by necessary deduction from it, as the sun
at noon tide, that we cannot make suitable returns to the great author of all
our benefits, but by establishing English episcopacy in America, and enforcing
it, (for it otherwise cannot be an establishment) by pains and penalties. Nay,
if from principles of gratitude, the national religion, by which he means the
church of England, may, as he supposes, "claim a right to the peculiar
attention, and consideration of those, who are entrus^ed with the direction of
our public affairs." What reason can be assigned, why the whole Anglican
hierarchy, with all its pomp and splendour, with all its pride, its riches, its
dominion, its tyranny, should not be established over our heads? If the
national religion means the ecclesiastical establishment in South-Britain,
which upon the Doctor's (...) of reasoning, must be allowed to be the best in
the world: ^^^y should we have a primitive bishop only, or rather, why a bishop
reduced even to a more humble state, than that of primitive bishops, a bishop,
whose power should be wholly confined to ordination, government of the clergy,
and the act of confirmation? Why should we not have spiritual courts, with all
their terrible appendages? Why be secured against the dreadful consequences of
excommunication, both greater and lesser? Why exempted from an enforced
observation of all the holy days of the church? Why admitted to the exercise of
any office in the state, till we have taken the sacramental test, in the only
true, pure, catholic, and apostolic church? These are the engines established
by law in England, for enforcing obedience to mother church, the religion of
which, the Doctor calls the national religion, and the Bishop of Landaff, the
native religion of our ancestors. In short it requires a very slender capacity
to discern, that the principles upon whith the Doctor builds his claim, to the
peculiar attention of "those, who are entrusted with the direction of our
public assairs," in savor of the national religion, lead directly and
hecessarily, to the full and complete establishment of episcopacy.

This concatenation could not have escaped his sagacious eye. For if the
national religion of South-Britain is the best and purest religion, if in the
church of England, the praises and adoration of God's creatures are most
regularly offered in their solemn offices, which he more than insinuates, why
should our gratitude to the Almighty be restrained? Why, rather, should the
national religion be formally excluded by establishing an episcopate, as little
similar to the hierarchy of the Anglican church, as it would be to primitive
episcopacy? He cannot think so inconsistently; he cannot be thus at odds with
himself; and while he believes, that our duty to God, requires "a peculiar
attention to, and consideration for our national religion; it at the same time
must be his opinion," and I dare say it is his ardent wish, as an honest son of
the church, that the splendid hierarchy may be erected, and her proud banner be
displayed over the land; over that land, to which his own ancestors fled sor
refuge, from the persecuting spirit and prelatic intolerance of episcopacy;
that species of epispacy, whose present mildness if she breathes more gently on
those, who are without her bosom, than she formerly did, is perhaps not so much
to be accounted for, by the assertion, "that cruelty and severity is by no
means the character of English bishops;" as to the avowed, the sleady and
powerful protection, which his present majesty, and his august ancestors, of
the house of Hanover, have always afforded to religious liberty. It cannot,
indeed be doubted, that the Doctor, however consistently he thinks, has not
stamped his writings with the same character. Nor could this be avoided. His
appeal is an address, not only to the public, but to those in authority. To
conciliate the favor of the former, it was necessary to strip the bishop of
all his pontificialibus, and to reduce him almost to the abject state of a
mendicant friar; but to command the attention of the latter; such sentiments,
in favor of the national episcopate, were to be discovered to them, however
concealed from vulgar observation, as are calculated to show, that through the
want of an establishment, men in power are deprived of the principal state
engine, for subduing American liberty. Harsh as these reflections may seem,
they are fully justified by the passage more immediately under consideration,
and by many others, which I shall occasionally take the liberty of dissecting
in the view of the public. -- They afford the clearest demonstration, that the
Doctor's positive and express declarations, in favor of primitive episcopacy,
are thrown out merely ad captandum vulgus, to amuse the people; while the more
secret design of the Appeal, is to lay a sure foundation for prelatic dominion
in the church, and arbitrary rule in the state. -- These have ever been
inseparable companions; and while we are marking the one with a jealous eye, we
should as attentively watch the motions of the other.

But before I conclude, it may not be amiss to enquire into the propriety of
that expression, upon which so much is built, and by the magic force of which,
we are taught, that whoever is opposed, to the establishment of episcopacy in
the colonies, is unmindful of those signal deliverances, which have lately been
wrought for us, by the finger of God. To talk of a national religion of France,
in Spain, or in Turkey, would be to speak with propriety; but to apply this
character to any church, in the British Empire, is absurd. In England prelacy
is established; in Scotland presbyterianism; in New England colonies
congregationalism; and in almost all the other colonies, they have no religious
establishment at all. -- How then, when by religion is meant, not Christianity
itself, but a particular denomination of Christians; how, I say, can any
religion in the king's realm or dominions be called national? Truly I cannot
conceive now, unless by a well known figure in rhetoric, which puts the part
for the whole; but upon a subject of so much importance, and in an Appeal to
the public, it is excusable to deal in figures. I am therefore rather of
opinion, that the Doctor supposes that England, though a part only of the great
whole, has exclusively considered a right, in the plain and common sense of the
words, as they are used and understood by British Protestants, to extend her
ecclesiastical establishment throughout the colonies of the British Empire; and
to load Americans with burdens, which neither they, nor their forefathers could
bear. And whether the sound of this doctrine is more agreeable to an American
ear, than the unmusical periods of the stamp act, I leave to my American
readers to determine.

M.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Monday June 20th. A KICK FOR THE WHIPPER. [No. V.]
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
-- She eats and wipeth her mouth, and says I have done no Wickedness.

SOTOMON.
SQUIRE TICKLE's assistant (No. IV.) seems to belong to Nimrod's hunting party,
for in true sportsmen's language he says, the faction first opened with the
Independent Reflector; -- but what game was he pursuing, or (if you please)
persecuting? Why, the church and clergy. He was a yelping hound that is certain.
He yelp'd at the excise; the abuses of the road and watch; extravagant
sunerals, bills of credit, and copperpence, (what is more natural to the
species) beef and pork, and twenty like things beside: He likewise barked at
mendicants and felons imported, creeds and systems, party divisions, and a
party colloge. How far the church of England or her clergy are peculiarly
concerned in the premises, so as to fancy themselves only persecuted, I leave
others to judge; but for my part, I cannot conceive, how, in yelping and barking
at such things as these, he should have followed the example of any hireling,
republican, deistical dog living, much less of the last century. "The next, he
says, was a more furious, but worse conducted attack from (what all insidious
enemies hate most abominably) a Watchtower; but they lost -- all they were
contending for; and it was hoped they had sallen -- never to rise again." No
doubt of that Mr. Anonymous; but it seems they are risen again, to persecute
the church and clergy, and oh! what will become of poor honest men. Alas! they
will be torn to pieces (take my word for it) by these persecuting bloodhounds.

In Par. 2d, and 8th, Mr. What d'ye-call-him, talks of the present religious
establishment. Quere, Was not Religious put by mistake instead of the word
civil? Or if not, do all the laws of God as well as man, entitle any church to
the full benefit of an establishment, which (instead of Christ) makes a mortal
the head of the church, and is not by a single law of God authorized? However,
if there be at present an establishment, to the benefit of which the church is
barely by the laws of man incontestibly entitled, it is mighty strange she cannot
receive it. Mr. No-name seems to think it imposlible to have added the section
he mentions to the Appeal; but that, "had it been done with the same force of
argument, etc. with which the whole book is written, not a dog had moved his
tongue against it. Now, in both these articles, I must beg leave to dissent
from the gentleman; ^o^ I believe the section in question, might have been
written (even by Dr. Chandler himself) with much greater force of argument,
than any other contained in his very candid and modest Appeal; nor can I
entertain so charitable an opinion of its enemies, as our author seems to do;
for such biggoted, unrelenting dissenters are they, that though it had been
proved, "that the establishing of bishops in America would be of no service to
the church of England; yet unless it had also been proved, that it would have
been of no disservice to other denominations, I Am persuaded the growling
faction would have still bay'd the moon, and that snarling puppy the Whig,
still yelp'd and barked like a bull-dog. The church, says Mr. What
d'ye-call-him, has amazingly increased, -- in New England, by the native force
of" -- of what? native religion? no; of what then? why -- of -- of -- of --
Truth! Now I Will be whipped if the reader did not think I was going to say --
pride, resentment, or Arminianism. "The church in this capital, he says, is
really venerable, and commands respect. What a pity it is, that a respect
commanding church should be scribbled against, slandered, reviled, and
persecuted; snievelled, snorted, roared, raved and spit at! -- Oh! but she
commands respect so as to check the factious lustful thirst of power. How? why,
by excluding from the assembly, by the finesse of election jobbing, a
tremendous candidate, (who has lately had the honor to fright her ladyship
most horribly,) as she formerly commanded respect by saddling the faction with
a tax, by means of well-timed cabals in the house of representatives.

Par. 3d, 4th, 5th and 6th, being much of a piece, I shall truss them all up
together. They again put me in mind of Potiphar's wife, who, because she could
not ravish Joseph, swore a rape against him; of Queen Ann's motto, semper
eadem, and of Demosthenes's observation concerning oratory, which being by way
of parody applied to our present purpose, will be, repetition is the beginning,
and likely to be the middle, and end of Whig-Whipping.

Par. 7th, our author says, "without the consent of the venerable, primitive,
apostolical order of Bishops, the act of toleration could not have passed."
Without their consent likewise, doubtless the stamp act had never been
repealed. Their order, no doubt, has ever been held sacred, even by heretics
and schismatics; who venerated lawn sleeves; though that St. Paul, or even St.
Peter, primitive apostolic gentlemen ever wore them, might be as difficult to
prove, as the unterrupted line of succession. This advocate for a church, by
episcopalian bigots universally absolved of ignorance, pride, hypocrisy, and
superstition, very justly (in spite of the acknowledgments of those old women,
Archbishop Usher, Bishop Burnet, and many other old womenly bishops) despises
the religion of the faction, as a religion of yesterday; a new religion must
needs be wrong, the Jews and Greeks in the primitive times thought so: But
antiquity is the thing; though merely boasted antiquity, it will do wonders --
this will infallibly prove even the uninterrupted succession, and the divine
right of paganism. Mr. What d'ye-call him cannot conceive, why it should be a
mark of reproach to the English bishops, that they are court favored and law
dignified. I can assist his conceptions, -- it is because the faction is weak
enough to believe an ancient oracle, which says, 'Christ's kingdom is not of
this world:' and they would condemn even Moravian and Popish episcopacy, did
they not want zeal to subject all denominations to what they prosess to believe
to be apostolical authority.

This skilful gardener employed by Squire Tickle, to cultivate the plants
sprung from the seeds of discord, sowed, (as he pretends) by the presbyterian
or independent faction, (whether he means one or both, I know not) complements
the other denominations, (for others it seems there are) with living peaceably
under the present establishment. Compliments are often ill-deserved; this I
fancy is such: though somewhat more silent than Balaam's ass, no other
denomination, I dare say, lives very quietly or peaceably under the only
religious establishment I know of here, i. e. the establishment of a tax, for
the support of the episcopal church and clergy. This is a civil establishment,
say you? Why that is true; however it matters not, for civil and religious, it
seems are the same. That church which is so motherly as by a tax to treat all
denominations like her children, no doubt is, and will be their grand security
against them oppression of others.

Mr. What-d'ye-call-him says, "he dares pronounce that, should the present
happy constitution be given up into the hands of the faction, no one religious
denomination would enjoy the least toleration from them, but must be content
(it were hard that they must be content) to be hanged for their religion." Mr.
What-d'ye-call-him (as well as Squire Tickle) I must needs say, does not want
courage. Tremble ye factious opposers, for they dare affirm, deny, or pronounce
any thing whatsoever; so daring are they, I am almost afraid to KICK them.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, June 23. The SENTINEL. No. XIV.
AMONG the various extraordinary arguments, which Dr. Chandler makes use of to
promote his favorite scheme of an Amercian episcopate, there is none he seems
to lay more stress on, than that which he draws from the great increase, and
large proportion in numbers of the professors of the CHURCH among the
colonists. This he carefully states: This he insists on again and again, in his
appeal. Having acknowledged, that formerly bishops were not greatly wanted,
even in the provinces settled chiefly by episcopalians, as the beginnings were
small; and that it would have been, without dispute, improper to have sent them
to provinces settled by people averse to episcopal government, it lay upon him
to show such a change of circumstances in America, as would make it reasonable
to "settle" a general episcopate there; for although it is manifest the numbers of
people in the British plantations are greatly increased, yet "our superiors" in
England, might not be apprised, that in the nonconformist colonies, the
professors of the church of England are, at length, become so respectable in
point of numbers, as to make it reasonable to extend the long-projected
establishment of episcopacy even to those parts, where formerly "it would have
been, without dispute imporper" to have done it.

An argument, on which so much dependence is placed, deserves to be well
examined; and the rather, as we have seen that the doctor full of zeal for holy
church, is apt to press matters too far, and to forget mentioning all the
circumstances necessary to enable his readers to form a right judgment of what
he offers to consideration. Thus in calculating the number of petitioners for
establishing an episcopate in the colonies, he takes in the people of the sugar
islands, and southern colonies, although never consulted in the forming or
forwarding the seven potitions, drawn up by the missionaries of New York and
New Jersey; because members of his church abound in those parts, and every
episcopalian, as a true son of the church, must, in the doctor's judgment, be
at least a virtual supplicant on this important occasion.

This method of exaggerating facts, being the doctor's foible, it shall be my
present business to consider this argument drawn from the increased numbers of
his church, and the use he makes of it.

He says, page 56, "a general survey was made in 1762, of the proper British
subjects in America, and communicated by a gentleman of veracity; that it was
then found, (exclusive of the new colonies ceded by the last general treaty of
the peace) they amounted to between two and three millions in the colonies and
islands. Of the whites, the professors of the church of England, were about a
third part. -- The presbyterians, independents, and anabaptists not so many. --
The Germans, papists and other denominations amounted to more." He adds, "the
blacks in our islands and colonies were found, in the above mentioned survey,
to be 844, 000; that many of these it is to be feared, are not Christians at
all; yet, they may be said in an imperfect sense to belong to the religious
class of their owners, who are chiefly churchmen." Just before, he has these
words; "should it be said, that the church of England in America, contains now
a million of members, the affertion might be justified. It is not easy to
ascertain the numbers exactly in a country so widely extended, and unequally
peopled; but from general calculations, it has been frequently said of late
years, that the proper subjects of the British crown in America, amount to
three millions." Elsewhere (page 89) we are told, "that of the inhabitants of
this country, a full third belong to the CHURCH; and a considerable proportion
of others, are professed episcopalians, who cannot consistently be supposed to
have an aversion to bishops." And in page 7^, he speaks of the complaints of
near a million of British subjects, suffering unprecedented hardships and
intolerable grievances, for want of bishops; argues, that it is absurd,
injurious and ungrateful, to entertain any suspicion, that the administration
and legislature will treat so large a number of subjects, with such cruel
partiality as to deny their request.

This is the amount of what doctor Chandler has advanced on this subject. Let
us now examine what it amounts to. It may not be material to dispute the
general number of people, here said to be, in the British plantations, nor the
particular account of the negroes included in it; even though there might be some
inaccuracies in the survey referred to. But it is of importance to ask, why all
the American colonies, except Canada and the Floridas, are here considered in
one view, and brought into one calculation. Why countries, so disjointed and so
remote from each other, as many of them are, should for the purposes of
spiritual polity, be treated as capable of a convenient connection under
bishops? Is it possible, that such an ecclesiastical superior placed at
New York, or elsewhere on the continent, could be of any more service to the
islands, than his grace of London now is? Or, suppose two of these lords
spiritual placed on the continent, and one in the islands, at Jamaica for
instance, as the largest, (for three bishops are the most, says their
apologist, that have been mentioned,) he must have a strong eye Dr. C. talks
of the American bishop, having the inferior clergy "under his eye." Page 35.
to see how the clergy behave at Barbados, and the other islands, which are at
the distance of five or six weeks sailing from Jamaica; yet these places, and
people, distant and different from each other, in climate, customs,
circumstances and religious sentiment, are all proposed to be included in one
plan of church discipline, and that too a newly projected one.

I wonder this zealous advocate for the proposed American hierarchy, when he
was thus striding over sea and land, did not stretch a little further than the
island colonies, in order to bring some other country, (Ireland for instance)
abounding with episcopalians into the survey, in order to counter-balance the
great body of non-conformists in North America; whose numbers stand so
unluckily in the way of this grand scheme of the missionaries. By this means,
they might have been all to say, that the professors of episcopacy, in the
dependencies of Great Britain, are a great majority of all the inhabitants of
those countries, and therefore episcopacy ought to be established in the middle
and eastern colonies in North America. Ireland is as much a dependent state as
Jamaica, and as much connected with North America. It is true, the major part
of the people in that kingdom, are papists; but as they are "professed
episcopalians" and full as good churchmen, as great part of the Dr's million,
they cannot consistently be supposed to have any aversion to bishops. In like
manner it might be contended, that diocesan episcopacy ought to be established
in Scotland; for the professors of the CHURCH, are at least, three parts in in
four of the people of Great Britain, taken into one account; Scotland
containing little more than a million of people of all denominations; and the
dissenters in England not exceeding a million, among seven or eight, which that
part of the united kingdom is said to contain. Their union in legislation, and
their adjacency, would be additional arguments, not subsisting in the case of
the colonies.

The white people in the islands, some few quakers, papists and jews excepted,
are all professors of episcopacy as established in England. It has not yet
appeared that they suffer persecution, nor have we heard them cry out for
relief, on account of "unprecedented hadships and intolerable grievances." If
they want an episcopate in every island, and will provide for the support, and
regulate the authority of such an ecclesiastical superior, by act of assembly,
the way seems to be clear for them; and till the crown refuses to concur, there
is no ground for complaint. As they have not offered to do this, we must take
it for granted, they are content with the superitendency of the bishop of
London, and do not wish for a bishop any nearer. The same must be said of
Virginia, Maryland and other southern provinces, where the professors of the
doctor's church have the upper hand; notwithstanding dissenters are numerous in
those parts and increase daily. That power, which established parishes and
taxes for the episcopal clergy, must be able to guard the CHURCH against all
persecution, and to give it dignitaries residing in America, as soon as the
respective legislatures, who are the best judges, find them necessary. How is
it possible then, that near a million of people "in America, are "suffering for
their religious principles and denied the same privileges, as all other
denominations enjoy?" Is it ingenuous, is it consistent with the character of a
minister of the "true religion" to represent the episcopal churches of America
in general, as in distress and under persecution?

Though the people of the English islands, and of the episcopal colonies have
been lugged into this busness, yet we find, they have nothing to do with it.
They have neither been petitioners with the Dr. and his brethren, for bishops;
nor are they distressed and persecuted. As the missionaries are the sole
petitioners, so are they and their followers the only people who can have any
cause of complaint.

But even as to them, the charge is most unjust and ungrateful; Unjust to their
neighbors, and the civil governments under which they live; Ungrateful to
their superiors and fellow subjects in England. They are here called on to show
any instance, wherein they are denied equal privileges with others. In three of
the New England governments, where a very lax kind of religious establishment
has obtained, the episcopal ministers are entuled to that part of the tax
levied for supporting the clergy, which arises from their own church members.
In the city of New York, and in some of the counties of that colony, part of
the poor tax is taken to maintain their ministers. In Rhode Island, New Jersey,
and Pennsylvania, they are on a footing with the most favored. And in all the
old colonies, north-east of Maryland, they have ministers called missionaries,
(a name peculiar to such as are sent to instruct infidels) supported for them
by the charity of well-disposed persons in England and Ireland, and in the
reformed churches of Holland, Germany, and Switzerland; at an expense of
between three and four thousand pounds sterling, per annum.

It is some of these pretended missionaries, and these only, who have raised
all the late clamours for bishops; who are restless and unwearied in their
endeavors to procure an establishment over the body of the people, among whom
they reside. So unreasonable are they, that not contented with being the most
favored, they would have their discipline extended over all other
denominations, by act of parliament; though their church be not a fortieth part
of the community. The state of episcopacy in the old colonies north east of
Maryland, is nearly this. These districts having at first settled by people of
nonconformist opinions, chiefly refugees from the persecutions of the Bishops
in England, the sew professors of the church of England, who settled among them
from time to time, would have almost generally joined with, and been
undistinguished at this day from the other protestant communions, had it not
been for the society for propagating the gospel, or rather for propagating
episcopacy. To their indefatigable application and amazing perseverance, we
will readily allow, it is owing, that there are above five or six such
congregations in all the country above particularized. What indeed are their
societies, for the most part, but little parties, not deferving the name of
congregations, utterly unable to support their preachers? At this day, there is
no city, town, or place, throughout the middle and eastern colonies, except
Philadelphia, where the professors of the church of England support their
clergy, without help; whilst other denominations, unassisted, maintain their
pastors, to the number of eight or nine hundred; except it may be the papists.

The inquisitive and accurate Dr. Styles, of Rhode Island, in his discourse on
Christian Union, tells us, he found the episcopalians, in all New England, did
not exceed 12,600 souls; yet they had 30 ministers, and 47 places of worship.
This was in 1760. The people of other denominations appeared to be 487, 000;
and they maintained above 600 pastors, exclusive of the public instructors
among the Friends. The ease is much the same in Pennsylvania. The Rev. Mr.
Craig, of Chester, who has resided a long time, and in different parts of the
province, in his letter to the society in 1764, says, "that of the people of
the province, who as some calculate are 300, 000 souls, he can safely affirm
not one fiftieth part, belong to the church of England; and that his
communicants in his three congregations, were 15 only. The Rev. Mr. Thompson,
itinerant missionary in the counties of York and Cumberland, acquainted his
venerable patrons the same year, that his people within those counties, did not
exceed 202 souls; although it is well known those districts contained at that
time, thirty or forty thousand inhabitants. And the Rev. Mr. Murray of Berks
county, complained that his people at Mollattin, were reduced by removals, to
twenty-nine families; that he despaired of seeing a church built within his
mission; and expected soon to be reduced to the society's allowance for his
support See Society's abstract for 1765, for these and many other accounts of a
similar nature.
The episcopal societies in New York and New Jersey are in very little better
circumstances. At Cohanzie, in West-Jersey, stands a church, but there is not
the shadow of a congregation in the county. At Salem the episcopal cause is
almost as low. It would be tedious, as it is needless, no ^^^^ply instances to
illustrate this matter: Suffice it to say, that it is in the cities and some of
the larger towns only, that their congregations are numerous. Yet the episcopal
church in the non-episcopal colonies, never was in such outwardly flourishing
circumstance: And no wonder; the society's expensive interposition, could not
but have some considerable effects. It has brought it from nothing to
something; it has kept the professors of the church of England together; and,
as many like cheapness, even in the way to heaven, some have joined them from
other churches, who were well enough pleased to have ministers maintained for
them, by good-natured people in England, and elsewhere. How unjust, how
ungrateful then, are these missionaries of New York and New Jersey in their
complaints of hardship, grievances and persecution. They are unjust to their
fellow subjects, among whom they reside: Ungrateful to their patrons and
benefactors in Europe: and their behavior must reflect severely on their own
characters, wherever this unfairness and disingenuity shall be opened up.

But the artifice of bringing all the old colonies and islands into one view
and computation, is not the only or chief ground of complaint against Doctor
Chandler, in his management of this argument. It is indeed but a small instance
of his infirmity, compared to one I shall now mention.

No one will assert, that the whites of the Doctor's church in America, amount
to "a million nearly." We may very safely say, they are not half that number.
In all our islands, the white people do not come up to 90.000; and on the
continent, the professors of the church of England cannot be four times as
numerous. Where then (...) the Dr. get above 500, 000 of his churchmen? Only
among the Negroes, those virtual episcopalians, who chiefly belong to episcopal
owners. An attentive reader will easily perceive this, although the Dr. seems
loath to speak it out plainly. Behold a crowd of Negroes, in the Islands, and
southern colonies, almost all of whom "are not Christians at all" slipped into
the episcopal scale, in order to balance, in some measure, the dead weight of
non-conformists in the northern colonies; and yet it kicks the beam! Behold at
least 500, 000 virtual churchmen, virtually petitioning by their friends the
clergy of New York and New Jersey for bishops! What low artifice is this! How
unbecoming the clerical character! Well may deists represent dissimulation, as
a vice of the order: Such behavior, but too well justifies the charge.

Are bishops then to be introduced into, and imposed on the non-episcopal
colonies, which were granted as asylums from the power of proud prelates, by
the force of such wretched arguments, as this we have been considering? It must
not, it cannot be: It is absurd, injurious and ungrateful to entertain any
suspicion, that the administration and legislature will treat so large a Number
of good subjects with such cruel partiality as to put them under a yoke, which
neither they nor their fathers were able to bear, merely to exalt a little
party, some of whose clergy, affect importance, and make a great bustle,
proudly arrogating to themselves the name of Church, as if all Christianity was
confined within their narrow pale. It may be time enough a great while hence,
to think of "settling" episcopacy (the Doctor uses this as a softer term than
establish) in these colonies, if numbers are to determine the point. It would
be fair, however, that the episcopal colonies, should try the experiment of
importing bishops first; at least, whilst they neglect providing for
ecclesiastical superiors, the rejectors of episcopacy may be well excused in
opposing their establishment among them, by an act of the state.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Monday June 27th.
A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG, No. XIII.
By TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes.

VIRGIL.
The Goodnature of some unknown Correspondent, has furnished out Entertainment
for this Week. The Extract contained in the Letter, breathes such an Air of
Truth, that I imagined it would be injustice to deny the Public the same
Satisfaction I myself enjoyed in perusing it.

TIM. TICKLE.

To TIMOTHY TICKLE, Esquire
SIR,
IT is impossible for hypocrisy long to remain undetected, when she exposes her
actions to public attention, "in the fair face of day." Passion and ungoverned
zeal, will inevitably put her by her guard, her mask will fall off in the hurry
of interest, and discover the monster in her native hideousness. This has been
the case with the bitter faction, which now is, and always has been
endeavoring, to fix the vilest stains on the reputation of the church. In
spite of all their former disguises, they now stand confessed the real soawn of
that envenomed brood, who burst the bonds of gratitude, justice, and religion,
and in a torrent overturned turned altars, levelled, churches, and laid waste
"principalities and powers." Any person acquainted with the history of those
times, must be struck with the resemblance there is visible, even in the soam
they have cast forth. There is hardly a paper of the whig, "that whineth not of
bloody persecutions, "the Power of a bishop's pastoral staff," "the scarlet
whore." mitred generalissimo, "cup of fornication," grandeur of St. Paul's
church, "Popish apparel, prelacy," "onions of Egypt," and other like cant
phrases, tuned formerly from the noses of those Puritanical snufflers, who
overwhelmed the nation with bloody destruction. But what surprises me most is,
that these dabblers in politics should insinuate, that "* the national church
of England," was composed almost wholly of men who embraced protestantism
merely to save their estates, and avoid persecution." -- Let history
indubitably prove the falsehood and illiberality of this assertion! In the times
of severest persecution, were not the clergy of the church most distinguished
by their opposition to popery, as well in their writings as actions? Did not
some of her most dignified ecclesiastics fall victims to the cruelty of
papists? Where then (we may ask) were those firm defenders of the reformation,
who so much boast of their fortitude and Christianity? Like serpents, when the
cold winter of persecution approached, they shrunk into their hiding-places. --
But now, enlivened by the serene air of moderation and security, they march
proudly abroad, discharging their venom, and aiming their stings, at that
bosom, which cherished and protected them.

The cause of this enmity to the church (which has occasioned so many bitter
jealousies and tumults in the nation) I could never account for, till I met by
chance, with the enclosed paper, written many years ago, which (if it can any
way show the danger of endeavoring to destroy the church) is at your service.

I am yours, etc, T. P.

IT has been the constant unhappiness of the English nation to suffer the most
terrible convulsions, and to lie in a fatal posture of confusion and disorder
upon the account of religion. The original enemy of our church is the papist:
He appeared in the infancy of the reformation, and ever since has been
invincibly industrious to ruin the happy establishment; being persuaded, that
the papal power and obedience must sink low in the opinion of mankind, so long
as the realms of Great Britain, that bear so considerable a figure in the
Christian world, continue in a revolt from the faith, and keep wide so
desperate a breach in the Roman communion. Vide, No. II. Am. Whig.


The church of England has been always justly esteemed the only bastion of the
protestant interest, and has produced so illustrious a succession of able
champions for the truth, as in all human prospect, will in time convince the
world of the apost^^y of Rome from the Christianity of the pu^est ages, and
induce them to file off the shackles of blind homage and submission, which
ignorance and the Romish artifice have fastened upon the hands of all princes
and potentates under the papal jurisdiction; and whatsoever some people may
imagine, there is nothing at all formidable to Rome in those little sects and
separatists, who by their own eternally subdividing principles, will like the
sheaf of arrows in the sable, be severally broken, without any Difficulty; but
the church of England is a compact body, firm and well set together, she wears
so much of the apostolic innocence and antiquity both in doctrine and
discipline, that St. Peter's sword can never hope for an universal monarchy,
without undermining the foundations of our constitutions; to accomplish which
glorious design, the enemy inspires himself and all his engines, with all
possible application and diligence.

And since the Roman statesmen have long despaired by force and military
violence to recover these kingdoms under the dominion of the holy see, they
betake themselves to stratagem, and artfully attempt to subvert that
reformation by divisions, which they were unable to overthrow by a more open
assault; it being a maxim in the conclave, that there is no other way to
prevent people from turning heretics, and for the recovery of others again to
the mother church, than by a diversity of doctrines.

Among all the religious orders of Rome, the Jesuits were soon distinguished as
a body of men, subtle, enterprising, and audacious, acted by ^^incible
resentments against the English settlement, and acco^^^ngly were ordained to
manage in this mo^^^orious undertaking, and dispatched very early to create
schisms and separations in this reformed church: Their Commission gave them
full powers to revive the most infamous heresies, to profess the most
abominable principles, to swear and forswear, to appear in whatever disguise,
so that the populace might be inflamed against the establishment, and fixed at
an irreconcilable distance from the lawful communion: And these emissaries in
a short time, became masters in this execrable policy; they insinuated
themselves into the conventicles of the pu^^tans; could bellow loudly, and cry
out popery upon the ceremonies of our church; revile his holiness himself, and
were so eminent in the gift of extemporary devotion, that the people were
quickly prayed out of their religion and allegiance; they pressed them to throw
off the tyranny of bishops, to insist upon a liberty of conscience, to pull
down Babylon, and took hold of all occasions to run them into open hostilities
and rebellion against the civil and ecclesiastical powers, and all this in
hopes to destroy us with our own weapons, and erect the Roman trophies upon the
ruin of the church of England, the only bulwark of the protestant faith.

To give the clearer light to these discoveries, let us look back a few ages
ago, and we shall find a very remarkable history in the reign of queen
Elizabeth, of one Faithful Commin, a Roman divine, who came over into England,
and was generally reputed as a very zealous protestant; his seeming piety
procured him a very great character with the inferior people, who were more
particularly pleased with him for his severe raillery against the church of
Rome, and his bitter invectives against the pope himself: This imposter was at
last detected, but by an escape avoided the hands of justice, and returned to
Rome. The pope immediately imprisoned him for the abuses he had spread about
him in England; but Commin writ to his holiness, and acquainted him that he had
something of importance to communicate to him, if he could have the honor to
be admitted into his presence; the pope sent for him next day, and as soon as
he saw him, sir, said he, I have heard the character you have bestowed upon me
and my predecessors, among your heretics in England, by reviling my person and
exposing my church; Commin replied, I confess my lips have uttered what my
heart never thought; but your holiness little imagines the considerable
services I have done you: To which the pope returned, how, in the name of
Jesus, Mary, and all the saints, have thou done so? sir, said Commin, I
preached against set forms of prayer, and I called the English liturgy a
translation of the mass book; I have made the people fond of extempore prayer,
and by that means the church of England, is become as odious to my proselytes,
as mass is to the church of England, and this will be a stumbling block to that
church while it is a church: Upon which the pope commended him, and gave him a
reward of two thousand ducats for his good service.

To give the greater evidence to what I have said upon this subject, I shall,
for the benefit of the English reader, translate a copy of that public
instrument, a Jesuit receives from the pope, when he is sent as an emissary to
advance the interest of Rome, in any of the reformed churches.

WHEREAS we (the pope) have found and daily find heresies increasing in several
colonies, principalities, realms and countries, subject to the sacred see of
St. Peter our predecessor, and they deserting our jurisdiction with their
blasphemous and railing writings against us, our ceremonies, and apostolic
privileges, granted unto us, and our successors from God, and formerly
generally acknowledged by emperors, kings, and princess to be ours, and our
predecessors due and right.

We therefore in the name of the holy Trinity of the blessed mother of God, the
virgin Mary, of St. Peter and St. Paul, in the name of the holy host of heaven,
of the archangels and angels, of the holy apostles, saints, and blessed
martyrs, do will and authorize the wise and learned of our clergy, expert in
divine service, to labor, endeavor, and devise all manner of devices to be
devised, to abate and confound those heresies repugnant to our sacred laws,
that thereby these heretics might be either recalled to confess their errors
and acknowledge our jurisdiction, or that a total infamy may be brought upon
them and their posterities, by a perpetual discord and contention among
themselves, by which means they may either speedily perish by God's wrath, or
continue in eternal difference, to the reproach of Jew, Turk, heathen, nay to
the very devils themselves.

To the Author of the American Whig.
SIR,
WHEN I first saw the title of your paper, I flattered myself, the public would
have been improved and entertained, by an examination of a Subject of such
moment, with all that candor, charity, and liberality of sentiment, which
constitutes the true character of a Whig. Coolness and mildness ought to be
preserved in every controversy, but especially, where an opponent makes use of
the greatest moderation and tenderness. -- A contrary conduct serves but to
inflame the passions, and confuses the subject in the noise of contention.
Indeed from the constant tenor of your paper, this seems to have been your
primary intention, and I must say, such a purpose has been admirably answered;
-- for the sparks of resentment, which were before dying away, are kindled into
a blaze, and will soon (I fear) rage with the greatest violence. -- Your first
paper, swelling with ill nature, was all over beautified with such innocent
puerilities, as were extremely diverting, but unfortunately, those bubbles of
wit (you are fond of playing with) are so thin and lightsome, that they shrink
at the touch, and if blown upon by the least breath of inquiry, burst into
nothing. -- It Is true you promise us pretty largely in that paper, "that you
would show as well the falfity of the facts, as the futility of the reasoning
in the appeal; that you would defend the liberties of your country against
every project calculated to ruin and enslave it." How have you performed this
Promise? By asserting that the doctor does not mean what he says! By conjuring
up an ideal hobgoblin to attack! By trumpetting out your own praises; or by
throwing out the most uncharitable insinuations against the church and its
clergy? -- Your spending the time of the public, with long aggravated details
of the evils of spiritual courts, or with weak, though imbittered attacks at
episcopacy, is, I conceive, nothing to the purpose; -- for the first is what
the church does not appeal for; and as for the second, if the church imagines
it necessary or beneficial to itself, your contrariety of opinion will not be
of much consequence, since every denomination of Christians, in his majesty's
dominions, is allowed the free enjoyment of its religious opinions and
privileges.

With respect to the subject in debate, I appeal to every unprejudiced person,
whether one ray of light has been cast on it; or whether the mists of
prejudice, resentment and calumny, have not been raised to the almost utter
extinction of friendship, love, and concord among our fellow citizens.

You must be solely guided by the meteor of rage and prejudice, or no public
writer could have wandered so far from the path he proposed to tread.

As an answer to the appeal, the public has been entertained with a Welsh
letter of kowz, and zowz, and goozy chickz. We have been puzzel'd with one in
Dutch, de Staamp Act, -- de act vaa soldaten de billeteeren, de act van
suspensie of op schorting -- envan de de tax en revenue of inkomst, -- van
spiritual courts -- van de geestelike courts -- poor de keerkenraad classis, en
synod -- van de Bischoppelyke court, de inquisitae van Portugaal en Spanje. --
We have been frighted by a BULL -- thundering out excommunications against the
church of Rome -- cutting it off from the body of Christ, and making it a
Synagogue of Satan -- raving, -- of classes, Presbyteries, Synods, Praeses,
Moderators. -- Braying, -- of meeting houses, made of lime stone and wood -- of
the orthodoxoy of bricks and oyster shells -- of episcopalian bigots, masses,
martyrs, corrupt translations, adulterating baptisms, popish episcopalians, and
idolatrous transubstantiations -- and grunting -- of undoubted operations on
the hearts of many to their conversion and confirmation in faith -- of ten
thousand converted in Dutch churches, to one in episcopal meeting houses, and
twenty gained, to one lost. From this last effusion of incoherencies, I should
be apt to magine you, some fiery, mortified, sour tempered zealot, Who beats a
drum ecclesiastic
With brawny fist, instead of a stick.
whose brain is clouded with visionary dreams of enthusiasin, and whose reason
lies buried in the rubbish of bigotry.

How this, or any thing you have yet asserted, is pertinent to the point in
question, my eyesight, I must confess, is too weak to perceive. -- Instead of
entering (with politeness and calmness) into the merits of the cause: And by
Christian charity, hushing our unhappy divisions into peace, the subject has
been lost in scurrilous buffoonery. -- You throw out the bitterest invectives
against the advocates for a bishop; represent the church as of the most
intolerant spirit -- paint her clergy in the most odious colors and picture
out in every paper, all bishops without distinction, as the most persecuting,
cruel, inhuman monsters, deprived of all sensibility and conscience. O! But for
all this you are no enemy to the church, you imagine it would be injustice to
deny them a bishop, so curtailed and limited as his future lordship is
represented! This is not unlike the behavior of a gentleman, who after he had
(in a passion) sworn a hundred times, that all the fair sex were whores; yet
(says he) I like an honest woman as well as any man in the world.

As I am a Whig in principles, I would willingly see all my countrymen
enjoying their religious liberties without being molested by the envy or
ambiton of party.

Benevolence and brotherly-love, as I imagine, are the principal
characteristics of Christians; if these were more inculcated, than that proud
narrow-hearted, uncharitable spirit of hypocritical sectarism, which prevails
among us, a mutual confidence would follow, productive of the greatest
advantages both to ourselves and country. -- But some men, influenced either by
ambition or envy, have ever been (to the great detriment of this province)
endeavoring to raise a monument of their literary abilities, on the ruin of
public tranquillity -- to gorge their purses as well as spleen, by fomenting
dissentions in religious as well as civil societies.

I am Yours, etc. A CANDID WHIG.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE. June 27.
The AMERICAN WHIG. [Numb. XVI.]
The identity of possible and probable; or a new system of ratiocination, by a
convention of spiritual logicians, at one of their anniversary meetings for the
propagation of -- a convenient settlement for the bishop of LANDAFF, in a
country where people do not expect to perish for lack of that kind of vision.

WHATEVER opinion the world may form of Dr. Chandler's candor, or his talents
for reasoning, I think no author that has ever appeared, can dispute with him
the prize of artifice and sophistry. In art, he surpasses the most artful; and
the most sophistical in his dexterity at sophisms. In support of this
assertion, numerous instances might, and hereafter shall be produced from the
memorable appeal. I shall at present confine myself to the 109th page, which is
a masterpiece of the noble science of logical craft; and may be of singular
use, in teaching future reasoners to refute any objection in the world, by a
bare substitution of a different word in the answer, for that contained in the
objection. The whole passage runs thus; another objection has been made by some
persons, to the following purport, that if Bishops are once settled in America,
although in the manner we now propose, there will probably be an augmentation
of their power, as soon as circumstances will admit of it; and what is easy and
inoffensive in its beginning, may become but thensome and oppressive in its
end. But at this rate there can be no end of objecting. For if every possible
ill effect of a thing, although confessedly proper in itself, and harmless in
its natural tendency, may be made an argument against it, there is nothing that
can escape. Arguments of this sort may be as fairly and properly alleged --
against a religious toleration, which is now generally esteemed by protestants,
to be a natural right of men, and a very important one of Christians -- against
admitting those, who dissent from the national religion, to any degree of civil
or military power, to which indeed they have no natural right -- against
allowing the common people the use of the holy scriptunes, or the liberty of
examining any points of religion or government -- against suffering any to
receive a learned education, etc. for none can tell what ill consequences and
abuses may follow, in some future period, from these concessions and
indulgences. The truth is, men are not to be terrified or influenced by fears
of such consequences as are barely possible; but to consider what is reasonable
and proper in itself, and what effects will probably and naturally follow.

The objection here stated is, that if Bishops are once settled in America,
although in the manner now proposed, there will probably be an augmentation of
their power, as soon as circumstances will admit of it; and what is easy and
inoffensive in its beginning, may be burdensome and oppressive in its end. Now
if there be any reason for these apprehensions; or in other words if it is
really probably that such a cause will produce such effects, the objection is
well founded. On the contrary, if there be no probability that an episcopate so
harmless in its original erection, will finally degenerate into the evil
apprehended, it is altogether groundless. The first, and I think the only
thought, that would therefore occur to an author, who wrote under the influence
of truth and sincerity, would be to remove the objection, by disproving the
probability on which it was was raised. But let us see how cleverly a writer,
who cannot follow reason and nature when reason and nature are against him, can
depart from both. But at this rate (says he) there can be no end of objecting.
For if every possible ill effect of a thing, although confessedly proper in
itself, and harmless in its natural tendency, may be made an argument against
it, there is nothing that can escape. But pray is it, at this rate, that the
objection is stated? Nothing like it. The objection is grounded on the
probability of the consequence, which the objector is introduced as
apprehending. He is not represented as alarmed at bare possibilities, which
would be idle and rediculous. But he is brought on the stage as declaring his
disapproving of the scheme proposed, on the supposition that though it be
harmless and inoffensive as requested, it has a natural tendency to degenerate,
and probably will finally issue in what is destructive and pe^^icious; and in
this view, ought to be alarming, and the matter of opposition and contest. For
what purpose then is the probable! in the objection, so dexterously and
instantaneously slid into the possible, in the answer? Does the doctor really
think it either probable or possible to convince the world, that this was done
without design, or with the honest purpose of serving the cause of truth?
Should a man tell our author, that he was afraid to travel a particular road,
because, from probable circumstances, he had reason to apprehend it was
infested with robbers; could he think of allaying the fears of the traveller by
the following answer, Sir if every possible thing is made an argument, against
your proceeding on your journey, there is no such thing as traveling at all.
Would not the man conclude, that the doctor greatly undervalued his life and
property; or treated him like a person void of understanding? -- What then must
we think, when an author endeavors to palm such fustian on the world; and
appears before the tribunal of the public with such cobweb sophistry? What a
strange perversion of the noble faculty of reason, to the unworthy purpose of
delusion and chicanery! A melancholy instance of the power of prejudice, and
how ambition will blind and intoxicate the understandings of men, otherwise
clear and discerning!

But instead of answering the objection as first stated, and in the form in
which it is really strong and forcible; he proceeds in rendering it still more
ridiculous, by a sudden and artful transmutation into what, to an incautious
reader, would appear, and what he intended should appear, no more than a bare
repetition of it' in a different mode of expression. 'For if every possible ill
'effect of a thing, although 'confessedly proper in itself, and harmless in its
natural tendency, etc.' But is this a fair state of the objection? Is it so
much as a supposeable case, that the same person who confesses the thing
harmless in its natural tendency should object against it, as tending to,
produce the evils he apprehends, and which constitute the very essence of the
objection? The meaning of this passage, if it has any meaning at all, must
therefore be this: The thing, Mr. objector, which I declare to be, and which
others confess to be, proper in itself, and harmless in its natural tendency,
you ought not to object against, or there is nothing that can escape. But in
this sense, the argument is as ridiculous as he has endeavored to make the
objection. For there is nothing surely absurd in one man's apprehending danger,
from what another conceives proper and harmless. But it is the highest
absurdity for the same man to object to a thing, as likely to become burdensome
and oppressive, which himself confesses to be harmless in its natural tendency.
And yet such is the subtle turn which this antihussar in controversy, has given
to so plain and perspicuous an objection. But let us consider the several
particulars, by which he has endeavored to elucidate, that there is no force
in the objection he combats; and which as he perverts it before he enters upon
an answer, was really never made. The instances by which he thought proper to
illustrate the inconsequence of the no-objection he is at present most
puissantly attacking; and against which, he says, arguments of this sort may be
as fairly and properly alleged, are the four that follow; and which,
considering his violent antipathy to any alteration of his method, I shall
consider in the order he has mentioned them.

1st. Against a religious toleration, which is now generally esteemed by
protestants; to be the natural right of men, and a very important one of
Christians. And does this gentlemen really think, that there is equal reason
for apprehending pernicious consequences from a religious toleration, which has
never yet produced one such consequence, as there is from the pride and
ambition of dignified ecclesiasties, which has so frequently turned whole
nations topsy-turvy? And pray what does he mean by the mumbling, "mincing is
now generally esteemed by Protestants?" Does not he himself esteem a religious
toleration to be the natural right of men, and a very important one of
Christians? If he does, why does he not speak out like a man? If he thinks
otherwise, why afraid publicly and explicitly to avow it? But the next
illustration is involved in still greater obscurity: and might with much more
propriety be termed an obfuscation of the truth. For,

2dly. Arguments of this sort, says he, may be as fairly and properly alleged
against those who dissent from the national religion to any degree of civil or
military power, to which in-indeed they have no natural right. That is in plain
English, it is as ridiculous to apprehend any danger from the abuse of
inordinate power in the hands of ecclesiastics, who appear from history to have
almost perpetually abused it, as from an admission of the Dissenters to the
common rights of all loyal subjects, which they have never abused. A striking
instance this, of that moderation and candor toward Dissenters, which, for a
certain reason, I mean smoothly to carry his point, he was obliged to assume;
but which for another certain reason, I mean his mental bitterness against
them, he could not conceal! But what means the Doctor by saying, that the
Dissenters have no natural right to any degree of civil or military power. If
by natural right, he means any right in contradistinction to municipal or
political rights; it may with equal propriety be predicated of the
Episcopalians, and of all men. For no man has a natural right to a political
privilege: And in this sense, it is nothing but downright malevolence, without
any tendency to benefit his argument. If he means by it any thing peculiar to
Dissenters, what prevented him from showing the superior natural rights of the
conformists? But probably it was intended by way of title, in contrast to that
of the members of the church of England, that we take care in all future times,
not to be more cautions when speaking of the latter, in adding as by law
established, than of the former, with the distinguishing addition of, "who have
no natural right to any degree of civil or military power." But.

3dly. Arguments of this sort, may be as fairly and properly alleged against
allowing the common people the use of the scriptures, or the liberty of
examining (...) point of religion or government. Arguments have actually (...)
brought (such arguments as they were, and they were as solid as most of the
Doctor's) against such use of the scriptures; but then they were brought by the
Papists; and it must grieve any man to find a Protestant Divine so far adopting
the practice, as to put them upon an equal foot with arguments against the
danger of political power in the hands of ecclesiastics. The holy scriptures
were given to teach men the way to salvation; and they are said to be necessary
for instruction, etc. But can it be said to be necessary for a bishop, to be
clothed with powers formidable to the civil rights of mankind? If not; how are
the instances parallel? Without the liberty of examining any points of
religion, religion would soon degenerate into priestcraft; as experience shows
it has done, whenever such liberty has been restrained. Without the liberty of
examining into any points of government, (a singular phrase!) government would
degenerate into tyranny; as all history show, it has done, where such
examination was prohibitted. How, therefore, can that which is absolutely
necessary to the very existence of religion and government; and which, instead
of producing, has prevented evil and oppression, be dangerous to either? Or be
compared to that, which is not essential to episcopacy, and has frequently
proved destructive and pernicious? But,

4thly. The possible ill consequences and abuses of a learned education are
placed in comparison with the danger apprehended from the probable augmentation
of the episcopal power, as soon as circumstances will admit of it. The
comparison, truly, has no kind of similitude, and to give it a lift, the author
is obliged to have recourse to his wonder-working possible, which has probably
been of greater service to him throughout this whole augmentative page, than
ever it was to all other the pamphleteers his predecessors put together. The
truth is, (says he,) men are not to be terrified or influenced by fears of such
consequences as are barely possible; but to consider what is reasonable and
proper in itself, and what effects will probably and naturally follow.

Thus after a rotation of a page, he returns to the very spot from whence he
started, and again gives the objection as it was stated at first. For it is of
such effects, as will probably and naturally follow, and of no other, that the
objector is supposed to be apprehensive; and which the author has metamorphosed
into such, as are barely possible, and in that light endeavored to remove by
comparing them to others, that are but barely possible; and whether it is
either probable or possible, that all this was done without design to raise a
mist before the reader, I cheerfully submit to the tribunal of the public. To
me it seems pretty extraordinary, that of all the things in the world, the
gentleman should have selected a religious toleration, the admission of
Dissenter to any degree of civil power, the reading of the holy scriptures, and
a learned education, as the four objects of equal terror, with the additaments
to the power of bishops, as soon as circumstances will admit; because these
have not the least tendency to introduce any mischief, while the other as
naturally tends to it, as heavy bodies do to the center; is it because these
things appear peculiarly formidable to those who want an American hierachy,
that they so familiarly offer themselves as things particularly liable to evil
consequences? This is certain, that a^^inst his darling project he could not
have found four more terrible enemies, had he ransacked the whole creation. Let
him but fairly get ^id of those concessions and indulgences (as this moderate
gentleman is pleased to call the natural and unalienable rights of mankind, --
rights as clear and indubitable as the enjoymant of life or reason) and the
proposal would go down as smooth as oil. But whi^^ ^^^ur such stubborn things
as toleration, the bible, li^^^^^ and learning, exist in the country, we may
write app^^^ ^or a century, without persuading one man of sense, who has no
personal expectations from a mitred Lord, nor intends to dance attendance on
the episcopal palace, to acquiesce in so perilous an encroachment on the
peace, and prosperity of this now flourishing and happy country.

Q.

A KICK FOR THE WHIPPER. [No. VI.]
By Sir ISSAC FOOT.
-- Quid si nune coelum ruat?

TERENCE. Heautontimor.
To Sir ISAAC FOOT.
SIR,
AS Squire T. (No. V.) has employed another deputy to Whip in his room, I beg
leave to give a Kick or two in yours. This new Whipper (who calls himself
Probus) says, (par. 1.2. etc.) 'the Whig's design is to divide the members of
the church of England.' No doubt of it! -- when a cord and a cable pull
different ways, it must surely be a prudent piece of art to divide the cord,
lest its superior strength should break the cable; and who can blame Probus for
endeavoring to give us high ideas of the greatness of his little party, any
more than a schoolboy for stru^ing on stilts, or AESOP's frog for striving to
swell to the size of a CALF?

Par. 3d. He gives us a string of quotations from the Whig, N. III in which if
the reader can fi^d a single instance of alteration, decurtation, or other
misrepresentation, I hereby oblige myself to pay Probus's whipping-sees; for
nobody surely will take the trouble of comparing Whig and Whip together.

Par. 4th. With his arms akembo, he gives himself airs as a critical historian,
(and like doctor C -- r,) implicitly boasts of the character of a Tory; which
if any man presumes to think disreputable or unfriendly to liberty, he is a
Whig; which is, being by sycopants interpreted, a lying rascal, but, by all
loyal patriots and friends to the revolution, an honest man. I expected your
kicks, sir, would stagger squire T. and his associates; but Probus, it seems,
is already much staggered by his own thoughts! 'Twere a pity the poor fellow
should break his neck before his own reformation is more complete; but if the
Whig's complaint of the imperfection of the reformation in Henry VIII's. reign,
should make him reel so as to fall, who can help it? Probus has such a peculiar
talent at making feints with his whip, that no mortal can guess beforehand
where it will fall; -- let us consider his merit this way. The Whig says, 'the
reformation was begun by Henry VIII. from no very religious motive;" ergo,
(Probus infers) he considers Henry as a reformer, -- Probus says, he is called
so, by none that he knows of but Papists;" ergo, the Whig, (for he knows of
him) is a Papist. [Quere, what Papist ^ver complimented Henry with the title of
a reformer?] The Whig insinuates, "that the high and low-church parties,
originated from different motives at the reformation;" ergo, (says Probus) he
insinuates, "that the distinction originated from thence;" ergo, again, "he
lies like the d -- dunce Mahomet, in his Koran." "The distinction, it seems,
was not known for more than a century after." So we are told, the distinction
of Cavaliers and Roundheads, was not known, till the reign of that king who
had his head cut off; nor that of the Whigs and and Tories, till about the year
1678, in the reign of that buck his son; and yet, quere, were not Rehoboam's
old prudent counselors in reality Whigs, and his young hot headed advisers
Tories? I must, it seems, inform Probus, that a thing sometimes exists long
before it has a name. But to proceed, the Whig says, "such as were Papists in
their hearts, were always mighty sticklers for rites and ceremonies, the
uninterrupted line of succession, etc." Ergo, he says, "sticklers for
ceremonies, were always Papists in their hearts." Ergo again, he calls Laud and
Hall Papists in their hearts. Probus says, "Bishop Hall was a favourer of
puritanism;" ergo, "he was one of the warmest friends of Dissenters." "He wrote
a book, entitled, Episcopacy by divine right;" ergo, "he was one of the monst
strenuous asserters of the succession." (asserters! very well!) "No church on
earth is more distinguished for moderation than that of England, and she shows
sufficient indulgence to scrupulous consciences;" ergo, "The demands of heated
enthusiasts, factious sectarists, and restless heretics, are unreasonable." The
American Whig, etc. (those heated sectarists, etc.) demand security from
episcopal tyranny." (what presumption!) ergo, "If they are gratified, this
moderate church will soon be utterly annihilated: Alas! then for the dear,
dear, dear ceremonies and canons!" "The independents in England persecuted
sticklers 120 years ago, and beheaded a man who had been a king," ergo, "The
Whig, and his party the Presbyterians, (perhaps Papists) would fain do the same
now in America. Quere, what induced Probus to put heathens instead of
sticklers, etc? Answer Interest. Vid. par. 5th, 6th, 7th, and 8th.

Probus's probity as to par. 9th would have been more evident, had he made
numerical references to authors by name, and his good sense will be
indisputable, when he shall have pointed ^ut the relation of that and the 10th
par. to the occasion of the present disputes.

In par 1^th and 12th, Probus shows such vast political abilities, he must
needs be a clergyman; if made a stateman, i. e. a Bishop, doubtless he would
soon smell out a thousand factions, cabals, conspiracies, and secret
machinations, no one but himself ever dreamt of. He already from a considerable
distance smells popery in New York. He expects there are even Jesuits here, and
for his suspicions gives two and a hall reasons or symptoms. 1st Papists, and
none else, place the reformation in a disadvantageous light: -- The Whig has
done this: ergo, he is a jesuit." Now Papists blame the reformation so far as it
was, and the Whig so far as it was not a reformation -- both the same thing,
you know, gentle Sir! 2dly, there is a furious outcry raised against Bishops in
New York, and this tallies exactly with the sentiments of Papists; ergo, There
are Jesuits in New York. Now you know, sir, the most artful method to promote
the sucess of any obnoxious project, is to raise a surious outcry against
something very much like it. 3dly. The suspicion heightening half symptom, is,
"that the faction has made no clamor or noise, about the popish Bishop of
Quebec." Now, had he been sent to New York, instead on raising a furious
outcry, no donot the faction would have quietly and peaceably submitted to his
lordship's ghostly tyranny; what a wonder it is this Jesuitical faction have
never assembled any conventions, drawn up any petitions, or written any
Appeals, relative to the introduction of a popish Bishop!

Par. 13th, contains the old doleful ditty encore, set to the same mournful air
da capo. Doctor Chandler gave the key, and now all high church zealots join the
chorus, or rather sing successive solo^s^ and Probus in the same plaintive
strain with the rest; however before his song is ended, with all the art of the
famed Timotheus, he suddenly shifts from the Lydian, to the Phrygian measure.
in order to kindle rage against, those, who wickedly wish to see the poor
persecuted church hang her harps on the willows. He tells us he is a churchman
from principle; but from what principle he is so, is not clear to

Sir, your humble Servant, ANTIPROBUS.

TO my correspondent's observations, I beg leave to add, that though (even
according to Tory historians) Henry VIII. renounced the Pope's supremacy,
suppressed monastries, etc. in spite of clerical opposition, and several
rebellions, and at length arbitratriry frighted his subjects, (even those of
the convocation) into complaisance; yet it were doubtless very reasonable to
suppose, that the reformation was effected with great mildness and Christian
temper, considering, etc. and not so much by force as the Whig represents: And
that, though Queen Mary's parliament renounced the reformation, which had been
approved and confirmed by parliament, under Henry VIII. and Edward VI. yet we
are not from thence to conclude, but that the most (especially the clergy,)
embraced it for conscience sake. Having said thus much, I hope neither Squire
T. nor Probus, will call my correspondent, or me, a Papist, or imagine, that
either of us has the least fancy for a popish, any more than for a protestant,
court-favoured law-dignified BISHOP.

Z.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, June 30. The SENTINEL. No. XV.
NOTHING has occasioned greater mistakes, nor given room for warmer debates,
than the varying and unsettled meaning of names and terms. A word, which in one
age, has served to convey a particular idea, at some succeeding period, has
been understood in a very different sense; and controversial writers have been
so candid as to state the difference: more eager for victory, than truth, they
have often disingenuously laid hold of such an opportunity, to carry their
point with the ignorant and prejudiced; whilst ever thing has made against
them, except the construction and sound of the syllables.

This has been remarkably the case of the episcopal character in the Christian
church. Many, who have no idea of a bishop, separate from the appendages of the
office in some hierarchies, when they read any thing in the new testament
concerning this minister of religion, apply it without hesitation to prelates
of the establishment they are best acquainted with; and wonder at the
preverseness of those who differ from them. Few professors of Christianity deny
bishops to be of divine institution; but the difficulty lies in adjusting their
rank and powers. The Roman, the Greek, and other eastern churches hold, that
bishops are of divine right, an order superior to priests; and that although
they are presbyters, they have also an higher character, and are distinguished
from the other clergy, in like manner, as the apostles in the infancy of the
church, were superior to the common teachers of the gospel. The protestant
communions abroad, Lutheran and Calvinist, have rejected this opinion as
unscriptural, as having been the source of much abuse and corruption. The sense
of the Protestants of the German empire on this point, is set forth in the
articles of the league concluded at Smalcald in 1530; in which they assert the
power of ordaining to belong, by divine right, to presbyters. Accordingly the
Lutheran super-intendants are only first among equals, or standing presidents
of the councils of the clergy. It is almost needless to observe that the
churches of the reformed, and the church of Scotland, have agreed in the
abolition of all prelacy; for with them every parish minister is a bishop. In
England the established church has never explicitly declared herself on the
point; if we attempt to deduce her judgment from her conduct, we shall find it
unsettled; yet more favorable to the distinction of order in latter times,
than formerly In the reigns of Eliz. and James I. many divines ordained abroad
by presbyters, were admitted to parishes in England; but since the restoration,
all the protestant ordinations are treated as invalid, and orders from diocesan
bishops insisted on.
The first reformers in England, with Dr. Cranmer at their head, perfectly
agreed with their brethren the protestants abroad, and held presbyter and
bishop to be the same in scripture. As they looked on church polity to be
mutable, in much the same manner as civil government, they thought it very
allowable for presbyters to wave their rights, and for the sake of better
order, to submit to superiors of human institution. See Cranmer's opinion in
Stillingfleet's Irenicum, Cap. VIII; also the opinions of the Bishop of St.
^saph, of Therleby, Redman, and Cox, who assisted at a select assembly of
divines in the regin of Ed. VI. -- That learned expositor Dr. Hammond, says,
"there were no presbyters of an inferior order to bishops, instituted by the
apostles. -- And bishop Stilling fleet makes this noble concession, "that there
were no bishops, (meaning diocesa^ prelates) during the apostles life." -- And
in another place, (Irenicum page 276) "I believe upon the strictest enquiry,
Medina's judgment will prove true, that Jerome, Austin, Sedulius, Primasius,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact, were all of Aerius's judgment, as to the
identy, both of name and order, of bishops and presbyters, in the permitive
church." -- The great Usher and Burnet speak the same things.


It is plain enough to all unprejudiced persons, that in the new testament,
bishop, pastor, overseer, presbyter and elder, are used promiscuously, to
describe one and the same office; and there is nothing any where said of an
upper order in the Christian ministry. As churches were gathered in different
parts of the Roman empire chiefly in cities at fi^^t, the people chose their
instructors by common suffrage; and the apostles and evangelists, such as Paul,
Silas, Barnabas, and Timothy, by a solemn imposition of hands (a ceremony
derived from the Jews) invested these persons with the pastarol office. The
choice of the people was the main point, the solemnity f^^etting apart being
"not of necessity, but only for good order and seemly fashion." This is
Cranmer's opinion in Stillingfleet. Iren. Cap. VIII.
Of these bishops, there was it seems one or more in every church or
congregation, as the number of converts, and the prospect of new additions
required. At Ephems for instance, we find two, if not several elders, who are
expressly called bishops Acts xx. 17 and 28. Express mention is made of bishops,
in the plural number, as residing at Philippi; Phil. (...). 1.
; and Titus was directed to ordain elders in every city of Crete, who are
spoken of as invested with the episcopal office Ep^st. Paul to Titus, i. 5.6.
It was a long time before the original Christian congregations in the cities
became so numerous as to make it necessary to divide their assemblies, they
kept together till mere inconveniency forced them to it. Not having equal
success in proselyting the country people, the difficulty was less selt, And
when at length they allowed new places for holding assemblies for public
worship, they considered them as chapels of ease, and the people as part of the
original congregation. The number of pastors was in this manner necessarily
increased within the parish or diocese, and it became, in process of time,
orderly to have a president at the meetings of the consistory; to whom, by
degrees the name of bishop was restrained. This head presbyter, however, was
only primus inter pares. First among equals; the affairs of the congregation
being managed by him and his brethren, with the concurrence of the people. As
it was natural for the Christians in the purer ages of the church to place the
most respectable of their elders in the chair, it is easy to conceive, how
superior abilities and character on the one hand, and undissembled love and
respect on the other, might conspire to give a fatherly pre-eminence to a
primitive bishop. His age and standing, not to mention the sufferings which
many of them endured, would unavoidably command this, and every other
expression of reverence, which the members of a voluntary society, unsuspicious
of any ambitious schemes, could give. It would of course happen that the bishop
and the more aged presbyters would always be resident near the mother church or
cathedral, whilst their younger brethren itinerated through the parish, laboring
from house to house, and in the dependent places of public worships: The bishop
would be generally deputed to sit in the synods and councils of the church: And
nothing of importance would be undertaken at home, without the advice of a
person of so much experience and piety.

In all popular assemblies, great regard is paid to the opinion of a few of the
best ability and most knowledge; but if a great moral character accompanies
these endowments, the influence of such persons is almost unlimitted

Such seems to have been the rise of the diocesan bishop; an office not known
in Scripture. The very large extent of the dioceses in some parts, and the
general conversion of the pagans (probably so called from pagi, a word
signifying the people of the country) must have increased and confirmed the
superiority of the bishop. As the people became too numerous to assemble and
consider of their affairs, on every occasion, the care of them devolved to the
consistory; and the duties of instruction calling out the younger presbyters to
different parts of the district, the business of discipline now increased, and
occuring daily, gradually centered in the bishop and the aged elders, who
remained with him. Hence rose the Chapter, or that body of clergy, who at this
day make a mock choice of the bishop, and are as a council to him in some
lesser matters; but in the most important are entirely laid aside. "The bishops
grants orders alone, excommunicates alone, and judges alone: This seems to be a
thing almost without example, in good Governments; and therefore not unlikely
to have crept in during degenerate and corrupt times. The greatest kings have
their councils. -- Whence should this sole exercise of jurisdiction come?
Surely one may suppose upon good grounds, from the beginning it was not thus;
and that the deans and chapters were councils about the chairs of bishops at
first; and were to them a Presbytery or consistory and intermeddled not only in
disposing of revenues and endowments; but much more in eclesiastical
jurisdiction. -- We see the bishop of Rome performs all ecclesiastical
jurisdiction as in consistory. -- "Of the ancient mode," we see many shadows
still remaining; as that the dean and chapter, for form's sake, choose the
bishop; which is the highest point of jurisdiction; and that the bishop, when
he grants orders, if there be any Presbyters actually present, calls them to
join with him in the imposition of hands; and some other particulars." Ld.
Chan^. Bacon on the peace of the church, Sect: II.


When wealth and corruption entered the church and lovers of Pre-eminence got
into the Episcopal sees, that authority which had been conceded to the personal
character of the former presidents of the clergy, was now claimed by, and
yielded to their successors, as their proper jurisdiction. Instead of flying
from a station, which formerly had set a man up as an object of persecution,
and which was thought to require an uncommon share of zeal and faithfulness to
discharge its duties with a good conscience, the vain and the ambitious
secretly intrigued for Votes, and used every artifice to arrive at a dignity,
endowed with riches, and consequently invested with state influence and worldly
power. These abuses, of which the prince had by his insidious liberality been
the chief author, rising into tumults and even bloodshed, gave him a specious
pretense, for taking from the people, their right of choosing their bishops,
and to farther debase the church and clergy, by turning religion into a state
engine.

The Sea of Rome was tainted very early. This arose partly from the great
benefactions entrusted with her bishops, for the purpose of sending out
missionaries to the northern and western parts of Europe; which also served to
advance their Influence, and promote their authority, even under the loss of
the seat of empire, which was transferred to Constantinople. The bishopric of
Rome therefore became early the object of competition among those who sought
after filthy lucre, and were disposed to lord it over the heritage of God. The
conful Pre^extatus, (...) heathen, in the year 466, could say, "if you will
make me bishop of Rome, I will make myself a Christian."

To those who are the least acquainted with church history, it seems strange to
find Dr. Chandler arguing, that diocesan Episcopacy must have been the original
plan of government in the church, because of the supposed difficulty of
altering things connected with religion. I would ask him, whence came
archbishops and patriarchs? Whence arose that grand corruption of Christianity
called popery? The truth is, the alteration was gradual, and at the time of his
favorite St. Ignatius, the bishop was, as primate Ulster wonds it, "only
different in degree, not in order:" as a Lutheran super-intendant at this day
presides over a consistory of pastors. To bring in the Episcopacy of the 1st.
and 2d. centuries, then, to support that of the church of England, is plainly
begging the question. It is to treat two characters as the same, who in fact
are as different as the first commissioner of the treasury in England, and the
lord high treasurer; or as the Doge of Venice, the president of that republic,
and the absolute duke of Florence.

From Mr. GAINE's GAZETTE, Monday July 4. A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG. [No.
XIV.]
BY TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
-- quae men's tam dira, miserrime conjux,
Impulit his cingi telis? aut quo ruis? inquit.
Non tali auxillo, no defensoribus istis,
Tempus eget: non, si ipse meus nune afforet Hector.
VIRG. What more than madness, 'midst these dire alarms,
Moved thee to load thy helpless age with arms?
No aid like thine this dreadful hour demands,
But asks far other aid, far other hands;
No; could my own dear The late Dr. M. -- h -- w, Of whom our present
Propugnat^r,
Is an humble Imitator.

Hector arm again,
My own dear Hector now would arm in vain.
PIT.
TO TIMOTHY TICKLE, Esquire
SIR,
ALTHOUGH I profess myself an independent, I shall nevertheless always bear
public testimony, as I ever have done, against all measures that seem
calculated to injure the general interest of religion. Nor shall I at any time,
be ashamed to reprehend even those of my own persuasion, whose proceedings may
have the same tendency, though designed to answer a different purpose; or those
who false to our cause, and true to none, see the consequences in a just light,
and yet continue to use means which must of necessity produce them. Now, since
the American Whig, the Sentinel, and Dr. Chauncey, have undertaken (to speak in
their own polite manner) to grease the wheels of that carriage, which lays down
a load of scandal at each man's door who happens to dissent -- strange! that
they should hate dissenters -- from their opinions; I have made the few
following remarks upon these men's spirit and behavior, which are at your
service; though I must heartily own, that I should not have used your paper as a
channel of conveyance to the public, for my sentiments, had I not been
apprehensive that the writers of my own denomination would want both fortitude
to acknowledge, -- and by publishing my reprehensions they must have
acknowleged -- their faults, and ingenuity to amend them.

Some time ago, eighteen presbyterian parsons, (or more properly independents)
under the unaccountable influence of some delusion or other, recommended in the
warmest and most indiscreet, though it must be owned, in the most modest,
dutiful, and decent manner, a person who had deserted our cause, or was thought
to have done so, to the favor and patronage of one of the most distinguished
and most virtuous prelates in Christendom; from whom nothing less could be
expected, than the very genteel reprimand, with which he condescended to honor
them. I then gave them a proper chastisement for their misconduct; which, it is
true, they, and the public received in a very different manner. But I hoped
however that they were not so far lost to their cause, and to themselves, as to
have transgressed again, while their backs are yet reeking from the lash of
public indignation, by falling upon schemes, under pretense, at least, and
perhaps with a design, of supporting our cause, which have a direct tendency to
ruin and subvert it. But how infecurely my hopes were founded, every week's
experience does again, and again, convince me -- Once more therefore, am I
obliged to take upon me the disagreeable, though necessary office of detecting
the treasons, of our pretended friends, but real enemies, or correcting the
errors (to give them the softest Name) of our very true brethren, but very
incompetent advocates; I mean (what my reader already understands) the American
Whig, the Philadelphia Sentinel, and Aberratious Doctor.

All these write with great warmth against bishops; but then, alas! their zeal
is without knowledge, policy, or purdence. The Whig, in his third numb. has cast
the most odious reflections upon the reformation itself, that the keenest
malice could invent; -- and the Sentinel, in his sixth numb. has represented
the clergy of al^ denominations, and in every age, as the greatest villains
that ever existed. Now the world will naturally suppose that he is more
acquainted with the clergy of his own denomination, than with those of any
other; and if people go a step farther, (as it is natural enough to believe
they will) and suppose (which is also reasonable enough to be supposed) that
the clergy of most other denominations, would not admit such a railing accuser
many times into their company; their conclusion (a probable on^ at least) will
be this, that, if he is an honest man, he has painted his own teachers in the
colors which most aptly represent their genuine complexion; but that let him
be as honest as h^ will, he cannot be depended upon for the description of
other^ whom he has not had adequate opportunities of knowing; and whom it is
probable he has no acquaintance with at all; but that he must have formed his
notions of all, from his knowledge of one particular sect; and because they are
all clothed in black, have concluded them all together the children of
darkness. This is acting strangely indeed! as if a statuary, who was ordered to
make a most delicate resemblance of an Adonis, or a Ganymede, according to the
best Ideas of their beauty he could form by the liveliest descriptions of the
poets, should, in order to avoid the trouble of searching, or for any other
cause, (it matters not what) immediately turn to Homer, and chizel out an Image
of Thersites. It Is as if a painter should set Otway's Witch before him, while
he was drawing a portrait of a Venus, or a Hellen. These are the conclusions, I
say, that people who do not think with us, will be apt to form, and which it is
too evident the Worthies abovementioned either intended to suggest, and so are
false brethren, or else they spoke at random, and therefore are not properly
qualified for the office which they have assumed, viz. That of defenders
general of the faith, which is one word more than his majesty himself claims in
his title, and which, when taken in this Sense, viz. The faith of independents,
or independent faith, or faith on which there is no dependence; requires a much
stronger advocacy than they (sweet babes!) are able to afford it.

This is one instance either of treachery or want of prudence. Another is, that
they, -- I say they, for I doubt not that what one asserts, the other will
swear to -- did publicly accuse a convention of Episcopalians, of writing a
number of petitions to some of the most respectable personages in England, in
order to have a bishop appointed for America; -- which application, independent
as I avow myself, I cannot in my conscience either blame them for making, or
think that their request ought not to be granted; -- and also of saying sundry
things therein to the disadvantage of dissenters. -- With respect to the former
part of this accusation, my sentiments are as above: With regard to the latter,
our defenders, -- (would not protectors, think you, Mr. Tickle, be a more
significant term?) -- have produced no evidence to support their charge. If
they had evidence, why did they not produce it! If they had no evidence, and it
was all poetical imagination, or, what they thought, probable conjecture, --
and why they did think it probable becomes not me to say, -- why did they
bring the accusation so openly? unless it were purposely done to betray our
cause, and give the enemy an advantage over us. For a calumny unsupported, will
for ever recoil upon the head of the propagator. The public will always judge
according to evidence; in the present case, they will condemn our protectors,
and acquit the convention.

The Whig, and the Sentinel, of all men, ought to be deep politicians: But they
seem to be perfectly destitute of every qualification, save one, -- and that
one is not Chicanery, -- which helps to form that modern character. Nothing
could betray their inabilities in this respect, so much, as their endeavoring
to represent the church of England in the light of a persecuting church. Who
could not have foreseen, -- that could see before his nose, -- that this
representation would put men upon making comparisons; which, in this case more
especially, are odious, as they can only turn out to the advantage of the
church, and the real mortification of us and our Zion.

How impolitic was it likewise, both in the Whig and Sentinel, to cry out for
the liberty of British subjects, at the same time they are opposing that
liberty, and endeavoring with all their might to preclude a great, -- was it
consistent with my profession, I would add a good -- part of those same British
subjects in America, from the enjoyment of that liberty; I mean the most
valuable branch of it, even in their own profession, the liberty of religion;
wherewith I always was wont to think that Christ had made them, as well as
ourselves, free? every reasoning creature must at length perceive -- whatever
mists are raised to perplex and bewilder the unthinking traveller in his
journey through the mazes of controversy, -- that the liberty of British
subjects, necessarily supposes, that those subjects have a right, if they
choose the enjoyment of it, to bishops, with all the powers they are possessed
of in Britain? But if the bishops that are prayed for, are to be vested with no
civil power, who does not see that it would be manifest injustice, a most
palpable infringement of every thing that is right and reasonable, to impede
their arrival? And if Bishops are an obstruction to the liberty of Dissenters
in England, by reason of the civil powers wherewith they are there invested;
who can be so perverse as not to acknowledge, that, upon the plan of the
appeal, the Dissenters in this country would not have any cause of complaint;
because none of our liberties could thereby be possibly affected? Nay, I might
ask farther, supposing some complaints of our brethren in England, be founded
in justice, would it not be unjustifiable in us to depress our fellow subjects
in this part of the world, with similar hardships, because some burdens
continue there unremoved, which the churchmen here cannot possibly be supposed
to have had any hand in imposing? Suppose the parliament should grant these men
their request, which is, that they may have the rights of British subjects; and
should moreover send bishops to America, with all the powers, civil and
ecclesiastical, which they enjoy in Britain; is it not plain that this would be
British liberty? But if the episcopal party make no such request, and only ask
for bishops to ordain, and govern the clergy, should not we be more ready, on
our own principles, to assist, than to obstruct, so reasonable, so necessary,
and so modest a design? May they not fairly conclude, that we are, in heart,
enemies to that religious Freedom, which our tongues so justly extol, if we
continue any longer to obstruct its establishment?

As for the doctor abovementioned, he has acted altogether beneath the
character of an honest man: and has thus laid himself open to so much censure
and reproof, that whatever he advances for the future, must rather disserve
than promote our interest. His intentions in so doing are best known to
himself; but the consequences are not to be avoided.

Out of the many falsehoods he has published, I shall at this time, select but
one, which is this; that all the candidates for holy orders in the church of
England, have the expenses of their voyage home, paid by the society, etc. The
society, as I and every one else can see, publish every year an exact account
of the moneys they receive, and of the purposes to which they are applied. If
he can produce one instance, wherein the expenses attending the voyage of any
one candidate for orders, have been defrayed in the manner he mentions, it is
more than I have ever seen; and I think, from my scrupulous inspection into the
society's abstracts. I may venture to affirm that none is to be found. Let the
candid therefore, of all denominations, judge (for in spite of the doctor, and
all our other advocates, they will judge for themselves,) what spirit it was
that dictated so infamous an assertion.

The doctor, too surely, in this instance has endeavored to impose wretchedly
upon the public. If he did it wickedly, (which I must not suppose) he is an
improper instrument to advance the cause of truth and righteousness; if he did
it weakly, (which I cannot suppose, as information was so easily to be
obtained) he has proved (as the Whig and Sentinel, have done also,) that his
abilities are not equal to the task which he has undertaken, and therefore,
that our cause can hope for no advantages from his feeble efforts to support
it. In short, if he has nothing better to say, than what he has already
advanced, every man who wishes well either to himself or his neighbor, will
desire him to put his hand upon his mouth, and say nothing. If this will not
prevent him from injuring both our own cause, and the general cause of
religion, he is hereby interdicted from any farther publication, without
license first had and obtained from the guardians of our church, who are
appointed to take care -- ne quid detrimenti capiat ecclesia. -- that nothing
be printed to her disgrace or disadvantage.

Depending upon your candor for the publication of this Epistle,

Philadelphia, June 15, 1768. I am, with respect to all others, AN INDEPENDENT.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE. July 4.
The AMERICAN WHIG. [Numb. XVII.]
WHEN a writer indulges himself in round assertions, as the basis of any
scheme, his abilities must indeed be slender if the super structure is not, at
least, unblemished with those gross irregularities, which at first view offend
the eye of the understanding. It is upon a foundation of this sort, that Doctor
Chandler builds one of his most cogent arguments, in favor of his darling
episcopate, to induce those, whom he calls "The guardians of our national
interests" to adopt his plan; and lest "they should be insensible to motives"
of "a religious nature, he thought it prudent to assail them with political
considerations. But these, he must confess, can have little weight, unless they
derive it from the assertion, that the church of England, in its external
polity, is so happily connected, and interwoven with the civil constitution,
that each mutually supports, and is supported by the other. A curious picture
this, were it just, of the blind leading the blind! it is, however, a signal
instance of condescension, in so brave a champion for the hierarchy, to admit,
that it is in any wise supported by the state. What prodigious effects will a
change in government have, upon men's private opinions! Those of the doctor's
kidney would have scorned so degrading a stoop, before the submission of the
clergy, and the statute that declared king H. 8, the supreme head of the
Anglican church. But instead of amusing the attention of my readers, with
reflections on those lessions of humility, which haughty eclesiastics are
frequently obliged to read to themselves, since the expulsion of papal
authority, I shall proceed to question the truth of the assertion, by the
omnipotence of which, so much execution is expected to be done in the field of
polities.

That the church of England is connected and interwoven with the civil
constitution of the British empire, as far as it respects England, Ireland, the
principality of Wales, and the town of Berwick upon Tweed, cannot be denied:
That it has not the least relation to that constitution, as it concerns
Scotland, and the colonies in general, is equally true; but that its connection
with the civil constitution in England, is either happy for the state, though it
certainly is for the church according to Doctor Chandler's sense of the word,
or supports it, though it is indeed supported by the state, is a position, which
every sound whig is bound to deny. The subject of enquiry, therefore in this
paper, will be, whether that part of the Britis^ ^^pire, to which the church of
England extends, or the colonies, in which the Doctor would erect his qualified
episcopacy, can derive happiness, or the state receive support from either. If
we look into the history of England, before the abolition of the papacy, we
shall find, that the church was ever inimical to the state. The Pope not only
claimed, but, as often as he could, exercised a supremacy over both; sometimes
excommunicating the king, and discharging his subjects from the bond of
allegiance; at other times, laying the whole realm under an interdict; -- anon
disposing of the kingdom, by his apostlic authority, to any foreigner who would
attempt the conquest of it; perpetually draining it of its wealth, by the
unrighteous levy of Peter Pence, and the continual exaction of annates, or
first fruits, and other ecclesiastical imposts; convoking all spiritual causes,
in their last remove, before the vatican; presiding, by his legate, at the
synods and convocations of the English clergy; disposing of vacant sees to
foreigners, who in right of their temporalities, and with hearts alienated from
the state, took their seats in parliament; and not only had great weight in
council; but, in some instances, bore the principal sway in the political
movements of the state: While, to crown the power and independency of the
Hierarchy, holy church, was, by magna charta, declared to be free; and
maintained this freedom, to so high a pitch, as not only to make her spiritual
courts a terror to all the king's subjects, but even to claim a constitutional
exemption from civil jurisdiction, in the perpetration of the most flagitious
crimes. That this is a just picture of holy church, as she was formerly
connected and interwoven with the state, is unquestionably verified, by
historical evidence. It is indeed too just and striking a description, of the
outlines of her external polity, to be disowned by any son of the church. Such
was the indulgent mother, before the reformation. But who does not see, that
this external polity, so far from being friendly to monarchy, was a bitter
enemy to all government? Could the chief magistrate, under any form of civil
rule whatsoever, be secure in his seat? Could he guard the nation against
foreign attempts, or protect it against internal convulsions, while so much
power was attached to the church, which was so wholly at the disposal of the
Pope? It was utterly impossible. Instead of exalting our idea of the monarch,
it actually debased him; so far debased him, as in one instance to exhibit
majesty itself, acting the grovelling character of a groom, to an insolent
ecclesiastic. Instead of giving us security and strength against our enemies,
it exposed the kingdom to become their spoil, by color of a pontifical bull;
it opened a sluice for draining the nation of its wealth, the principal sinew
of national power; it exposed the wholesome English constitution, to fatal
changes, by the influence of foreigners, in the legislature, in the courts of
justice, and in the council of state; it armed the subject against his Prince;
In short, it was the most deadly adversary to the public weal, even had England
been an absolute monarchy. And yet the church was as much, and how happily let
the reader judge, connected and interwoven with the state, before, as it ever
has been since the reformation.

We are next to enquire, what mighty changes have been wrought, at or since
that memorable event, which could possibly render that connection more happy to
the state, than in times of popery. In this research, it will be just to
confine our attention, merely to the external polity, without regard to the
internal changes in doctrine, discipline and worship, which the reformation
gradually, and in several successive reigns, effected in the Anglican church.
Before this Era, the Bishop of Rome was its supreme head on earth. By the
reformation his holiness was dethroned; and whom the clergy of England made
submission, how free and unconstrained let history declare: All dependence on
or connection with the pontifical see, was absolutely and totally rescinded.
The king, by another act, was made the fountain of all the benefices of the
superior clergy; the mere form, only, of election, being reserved to the Dean
and Chapter, to be exercised in favor of those, whom his Majesty, by his
letters missive, should appoint. The clergy were also rendered responsible in
criminal matters, before the king's temporal courts of justice, but continued
in the exercise of their jurisdiction, over the subject, in the ecclesiastical
courts. The monastic priesthood was, by other legislative provisions, laid low
in the dust; the abbeys and monasteries were dissolved; and their temporalities
yested in the crown, to be disposed of for the endowment of schools, and other
charitable and religious uses: And by this means, twenty-seven lazy Abbots were
turned out of parliament; and in their stead, fix new bishoprics were erected
by the king, in virtue of an act of legislation. The prelates, however,
remained possessed of their seats in parliament. The convocation of the clergy
subsisted, as before the reformation; and still constitutionally subsists, though
the wisdom and lenity of the Hanover family forbids the exercise of their
dreadful power, by restraining them from proceeding to business; and the
jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical courts, save only in a sew cases, is yet
entire. This, I believe, is a just representation of the present external
polity of the Anglican church, as far as respects the superior clergy. It
therefore follows, that if the state derives happiness and support from the
church, or if the civil constitution harmonizes with it, this happiness, this
support, this harmony must be evinced, in one or more of the following
particulars. First; that the king is by law, the supreme head of the Anglican
church. Secondly; that he has the appointment of all the spiritual lords in the
realm. Thirdly; that those lords make a part of the legislature of
Great Britain. Fourthly; that they are authorized to hold spiritual courts in
England, for punishing offenders, -- against the ecclesiastical law. Fifthly;
that the king has authority to summon the convocation, and to permit them to
make canons; to which, as well as to all others now in sorce, all the
inhabitants of South-Britain are bound, under temporal penalties, to say yea
and amen. When I consider the Doctor's assertions, I am in charity, and to
avoid a more severe imputation, obliged to doubt his acquaintance with the
English constitution. For I verily am at a loss, upon comparing it with the
external polity of the Anglican church, to discover in what particulars, his
boasted reciprocation of happiness, support, and harmony consists. It is
evident that the King not only is the supreme, but the absolute monarch of the
church. And is his authority so uncontrollable in the state? It is as clear,
that the people have not the least share, in the construction of ecclesiastical
laws; but who is ignorant, that in temporal legislation, they have a principal
and essential agency? In the church, the upper house of convocation, from the
nature of their appointment, are real slaves to the crown; the lower house are
their mere dependant creatures. In the state, the temporal lords have a noble
hereditary independency, the commons are servants during good behavior to the
people. In the church, the judges are as subservient as the legislators: In the
state, the oracles of the law hold their offices, by the freest tenure, during
good behavior. A singular blessing of which, while our fellow subjects in
England and Ireland are in the full enjoyment of it, the colonists by an odious
desparity are deprived.
Or should they both be thought to hang upon the favor of the crown, with an
eye to promotion, the ecclesiastical judges are makers and pronouncers of the
law, and triers of the facts; but the temporal judges are only speakers, of
what independent of their authority is established law, while the people
determine facts. In short, none are so blindly ignorant, unless the Doctor
should be so, as not to see, that if our constitution is a monarchy, it differs
widely from all other monarchical governments in the world. It is a monarchy,
two of the grand ingredients in which, are, that the people, in the common law
courts, are absolute judges of facts, upon which the law must necessarily
arise, either pro or con, as the facts are found; and that in legislation, they
have two voices in three. But do we discover the least resemblance of those
popular rights, in the church? Do we behold the laity sitting either in the
seat of the lawgiver or in judgment? -- Not at all; in things so sacred they
may not intermeddle; odi profanum vulgus et arceo. If they feel the powers of
the one, or the other, it is not by participating in the exertions of either,
but by submitting to the weight of both; as the ass that bears the burden.
But the temporal powers of the superior clergy show, in a striking point of
light, how little harmony, at least in theory, subsists between the
ecclesiastical and political state of England. The right of the spiritual lords
to sit in parliament, which the advocates for the church have ever, and with a
good deal of reason, esteemed a spiritual right, is, by the true friends of
liberty, regarded with as jealous an eye, as are the borough representations,
in the house of commons. This right of the clergy, is a real deformity in the
constitution; and contravenes the very principles, on which the British
parliament is built. The several parts of that august body, as consisting of
three estates, ought legally and absolutely to be independent, in the exercise
of authority, each of the other: And yet, in the house of Peers, there are no
less than twenty-six unapostolical ecclesiastical lords, ever regarded by their
lay-fellows, with a mixture of disgust and contempt; ever dependant on the will
of the Prince; for who is not fond of promotion? and too often ready, not only
to countenance, but execute court measures, as history abundantly shows. While
every other person in that great and most illustrious assembly, is at least
constitutionally free. Nay, so very odd and unnatural is this connection, that,
I believe, the Doctor is singular in his opinion, that it is productive of
felicity, or gives strength to the state. The great dissimilitude in the
constitutions of state and church, pardon me good Doctor, for the irreverent
transposition, affords not, indeed, the least possibility of a mutual
interchange of happiness, support, or harmony. For how can blind submission and
obedience in the church, accord with English liberty in the state? How can that
form of ecclesiastical government, which either actually or virtually lodges
all authority in the hands of one person, and excludes the multitude from all
participation, in framing and executing the laws, be said to be happily
connected, and harmonize with, or to have the least tendency to support, that
form of civil government, under which the subject has a necessary agency, in
legislative and distributive justice? The Doctor should have honestly, and in
plain terms, spoke what he really meant; that the hierachy, of which the Prince
is the supreme and absolute head. is most happily calculated to indoctrinate
the laity, in passive obedience, and non-resistance, to an absolute monarch in
the state. The truth of this assertion would, at least, have been admitted.
Yet, why should an American press, groan under the weight of this doctrine? Are
we not all free? Or are we indeed bond slaves, sold under the power of tyrannic
sway? God forbid the thoughts! We have a Prince and a constitution, friendly to
liberty; why then, such a more than insinuated address, to those who are
entrusted with out public affairs? I confess the Doctor does not assert, that
Episcopacy and absolute monarchy are in their frame, best suited to each other.
Thus, however, he ought to have spoke; or been silent. They are truly twin
sisters, the genuine offspring of certain parents, equally known and detested
by every lover of liberty. But by his mealy-mouthed, mincing omission of the
word absolute, which, nevertheless, is left to be understood, by all
connoisseurs in the art of unlimitted sway, he intended to gild the pill; to
make it gain an easy passage into American stomachs. Nor can he escape with a
declaration, that by monarchy unepithetized, he intended monarchy in general.
For in this view, his doctrine is notoriously false. It includes all mixed, as
well as absolute monarchies. But is it not evident, that absolute supremacy in
the church, and the rights of a free people under a mixed monarchy, form when
attempted to be pronounced, in union, a most jarring discordant sound? Or
should this be his argument, that as the English hierachy and absolute monarchy
are in their frame and constitution, best suited to each other, so a qualified
hierachy, in which the bishop should have no other powers than those of
ordaining and governing the clergy, and confirming the baptized, "exactly
harmonizes" with our mixed monarchy, let him beware of its consequences. If it
should have strength, sufficient to rear his beloved idol in America, its power
may possibly be felt, in the demolition of that more towering idol, beyond the
atlantic, to make room for the erection of another, that will more "exactly
harmonize," with the mixed monarchy of the British empire; an hierachy, in
which though one shall preside, for the sake of order, yet the whole church,
including laity and clergy shall give laws and execute justice in
spiritualities. Such an hierachy would indeed bear some faint resemblance to
Episcopacy, such as it was in the early ages of the church.

But to examine the Doctor's mode of reasoning a little farther; it is plain,
that by his scheme of a qualified episcopacy, the laity are, by no means, to be
affected. The discipline of the church, so far as it relates to the private
members, will be left as it is; and nothing further will be done, than refusing
the communion to disorderly and scandalous persons; which every clergymen may
now refuse. And is this all? If so, how is our relish for a mixed monarchy to
be heightened, and improved, by this scheme? The Non-Episcopal clergy, and the
laity of all denominations, are not to feel the weight of Episcopal authority.
This, it seems, is reserved for the correction of the more ungovernable clergy
of the church. All other ecclesiastics are to do as they list; and the people
of all persuasions are to be left to the guidance of their respective
Presbyters, in the exercise of their authority to exclude from the sacrament.
This indeed savours of Presbyterianism. Expellas naturam surea taemen usque
recurret. The prejudices of education, either really exert themselves at times,
or our reverend author knows, if he knows nothing else, how to effect political
qualms. But in the mean time, it remains a glaring truth, that, however
unquestionable the assertion may be, that our civil rulers have always
considered Episcopacy, as the surest friend to monarchy, the Doctor's plan of
Episcopacy, is not in the least calculated, to merit, on that account, the
peculiar attention of those who are entrusted with our public concerns.

My readers are, I flatter myself, now convinced, if they needed such
conviction before, that the church of England is not so happily connected, and
interwoven with the civil constitution, that each mutually supports, and is
supported by the other; that their harmony exists no where, save only in the
elaborate appeal; and that Doctor Chandler's plan, of an American Episcopate,
bears not the least shadow of a resemblance, to the beautiful form of our civil
constitution; for which he admits many, and were he disposed to speak the whole
truth, he should have said, all the British subjects, both at home and in the
plantations, who reject Episcopacy, are warm, nay the warmest, "advocates." On
the other hand, he can expect little countenance from our civil rulers. They
neither desire, it is to be hoped, to enamourate us with absolute monarchy; nor
are so incompetent, as not to reject his plan of Episcopacy, as an inadequate
engine of just government. In short, his adroitness is by no means equal, to
the still of those artful men, who can raise objections and difficulties, in
the plainest cases; and can make any thing, an argument against any thing, in a
way, that shall seem plausible. This is a talent, to which, whatever may be the
aspirations of his heart, his head is an utter stranger. To retort his own
sentiment; he rather seems calculated for those exercises, which are "as
unworthy of the public attention," as the labors of a child, that "engages in
crambo or pushpin."

M.

A KICK FOR THE WHIPPER. [No. VII.]
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
-- amphora coepit
Institui, currente ro^d our urceus exit?
HORACE.
NO less than two questions concerning one of the Whig's correspondents have
been disputed, it seems, in several companies; and Squire T. (No. VI. par. 1.)
gives the church of England the credit of -- the disputation! From the presumed
character of the judges, and especially from Squire T's. very grammatical
construction, a person of common sense would conclude the 2d question (as well
as the 1st) was determined in the negative; but Squire T. assures us it was
decided in the affirmative. What can he mean? says one. Alas! reader, common
folks (like you and I) must not expect to understand so mystical a logician as
Squire T. who, (to his credit be it spoken) can From vulgar rules with wild
disorder part,
And snatch a grace beyond the reach of art.
Whether his manoevre be his, Printers maneuver, is a question I shall not
decide; but, if several companies should dispute it, the disputation might
probably be spoken of much to the credit of the church of England.

Par. 2d. Squire T. seems to suppose the American churchman, would be glad to
see the church in puris naturalibus, without a figleaf to cover her etc. How
that may be, I know not; but Squire T. (who knows the original use of
fig leaves) seems apprehensive, as well as I, that (in that case) the poor
church's nakedness would be exposed, and some of my politico-anatomical friends
are so censorious, as to think, she would appear to be a --

The Tennis Ball which Squire T. strikes, (par. 3d,) he has so often, with such
a racket and in such a frustration, bandied about before, that I shall not
interrupt him; but let him play with it till he has tired himself. I shall
however just observe to this accurate gentleman, that it is a distinction, (and
not a criticism upon a distinction,) which he takes such important notice of in
par. 4th. -- Yet I must needs say, his own phraseology ('a church of England in
America-man") is really vastly pretty.

As I have no great fondness for interfering in a dispute between two church of
England in America-men, I shall pass over the seven following very learned in
the law paragraphs, by only observing, that they had all appeared unnecessary,
had Squire: T. sufficiently attended to what he advances in the 8th, with a
small addition I beg leave to make, viz. 'that the present question is not,
what rights the English bishops have had, or now have, but what authority
American bishops will have, when they are appointed? and what authority they
will naturally claim when they are established.

Par. 12th, Squire T. seems to undertake to settle, (what he calls) the capital
point, 'whether the church of England is established in the colonies?' Some are
so silly as to think this question admits of no dispute; however they think,
Mr. Hobart, the Independent Reflector, and others, have firmly enough settled
it in the negative. Ah! but those were hireling, republican, deistical writers.
Well then! Quid dignum tanto tulit hic promissor hiatu? What says Squire T?
Nothing but IF -- if it is -- and if it is not. 'If it is not, all this clamor
against spiritual courts -- is groundless and impertinent;' but 'if it is, --
an act for the erection of an American Episcopate, may be by its friends
obtained without much difficulty." Truly, Squire T. this is a dry indigestible
crust indeed!

I designed to have trussed up another bird on this spit, but it unfortunately
happens to be a rank bird of prey, likely to prove nauseous to nice palates,
and indigestible, but by strong stomachs; I shall therefore hereafter roast it
by itself, when, if my guests can dine upon it, they shall be heartily welcome.
In the mean time, I shall, for a desert, set before them a little knick-knack,
just now sent me as a present.

Z.

To Sir ISAAC FOOT,
SIR,
HAVING read a small volume lately published, entitled Sermons to A --, (you
know what is meant, -- that species of animals, on one of which Balaam rode,)
the contents of which, appear to me very pertinent to the occasion of the
present politico-religious disputes; I beg leave to recommend it to the
attentive perusal, and serious consideration of your readers in general, and
Doctor Chandler, Mr. Seabury, Squire Tickle, Probus, Aristocles, Hierocles,
etc. in particular; sincerely wishing they may be as much edified thereby, as
has been.

Sir, your humble Servant, ISSACHAR.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, July 7. THE SENTINEL. NO. XVI.
To the AUTHOR of the SENTINEL
SIR,
THE readiness, with which you published the letters, I sent you, emboldens me
to offer some farther thoughts on the subject. I have endeavored to show that
the church or rather every church in America has a right in itself to provide
for its own discipline and government, that if civil laws are necessary for the
support of its clergy, or for the regulation of its members, they ought to be
made by the legislatures of the respective colonies; and therefore that any
application to the parliament of Britain, or any power on earth, other than the
legislatures of the colonies, to establish any sect or denomination of
Christians in his majesty's American colonies, is an infringement of the rights
of the people, and as such ought to be resented. I shall now consider what it
is, that Doctor Chandler and the applicants petition for, and hope to convince
you, that it is not a minister of Christ, a publisher of the gospel, nor an
officer of the Christian church, but a dangerous engine of state. This will
appear if we consider for what purposes he is wanted with what powers he is to
be invested, and in what manner he is to exercise those powers.

The liberty of America has ever been a matter of envy to the bigots and high
flyers, as well as to the favorers and abettors of arbitrary power in England.
Instances of this might be given, from the times of Laud, and (...) ^oft down
to the time of those venerable bishops, who with one accord entered their warm
protest against the repeal of the American stamp act. -- And it might easily be
shown, that whenever attempts have been made at home to increase the power of
the crown, or subvert the British constitution and the liberties of the people;
the liberty of America has at the same time been invaded. Nor is this to be
wondered at; for while America remains a sacred asylum, she shackles of slavery
cannot well be fixed upon Britons, nor can ecclesiastical tyrants exercise
arbitrary sway.

But what is particularly worthy of observation is, that every attempt upon
American liberty, has always been accompanied with endeavors to settle bishops
among us. Thus in the reign of Charles I. when Laud attempted to subjugate the
colonies, then in their infancy, he was not content with contriving to cramp
their trade by foolish proclamations: Rushworth, Second part. p. 718.
but to complete their mortification and effect their ruin, was upon the point
of sending them a Bishop, with a military force to back his authority. Heylin's
life of Laud. p. 369.
the sam^ a^^^pt was revived in the latter end of queen Anne's rei^^ (...) und,
had not God in his providence interposed, and blasted the designs of the
enemies of Britain, the same year might have been remarkable, for the downfall
of pro^estan^sm. the introduction of the pretender, and the revival of popery
in England, and for the establishment of bishops in America. The unsettled
state of the nation after the accession of George I. gave the enemies of that
prince and of their country some faint hopes of accomplishing their design;
and, therefore, in the year 1714, while the spirit of rebellion was kindling
into a flame, and the friends of Popery and the pretender were forming their
party and preparing to overturn the government, and the religion of their
country, the same restless spirits, who in the last reign had labored to get
bishops established in America, 'renewed their attempt, and made one vigorous
effort to accomplish' what they call their 'grand affair.' But (thanks to the
great over-ruler of events) the designs of both 'proved abortive.' The
rebellion was quashed, and the scheme of an American episcopate dropped of
course: Some persons however still continued to keep sight of the great object,
and as they are always watching for seasonable opportunities of exerting
themselves to obtain it," we find it resumed with great warmth not long before
the rebellion in 1745.

With what views a bishop is so earnestly desired for America, and for what
purposes he is sent, we are now to enquire. 'His 'authority,' we are told,
'shall operate only on the clergy of the Church and 'not on the laity.' The
bishop spoken of in the New Testament is ordered to feed the flock, and take
care of the church of God. But the American bishop is to exercise no authority
over the laity or private members of the church, over which he presides. His
business is to 'ordain, unite,' support and govern the clergy. A confirmation
is also mentioned as one of the important offices of a bishop, and great stress
seems to be laid on it, by Doctor C. But how high soever the popish church and
its adherents may rate confirmation, and the uninterrupted succession, the
Doctor ought to know, that the church of England, of which he professes himself
a member, considers them in no very favorable light. Confirmation, penance,
orders, matrimony and extreme unction are not to be accounted for sacraments,
being such as are grown, partly of the CORRUPT following of the apostles,
partly are states of life allowed by the scriptures. 25 Art. of the Chapter of. Eng.
over these his power is to be absolute. He is to hold no spiritual court, p.
95. And yet he is to have power to suspend any clergyman, to deprive him of his
benefice and not only silence and depose him but excommunicate him from the
society of Christians. P. 33.
All this he is to exercise according to the directions of and by virtue of a
commission from the diocesan, B. 80.
who may reside at London, Lambeth, or elsewhere. This Doctor C. assures us is
'the plan of the American episcopate, and that he does not know of a single
instance wherein reason has been given to suspect a departure from it. How well
this plan was calculated to answer the views of a Laud, who wants to introduce
arbitrary government into church and state, is easy to see: Nor will it be
difficult to reconcile it with the schemes of those, who labored to introduce
Popery and the Pretender.

But to add to the weight and importance of these bishops, and the better to
enable them to promote the designs of the minister, a hint is given that 'the
government may hereafter see fit to invest them with some degree of civil
power, worthy of their acceptance;' that as 'a clergyman may be made a justice
of the peace or a judge of the quorum; so bishops may be invested with a
proportionable degree of civil authority; C. 3.
which can be nothing less than a member of the upper house of assembly or
governor of a province. To this we are told, no one ought to object: For 'all
that the happiness and safety of the public require, is, that the legislative
and execute power be placed in the hands of such persons as are possessed of
the greatest abilities, integrity and prudence; and it is hoped, says Dr. C.
bishops will always be thought to deserve this character.'

Let us now consider what a dangerous engine of state this might be in the
hands of an enterprising and ill-minded minister. Where a man's private
interest is united with the interest of his country, it is reasonable to
suppose, he will heartily wish that country may thrive, and will extert himself
in support and desence of its liberty; but this is not the case with those who
are sent from another part of the world, to be employed in places of profit and
power: Because they can bear no affection to the place where they sojourn;
their sole business being to advance themselves by following the directions of
their principals: Neither will it be the case with those who are taken into
offices, although natives of the land, because they are greater gainers while
they keep their offices, than they can be by promoting and defending the
interest of their country.

The people of America are to have no concern in the election of this bishop,
over his actions they have no control. The clergy as they will hold their
livings at his pleasure, must pay the same implicit obedience to his commands,
which he himself will always pay to the minister of state, whose creature he
is, and on whom his hopes of preferment depend.

I cannot therefore wonder if the administration of a B -- e or a G -- e is
distinguished with an attempt to introduce an American episcopate.

I am, etc. A. B.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Monday July 11. A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG. [No.
XV.]
BY TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
In all you speak, let Truth and Candor shine.

Pope.
I Have engaged in this course of periodical papers, as an advocate for the
religious 'liberties' of a very numerous and respectable body, of my
fellow subjects in North America. I have entered upon the question of an
American episcopate, and the' defense 'of Dr. Chandler's appeal to the public,
in favor of it; as I esteem the question to be of greater importance to the
members of the church of England in America, than any which affects not the
rights of conscience -- and of some importance to others, whether they be the
friends of religious liberty in general; or, like the American Whig, of that
sour, spelnetic, perverse, unchristian, unbrotherly, inhuman, meager,
lean-visaged disposition, which sickens at the sight of other men's happiness.

'The Dr. addresses the public, with an air of the highest,' and most well
grounded assurance, of the propriety and expedie^^^ of his plan; and with
design, no doubt, to engage his (...) in the immediate prosecution of it, he
very justly observen, from the appearance of things, at the time of his
writing, that the apprehension of any general popular discontent or opposition,
was entirely groundl^^s. His good ^pinion of the dissenters, he expressed in
these words: Of any considerable discontent or uneasiness, there is no reason
to be apprehensive. Whatever notions the dissenters of this country may have
formerly entertained concerning the church, of late years they have greatly
come off from their prejudices -- excepting here and there a hotheaded writer,
or a pragramatical enthusiast,

The Dr. I am persuaded, had good reasons for his general opinion; but I
apprehend him to have been mistaken in one circumstance, as he seems not to
have imagined that the number of 'hot-headed writers' against the proposed
episcopate would be so considerable as now appears -- and I will not affirm but
he may have been also mistaken as to the real number of pragmatical enthusiasts
in this country. But this I do and will affirm, that none but the hotheaded
writers, or pragmatical enthusiasts aforesaid, and such as have been deceived
by the misrepresentations of the former, or the blind zeal of the latter,
discover the least disposition to oppose the episcopate in question -- and that
the number of people thus deceived is but small, in comparison with what the
American Whig has represented it to be. There are many, even among the
dissenters, upon whom all the sophistry of this writer has had no effect, and
who most cordially despise the low, illiberal, ungenerous, and dishonest arts,
whereby he and his associates have endeavored to impose upon the ignorant and
unwary; esteeming them to be an evidence of two Things, which they would
willingly conceal, the badness of their hearts -- and the wretchedness of the
cause they have undertaken to maintain.

I pass over No. IX. of the Whig, as utterly unworthy of notice; being only a
feeble effort to misrepresent a very harmless passage in the appeal, and
pervert it to a sense which, I dare say, was never once thought of by the
author. Besides, it is such a Burlesque upon several passages of scripture,
that it cannot be read with patience by any one who has the least regard for
religion, and could only be written by a man lost to all moral goodness.

The tenth production now before me, is qualis ab incepto, -- such as was
expected, and such as will be expected from him as long as he shall continue to
write in the present controversy; being one of those compounds of
misrepresentation, deceit and falsehood, which are inconsistent with common
honesty.

The author of the appeal, after having answer, as he in^gined, all the
objections against an American episcopate which he had ever heard of, says,
with reference to such-Genius's as our Whig: It is indeed possible that other
objections may haw been offered, or may be here after suggested, against
America^ bishops; but I am persuaded, that upon examination they will generally
be found to be proofs, rather of the dexterity, or ill will of the inventors,
than of the real sea^s and uneasiness of the inhabitants. Artiful men may ra^s^
objections and difficulties in the plainest cases, and can make any thing^^
argument against any thing, in a way that shall appear plausible to those who
are unacquainted with the legerdemain of cavillers and sophists. But whoever
employs his talents in this exercise, is as unworthy of the public attention,
as the child that engages in crambo or push-pin,

Now upon this passage the question arises, whether the author of the appeal
has here said any thing that cannot be justified on the common principles of
truth and candor? No small number of 'artful men' have been for several
months, employed in raising objections against American bishops; and it is
submitted to the judgment of every candid and intelligent person, whether they
have yet produced any new objections, but such as are perhaps, some small proof
of the 'dexterity,' but which are in reality, a much greater proof of the
ill will of the 'inventors?' Has it not been the study of the American Whig,
and his confederates, to 'raise objections and difficulties in the plainest
cases?' Have they not been sounding a false alarm, and aiming to terrify people
with imaginary dangers? Have they not trifled with, and abused, the patience of
the public to that degree, that several of their quondam friends have deserted
them, and others are ashamed of them? In short, have they not 'employed their
talents' in such a manner, as to have rendered themselves as unworthy of the
public attention, as the child that engages in crambo, or push-pin?

The author of the appeal is accused of thundering out clerical anathema's'
against his opponents, and of saying, that whoever employs his talents in this
exercise, that is, gentle reader, says the Whig. of offering any objections to
his darling episcopate, is as unworthy of the public attention, as the child
that engages at crambo or push-pin, the whole passage of the appeal, upon which
the accusation is founded, is inserted above, and every reader can judge for
himself, whether the author says any such thing as he is here made to say -- or
thunders out any such anathema's as he is made to thunder. He is evidently
there considering, not objectors in general, but one species of objectors,
namely, 'cavillers and sophists,' who by their 'legerdemain' or the tricks of
their art, make any thing appear to be an argument against any thing, to the
ignorant and inexperienced. As to open and fair objectors, Dr. Chandler always
speaks of them decently and properly, and has declared his readiness to treat
them with due respect. So that the Whig's representation of him is deceitful
and false; it is a prepensely malicious attempt to impose upon the goodnature
and gentleness of the reader, and merits the resentment of every lover of truth
and sincerity. He that deceives another, or attempts to deceive him, is no
better than a liar; and he that attempts it publicly, is a public liar, and as
such should be treated. A man had better play at 'crambo or push-pin' to
eternity, than engage in such practices. And so much for push-pin.

The author of the appeal had said, that he knew of no public clamor that had
ever been made in this country upon the prospect of an American episcopate, and
that he did not soresee that any would be made. The American Whig al^ows, that
perhaps it may have been so -- that Dr. Chandler had neither heard of any, nor
did foresee any. But now, in his turn, he makes his appeal to the Doctor.
whether since the publication of his appeal, a very general uneasiness is not
visible among the people; and a general popular opposition expressed against
his episcopal project, among all ranks of men, as they become daily more
diffusively acquainted with the reality of the design. The Dr. will himself
reply to this appeal, if he thinks it deserves a reply, in due time; in the
mean while, if I may be allowed to make so free with his property, I will offer
a few words upon it. If by, 'since the publication of the appeal' is meant from
the time of its publication, my answer to the question must be in the negative.
It is well known, that the appeal was published many months before there was
any appearance of uneasiness on the account of it; nay, so far from it, that it
was read by many of the dissenters, who declared themselves perfectly easy and
satisfied, with regard to the plan, and thought it liable to no reasonable
objections.

But is not 'a very general Uneasiness' now visible among the people? I answer
again in the negative. What is visible is this, that some factious writers have
endeavored to create a 'general uneasiness among the people.' and have spared
no pains, and neglected no arts, that were likely to effect it. Some success
they have undoubtedly had, but in my opinion, far short of what is pretended.
The late election in this, and a neighboring province, has clearly evinced,
that, in the several counties where the matter was put to the trial, the
majority of the people were free from the 'Uneasiness,' and 'very generally'
expressed their contempt of the low and infamous methods that were used to
deceive them. And I will venture to prophecy, that 'among all ranks of men, as
they daily 'become more diffusively acquainted with the ^eality of the
'design,' the more it will be approved. The Whig, I believe has seen his best
days, people for a while, were diverted with the caperings and twisting of such
a scaramouch, but these things will not always entertain.

The American Whig pretends, that among the lay-members of the church, there
are not a few zealous opponents of an American episcopate. Others can judge of
this matter as well as he; and I appeal to every reader, whether he knows of
many such persons. For my part I have never met with a single churchman, to my
knowledge, or so much as heard of one, who zealously opposes, or has a
disposition to make any opposition at all to American bishops, since the plan
has been publicly explained; excepting always the Whig's friend, the American
churchman, whose good manners, if he ever had any, have been miserably
corrupted by evil communications. Now if by 'not a few' be meant a single
person, and if the American be in reality a churchman; then indeed it must be
allowed, that 'not a few' churchmen are zealous opponents of an American
episcopate.

What he says of churchmen in Virginia, he offers with unusual diffidence and
modesty; from whence the consequence is as clear as any in Euclid, that he is
destitute of evidence to support it. the people of Virginia are so distant,
that neither he nor I can be supposed to be competent judges of this matter.
But Maryland is nearer; and both by persons and letters from thence, I am well
assured, that the laity of that province are, in general, most impatiently
desirous of an episcopate -- that they declare themselves ready to join in a
petition for that purpose -- and willing to do every thing in their power in
order to obtain it^ And I see not what should make any great difference between
the people of Virginia and Maryland in this respect, unless the nature of the
proposed episcopate has not been so well understood and considered in the
former of these Provinces. In a word I have yet met with no reasons for
believing, that there is a churchman upon the continent, among the laity, who
understands the subject, that has any inclination to oppose the episcopate in
question, (excepting as before excepted) -- or, that there are any clergymen in
America, who do not earnestly desire it, excepting those only who have reason
to fear it.

After a sly grin at the fate of the late stamp act, our Whig pecks at the
foundation of the appeal: But it is in no danger from such efforts. The plan of
an American piscopate was formed by those persons whose p^^per business it was
to form it. They well understood what they were doing, and needed not the
instruction of American Whigs. This being the case, not 'the basis of the
appeal,' but the basis of this attack, will be found to be chimerical and
absurd.

But is not all the power here contended for, in the hands of the clergy
themselves? Why is the civil government called upon to interpose? If this
sagacious gentleman is unable to discover the true reason of this, I will
inform him; and I desire him to remember, that the clergy of the church of
England choose to have the approbation of the government in all their
proceedings. They also think it their duty, not to proceed in an affair of such
consequence, before the nature of the measure is explained, and application has
been made to the higher powers for their consent and patronage. They would
choose also to have the approbation of all people, of every denomination, both
at home and in the colonies; not forgetting the American Whigs. For this reason
the plan has been freely submitted to the inspection of the public, that all
persons may see with their own eyes, that nothing is proposed or intended which
can interfere with their interest or happiness.

In return for this open, candid and generous conduct, the elergy have been
most illiberally slandered and abused. They have been represented as so many
public liars, furious bigots, and enemies to their country. In the very paper
now before me, the elegant and polite author of it, charges them with unavowed
ecclesiastical machinations, and more than insinuates, that though the voice may
be Jacob's voice, yet the hands are the hands of Esau -- having thought fit,
for reasons well known to himself, to drop his original metaphor of the Sheep
and the Wolf.

In the next paragraph, a supposition is first made of the execution of the
plan for an American episcopate, in the manner wherein it has been proposed;
and then the inhabitants of South-Britain, (for there are no Englishmen nor
Scotsmen, since the act of union,) are introduced as reflecting and reasoning
upon the matter, at such a rate, as none but American Whigs have ever reasoned.
The Americans, (they are taught to say) are a people tenacious of their
liberty; who have successfully opposed the introduction of bishops, as
political persons, dangerous to their civil and religious privileges, etc. In
which passage it is conceded, that the episcopate now in dispute is the same
which is stated in the appeal, contrary to what this writer has ever pretended:
-- This episcopate is supposed to be carried into execution, under the sanction
of an act of parliament: -- The episcopate of the appeal is thus established,
in consequence of the American Whig's successful opposition to it: -- And his
opposition to it consisted in his opposing the introduction of such bishops as
the appeal had no concern with. Amidst this strange confusion of concessions
and suppositions, the inhabitants of South-Britain are properly furnished with
corresponding reflections.

But I am tired with the 'inconsistency and jargon' of this writer; for, which
reason, I will leave him his concluding paragraph entire, with my free consent
that he may make the best of it.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE. July 11.
The AMERICAN WHIG. [Numb. XVIII.]
To THE AMERICAN WHIG.
SIR,
AS Dr. Chandler, in his appeal to the public, has been pleased not only to
advance reasons in favor of sending bishops to America, but also to plead the
cause of episcopacy itself; vainly declaring that he should look upon the
silence of the dissenters, with regard to his pamphlet, as a tacit consent of
the strength of his arguments; I think it my duty to endeavor by the channel
of your paper, to convince the reader of the weakness of his reasoning, and to
prove that diocesan episcopacy is not of divine original, but merely of human
invention.

The dispute between the episcopalians and presbyterians is this. The
episcopalians assert that there are different orders of gospel ministers, such
as bishops, priests, etc. the one superior in power and authority to the other;
and that the right of ordaining ministers, is vested solely in the bishops: The
presbyterians, on the contrary affirm, that there ought to be a perfect
equality between all the ministers of the gospel, and that the right of
ordaining to the pastoral office belongs to the presbytery, or a collective
body of presbyters. These are the reasons they advance in favor of their
sentiments.

1. One presumptive argument against episcopacy, and in favor of presbytery,
is this; that the first reformers, when they rejected the errors of popery,
rejected with it episcopacy, as an innovation introduced into the church of
Christ, and adopted presbyterianism, or the doctrine of equality amongst
ministers, as the most consistent with gospel purity and simplicity. Calvin in
his institutions expressly declares, "caeterum quod episcopos, et presbyteres,
and pastores, and ministros, promiscue vocari qui ecclesias regunt, id feci ex
scripturae usu quae vocabula ista confundit." i. e. But the reason why I have
promiscuously called those who rule the church, bishops, and presbyters, and
ministers, and pastors, is my following the custom of scripture, which
confounds, or indiscriminately uses those words. Indeed had episcopacy been of
apostolic institution, and essential to a proper constitution of the church of
Christ, there a thorough reformation of the church from the errors and
corruptions of popery would have been morally impossible, as the popish bishops
were entirely opposed to the first reformers. And in as much as those first
reformers were remarkable instruments under Christ, in purging his church, as
they enjoyed a large measure of the spirit of God, as they were very good and
great men, and as they rejected episcopacy, we may rationally presume it was
not of divine original.

2. Another presumptive argument against episcopacy is this. Almost all the
present churches, except that of England, disclaim it; and even a great part of
the English nation, and those perhaps among the best Christians in it, are
opposed to it. The churches of Holland, Geneva and Scotland, the protestants in
Germany and France, the dissenters in England, Ireland and America, are all
against it. Now if we compare the protestant episcopalians and presbyterians
together, (I mean those referred to above) we shall find that the latter
greatly exceed in number; and if we consider that there have been amongst the
latter, men of as great ^^^lities, knowledge, learning and virtue, as amongst
the former, which, I think, cannot well be denied; we may rationally presume
against episcopacy, as the majority of competent judges have voted against it.
This argument will be strengthened if we consider that the Waldenses and
Albigenses, those strenuous asserters of, and martyrs for the truth, disavowed
episcopacy; whilst the church of Rome at once overrun with error and vice,
were the zealous patrons of it. Surely if the secret of the Lord is with them
that rear him, as the royal psalmist teaches; and if an exact conformity to the
precepts of the church is the best method to obtain the knowledge of his
doctrines, as our blessed Savior declares, and if we compare the character of
the Waldenses and Albigenses, with that of their adversaries, we may rationally
presume that episcopacy is not of divine original.

3. Another presumptive reason against diocesan episcopacy, is this. Although
it is the form of church government in England, and although all the honors,
riches and conveniences of the present life, are on its side, yet there has
been, and still is, a vast body of Christian ministers and Christian people,
many of them the brightest lights in the nation, who could not in conscience
consent to it. How many poor presbyterian ministers are there not in the land,
whose sallaries are so small that their families are in a starving condition,
and who have it in their power to mend their circumstances greatly by entering
into the service of the church of England, and yet they choose rather to
grapple with all the perplexities and disadvantages of indigence than to do it.
Now if we consider what a powerful motive an increased salary is to a man in
want, and who sees his dear wife and children thereby exposed to innumerable
dangers, difficulties and disasters, we cannot avoid concluding, that nothing
but the force of conscience, and a secret conviction that episcopacy is wrong,
could prevent such persons, many of them confessedly men of good sense, and
earnestly desirous to promote the welfare of their families, from subscribing
to it:

4. Another presumptive argument against episcopacy, is this, that it seems not
so consistent with the genius of the gospel, and the humility it so strongly
inculcates, as the schem of an equality amongst ministers. As the son of man
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, so it ought to be with his
ambassadors; they should not desire to lord it over their brethren, but as the
Apostle says to the Romans, they should in honor prefer one another. As Christ
their great lord and master washed the feet of his disciples, so they should
wash one another's feet, and cheerfully submit to the lowest offices of mutual
kindness. But is not the episcopal office incompatible with the exercise of
these duties? Our blessed Lord reproved the sons of Zebedee for aspiring to a
superiority over their brethren; and the beloved apostle complained of
Diotrephes, who loved the pre-eminence. How then could either have instituted
episcopacy which countenances such a superiority and pre-eminence? It was a
remarkable saying of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he frequently repeated, every
one that exalts himself shall be abased, but he that humbles himself shall
be exalted. His continual advice to his followers was, learn of me, for I am
meek and lowly in heart. He told his apostles, that those who were desirous of
being the greatest in his kingdom, should become the least, and servants of
all. Now I leave it to any candid judge to determine, what form of church
government is most agreeable to these maxims, and the genius of the gospel, the
episcopal or the presbyterian? Surely there is something in them that does not
well harmonize with the former, but is very consistent with the latter. What
language sounds most avangelical, such as an inferior clergyman would use to a
bishop, or such as a presbyterian would use to a presbyter? Surely the latter.
Nay I am apt to think, that the names and titles ascribed to bishops are highly
displeasing to God, and disagreeable in the ears of every pious prelate. The
archbishop of Canterbury is styled, his grace, the archbishop of Canterbury,
metropolitan, primate of all England. The bishop of London, is called the right
reverend father in God, the lord bishop of London, etc. How contrary is the
giving and assuming such sounding and lofty titles to the genius of the gospel,
nay to the positive declarations of Jesus Christ? It was an express commandment
of this great head of the church, call no man master, for one is your master
who is in Heaven; call no man father, for one is your father even God. It is
not impious for a man to assume the name of lord, when his great matter was
distinguished by that title?

5. A farther presumptive argument against episcopacy, is this. It is more apt
to swell proud ambition, and promote its dangerous and horrid effects, than
presbytery; moderate revenues and common privileges will never engage haughty
aspiring minds in the gospel ministry, but a swelling title and a large revenue
will; and episcopacy naturally verges to high titles and great salaries. Thus
the hierachy has made men aim at holy orders for the sake of honor and riches,
who never would have done it for the glory of God and the good of souls. But
how is this consistent with going forth unto Christ without the camp, bearing
his reproach? How is it compatible with denying ourselves, taking up our cross
and following our great master? How is it learning to endure hardness like good
soldiers of Jesus Christ? The hierachy has been the cause of very great luxury
and prodigality in the church of Rome, and in some protestant churches; to wit,
superb palaces, large reveaues, grand and magnificent cathedrals, and much
external pomp and splendor; nay, I dare affirm, that if there had not been a
distinction of orders among the clergy, and if one order had not been greatly
exalted above another, there never would have been such spiritual tyranny in
the church of Christ, and such persecution and oppression, as the annals of
past ages, and our own experience acquaint us with: There probably never would
have been popes, patriarchs, cardinals, and such like domineering
ecclesiastics, if there never had been diocesan bishops. Therefore from these,
and many other bad effects which have flowed from episcopacy, and to which
presbyterian government would have been an antidote, we may justly conclude,
that the former is inconsistent with the purity and prosperity of the church of
Christ, with which the other is entirely consistent.

6. Another presumptive argument against diocesan episcopacy, and in favor of
presbyterian church government is, that the latter (all things considered) is
more likely to promote the welfare of the church of Christ than the former. One
man is more likely to be imposed upon, to mistake and to act wrong in
ecclesiastical affairs than a great number. Those very reasons which rendered
it expedient in the apostles time, that they should be consulted about the
ordination of ministers, on account of their supernatural abilities to
distinguish the qualifications of the candidate; those very reasons, now
extraordinary gifts have ceased, render it proper that a presbytery should have
the power of ordination, and not a bishop; for supposing them all men of equal
goodness and abilities, surely the decision of the whole body will be more just
and consistent than those of one man, and this is entirely agreeable to the
maxims of the wise king, that in the multitude of counselors there is safety.
One man, though never so honest, may sooner be deceived than a great many, and
thus be the instrument of introducing a wicked and unworthy candidate in the
ministry. A single man may sooner be bribed or corrupted to lay on hands
suddenly than several. Besides, if a bishop he as wicked a man as a presbyter,
the former will be a much greater detriment to the church than the latter; for
one wicked bishop may do much greater injury to religion than several wicked
presbyters; those of the latter order will be mutual checks upon each other's
ambition and wrong measures, but the former being free from all restraint, is
at liberty to put in practice the wildest schemes. To this we may add, that
under bishops, corruptions in religion may more easily be propagated than under
presbyters. A bishop may scatter his poison through a whole diocese, whilst a
presbyter may be restrained by his brethren in a single congregation.

7. Another presumptive argument against diocesan episcopacy, and in favor of
congregational bishops or presbyters, is this. It is impossible that one man
can so properly govern and superintend a whole diocese as a great many. A
faithful minister finds it hard and difficult enough to take care of the souls
of a single parish, how then could he take care of the souls of many parishes?
and therefore we read in scripture of no other ordinary relation, respecting a
minister of the gospel, than that which subsists between him and a particular
flock committed more especially to his care. As to the apostles, they were
eyewitnesses of Christis resurrection, extraordinary officers endowed with the
power of working miracles, and divinely inspired, and therefore they could have
no successors to their peculiar office; and, till modern bishops can prove
their superiority over their brethren by miracles, and a divine inspiration,
they must excuse us from acknowledging the reasonableness and divine
appointment of such superiority. As to the evangelists, their ministry was not
indeed confined to a single congregation, yet there was nothing peculiar to
their office which could not be performed by a common presbyter. In short, a
careful oversight of the flock of Christ, a particular insp^^^on into their
manners and conduct, the instruction of the rising generation, preaching the
word continually, administering the sacraments, and a due attendance upon his
people in sickness and spiritual distress, is the duty of every settled
minister of the gospel. But how can one bishop perform all this with regard to
a whole diocese? therefore, it is probable, that diocesan bishops were not of
divine institution.

8. Another very strong and presumptive argument against diocesan episcopacy,
is this. That several bishops and learned clergymen of the church of England,
have themselves disavowed the divine institution of it. In the year 1537 or
1538, Thomas Cromwell, vicar general, the two archbishops, eleven bishops, and
many other doctors and civilians, subscribed a declaration, which closes with
these remarkable words. That though the fathers of the church had instituted
other inferior orders and degrees, as Janitors, Lectors, etc. yet the truth is,
that in the New Testament there is no mention made of any degrees or
distinction in orders, but only of deacons or ministers, and of priests or
bishops. Archbishop Whitgift thought no particular form of church government
of divine right. Bishop Morton in his Catholic apology, tells the papists, that
the power of order and jurisdiction which they ascribed to bishops, does de
jure divino belong to all other presbyters, and particularly that to ordain is
their ancient right. Bishop Jewel, in a certain passage does not merely censure
one Harding for condemning the doctrine of the parity of bishops and presbyters
as heretical, but plainly supposes that opinion, to be both agreeable to
scripture and to the doctrine of St. Jerome, St. Austin, and St. Ambrose; and he
cites with approbation, these known and remarkable words of Jerome, 'let bishops
know that they are in authority over priests, more by custom than by order of
God's truth.' In the reign of Henry VIII. we are told by Dr. Stillingfleet, in
his Irinecum, part 2. chap. viii. p. 386. There was a select assembly called by
the king's special order, at Windfor castle, where met these following persons:
Thomas, archbishop of Canterbury, Edward, archbishop of York, the bishop of
Rochester, Edmund, bishop of London, Robert, bishop of Carlisle, Dr. George
Day, Thomas Robertson, Dr. Redmain, Dr. Edward Leighton, Dr. Simon Matthew, Dr.
William Tresham, Dr. Rye Cozen, Dr. Edgworth, Dr. Owen Oglethorp and Dr.
Thyrlby; and among other questions proposed to them, to which they severally
gave in their answers; the tenth question was, whether bishops or priests were
first? And if the priests were first, then the priest made the bishop? To this
question archbishop Cranmer's answer was in these words: The bishops and
priests were at one time, and were not two things, but one office in the
beginning of Christ's religion. And we are told by the same author, that the
bishop of St. Asaph, Thyrlby and Cox, were all of the same opinion with the
archbishop, that at first bishops and priests were the same. Thus, says he,
we see by the testimony chiefly of him who was instrumental in our reformation,
that he owned not opiscopacy as a distinct order from presbytery of divine
right, but only as a prudent constitution of the civil magistrate for the
better governing in the church. I might produce passages to the same purpose,
out of Dr. Reignolds, Dr. Hammond and others, but the limits prescribed by the
printer, would not admit of such an enlargement. I shall conclude this argument
with observing, according to Dr. Stillingfleet, that King James, Dr. Cosins,
Dr. Low, Bishop Bridges, Dr. Su^tcliff and Dr. Crackanthorp, were of opinion,
that no form of church government is by the scriptures prescribed to, or
commanded the church of God. Upon a review of all the above arguments, and a
consideration of their united force; I think every rational, unprejudiced man,
will be ready to conclude, that it is not, upon the whole probable that
diocesan episcopacy was of divine original, or that it was instituted by Christ
or his apostles. And now, having premised these presumptive arguments, I will
boldly defy all the divines and learned men in the world, to produce a single,
positive or probable argument to the contrary from any part of the Bible, the
only religion of protestants (as Mr. Chillingworth justly observes.)

DORDRACENSIS.

A KICK FOR THE WHIPPER. [No, VIII.]
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
-- furor arma ministrat.

VIRGIL.
MY title now first appears inadequate, for the 7th No. of the Whip; the former
part of it, especially, is so singularly malicious, that the writer certainly
deserves something more than a Kick; the reader will therefore excuse, me, if
on this occasion, I act for once a little out of character, in treating
seriously one, who perhaps has it in his power to do mischief, as a person (for
that reason only) of some importance. Barely to laugh at a felon, would be
highly incongruous, and only to ridicule as a simpleton, a man who ought to be
stigmatized as a villain, would be inexcusably criminal.

As Squire T. begs all candid readers 'to reflect, whether such publications as
the Whig's 5th No. have not a direct tendency to raise suspicions and
jealousies in the mother country, against the colonies,' I beg leave to appeal
to the same impartial judges, whether such publications as his 7th No. have not
a still more direct tendency, to increase and confirm such suspicions and
jealousies? If the Whig has been imprudent, is not the Whipper evidently
malevolent? If the Whig has driven a nail, has not Squire T. done all he could
to clench it? If the Whig has inadvertently kindled a fire, has not his
flagellator industriously blown the coals? If the Whig has merited a Whip, does
not the Whipper himself richly deserve a scorpion? Nay, did he not write No. 7.
(I dare appeal to his own conscience) stimulated by the design, and animated by
the hopes, of incensing the government at home, against the non-conformists in
America? If any one doubts, let him but impartially read over the five first
paragraphs, and he must needs be convinced, and give his opinion in my favor.
What but the rage of conscious guilt, and consequent malevolence to its
detectors, could have instigated Squire T. to accuse the saction (as he affects
to call them) of hopes and designs never conceived; -- principles, most
maliciously represented as disloyal and destructive, both to the being and
authority of Kings, but never 'til of late considered as such by any but
Jacobites, since the reign of William the third. -- Endeavors to taint the
minds of the people, and debauch their affections to the mother country,
chargeable, so far as I know, on no American whatsoever; -- an intended
revolution, every real Whig in America, I dare say, trembles as much as the
thoughts of, as the most flaming Tory in the universe, and even as much as the
pious Squire T. did at the Whig's horrid impiety -- and wishing the ruin and
destruction of Great Britain, which I believe Anti-Episcopalians in America as
little please themselves with contemplating, as the American Whig has written
about it, and that is (reader would you imagine it!) not one single syllable?

The character of the American non-conformists as to loyalty, before Dr. Ch --
r's ungenerous but artful insinuations, ever stood unimpeach'd in America, so
far as I know, even in imagination: Dr. Ch -- r whispered some sly but
malicious hints to their prejudice (how far the conventional petitions
whispered I cannot say) but Squire T. bears away the palm of impudence, and
bellows aloud what lesser proficients in defamation dare scarcely mutter; so
that he now is as remarkable for his brazen ^^^nt, as he was before for his
harsh voice, foul mouth and dirty language. Strange! that a writer, who so
severely condemns the Whig, should be so much more guilty himself, and, after
whipping others for their dirtiness, like Smedley in the Dunciad, dive so much
deeper than the rest in the mud! -- Strange did I say? No; per fas et nesas is
his motto, and as he has darling purposes to answer, recte si possis, si non,
quocunque modo remsacias will sufficiently account for his conduct. The faction
indeed are neither ashamed or afraid to profess principles, partly at least
republican (having the happiness of being subjects, not of an absolute but
mixed monarchy) as in so doing they are honored and secured by his Majesty's
example; and there is reason to think, none but such as are of the same
sentiments, are real friends to the establishment in the present reigning
family; let them boast as much as they will, of their attachment to the present
happy constitution. The advocates for passive obedience and non-resistance
(which Whippers and Hang men are accustomed to) are not apt to be fond of a
limited monarchy, as being unfriendly to their own ambitious aims and despotic
principles.

Having with all the virulence of malice, thundered out many bitter invectives
against the Whig, etc. in his five first paragraphs, in the 6th Squire T.
trumpets his own praises most delightfully: I, is the little hero of the tale.
He seems to have determined to make reprisals, and dress himself as decently as
possible, at the expense of the faction; nay, who knows but he hopes to get a
pair of lawn sleeves, made out of the rags of their reputation?

I dare not make any remarks on par. 7th, 8th and 9th, for fear of making the
reader sp --. If he needs a vomit, par. 9th, though a small, is, however, a
sufficient dose.

The little fulsome witticisms (such as 'Britain's coming over and leaving
herself behind,' etc.) with which Squire T's 7th No. are here and there
decorated, are like nauseous sweets added to a bitter draught, having no other
effect but that of rendering the whole completely disgustful.

A.

AS I dare say the author of the American Whig, will never vouchafe to answer
such a writer as the reverend Doctor Hierocles, I beg leave to present him with
the following observations and queries.

1. That he cannot expect to be taken for a peace maker, till he has convinced
the world, that he can write at least six lines without abusing the
Presbyterians, who have given him no provocation for his virulence; nor are
greater enemies to his darling project, than every non-episcopal denomination
among us; it being universally detested and abhorred by them all.

2. That he cannot expect any reasonable man to confide in his declarations,
that he wants no modern, but only primitive, bishops; after admitting that we
were not to be blamed for being alarmed about our religious liberties; that his
bare word is to be deemed sufficient security, in a matter of this importance.

3. What security can be given, by a set of dependants, for for their daily
bread on charitable contributions from England, and great part of them from
people of the same denomination, with those whom they are here daily abusing
and insulting?

4. What reason can he assign, that the controversy, ought to cease before the
security is given; and whether it is not more prudent to distrust the words of
those, who never kept a promise; except when they had threatened to persecute
and destroy the Whigs?

5. Whether he believes in his conscience, what he has solemnly declared in
print, that the author of the American Whig is really a Tory? Let him declare
this in the presence of God if he dare.

6. Whether he has not greater reason to think, that a certain champion, for an
American Episcopate, is a Tory; not only from the rampant high flying
principles in his appeal, but his contemptible drolling on Whiggism, by his ill
timed ridicule of, -- for America has Whigs?

7. Whether any but Whigs are to be found in America, save only among the
convention and the Papists in Maryland?

8. And lastly, Whether all his scurrility, abuse, and falsehood, is a proper
sermon from his text, Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called
the children of God?

TIMOTHY RETORT.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL. July 14 The SENTINEL. [No. XVII.]
DR. Chandler, in the name of his brethren, adduces the wretched condition of
the episcopal church in the colonies, for want of regular government and
discipline without bishops, as an argument for their introduction. He esteems
it a great grievance, and unparrelled hardship, and a disadvantage of greater
consequence than the want of confirmation; although he imagines that by that
rite, the gracious assistances of the holy Spirit are communicated.

Wretched indeed is the condition of that church, which is destitute of regular
discipline: But there is ground to suspect that the episcopal missionaries in
America are no more affected with this consideration, than their brethren on
the other side of the atlantic, who are in the same wretched condition, yet
make no attempts to get the grievance redressed.

The reformation of their church in this article, is not among the happy
consequences, which they can expect from the establishment of bishops in this
country. The argument is only thrown out to work on the ignorant, and to excite
compassion among well minded persons, for their suffering, persecuted church;
which their apologist, Dr. Chandler, artfully represents as 'perishing for want
of necessaries' The missionaries must allow, there is no necessary connection
between the establishment of diocesan bishops in a church, and the
administration of Godly discipline: That there may be discipline in a church,
where there are no prelates: And that there may be bishops in a communion,
destitute even of the shadow of regular discipline. With respect to the first
of these, they see other churches around them without bishops, exercising
discipline over their own members; and they know that the church of England in
the midst of all their uncharitable pretensions to be the only true apostolic
church, the propagators of the true religion, the best reformed church in the
world, the preservers of the true Christian faith, worship, and discipline, is
solemnly confessing to God from year to year, that they are destitute of a
godly discipline, Commination before Lent.
although they are aided by a civil establishment, and supported by the
authority, grandeur and opulence of prelates and other dignitaries.

That this is truly the situation of the church of England, has been often
acknowledged by her most judicious and candid members. They ingenuously
confess, that there is a great prostration of discipline in their church: That
it is ruined among them: -- That the distemper of the times is evidently too
hard for it: -- That the discipline of the church has not been carried to any
degree of perfection; and now lies under a general relaxation: -- That their
people are often indulged in all their unreasonable demands, and disorderly
ways, to prevent their executing their threats of going to the meeting -- That
they have only the form and shadow of discipline, but trust in God, that 'these
dry bones will one day live.' White's Letters to a Dissent. Gent. Lr. 3d, pages
12, 13, 14, 17, 22, 28.
-- And Dr. Chandler himself gives a like mournful account of its discipline.
'Excommunication,' says he, 'the utmost effect of the church's power in this
world, however it was dreaded in the purest ages of Christianity, has lost much
of its force in this, wherein altars are set up against altars, and churches
against churches, and those who are rejected by one may be received by another.
A disposition to slight the highest punishment which the church can inflict has
become general, and there appears no remedy, but in the use of reason and
persuasion. But we live in an age in which reason will not be heard, nor the
strength of arguments regarded, although supported by the declarations of
Heaven, on the subject of church discipline.' Appeal, 31.
The Doctor and his brethren know that the test has broken down all the
enclosures of the church of England, and has laid open her most holy things to
the most abandoned and profane. Rakes, debauchees, blasphemers of God, infidels
and scoffers at all religion, are often seen on their knees at her communion
tables, eating her children's bread to qualify them for a post: And dare the
clergy refuse them? No; they dare not refuse the most impious blasphemer the
three kingdoms afford, when he comes to demand the Lord's Supper, as a
qualification for a post in the fleet or army.

It is also notorious that the English bishop himself is excluded from having
any power even in his own court; where a chancellor, generally a layman, sits
supreme and uncontrouled by the bishop, and finally determines who shall be
excommunicated from, or received into Christian fellowship. If there be any
thing, says a great prelate of the church of England, in the office of a bishop
to be challenged peculiar to themselves, certainly it should be this; yet it is
in a manner quite relinquished to their chancellors, Laymen, who have no more
capacity to sentence or absolve a sinner, than to dissolve the Heavens or the
Earth. And this pretended power is sometimes purchased with money. Their money
perish with them! good God! What an horrid abuse is this of the divine
authority. But this notorious trangression is excused, as they think, because a
minister call the bishop's Surrogate, but is indeed the Chancellor's servant,
chosen, called and placed there by him, to be his crier in the court, no
better, when he has heard, examined and sentenced the cause, then this minister
forsooth pronounces the sentence. Just as if the rector of a parish should
exclude any of his congregation, and lock him out of his church, then comes the
clerk, shows and jingles the keys that all may take notice he is excluded.
Crosts, Bishop of Hereford, naked truth, p. 82.
It is also well known, that in these courts, the most scandalous sinner is
suffered to commute, to have pardon for money; nay, when he is going to be
delivered over to Satan, or when he is actually delivered over, and the Devil
has him in keeping, an handsome sum of money will restore him again to the
soft, indulgent bosom of the church. --

-- -- At vos
Discite Pontifices, in sacris, quid facit aurum.
Per. sat. 2. Such is the melancholy situation of the church of England with
respect to her discipline, even in full possession of an establishment by law,
and supported by all the splendour and influence of lordly prelates and
dignified priests. Yet it is said the episcopal church in the colonies suffers
unparallelled hardships, for want of regular discipline, because she is
destitute of bishops. But can the missionaries seriously believe this grievance
would be removed by the introduction of bishops? No such matter. They declare,
by Dr. Chandler, that no reformation in this respect will be attempted: that
the discipline of the church, as far as it relates to the private members, will
be left it is, under the proposed episcopate. Appeal, 26, 31, 95.
Discipline was not the thing they had in view, when they petitioned for
bishops to be set over them. They are merely to unite, govern, support and
defend the clergy. More solicitous for the honor of an useless ecclesiastical
superior to cut a figure at their head, than to edify their people by restoring
the primitive discipline of the church; they propose a mutilated prelate, such
as never yet appeared in the churches of Christ. It would seem that when these
gentlemen took a trip to England in their youth for orders, they were
captivated with the magnificence of the episcopal palaces, the glare of the
bishop's equipage, and the splendour of their retinues, and have never been able
to get over this youthful prejudice: But are always dreaming of lawn sleeves,
the square cup and mi^re; and lusting after the leeks and onions of Egypt, even
in this land of freedom and liberty.

Why then are these pitiful lamentations made over the want of discipline in
the episcopal church in America, and considerations drawn from it to induce
their superiors at home to send over bishops, to rescue their sinking church
from inevitable perdition. Let us see how prettily the argument will conclude,
when reduced to a logical form. The church in America, without resident
bishops, is necessarily destitute of a regular discipline and government: 'But
the discipline of the church, as far as it relates to private members will be
left as it is, and no attempts of this nature will be made under the proposed
American episcopate.' Therefore an American episcopate is necessary for the
restoration of primitive discipline of the church. One not so well acquainted
with the rules of logic, as Dr. C. is, would have been apt to suspect that the
conclusion should have been, that it was by no means necessary for the regular
government of the church, as it would contribute nothing to the redress of this
'intolerable and unprecedented hardship.' Yet notwithstanding the obstinacy of
the premises, the doctor it seems was not willing to lose the wished for
conclusion, nor the opportunity of displaying his talents in painting his
church in such doleful colors. In making such bitter lamentations over her
want of discipline, he seems to have consulted poorly for her reputation, and
as wretchedly for the credit of her clergy, in avowing to the world, that no
amendment is proposed in point of discipline, except as to the clergy, the
laity being professedly left out of the plan. Appeal, 97.
This being the case, it is expected that Dr. Chandler, or the next apologist
for his church, will soften these mournful complaints, and for their own sakes
prepare a more favorable account of the state of discipline in their
congregations, and of the disposition of the clergy to reform it: Otherwise the
world will scarce believe their church to be the best reformed church in the
world; the purest church under Heaven; the bulwark of the reformation; the pure
apostolic church; and the church, by way of eminence and exclusion, as if there
was no other in the Christian world.

By this time, it must appear pretty plain, that the argument taken from the
prostration of discipline in the episcopal churches in America, is merely a
delusive piece of declamation, no ways connected with the scheme of an American
episcopate. Nay, bishops would rather tie up the hands of the clergy, and
prevent any thing being done of this sort, if we may judge from what passes in
England. Had it not been for civil establishments, what could have prevented
the reformation of many abuses in the church of England, which every good
member sees with regret? Dr. Chandler, imputes it to the want of good sense and
candor enough in the body of the nation. Appeal, 96.
But in this enlightened age, especially as the things which call for amendment
have been held up to public view, for more than a century past, by some of the
greatest men of the established church, as well as others, in a very striking
point of light; this cannot be the case. The root of the evil lies deeper, and
must be sought for in the civil establishment; by which even the most distant
hopes of reformation in any thing material, are cut off. establishments in
religion may make hypocrites and occasional conformists, when their seculiar
interests lead them that way; but never do great service to true Christianity.
This needs not the chains of earthly grandeur, nor the force of civil power to
spread and establish it. High dignities and preferments; mitres and thrones;
lordships and princely revenues have ever been injurious to its interests; and
instead of improving, have dreadfully corrupted, and depraved the religion of
Jesus, and robbed it of its native glory and strength. Ecclesiastical history
in all ages lamentably bears witness to the justness of these remarks; yet the
want of these things is now made an excuse for suffering discipline in the
episcopal church to remain relaxed and prostrate.

What can the episcopal ministers in the colonies have to say in excuse for
themselves, if they criminally neglect restoring primitive discipline? Dr. C.
confesses that presbyters may have a subordinate power to govern the church,
and enjoy a right to exclude from the Sacraments all publicly vicious members.
In this country they are un-restrained by the difficulties which embarrass the
conscientious parish ministers in England, their enclosures are not laid open
by a political test; and they enjoy every power which other churches in the
colonies have. Why then should they despair of accomplishing what is daily done
by others? They profess to wish for it; why do they not attempt it by reason
and persuasion, the only rational way in which it can be brought about? no
discipline was more severe than that of the primitive church; yet it was all
voluntary, and received no countenance from civil power.

But in truth, these people are, themselves, little affected with the pathetic
complaints, they make for want of a regular discipline. These are thrown out
merely to excite the public pity, and to skroen themselves from the charge of
supine negligence, in not attempting to restore it; under an idle pretense that
they want bishops to effect it for them. Yet at the same time they are so weak
and inconsistent, as to declare that no attempts to restore discipline, will be
made under the proposed episcopate.

[Here No. XV. of the Whip for America Whig, being in Dutch is omitted.]

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE. July 18.
The AMERICAN WHIG. [Numb. XIX.]
HITHERTO I have advanced only presumptive arguments, I shall now produce
positive proofs from the New Testament against diocesan episcopacy, or the
doctrine of the superiority of bishops to presbyters, with regard to
ordination, confirmation and ecclesiastical government. If there had been one
instance in the sacred scripture of a minister of the gospel, ordained to his
office, by the imposition of a bishop; how greatly would the episcopalians have
triumphed in such a case? I think therefore, as there is an instance of a
proper ordination to the ministerial office, recorded in the New Testament,
which is said to have been done by the laying on of the hands of the
presbytery, the point ought to be given up; and it ought to be heartily
acknowledged that diocesan episcopacy is not of divine original; and that
notwithstanding such a glaring evidence, which ought to put an end to the
dispute, any learned and sensible man should persist in the contrary sentiment,
is as strong and as melancholy a proof of the force of prejudice, and the
unwillingness of mankind, to give up old opinions, as can well be imagined.

Timothy was ordained by the laying on of the hands of the presbytery. This is
evident from St. Paul's first epistle to him. See the 4th chapter 14 verse.
Neglect not the gift which is in thee, which was given thee by prophesy, with
the laying on of the hands of the presbytery. As this text is so strongly in
favor of presbyterian, and so contrary to episcopal ordination, the patrons of
the latter have exercised their utmost ability to evade the argument that
arises from it. I will mention, and reply to all the evasions that have been
invented by ingenious men to obscure and invalidate our argument from this
passage of sacred writ; and I doubt not but I shall make it sufficiently
appear, that this text, notwithstanding all that has been said to the contrary,
is a full demonstra^^^ (...) the validity of presbyterian ordination, a
demonstration infinitely better deserving the name, than that of Chilling
worth, c^^ed and ret^iled by Dr. Chandler. The text runs thus in the Greek
language in which it was originally written. Me amelei ton en soi chari^matos o
edothe soi dia prophetias meta epitheseos ton cheiron ton presbyteriou.

The first evasion I shall mention, is this; the episcopalians pretend that the
word gift ought to be connected with the words, of the presbytery, and then
they would read the verse thus, neglect not the gift of presbytery, etc. It is
justly objected to this arrangement of the words, that it is evidently contrary
to the rules of Grammar, as may be seen by looking on the arrangement of the
original words. Besides the original word presbyterian, here rendered
presbytery, occurs but in two more passages in the New Testament; namely, Luke
xxii. 66. and Acts v. 22. and in both these passages it signifies an assembly
of elders, and not the ministerial office. I shall take no farther notice of
this evasion, as it must be evident to any person acquainted with the Greek
language, that there is not the least foundation for it.

2. Another evasion of the episcopalians, is this; they say, by the presbytery
we must understand the apostles. If this should be admitted, it would not prove
that the right of ordination belongs to a diocesan bishop, because if an
apostle has this right, it is no proof that a bishop, not endowed with
extraordinary abilities, and miraculous endowments, is possessed of it, much
less can it be argued that a single bishop may ordain because a number of
apostles did. If all the apostle, joined together in ordaining Timothy, their
example would be more conformable to the presbyterian method of ordination than
the episcopal. However, I absolutely deny that presbytery means the college of
apostles. I think it would not be much more absurd to suppose, that the
apostles were the sanhedrim, than to suppose them the presbytery here spoken
of; the apostles are no where called in the New Testament the presbytery. They
are styled the Eleven, the Twelve, the Apostles, etc. as may be seen in many
passages. Compare John xxi. 1. and xx. 18. with acts i. 2.15. and acts vi. 2,
26. In the two last passages we read, that the apostles chose by lot a
successor in the room of Judas, and of their laying their hands on the seven
deacons; and undoubtedly if they had laid their hands on Timothy at his
ordination. Paul would have mentioned it, and said, with the laying on of the
hands of the apostles, and not the laying on of the hands of the presbytery.

3. Another evasion, is this; that though the presbytery laid hands upon
Timothy at his ordination, yet what constituted the walidity of it, was the
laying on of Paul's hands: This is Dr. Chandler's plea. To this it is answered,
that the text speaks of the laying on of the hands of the presbytery, and not
the laying on of Paul's hands. If Paul had laid his hands on Timothy, at his
ordination here referred to, it is probable he would have said, with the laying
on of my hands and the hands of the presbytery; but as there is no mention made
of the imposition of Paul's hands in this text, it is certain it cannot be
inserred from it. However, if Paul should have joined with the presbytery in
setting Timothy apart to the ministry, and this passage should be allowed to
refer to that matter, it would only follow, that he acted in this affair so far
as is related simply to the ordination, as a fellow presbyter, and not as an
apostle.

4. Another, and the most material evasion, is this; That the gift here
referred to, is not the office of the ministry, but the gift of the Holy Ghost.
This is urged by bishop Hoadly, who alleges, that it is very strange that the
office of the ministry should be called a gift. But how surprisingly weak and
mean is such a subterfuge in so great a master of reasoning, and a man of such
candor as this eminent bishop undoubtedly was? It proves that this text hangs
like a heavy millstone about the neck of episcopal ordination, since such
absurd methods are used to get rid of it; and if such a champion as bishop
Hoadly could not remove it, we may presume that no other patron of episcopacy
ever will. We no where read in scripture that the Holy Ghost was confered by
the imposition of the hands of the presbytery; I mean, a company of ordinary
presbyters; and no one would have dreamt of such a thing, if it had not been to
serve the ends of a proud and lucrative hierachy: Besides, there was no need
for the presbytery to lay hands on Timothy to confer the Holy Ghost, the
apostle could do it alone; nay, asserts he had done it. 2 Timothy i. 6. In as
much then, as the presbytery laid their hands on Timothy, and as they did not
do it to confer the Holy Ghost, which Paul could do; nay, declares he had done,
we shall make bold to conclude it was to ordain him to the ministry, except our
opponents are capable of assigning a better reason for this ceremony.

To affirm that St. Paul laid his haads on Timothy on the occasion referred to
in the text, is to build without a foundation; the apostle declaring no such
thing in this passage, and it being utterly impossible that this passage, and 2
Timothy i. 6. relate to the same thing, for the following reasons; If they did,
the manner of expression in both, would not be so different as it is. Moreover
the context in the 1 Timothy iv. 14. suits best with the opinion of Timothy's
ordination to the ministerial office, as any one will be sensible of, if he
reads it with impartiallity. Besides, if b^^^ ^^^e above mentioned passages
relate to the same thing, (...) apostle is guilty of tautology, which is
unlikely. Further it is reasonable to think, that so great a master of address
as the Apostle Paul, in an epistle to a young minister, wherein he expressly
exhorts him to a faithful discharge of the ministerial office, would enforce
his exhortation by reminding that minister of the solemn occasion, when he was
set apart for that office, and entered into the strictest engagements duly to
perform it; but if it is not done here, it is done no where else in the
epistles. At least if Paul speaks twice of a gift given to Timothy, it is very
reasonable to suppose, that in one case he refers to the ministerial office;
and since it is acknowledged on all hands, that the presbytery laid hands on
candidates to ordain them to the ministry, and the apostles after laid their
hands on persons to confer the Holy Ghost; and since there is not one plain
instance in scripture of common presbyters conjointly conferring the Holy Ghost
by the imposition of hands, or any other way, it undeniably follows, that
Timothy was ordained by the presbytery.

I am surprised, that a man of bishop Hoadly's learning should pretend, that
the apostle did not design the ministerial office in the above passages,
because he calls it a gift. Did he not know that offices were gifts, that the
Greek word charisma, munus, signifies an office; Did he not recollect scripture
instances where the ministerial office is represented as a gift? Did he not
remember Ephesians. iv. 11. where the apostle tells us, that Christ gave some
apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some pastors and
teachers? Did he not remember Romans xii. 6, 7, 8. Having then gifts charismata,
offices differing according to the grace that is is given to us, whether
prophecy, let us prophecy, according to the proportion of says; or ministry,
let us wait on our ministry, etc. did he not know? Did he not recollect these
particulars? Undoubtedly he did. But what could he do? He had undertaken the
defense of episcopal ordination, and this text was directly contrary to it. He
was therefore obliged to wrest the scriptures. In short, his glosses on this
text to evade the evidence arising from it in favor of presbyterian
ordination, have convinced me more fully, that it is a decisive argument, with
regard to the point in debate. Before I conclude my observations on this text,
I shall take notice of another objection, which bishop Hoadly urges against the
use we make of it; he says, if this text proves any thing in favor of such a
right. i. e. the right of presbyters to ordain. It equally proves that
presbyters had a right to set apart, not only presbyters to their office, but
even evangelists, or church officers as Timothy was, to their office, which is
absurd, But it is no absurdity for a number of inferiors to set apart others to
a superior office: It is what is done continually, and church history furnishes
us with instances of this nature, directly to the purpose; which the bishop was
well acquainted with: But to say, that an evangelist, or that Timothy, was an
officer superior to a presbyter, is begging the question. Every evangelist is a
presbyter, and every presbyter is an evangelist; and if evangelists are
itinerant ministers, ordained to preach the gospel among heathens and infidels,
this is nothing but what presbyters may do, or have done; and if the being an
evangelist in this sense, would prove a man to be superior to a presbyter, it
will prove also, that a presbyter is superior to a bishop, as presbyters have
been employed in that business, when bishops have thought it beneath their
episcopal dignity.

It is asserted by bishop Hoadly, that Timothy was bishop of Ephesus, and Titus
bishop of Crete. But this I deny, and let those who assert it, prove that they
were; I mean diocesan bishops. That Timothy was bishop of Ephesus, and titus of
Crete, because the apostle directs the former to lay hands suddenly on no man;
and the latter, that he left him in Crete to set in order the things that were
wanting, and to ordain elders in every place, is a very weak argument; seeing
that parrallel directions and informations have frequently been given by
presbyters to presbyters. The apostle's direction to Timothy, to lay hands
suddenly on no man, no more proves his exclusive right to ordain, than the
Apostle's direction to the same Timothy, to drink a little wine, proves that
his reverend brethren the presbyters, were not entitled to the same privilege;
and yet upon so frivolous and weak a deduction, which by no means necessarily
follows from the premises, is the mighty structure of diocesan episcopacy
founded, so far as it relates to scripture testimony. If Timothy had been
bishop of Ephesus, it is probable that Paul would have mentioned him under that
character in the inscription at the beginning of the epistle to the Ephesians,
or in the salutations at the end of it; but not a word of Timothy in either.

If Timothy had been bishop of Ephesus, it is probable that Paul would have
recognized him as such, in the address he made to the Ephesian elders at
Miletus, and especially as he was taking his last leave of them; yet he
mentions not a word of Timothy; nay, instead of enjoining these elders to yield
obedience to Timothy, or any one else as their bishop, he says unto them, take
heed to yourselves, and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made
you overseers, i. e. in Greek episcopous, in English, bishops. Thus then these
elders were styled bishops by the Apostle, and therefore this passage, as also
Phil. i. 1. Tit. i. 5, 7.1. Pet. v. 1, 2. prove that the names, bishop and
elder, were indiscriminately given to the same officers, and all the world may
be challenged to give any positive proof from scripture, that bishops were an
order distinct from, and superior to, presbyters.

It does not appear from any of the epistles written to any of the churches,
that they had diocesan bishops; the Apostle in the inscription of those
epistles, makes not the least mention of them, which is a strong argument that
there were none.

The epistle to the Philippians is inscribed to all the saints at philippi,
with the bishops and deacons. Observe reader, the word is bishops, that is
congregational ones, and not bishop, that is a diocesan one; surely this text
favors not the episcopal dignity; for no man of sense will pretend that there
were more than one diocesan bishop in a city. 'As the Apostle therefore speaks
of bishops at Philippi in the plural number, it is evident he means presbyters
by that word, that the church there was governed by fellow presbyters.

Paul in his Epistle to the Thessalonians exhorts them to know them which
labored amongst them, which were over them in the Lord; and admonished them,
to esteem them very highly in love for their work's sake; here again he speaks
of the prophets, but not one word of the bishop.

Although the church of Christ was so highly celebrated, yet the Apostle no
where intimates that it had a diocesan bishop, When Paul wrote his Epistle to
the Corinthians, he particularly designed to heal the unhappy divisions that
had risen amongst them; if there had been a bishop at Corinth at that time, the
Apostle would undoubtedly have referred the corinthians to him, as a peace
maker and healer of breaches; but as he has not done it, we may conclude that
the Corinthians had no bishop.

In the Epistle to the Romans there is not any mention made of a diocesan
bishop. The Papists pretend that Peter was bishop of Rome, but perhaps there is
as little reason to suppose that Peter was bishop of Rome, as that Timothy was
bishop of Ephesus, or Titus bishop of Crete.

The Apostle to the Hebrews exhorts them, to remember those who had the rule
over them, who had spoken unto them the word of God; here again the Apostle
speaks in the plural number, thereby intimating that these Hebrews were under
the government of elders or presbyters, and not a diocesan bishop.

The Apostle Peter, writing to the elders, 1, Pet. i, 5. says, the elders which
are among you I exhort, who am also an elder, in Greek sunpresbeteros; seed the
flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight of them; in Greek
episcopountes i. e. exercising the office of bishops over them. By this passage
we not only see that bishops and presbyters were the same thing, but that the
Apostle Peter himself looked upon the presbyters as his fellows.

John the beloved apostle, 3 Ephesians 1 verse, styles himself an elder; and
instead of aspiring at a superiority over his brethren, for which he had once
been blamed by his master, he complains of Diotrephes, who loved the
pre-eminence. The short limits of a News Paper will not permit me to enlarge
upon the several arguments I have mentioned; I shall therefore conclude for the
present with a few observations.

The word of God in defining the essential marks of a minister of Christ,
confines itself entirely to one order of the clergy, without speaking a
syllable of any other; surely if there had been any such person as a diocesan
bishop established, or to be established in the Christian church, he would have
been described in the New Testament; and especially in the epistle to Timothy
and Titus, wherein St. Paul treats professedly on the qualifications of
ecclesiastical officers. If there had been different orders of gospel
preachers, he would, probably, have taken notice of them in those epistles; and
showed what different gifts and abilities were severally requisite, to fit them
for their respective offices. But we read only of one order of the clergy in
the apostle's writings; which make no mention of bishops, as distinct from
elders.

St. Paul no where informs us, what character a diocesan bishop should have. He
tells you what an elder, who does not labor in the word, should be: He tells
you what a deacon, who serves tables and takes care of the poor, should be, and
what a preaching elder should be; but takes no notice of a diocesan bishop.
Surely if any such person had existed in, or been intended for, the church of
Christ, and if he had been of so much importance to its administration, as Dr.
Chandler pretends, the apostle would have mentioned him; and especially when he
had so good an opportunity of doing it in the epistles to Timothy and Titus. Is
it not strange that in these epistles, Paul should describe the necessary
qualifications of the lowest officer, in the church of Christ, and not mention
the highest?

I intend to take a more particular notice of Dr. Chandler's appeal, in some
future papers, in which (I doubt not) I shall fully answer Chillingworth's
demonstration of episcopacy; and abundantly prove the futility and nonsense of
an uninterrupted succession. I think what I have said already is sufficient to
convince the impartial reader, that diocesan episcopacy, and ordination by a
bishop, are not of divine institution.

DOR^RACEN^IS.

A KICK FOR THE WHIPPER. [No. IX.]
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
Omn^ tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci.

HORACE.
HAVING in my last gently cudgelled the Whipper for the impudent malice of his
7th, I shall now proceed to animadvert upon the miscellaneous scribble scrabble
of his 8th No. for the future, however, reserving to myself the discretionary
power of treating him as a fool or a knave, and using my heel or my cane as I
think proper.

As Squire T. (par. 1st) assures us, it is a very easy matter for a writer to
make, and implicity acknowledges the Whig has made a specious appearance in a
periodical paper; it should seem strange he himself has not succeeded, who so
evidently 'aims at carrying his point by clamor, and raising an odium against
-- (I must not say his antagonists, for he has none; I Sir Isaac Foot having,
as yet, the honor to be no more than an epagonist -- but) the non-episcopal
faction, which he is feebly endeavoring to lash in the person of the Whig. If
a blustering writer, under all the advantages he could wish, egregiously fails
in a very easy matter, what must the world think of him?

The Whig's malice, it seems, renders him inconsistent. As how? Why, in finding
fault with Dr. Chandler, for falling into opposite extremes. Pray, Mr. Whipper,
is it impossible for a D. D. to speak sometimes too plain, and sometimes not
plain enough? -- one while to reason, so that the unavoidable consequence is
the invalidity of non episcopal ordination, and afterward for certain reasons,
to soften invalid down into at least irregular and defective? -- Has not Dr. Ch
-- r (as well as Squire T.) often inadvertently expressed even
self-contradictory sentiments, and who pray, is most justly chargeable with
inconsistencies, He who writes them, or he who, when written, holds them forth
to public view? -- public view! ay, there is the malice of it. So unguarded, and
yet so averse to detection, is guilty artifice!

Squire T. it seems, cannot find Dr. Ch -- r guilty of (what is visible to half
an eye) an universal denial of the validity of non-episcopal ordination. Any
one, at least who attentively reads sect. 1. par. 3d. of the Appeal, is (I
affirm) as blind as a bee^le, if he don't find Dr. Ch -- r representing all the
angels in Heaven, as well as all the men on earth, without an uninterrupted
succession of bishops, as insignificant to the validity of ordination, as Dr.
Tickle himself -- poh! I mean, Squire Tickle -- (par. 8th) makes all the
presbyters on the continent, to the fabrication of 'a single Christian priest.'
And if the evident real sentiments of both are just, the Lord have mercy on all
non-episcopal churches, and that of Holland among the rest! Squire T. indeed,
even while (conscience bound no doubt) he admits 'the church of Holland is not
so exactly episcopal, as that of England,' would fain be understood to admit
also the validity of Dutch ordinations; but alas (such dirty artifices are used
in ecclesiastical politics!) all this and much more (par. 3d and 4th) is but
time-serving complaisance, designed to secure the neutrality or engage the
interest of the Dutch churches, while consecrated fetters are preparing for
them, as well as English schimatical congregations.' But is Squire T. indeed,
stupid enough to hope to make dupes of the Dutch churches, who very well know
the church of Holland, as to constitution, differs more from the church of
England, than this last from the church of Rome, and that it is in every
respect non-episcopal, as much as if it were strictly and properly
Presbyterian? If so, fie upon thee Squire T!

Par. 5th is of the same complexion with the greatest part of No. VII.
containing a most villainous accusation of the faction as having long aimed to
seize the revenues of the Dutch church in New York, which I never dreamt,
heard, or read of, till the 23d of May last, and perhaps no mortal else, but
Squire T. and I heartily believe, that if this virulent charge did not
originate in his own head or heart, it was suggested by one of God's creatures
of superior abilities, but of a still more perverse disposition. In this par,
he again mixes bitter and sweet calumny, and what he doubtless supposes to be
wit; but who, besides Squire T. ever thought of 'incoporating a thing called a
meeting house by charter, any more than of 'anihilating existence by divisions?
though every one knows iron, wood, stone, etc. may be easily incorporated into a
pompous consecrated idolized thing, called a church, which, in spite of its
steeple, the faction is wicked enough to believe has, when the assembly is
absent, no more inherent sanctity than the most humble profane despicable
structure on the face of the globe.

Par. 6th 7th and 8th, Squire T. boggles miserably at the Whigs question (No.
V. par. 6th and 7th) one leg, though broken against the stumbling block, he has
indeed brought over, but the other he has been obliged to leave behind; so that
there he stands yet, like a witch bestriding the threshold of an enchanted
door. To put a good face on the matter, he makes a flourish indeed about
Monsieur Houdin; but not a syllable drops from his pen concerning Mr. Monroe.
Why this difference as to mentioning, as well as ordaining, these two
gentlemen, Squire T.? alas! it is subterfuge all, every one sees it; and yet
I Will make you the best excuse I can -- 'Twas of Dr. Chandler, and not Dr.
Tickle, the Whig challenged a categorical reply to his question; however I
cannot help saying, that, when the latter was pleased to appear as a catechumen,
if he thought it prudent to be silent about Mr Monroe, it had been much more so
to have said nothing at all about Mons. Houdin.

Par. 9th. he labors hard to be at a loss about the sense of the word match,
and at last removes his self caused perplexity, by a most sulphureously
humourous solution; and in par. 10th brings a scrap of Hudibrass to knock down
the Whig, who had been so unlucky as to expose himself to the blow. However
violent a Tory the author might be, the most rigid Whigs acknowledge the merits
of Hudibrass as a piece of humor; but wit is not argument, and, by the way,
Tickle is not Butler.

Par. 11th Squire T. finds fault with the Whig, for taking for granted, 'that
it is impossible, as the law now stands, to introduce a bishop into America,
who will not have authority, the instant he arrives, to set up an
ecclesiastical court. The force of this kind of reasoning (which, by the way,
is no reasoning at all) is not, it seems, evident; but I fancy this kind of
proposition, will, 'ere long, be sufficiently evident to many beside those
Squire T. himself rages, foams, swells, blusters, threatens, and prophesies, to
convince, frighten, or discourage. It is really not more diverting, to hear a W
-- give lectures on female virtue, than to read what this hussar in
controversy, this bush-fighter, has so gravely written, about sober argument,
and candid reasoning. For my part, I make no high pretenses to either of the
two (if two they are) and yet I flatter myself, there is at least as much real
argument, coach'd in my hints a posteriori, as in Squire T's round about
flagellations. Reader consider me not as guilty of vanity, for while you
justify my sentiments, in this respect (as I Am sure you must, if before
judgment you will but compare Whig, Whip, and Kick together) you are heartily
welcome to think as meanly of me as you please. E.

Sir Isaac Foot presents his compliments to Timothy Tickle, Esquire and thanks him
for his advertisement; but begs leave to assure him, that, at the time of its
publication, it was generally known, that there had been a convention of
officious missionaries in this city, at which (whatever the design of their
meeting might have been) the sacred text, For yet a little while, and he that
shall come, will come, and will not tarry, was by a most decent Christian
perversion, applied to the arrival of a profane, i. e. a political creature,
the work of men's hands, commonly called a BISHOP.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL. July 21. The SENTINEL. [No. XVIII.]
WHEN designing men have any schemes to execute, which may be prejudicial to
the rights and privileges of others, reasons, different from those which really
influence them, are contrived and thrown out to amuse the populace, and to
divert their attention from the consequences, that may follow from the
execution of their schemes. This seems to be the policy of the episcopal
missionaries, in their attempts to introduce bishops into the American colonies.

In our last Sentinel, we considered their idle pretense of the want of
discipline, as it is urged by Dr. C. as an argument in favor of the proposed
episcopate, We will now consider another artifice to gild the disagreeable pill
that it may be swallowed without suspicion, namely, that these new bishops are
to have no power over the laity.

It is well known, there are among the laity, many moderate members of the
episcopal communion, who detest spiritual domination, as much as others, and
who are as tenacious of their civil and religious liberties, as the members of
any other church, and therefore likely to be alarmed at this dangerous
innovation. Lest these should proceed on the supposition, that to prevent the
yoke from being fixed upon them, it was the safest way to oppose the scheme, of
introducing these new masters into the colonies, they are first deprived of
their natural right of being consulted on the important article, and then they
are amused with the false and inconsistent hopes of being entirely exempted
from the jurisdiction of the American bishops. We call it an in ^onsistent
hope, as it is contradictory not only to the known sentiments of the English
episcopal church, but also to the sentiments of every other Christian church in
the world. This plan of American bishops is a mere novel invention, without any
parallel in history either sacred or profane, since the first establishment of
a church upon earth; and yet no doubt, some zealous clergy will tell us, it is
the pure apostolic plan. It seems strange, indeed, that the clergy of the
church of England, who are, doubtless, Dr. C's superiors at home, who have
settled this plan, (if indeed they ever settled it) should deviate so much from
the model of their own and of every other Christian church, as well as from the
discipline prescribed in the scripture. A church, whose members are exempt from
the government of its officers, is what no age can furnish an example of. The
inconsistency, therefore, of this plan with the known principles of the church
of England, give grounds to suspect that Dr. C. has not given us the plan on
which bishops are to be sent to America, with that openness and candor that
might have been expected.

But this is not the only reason we have to suspect, that there is something
more at the Bottom, than what Dr. C. seems willing to confess. Sundry passages
in the appeal (where Dr. C. was off his Guard and therefore expressed the true
sentiments of his heart) seem to convince us, that the laity must yield
obedience to the new spiritual lords, and subject their unpractised necks to
the ecclesiastical yoke preparing for them. We shall point out some of these.

The church, says he, considered with relation to civil power, being in the
very nature of it a voluntary society, it is left to men's consciences, whether
they will become members of it or not. But after they are become members of it,
the laws of the church are in force against them, and they are subject in
ecclesiastical matters to the authority of those who govern it. What the just
penalties of disobedience are, we may learn from the nature of the church
itself. The utmost effect of its power in this world is the cutting off and
rejecting such members, as are incureably and dangerously corrupted. App. p. 30.
Let the world, to which the doctor appeals, judge how consistent this is with
the declaration, That the American bishops are to have no authority, nor indeed
to exercise any discipline over their own people, the clergy excepted. p. 95.
Let but bishops be once introduced to govern the clergy, and the laity will
soon hear it asserted, and probably feel it to their cost, That from the very
nature of the church, its laws are in force against them, and they are and must
be subject to the authority of those who govern it.

Again Dr. C. tells us, When bishops were first proposed or requested for this
country, they were mentioned under the title of suffragans. This is no
ambiguous term, it has a fixed and determinate meaning in the Laws of England,
and cannot be mistaken. Suffragan bishops are the same with those, that were
Chorespiscopi or bishops of the country, in the primitive church; and it is
their business to exercise all offices merely episcopal, in the ^^^ot^ parts of
the diocese, wherein they reside, according to the direction, and by virtue of
a commission from the diocesan. App. p. 80. System of English Ecclesiastical
Laws.
Is it then no part of the episcopal office to govern the laity? Are they no
part of the episcopal charge? Are they not the flock, over whom the Holy Ghost
has made them bishops? Acts 20.28.
If it is a suffragan bishop that is requested for America, whose power to
govern the laity of the diocese is fixed and determined by the laws of England,
with what confidence can Dr. C. and his brethren abuse the members of their own
church, with the fond hopes of being exempted from his government and
jurisdiction? Is it not an office merely episcopal to take notice of and to
punish the irregular and scandalous behavior of the members of the church, to
take cognizance of scandal and causes matrimonial? If these suffragan bishops
must hold their commissions from the bishop of London, or any other bishop in
England, and discharge all parts of the episcopal office in the colonies, as
being remote parts of his lordship's diocese, and if his power is fixed and
determined by the laws of England, it is plain beyond contradiction, that the
desire of the missionaries is to have such suffragan bishops imported into
America, as shall have authority to exercise all the powers given them by the
laws of England, although D. C. is obliged to confess that some of these
ecclesiastical laws bear hard upon British liberty and need an amendment. App.
95.96.
The colonies in America, it seems, are to be made a part of some English
bishop's (it may be the bishop of London's) diocese, and the power and
authority of his suffragan is to be reverentially submitted to, and
acknowledged in as full and ample a manner as is specified in the English laws,
by all that reside in this new erected diocese. In vain therefore, will the
laity expect (if they disoblige the clergy) to escape the utmost effects of the
church's power in this world; happy for them, should their poverty hinder them
to commute and purchase a pardon, if they escape her power in world to come;
and if her excommunicated members are not made to feel, after death, or on the
other world, the due effects of her sore displeasure. 'excommunication,' it is
true, has, among protestants, lost much of the dreadful force' it once had in
the Romish church, but Dr. C. it would seem by his modest hint, is not without
hopes or at least without desire of 'restoring' it in America. Happy will it be
for Americans if 'this power of the church' be confined to those who willingly
'become members of it.' There is reason to fear, that the members of every
other communion will feel the effects of it, in this remote part of his
lordship's diocese, when his suffragan bishops come over here with as full and
complete authority over the clergy as the laws and canons direct. p. 31.
For although it may appear miraculous, that a church should excommunicate or
cast out those that never did belong to her; yet we know that the church of
England daily works such miracles; and we have no reason to doubt, that the
suffragan who is 'to discharge all episcopal offices' will exhibit in America
the same evidences of his apostolic descent.

But lest there should remain any doubt about the power of this American
suffragan, or the plan, upon which he was first requested for the benefit of
the colonies, the whole affair is settled with sufficient precision, in the
words of the supplicants, as Dr. C. has recorded them. See notes in p. 49, 50,
51, 52.
Their request was 'that such governors in the church should be constituted' in
America. '1st. to rule and govern well the people, who are desirous to be
committed to their charge, without which (they are the very words of the
supplicants) no wonder if some members grow remiss in their duty, if many fall
into scandalous practices; and if atheism, deism, etc. prevail over more,'
'2dly, protect and defend both laity and clergy.' Their power and business as
set forth in the abstract quoted p, 52 is to 'govern both priests and people
according to the model of the English church.' This was the plan, upon which
suffragan bishops were first requested and to be established in America; and
Dr. C. says, 'he knows not of a single instance, wherein reason has been given
to suspect that a departure from the same general plan has been aimed at or
desired.' p. 80.


The power then of these suffragans is to rule and govern both priests and
people, according to the model of the English church; to govern well the
people, who are members of their church and put under their care; to correct
remissness in duty, scandalous practices, atheism, deism, etc. and yet if we
believe Dr. C. 'their authority shall operate only upon the clergy and not
up-the laity, or dissenters of any denomination.'

Another thing I would just remark. It is agreed on all hands, that the
American bishop is to govern the clergy. Dr. C. tells us 'his power over them
shall be as full and as complete as the laws and canons of the church directs,
p. 31.
and yet that 'spiritual courts will never be established here.' 96.
What is this but to say, that an arbitrary spiritual jurisdiction, unknown in
the British constitution, and abhorrent to the rights of freemen is asked and
about to be established in America. Alas for the poor clergy; if, when their
characters and livings are in question, they must hear from the mouth of a
proud ecclesiastic, sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE. July 25.
A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG. [No. XVI.]
BY TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
Here march my Grammarians, skilled to torture words; there my Sons of
sophistry, ever ready to wrest a meaning,

PARNELL.
A Person once asked a scholar what was the meaning of^ff, which stands for the
digests or pandects; and was humourously answered that it signified Farrago
sarraginum; as much as to say -- 'an heap of miserable stuff.' Or if a more
literal translation please thine ear, reader, the meaning is -- 'an hodge-podge
of hodge-podges.'

How justly descriptive of No. XII. of the American-Whig, is this answer! If
thou will cast thine eye upon it, indignant reader, thou will find it to be an
heap, hoard or congeries, of miserable stuff; an hodge-podge of hodge-podges.
It consists of three detached pieces -- all worthy of the Whig and his
associates; but utterly impertinent to the dispute now debating before the
respectable tribunal of the public; and unworthy of its notice. And I shall so
far imitate the Whig, as to depart from order -- he is a disorderly man, --
depart, I say, from the order in which these pieces are placed, and begin with
the last of them, and so proceed, as it were, by a retrograde motion.

A gentle lash will be sufficient for each of these flimsy, senseless things.
Now, the last is a letter to the Whig, from one of his under spur-leathers;
filled with wrath against Dr. Chandler and his brethren, because they sometimes
call the church of England, the church; although this is no other than the
language which has been used by English writers since the reformation --
dissenters as well as churchmen. Calling meeting houses by the name of
churches, or independents, members of the church, is a very late refinement,
and unknown to our forefathers. My eldest son, who is but twelve years old, can
remember the first of this custom. If any person however on reading that
letter, can perceive one grain of sense, or candor in it, he is welcome to it
for his Pains.

The second part of this multifarious Whig is another letter, signed Obadiah
Wheeler, and written in the West country dialect; which is here palmed upon the
public as an original, but in reality is pilfered from an old magazine, and
republished with a very few alterations. Our plagiary talks away about kowz,
zowz and goozy chikz -- his fellow creatures; about giving a bribe to the
American Whig, to put in a cavie against a bizhup. Now, however unable the
public may be to see the pertinency of this letter to the case of American
bishops; I am pretty confident they will be able to see an apparent connection
between a bribe and the American Whig. The association of these in our ideas,
is very natural; and so much for Mr. Wheeler.

Thirdly and Lastly, That is to say, meaning and referring to part the first of
this farrago farraginum, in which the American Whig himself makes his personal
and corporal appearance -- It speaks its origin plain enough. The author of it
makes mention of 'the wisdom of politicians -- of wise and able statesmen' --
words, which come from his mouth, with equal propriety and grace as the words
chastity and virtue from the mouth of a prostitute. The burden and design of
his production is to show -- That the spirit of high churchmen is absolutely
incompatible with that of our excellent constitution; and was their power equal
to their wishes, they would neither eat nor sleep, before they had turned a
limited monarchy into an absolute one -- that when they talk of moderation,
they mean want of power -- that should a future ministry be weak enough ******
to gratify the insatiate ambition of some of our rampant, high church clergy,
the colonies will be debauched from their loyalty -- that an American
episcopate would cut asunder the cord which ties them to the mother country --
for let them have but funds of their own by the management of their spiritual
father the bishop -- then adieu for ever to their political mother, old England.

And this zealous friend to our constitution and to old England, expresses his
ardent love to both. But it unfortunately happens, that he so unnaturally
counterfeits the voice of a sheep, that no reader upon earth can discriminate
it from that of a wolf.

It is hard to say which is most to be admired, or which predominates most in
this representation -- falsehood or malice. -- This writer not only insults
truth, but the understanding of every reader. Although he singles out High
churchmen, it is beyond any doubt, that by those he means, all who have any
degree of zeal for the interest of the church of England, or that would thwart
his pernicious designs, and intolerant principles. What warm friends the clergy
of the church of England, and particularly bishops, have been to our
constitution and liberties, every page almost of the history of England fully
evinces. And every page almost of that history refutes this infamous calumny,
which is thrown out, to blind and debauch the multitude, by a faction whose
principles, whose writings, whose conduct, demonstrate them to be republicans,
and enemies to our constitution -- even to a limited monarchy.

I shall here mention one memorable passage in our history, which will show
what warm friends to our constitution and liberties those were, whom our Whig
calls high churchmen. James ii. was a weak, misled prince -- a dupe to popery
and priests. He manifestly designed to introduce popery and arbitrary power in
England, and overturn the reformation. One of the first and chief engines he
employed for this purpose, was dispensing with those laws, which exclude
papists from places of power and trust. At Oxford and Cambridge, if I remember
right, the first attempts to exercise this dispensing power, were tried; where
it met with all the opposition that the members of those two illustrious
universities could give it. Soon after this, the king ordered 'a declaration of
liberty of conscience' to be read in all churches through England; which was done
only to pave the way for popery. With this the archbishop of Canterbury, and
six bishops who then happened to be present, refused to comply; and presented a
petition to the king, remonstrating against it; knowing that it had a direct
tendency to let in popery, and destroy the liberties of the nation. And for
this refusal and remonstrance, those seven bishops were clapped into the tower,
and there held in durance. There was no event which contributed more to rouse
the spirit of the nation, point out its danger, and bring about the revolution,
than this. Never was a nobler stand made for liberty than this was; yet these
bishops were such as our Whig would call high churchmen.

It is very remarkable, that whilst the church clergy opposed those arbitrary
measures, and refused to comply with king James's injunctions, dissenters
presented several addresses of thanks to him on the occasion. Even from
New England addresses were transmitted to king James, for granting a general
liberty of conscience. I will not anticipate the reader's reflections on this
occasion; nor pretend to determine whether those addresses originated from a
desire to see the church of England crushed; which must have fallen the first
victim, being the strongest barrier against popery and arbitrary power; or
whether dissenters were not imposed on by specious pretenses and promises, and
so lulled to sleep by the king's emissaries.

I shall only add further at present, that when these particulars, and many
more which the world ere long shall be informed of, are considered, our Whig,
even in point of prudence and regard to his cause, were truth and justice
entirely thrown aside ought to be more cautious in asserting what none will
believe, viz. that churchmen are enemies to the British constitution -- parcius
ista nobis tamen objicienda memento -- i. e. Mr. Whig, remember you are the
last person that should upbraid us with such things.

To TIMOTHY TICKLE, Esquire
JOY, joy, joy, my good friend Tickle. With all my heart I give you joy. I
thought your victory complete when Sir Isaac Foot (and a sooty fellow he is)
attacked you; but pro patria has put the matter out of a possibility of
dispute. I always looked upon you as a man of considerable merit; but I can
assure you that your reputation has gained much by the little, low, dirty
tricks, that your adversaries, especially the worthies abovementioned, have
thought proper (if ever they thought at all) to have recourse to. Strange it
is, that some people will pretend to write before they have learned to read! I
thought the knight the most illetirate and insignificant of all the race of
Adam; but pro patria has convinced me of my error. I am therefore so far
indebted to him. Nor am I the only person whom he has laid under obligations.
You yourself, Mr. Tickle, are much beholden to him. He has laid hands upon you,
Mr. Tickle; he has ordained my friend the squire. Well; may I perish, but he is
a good-natured soul! He has saved you the trouble of a couple of 3000 miles
voyages, and the expense of many a thirty shilling bill. If you are not the
most ungrateful of Men, as he is the most contemptible, you cannot but thank
him. -- But perhaps you do not allow the validity of presbyterian ordination?
Mr. Tickle, Mr. Tickle, you are utterly mistaken, Mr. Tickle. Not only pro
patria, but all the other Independents in the country say the same. What they
think is a different matter. But so many of them, from time to time, having
been re-ordained by bishops, is no good argument in their favor. Nay, I am
convinced, and so are they too (and, hinc illae lacrymae) that if episcopal
ordination could be had upon as easy terms as presbyterian, four fifths of the
whole clan would be happy in receiving it. This their followers know, and
therefore are so outrageously bitter against the introduction of a bishop to
the continent. They would sink into their primeval nonentity. And as for the
threats against the person of a bishop, they know in their hearts that they
durst not touch a hair of his head. However, it serves to show their spirit of
persecution, for which they have ever been infamous, and which I am persuaded
they will always exert, when ever they have the power to do so. But it seems,
Mr Tickle, that you have said the Whig is written by a faction. Is this
excusable? Is this, my reverend friend, (I ask pardon for not giving you the
title sooner) is this language for a Christian man, -- for a Christian
minister? Truth is not to be spoken at all times; and this, quoth pro patria,
is not the proper time. And pro patria says well. He took his cue from his
beloved Whigs; and as they have not thought expedient to speak it, pray why
should you? pro patria is a wight of much discernment. Pro patria knows the
faction. Pro patria follows their example. Pro patria, If I am not much
mistaken, was employed by the faction to do their dirty work; and I am sure
that pro patria is a very proper instrument. In time, both he, and his friend
Sir Isaac, may be equal to their masters. Par nobile Fratrum; if peradventure
they be two. I wish them success in their arduous undertaking, and am, Sir,

Your very humble Servant, PRO ARIS.
N. B. If you don't choose to dirty your fingers with such reptiles, as I have
plenty of water to wash off the slime, you may command me, as occasion shall
require, to give them a lash of correction for their many iniquities.



MR. Tickle's compliments to PRO ARIS, -- is much obliged to him for his kind
offer, -- acknowledges the writing, but cannot call to mind the person of his
friend; who is therefore requested to leave his address at the printer's, Mr.
Tickle having something of importance to communicate.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE. July 25.
The AMERICAN WHIG. [Numb. XX.]
I Should now pursue my confutation of the divine right of diocesan episcopacy
(a doctrine which Dr. Chandler has very unnecessarily obtruded on the public,
and which I am therefore compelled to consider, in order to give a complete
answer to the appeal) but having promised, in my first number, not to fatigue
the reader with the dry crust of unsavory controversy, I shall endeavor to
relieve his spirits with a very different scene. As to the subject now
suspended, I shall soon resume it, and hope so effectually to expose the
absurdity of that pretense, as well as those two other pretty priestly
conceits, -- confirmation, and the uninterrupted succession, as to prevent the
most bigoted conventioner, from ever re-introducing them into the company of
Christians or gentlemen.

In a letter of bishop Kennet, printed in the history of his life, that
excellent prelate has these memorable words: He was (says he, speaking of the
great and good Dr. Tenison, then late archbishop of Canterbury) truly
sensible, that at home and abroad we were in great danger of losing
Christianity, in the name of the church. The two great difficulties that lie
hard upon our society, for propagation of the gospel, are, (1) The want of
sober and religious missionaries; few offering themselves to that service, for
the glory of God, and the good of souls; but chiefly to find a refuge from
poverty and scandal. -- (2) Such men, when they come to the places allotted
them, forget their mission; and, instead of propagating Christianity, are only
contending for rites and ceremonies, or for powers and privileges, etc. -- What
particular conduct of the missionaries that venerable prelate then resented,
with so much Christian zeal and impartiality, I cannot determine. But that many
of them have, for some years past, made a practice of giving themselves an air
of importance, in their letters to the society, at the expense of truth, will
appear evident to any person, who will be at the pains of perusing the fulsome
extracts annexed to the anniversary sermons preached before that board. -- That
they have lately entered into a combination to asperse the American colonies,
in which they reside, in order to facilitate their darling project of an
American bishop, representing his majesty's subjects, of every denomination,
differing from their own, as entertaining principles, unfriendly to our
excellent constitution; (for which they know in their consciences, there is not
the least color of pretense) is abundantly apparent from the following letter.
On this notable epistle, I shall at present make no other observation, but that
the public may depend on it to be genuine, and that I have no other reason for
concealing the author's name, than my disinclination to expose him to the
righteous indignation of his injured country; but that if either of the two
weekly scribblers for the convention, will insist on his being made a sacrifice
to the popular resentment, for his scandalous misrepresentations of the most
loyal people in the world, rather than lose the pleasure of charging me with a
fashood; they may make their challenge with their usual friendship for truth
and decency, and they shall be gratified. I have only to add, that I have
printed a few lines in Italic, for the reader's present meditation; intending
hereafter to make proper remarks on those extraordinary passages.

A letter from one of the society's Missionaries in America, to one of his
Majesty's Chaplains.
REV. SIR,
THE cause of the church in America is so sacred and interesting a point, that
every faithful friend to it, who even ventures to wish himself able to
contribute the least in its favor, discovers a well affected zeal to express
his affection, and entreat the promotion of it. This indeed more evidently
appears in the clergy, where it ought to appear; having the concurrence of all,
from whom the best wishes, and their religious needs in the present imperfect
state which they enjoy, the church can only be expected to strengthen and
enforce the common plea; and also the adjuvant agency of others, that are
conspicuous enough to afford some encouragement from their endeavors, spirited
by that ardent affection for the church, which the faith of the invaluable
treasure she contains in her divine apostolic authority and constitution, and
the wholesome doctrines she dispences in the scriptures, animates. The clergy
of several of the provinces have respectively transmitted addresses to the
throne, and some of the chief dignitaries of the church, and the incorporated
society, for an American episcopate, to engage as extensive an interest in the
affair as might be practicable; particulars have thought it expedient, and have
applied to such persons as might, and from whom they had good grounds to hope,
would be useful in a case so greatly beneficial to us, and the act so highly
charitable to them; solicitous to bear a part in every effort of this kind,
joint as well as separate, I take the freedom to propose the subject to you, as
what I am persuaded must be esteemed by you, sufficient to merit your closest
attention; the cause is sacred to the honor of God, and the souls of men: We
also apprehend it so to the health of the constitution; a consideration proper
to be attended to, in these distant parts of his majesty's dominions; and what
is conceived may be advantageously improved, as the arguments in favor of it,
may be more pointedly urged and enforced upon the minds of different persons,
as they shall be inclined to regard the church, in a religious or civil view;
or both together. Your connections with some of the nobility, and with his
majesty's chaplains, is apprehended to place you in a situation kind to this
purpose; and this cherishes hopes of your readiness and ability, to be useful
among those in this particular business. If the important affairs of the
established church, could be properly laid before, and submitted to, the
consideration of the duke of Chandois, and the earl of Carnarvon, in a point of
view just and necessary; their interest in the dignities and prerogatives of
the crown, and the royal government of the kingdom, exclusive of a pious regard
to the true church of Christ, might possibly excite their deliberations, and
lead them to do that essential good service, their superior discretion may deem
practicable, to a cause that supplicates every charitable aid and assistance;
and which is impregnated with such principles, as is most likely, in its
fruits, richly to reward the exertions of those, in the security of their
dignity and peace, who labor to promote it: By such an attempt executed by
you, as shall appear judicious and suitable, it is imagined may be discovered,
how they are disposed, or by what means may be stirred up to a disposition,
previously languid and wanting; and also what notice and help, we, in these
parts, may expect to receive from that quarter. -- Upon trial, if any good
encouragements are offered, that will give license for an importunate and
respectful address, I dare venture to say, it will be most eagerly embraced;
and you yourself be waited upon in a manner more respectable. Should you think
proper to do this, it is most earnestly to be wished, you would also use your
endeavors, to influence the rest of his majesty's chaplains, to bestir
themselves, among the circle of their respective acquaintance, to render the
cause diffusive; and spirit as many as may be, seriously and conscientiously to
weigh the sacred suffering cause of the church of God, which even a cursory
reflection will openly show, how it needs must do here; while we are in a state
imperfect and destitute, in a great measure, of that office and
administrations, which our Lord has appointed in his church. It must be
supposed that they, agreeable to the divine commission they have received in
our excellent church, were led to do holy service at her altar, from the
dictates and persuasives of a well directed conscience: How then, with
deference I observe, can they, in the faith of Christ's authority, administer
in her appointments as faithful stewards, unless they extend their attention
and service to her general interest, where she is propagated, under the
protection of his majesty's government? As the faith is founded on the
Christian constitution, and the cause is common, not confined to this or that
particular place or congregation, the ministers of our common Lord owe a great
respect to accommodate all, however disposed for the advancement of that
religion, in the orders that support it, which they think expedient for
themselves to embrace.

The earnestness of my desire, make; me the less reserved in beseeching you do
to all in your power, in this case. And there is no small cause for such a
desire, as it is apprehended, that not only the church, but even the well-being
of the civil polity in America, depends, in a great measure, upon the
settlement of episcopacy here; for republican principles in religion, naturally
engender the same in civil governments; which of late have been avowedly A very
pretty compliment to those public bodies, and private gentlemen, who so
laudably exerted themselves, to procure the repeal of the late obnoxious
stamp^^^^!
very rise in these parts, and have appeared in open and alarming light, in
many melancholy instances. Indeed, Sir, if some methods are not taken, more
effectually, to fix and confirm the church here, which nothing but sending a
bishop will do, things bear a face that will bear a shrewd conjecture, that
opposition and insolence will grow too sturdy, as by the help of the
disaffected with you, which as they always have been, so they ever will be,
ready to afford, under the aid of their brethren in Scotland, to bring even the
church and bishops in England into danger. This, however extravagant at first
it may appear, the more discerning have feared, from the spirit on work; in
these circumstances let me beg you to consider also, how many thousand souls
really languish for lack of vision or spiritual food, in this low ebb of the
church; and then you will assuredly be sufficiently sensible, with how much
propriety we implore, and how much Christian charity presses you, and every
one, assiduously to use the best services, in behalf of our exigency, which so
clearly recommends itself by every possible urgency.

I am, Reverend Sir, Your humble servant and brother.
March 24, 1767.
To the PUBLIC.
-- Mutatas dicere sormas.

OVID.
THE spleen and malignity, so remarkable in the American Whig, against the
established church, has, I dare say, roused the resentment of every true son of
that apostolic communion. However, as to myself, I, who have the honor to be a
member of the same, have sound no small alleviation (under the arguments and
insults uttered against it) from the consideration, that all the logic, or
satire, of him and the faction, will not be of the least avail, either to
himself or them: Nay, they will only augment their infamy and reproach, as I
shall demonstrate anon. Is it not ridiculous for a man to squabble with a
kitchen maid, in the face of the public? -- Would any but fools contend, when
sure of being foiled, and exposing their incapacity and rancour, the view of
the world? This is the case of the schismatics and Whig; they worry and vex
themselves in vain; being ignorant of the very scheme, by which our pious
designs are conducted. At once to terminate their cavils, I shall disclose the
plan of our future proceedings, against those Heretics.

The venerable society (amidst persecutions and oppressions) have zealously
prosecuted the pious design of christianizing dissenters in America, and
transforming them into members of the national church. The devout labors of
their missionaries, have been rewarded with a plentiful harvest. Numbers have
been persuaded to abandon the schismatical conventicles, which (as that
venerable saint Mr, Checkly, avers) have neither a valid ministry or
ordinances; and joined the communion of our church: Religion, according to the
liturgy, flourished. Ample account of these converts were transmitted to the
venerable society at home, whose pious souls exulted at the success, and were
almost ravished at the prospect of episcopizing America. These devout emotions,
received, nevertheless, a mortifying check, by the most wicked reproaches of
the faction. They had the effrontery to traduce the characters of the godly
missionaries, and of the society itself. The latter they accused of perverting
the end of their institution; and that instead of employing their donations and
care, in converting the aboriginal pagans, to the Christian faith, and
knowledge of a Savior; they wantonly lavished their money, in perverting
dissenters; squandering large sums in opulent towns, which were amply supplied
with preachers of irreproachable characters; while the indigent, and those who
were unable to support the ministry, were neglected. The missionaries were
represented as expending that charitable bounty, not in the least in advancing
Christianity; but in seducing dissenters, from the pure and unadulterated
gospel of Jesus, to a perverted gospel, and in teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men. Such were the malicious slanders, uttered by the faction,
and dilently propagated by their abettors. Hereby the animating expectations of
the venerable society were blasted, their persons traduced, and many charitable
donations restrained. Notwithstanding, our dignitaries judging it necessary to
convert the sectaries, that they might not obstruct their success among the
heathen, they vigorously prosecuted their beneficient plan, and their success
was adequate to their zeal. Many deserted their former puritanical dogmas, and
became zealous assertors of episcopal faith. Pompous accounts of proselytes
were stransmitted to that reverend body, which were confirmed by their
lordships, and ushered into the world, with triumph and joy. Thus the venerable
board, continued to exert themselves with unremitting ardour, amidst the
clamours of the faction; and, although by the animating accounts sent by the
missioaries, it was expected that schism would long 'ere now have been
extirpated, and the whole American continent metamorphosed into episcopalians;
yet since the pious missionaries (as Dr. Chandler observes) had no other
weapons to avail themselves withal (while altar was set up against altar) but
the feeble efforts of argument, which were common to the faction themselves, no
wonder their success was not proportioned to their devout wishes; but after
about sixty years assiduous labor, the greater part still retained their
inveterate prejudices.

Some of their lordships, in their anniversary sermons before the venerable
society, had laid it down as a maxim, 'that they could not expect to convert
the heathens, 'till they had first christianiz'd the dissenters.' This was far
from being effectuated, and therefore, on the present plan, the heathen must be
neglected to some far distant period. This roused their zeal to attempt some
new expedient. -- What must be done? They must rid themselves of dissenters,
who obstruct the conversion of pagans, to the religion of the liturgy! To
episcopize them, is like to be the work of ages! The most compendious method
imaginable, would be to change the species of these obstinate heretics, that
they might no longer obstruct the gospel among the pagans. Accordingly, on the
20th of February, 1767, my lord of Landaff, in presence of that venerable
society, metamorphosed the whole schismatical herd into 'infidels, with more
than brutal manners!' This rare achievement was deservingly approved by that
respectable body, and the operator received their cordial thanks. This was a
bold, but effectual 'stroke. This craft had been dormant from the venerable
Circe, 'till revived by her present right r-v -- d successor; and no author
since Ovid, has had the honor to record such a mutation, except myself. The
legends of Rome contain nothing worthy of competition. All obstacles toward
converting the pagans are now vanished. Not a dissenter remains in America.
They are become fellow-infidels with their brethren, the natives. -- No more
clamor about perverting dissenters. Good people may now be invited to give,
for the sole purpose of converting infidels. By this a large field is opened
for needy missionaries; and gain and godliness may go hand and hand. Yet, these
quondam dissenters, retain, even since their mutation, something of their
former rancour; which may be no small exercise to our pious missionaries. It
might (to speak with submission) have been better, if they had been setenced
slaves; for although the Whig is an infidel, I doubt not he believes, his
lordship with equal veracity and ease, might have denominated them negroes and
slaves. Then like the Scythians of old we might have returned with Whips, and
driven them from their possessions, to our no small emolument. But they have
been confirmed infidels, and who dares dispute episcopal confirmation? How long
they are like to retain their present form, depends on their conduct. Should
they still prove refractory, they might next be classed with the brutes; should
they conform to the liturgy, like Lucian's ass, they might reassume their
pristine form. What strange transformation the obstinate may still expect, you
may learn from example. Cr. Chauncey of Boston, for disputing the reality of
this change, and insisting on the identity of former dissenters, was
immediately, by episcopalian slight, hooted into a ram-chicken, but has not yet
been confirmed in that character by a bishop's hand. What changes will be
inflicted on W. Livingston, and the Whig, must be left to the wisdom of the
convention. They may suffer as many metempsycoses as a Pythagorean, or shapes
as a silkworm. For the present it was determined, to lash ^^e Whig in revenge,
before he could be metamorphos'd out of the way. -- But, who shall perform this
ignominious task? None of the convention, though sufficiently vexed, had courage
to accept, They knew he disavowed passive obedience; and should they Whip, he
might return the compliment, and repel his aggressor. On mature deliberation,
Tabitha Kettle was unanimously chosen for this arduous office. She had been
cook to the rev Mr. Diotrephes, and brought up in his kitchen and principles.
She had the honor to belong to the church by law established, and read exactly
the prayers, and lessons, of each day (without daring to exceed) in obedience
to authority. Her favorite books were Checkly, Hudibrass, and the service
book; all of which she read with equal devotion. Her esteem for missionaries
arose almost to adoration -- and her abhorrence of dissenters to detestation.
In her disputes, she was furious and loud; and when clamor could not decide,
the broomstick and ladle were called to assist. This heroine received a
mission, to pelt and scold at the Whig* But on her investiture with so
important an office, it was resolved to metamorphose her sex* and dignify her
with a masculine name, as near as may be, similar to her former. Accordingly,
instead of Tibitha Kettle, she assumed the name and title of Timothy Tickle,
Esquire Thus being masculated, she accepted her post; and having Hudibrass in her
pocket, to furnish her with proper expressions, and armed with her usual
weapons, the broomstick and ladle, she marched forth to begin the fray, on the
4th day of April, A. D. 1768. -- Her success must be deferred to another time.

THAUMASTES.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE candor of the public is requested for Tabitha, who just after her 8th
squabble, on the 23d of May (whea she was sadly drub'd) advertised that there
were assembled in this city, the last week, twenty or thirty clergymen, to
write against whigs; make bishops, etc. But being out of breath, she omitted to
inform the public, that among the degrees conferred that day, after much debate
about a degree of infamy, suitable for Dr. Chauncey, Tabitha proposed the
degree of Ram-chicken, which was highly approved of, and accordingly conferred.

On Tabitha Kettle, for eminent services, the name and title of Tim. Tickle,
Esquire and that she assume virility.

As Tabitha has already so lavish^d all the opprobrious names out of Hudibrass,
that none are left for W. Livingston and the Whig, she is required to have one
against our next convention.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL. July 28. The SENTINEL. [No. XIX.]
IN clearing up difficulties and in adjusting differences that occur in any
society, it is the surest way to look back to the original principles on which
the founders proceeded; to examine how they and their immediate successors
understood, and how they acted upon these institutes. This has been
acknowledged to be a regular procedure in civil policy, and in expounding human
laws: It seems still more proper in revealed religion, whose author is
infallible. If the professors of Christianity had made this their rule, an^
^^^^d oftener recurred to the words of their lord, and to t^^ writings and
practice of his apostles: If they had always made the Bible their directory in
faith and discipline; and determined to call no man on earth master, abundance
of misguided zeal, angry contention and cruel persecution might have been
avoided; much corruption in doctrine and discipline prevented; and the
primitive simplicity of the gospel better maintained.

Most denominations of Christians are indeed ready enough to appeal to
scripture, and to be determined by it, whenever they think it favors their
peculiarities. Nay they will torture it by forced constructions to speak
favorably of their distinguishing tenets, even where it would seem to express
a contrary meaning. But the human inventions and corruptions of some churches
are so plainly against scripture, or unwarranted by it, that this method of
defense will not always answer. Recourse is then had to tradition, pretended
apostolic usage, the supposed right of the church to decree rites and
ceremonies, and to institute new modes of discipline. (if not to add new
articles of faith) for the support of these innovations: A method by which
almost any absurdity, ^error or usurpation might be vindicated, and the
Christian faith entirely thrust aside, to make room for the weak or wicked
devices of men.

In the matter I have now in view, Dr. Chandler appeals indeed to scripture;
though many will think, without good ground. However he cannot be charged with
wire-drawing its meaning, as he adduces no particular proofs of what he
nevertheless roundly asserts. The passage of his memorable appeal to which I
refer is this; 'if we carefully examine the writings of the apostles, these
things will evidently appear, that our blessed Savior before his ascension,
committed the government of the church entirely to them; -- that this
government was exercised by them; -- that they conveyed this power to others,
to be communicated successively to others to the latest posterity; --
particularly that these their successors, were an order distinct from, and
superior to those now called presbyters; and that none who were not of this
order, had the powers of ordination and government committed to them.' But
although he does not stay to offer proof, yet he mentions for instances, James
as diocesan of Jerusalem; Timothy of Ephesus; Titus of Crete; and the angels of
the seven churches of Asia.

It would have been satisfactory to many of his readers, if the doctor had
pointed out the passages in the New Testament, which so clearly prove, that the
great head of the church has committed the government of it entirely to
diocesan bishops, as successors of the apostles; because so important a claim
ought to be substantially supported. To instruct mankind in the doctrines of
the gospel, we indeed find a charge given, accompanied with a promise of power
from on high to assist them in doing it. But even supposing this commission and
promise limited to the twelve, what do they make for the sole authority of
modern prelates? The apostles were an extraordinary set of men; they had no
successors circumstanced as they were: Nor after the choice of Matthias in the
room of Judas; and the divine appointment of St. Paul, do we read of any new
elections. As they were to be chosen witnesses of the resurrection of Christ,
Acts of Apos. i. 22.
it was not possible they could long continue a distinct order: Their characer
and name accordingly died with the generation in which they lived.

In ordinary matters, the apostles, however, exercised no suck sole
jurisdiction. They preached and delivered the Christian doctrines as of divine
authority, and they proved their mission by works of an extraordinary nature;
such as the death of Ananias and Saphira, the blindness of Elymas, and the
like. But in those matters in which only their conduct can be exemplary, they
did every thing with the common voice of the church. Thus were the deacons
chosen. In this manner did they proceed in giving their judgment upon the
controversy at Antioch referred to the church at Jerusalem, concerning the
obligation of the Mosaic law over the gentile converts to Christianity. St.
Paul upbraiding the Corinthians for remissness of discipline in a case of
incest, tells them that when they were gathered together, they ought, 'with the
power of Christ,' to excommunicate the guilty person. And in his 2d epistle,
speaking of the same affair, he says, 'sufficient to the man was the
punishment, or censure, which was inflicted by many.' What became of the sole
authority of the bishop in these cases? How came the 'multitude,' Ibid; vi. 5.
the 'whole church,' Ibid: xv. 22.
the 'many' to meddle with the apostolic or episcopal rights. Nay', how durst
any teachers at Antioch to dissent from, and dispute with Paul and Barnabus,
one, if not both of them, of the superior order, to whom the government of the
church. according to Dr. C. had been entirely committed? And whatever blame
they incurred for error in doctrine, how happened it, that they escaped without
censure for want of due submission to an apostle? The great Lord chancellor
Bacon, who speaks the general sense of the doctor's church from the reformation
till his time, differs widely from him. His words are remarkable; I shall give
them at large, He says, 'on reading the Scriptures, I never could find, but
that God had left the like liberty to church government as to civil government,
to be varied according to time, place and accidents: Which nevertheless his
high and divine providence orders and disposes. For all civil governments are
restrained from God to the general grounds of justice and manners; but their
policies and forms are left free, so that monarchies, senates, and popular
states, are lawful, and where they are planted ought to remain inviolate. So in
the church, the substance of the doctrine is immutable; but for rites and
ceremonies, particular hierarchies, policies and disciplines of churches, they
are left at large. It is proper therefore to return to the ancient degrees of
unity in the church of God, which were one faith, one baptism; not one
hierachy, one discipline.' This penetrating genius was so far from supporting
the hierarchy of the church of England, (of which he was a zealous defender)
even from primitive practice, that he subjoins, 'the times of persecution were
excellent times for doctrine and manners; but are improper and unsuitable
examples of external government.'

That the apostles conveyed this sole power, which Dr. C. ascribes to them, to
others, to be handed down in succession, is equally destitute of proof. If they
assumed no such power themselves; if in the ordinary affairs of the church,
they and the evangelists and elders, mentioned in Scripture, exercised none,
how could they convey it over to successors. St. Paul, who was an inspired
writer, in giving his judgment in matters to which his divine direction did not
reach, could say, 'I speak this by permission, and not of commandment.' 1.
Epis. Corinth. vii. 6.
The pastors and ministers of the church, called by the people and solemnly set
apart by the apostles and evangelists, had the power of preaching the gospel;
and says a great writer, 'there is an empire in preaching: Dr. Jer. Tailor.
But the supreme direction of the affairs of the churches, as assumed by modern
prelates, was exercised by none. The people jointly with their elders judged,
even in excommunication. This passage of the doctor's implies the necessity of
an uninterrupted succession which he had just before asserted very explicitly;
notwithstanding the absurdity of such a notion, and the many inconveniences
attending it, have been often exposed. Mr. Locke's argument against it is
invincible. If, says he, a society enjoys the benefit of the presence of
Christ, according to his promise, that 'where two or three are gathered
together in his name, he will be in the midst of them,' they want neither
bishops by unbroken succession, nor any thing else necessary to the salvation
of souls. See the bishop Stillingfleet's Iren. Cap. viii.
Is the Christian ministry so essential to the being of a church, that it could
not exist without it? By no means, say very able divines; archbishop Crammer
had this question put to him; whether if all bishops and p^^ests were dead, it
would be lawful to appoint others to preach the word, and administer the
Sacraments? His answer to this and another question of like nature is this, 'it
is not against God's law, but on the contrary they ought indeed so to do.'
Letter 1st, on toleration.
The truth is, the churches of Christ, as all other societies, have the
principle of all power and privilege residing in the body, not in the officers:
And are competent to all necessary points. As in civil government, where a
failure of the royal family, or other defect in the administration is made good
by the inherent power of the community; so in ecclesiastical, the church may
interpose and supply every deficiency. All pretensions then of the officers of
the state or church to indefeasible hereditary right, are only derived from
ambition and usurpation, and can serve only to set them above control. If the
claim of a divine right in kings 'to govern wrong' be inconsistent with civil
liberty and public happiness; the opinion that all authority and privilege in
the church, resides in the clergy, and is to be conveyed through an
uninterrupted succession of bishops, as successors of the apostles, is
destructive of Christian liberty, and sets the blessings of the gospel on a
most precarious footing.

That bishop and presbyter are the same in Scripture, has been shown in a
former paper; and further, that many great men of the church of England have
thought so. The instances of diocesan episcopacy given by Dr. C. have no
countenance from the New Testament; for the notes subjoined to the epistles to
Timothy and Titus, in the opinion of the learned, were added 500 years after
these epistles were written. Titus was left behind at Crete to ordain elders or
bishops (as they are also called) in every city, which would rather prove that
he was an archbishop. But it is evident Timothy and Titus were evangelists,
employed in spreading the glad tidings of salvation to infidel nations;
consequently they had no settled charge. The primacy of Peter at Rome, and the
prelacy of James at Jerusalem seem much of equal solidity; and rest equally on
tradition. The angels of the seven churches in the prophetical language of the
Revelations, are evidently put for the churches themselves. But the prelatical
cause labors much, when recourse is had to such precarious and slender proofs;
which would not be offered if better could be had.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, August 1.
A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG. [No. XVII.]
By TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
Here then we fix, and lash without control,
The mental pests, and Hydras of the soul:
Acquired Ill Nature, ever prompt debate,
A zeal for slander and deliberate hate.
WHITEHEAD.
To TIMOTHY TICKLE, Esquire
SIR,
I Am a member of the church of England, and zealously attached to its
doctrines and discipline. -- For many years I have been retired from business,
and spend the evening of my days on a pleasant rural recess, far removed from
the noise and bustle incident to cities and larger towns. My farm affords me
all the necessaries and some of the conveniences of life. As I am not engaged
in the pursuit of riches or power, much of my time is devoted to the
contemplation of heavenly things; some to a few favorite authors; and I, now
and then, amuse myself by reading the public papers, whilst curling eddies of
smoke wafted from the cheerful pipe, diffuse a grateful odor through my little
habitation.

But with the utmost grief and indignation, I have observed of late, that a
rude and virulent attack has been made upon the church, in several parts of the
continent; and prosecuted in such a manner, that, decency and candor have been
sacrificed, by writers 'hackney'd in the ways of men,' to the accursed spirit
of party and dissension.

What could have been the motive of these writers for such a procedure, must be
left to the searcher of all hearts: Sure I am, however, that it is contrary to
the principles of Christian charity; -- that it can never serve the cause of
truth and religion; -- that it breaths a spirit of bigotry and malevolence; --
that it is inconsistent with the character of meek but firm assertors of the
rights of conscience.

Whether it flows therefore, from minds embittered by any disappointment, or is
the pure effect of zeal without knowledge; in either case I condemn it; since
we are taught by the oracles of divine wisdom, not only to be wise as serpents,
but also harmless as doves.

Virulence and rancour, with sarcastic and illiberal reflections, can never
properly serve a cause: They irritate, but do not convince, -- they rankle in
the bosoms of those at whom they are aimed, widen those breaches which for the
honor of Christianity ought to be closed up; and destroy that brotherly love
which our Savior so strongly recommended to all his disciples. To the eye of
impartial reason, the authors of calumny suffer most by it; for they forfeit
the heartfelt satisfaction, arising from a consciousness of innocence and
integrity.

Misrepresentation indeed, may prevail for a time: But it will not bear
examination before which it flies, like the early mist before the morning sun.

I have already said, SIR, that I am a churchman by profession -- As such I
pray for the whole Catholic church; and not for that alone, but for Jews, Turks
and, infidels; for all the race of Adam, whether within the verge of
Christianity, or as yet miserably enveloped in darkness and the shadow of death
-- Though I esteem the doctrines and ceremonies of my own church to be the most
pure, and conformable to the will of God: Yet in pursuance of the golden rule
of "doing as I would be done by." I would have every one enjoy liberty of
conscience in the most extensive manner. -- This liberty must consist, not in
privately entertaining any set of religious opinions; because at that rate
there could hardly be any such thing as persecution; the secrets of the heart
being un^earchable to any but the Almighty -- But it must consist in the free,
open, and undisturbed profession of our says; the being allowed publicly to
worship God in that mode we esteem most agreeable to him; a moral security,
that we shall not be hereafter prevented from thus acting; and an exemption
from any peculiar and grievous hardships on a religious account.

No sect can be properly said to enjoy liberty of conscience, unless it has
within itself the means of continuing its faith and worship. If the
Presbyterians were prevented from ordaining their pastors in the accustomable
manner, and among themselves, I verily believe they would complain, that they
did not enjoy liberty of conscience in its reasonable extent, since their
religion could only be of short duration.

Whilst I grant that every other denomination, not dangerous to the state,
should have liberty of conscience, I think I may boldly challenge the same
indulgence for the church in as full a manner at least. -- It has been alleged
indeed, that the church labored under no hardships; and that on the contrary,
there was danger lest it should become a church rampant and gubernant. -- Let
any one but reflect on a voyage across a wide and boisterous ocean; the many
perils and dangers it presents to our eyes; -- the lives that are lost thereby;
-- and the prodigious expense attendant on it: -- Let him also reflect that the
orders of the church of England can be obtained on no other, but on these
discouraging terms; and then let him heartily resolve me, whether this is a
hardship or not?

It Is said to be a maxim in law, that equity is equality. Equitas est quasi
Equalitas. If the church of England is not established in America; yet I
conceive, by the rules of equity, it ought to be upon an equal footing with
other sects of Christians. Whilst they can receive ordination in their native
land and at a small expense; why should the members of the church be obliged to
seek it at such a distance, so monstrous an expense, and imminent hazard of
their lives?

But we have been told, in one number of the Whig, that America will, in a
course of years, be the happy Asylum to which Britain must betake herself; when
that island, at present the seat of empire, will become a province to some
haughty continental power. As I quote entirely from memory, I must be excused,
Sir, if I have not given the Whig's own words; however, I believe his sentiment
is farthfully preserved -- Allowing that Great Britain must betake herself to
America, where shall the church betake herself for orders; since it is plain, the
Whig does not intend to admit bishops, with, or without a cargoe of
carnalities, to accompany the other parts of the constitution into America?
Nay, he tells us in another number, upon what authority I know not, that the
introduction of a bishop, however reasonable, upon the plan proposed, would
produce a scene of disorder, similar to what we have experienced upon a late
occasion. When this dreadful period therefore shall arrive, the church, so far
from being rampant and gubernant, can be no more: Her sons must, in direct
opposition to their principles, go into the arms of independency, and see their
religion (redeemed from the errors of Popery, by the blood of so many martyrs)
give place to one, they esteem far less pure, and less perfect.

Quis, talia sando,
-- Temperet a Lacrymis!
VIRGIL. Another writer indeed, has attempted to cut the gordian knot which he
could not untie. -- The sentinel proposes that the convention should assemble
together; choose one of their members bishop; and submit to his authority. That
writer should have considered, however he plumes himself upon his invention,
that the constitution of the church of England does not admit of Presbyterian
bishops; and, that he might as well propose no expedient, as one that cannot be
conscientiously used.

When Parmenio told Alexander, that were he in his place, he would accept a
peace which that monarch thought dishonorable: He made this noble answer,
"that so would he, were he Parmenio." The members of the convention, may in
like manner, answer the Sentinel, that they will elect such a bishop as he
mentions, when they become Sentinels; when they have renounced the doctrines
and discipline of the church of England, and can conscientiously acquiesce in a
form of church government, outwardly resembling the episcopal, but actuated by
Independent principles.

I fear, Sir, that I have already exceeded the limits of your paper, and
therefore shall only add, that though a novice in controversy, yet if you think
this letter worthy of your notice, I shall take the liberty of writing my
sentiments to you hereafter, as occasion presents.

From the Verdant Vale, July 1, 1768. I am Sir, Your most obedient humble
servant, ROGER DE CHAMPO.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHEREAS a letter said to be wirtten by a missionary, to one of the king's
chaplains, appeared in the last American Whig, the writer of which letter the
Whig has not thought proper to name, out of pure good nature, (for he is known
to be one of the best tempered, sweetest babes in his majesty's dominions) lest
his enraged countrymen should tear him to pieces, for calling in question
Independent loyalty, etc. (as there can be no doubt that loyalty and
republicanism are perfectly consistent:) The Whig is hereby called upon to
produce his author's name, and to leave the original letter at his printer's,
for the inspection of the public. I say he is called upon to leave the
original; for no pretended copy will be accepted: Because, as the said Whig
has heretofore been accused of forgery, (an accusation which perjury can never
wash off -- but of this more hereafter) the highest proof will be demanded
which the nature of the thing can admit of.

Mr. Wm. Livingston is also called upon for a vindication of his aberratious
letter to the bishop of Landaff; -- if peradventure it be vindicable, as soon
as he can find leisure from the weightier matters of the law. -- Quere, whence
comes it, that Independents, in general, are so extremely afraid of any
imputation upon their loyalty; and that churchmen so patiently bear the
appellation of tories, with which the others are continually endeavoring to
brand them?

To TIMOTHY TICKLE, Esquire
AS I think it a pity that so elegant a composition, and so just a compliment,
as that paid by the reverend fathers -- in Connecticut, to William Livingston,
Esquire should only have made its personal appearance in one news-paper, I herewith
send it you, and also a version thereof, for the entertainment of all lovers of
poesy, especially the saints of New England; praying you to cause both of them
to be printed in your next Whip.

I am, Sir, Your very humble servant, CRABTREE CRAMBO.

At a general association of the pastors of the consociated churches in the
colony of Connecticut, convened by delegation at Coventry, June 21, 1768.
VOTED, that the thanks of this body be returned to William Livingston,
attorney at law, in New York, for his late vindication of the New England
churches, and planters, against the injurious reflections, and unjust
aspersions cast upon them, in the bishop of Landaff's sermon before the society
for propagating the gospel; contained in his manly and spirited letter to his
lordship. -- And that the scribe be desired to transmit this resolve to Mr.
Livingston, and cause it to be published in one of the New York newspapers.

Copy examined. NOAH WELLS, Scribe.

A reviving CORDIAL, for a fainting HERO.
-- Maestam dictis argressa sororem
Consilium vultu tegit, as spem front serenat.
VIRG. The Scribe and Pharisees in meeting,
To William, ^i -- n, send greeting: --

WHEREAS, great Ogg! our stern-brow'd bully,
You Have splash'd the bishop plentifully;
Carried his hide, and beat him sore,
As never beast was beat before:
Exposed the church, that popish-dragon,
And left the whore with scarce a rag on; --
Whereas, good master, merry-andrew,
You Have played us all the tricks you can do.
A critic first -- with many a blow
Have hacked and maimed the Christ-cross-row;
Distilled poor vowels over and over,
And changed them 'till they were no more;
While mangled words have sighed and panted.
Stretch^d to the size your worship wanted.
A conjurer next -- have made appear
Hobgoblins foul, and monsters drear,
And set our pious wives a grunting
Of burning priests, and bishop-hunting;
Then changed your form^ and turned to squeaking,
Like some old whining, canting deacon;
So mild your words, so odd your guise,
You might deceive the sharpest eyes;
So like a sheep, in voice and skin,
We scarce could know the wolf within; --
Whereas (to our eternal wonder!)
You Have deigned to lay aside your thunder,
Nor blushed with praise to color over
Those names you ever scorned before;
And proved so liberal of your paint,
Each monster seemed a very saint:
As satan thanked the worthy knight
Who drew his reverend form in White,
So we, in humble imitation,
(As met in smoking convocation,)
(What none we sear besides would do)
Present our public thanks to you.
Receive it sir, -- for it is intent;
It Is but exchange of compliment;
Such praise from friend to friend is due;
We only echo back to you;
And you're the Doctor's Echo too!
March on brave Will, and rear our babel,
On language so unanswerable!
Give church and state a hearty thump,
And knock down truth with falsehoods, plump;
So flat shall fall their churches fair stones,
Felled by another praise God bare-bones.
Signed with consent of all the tribe. By Noah W -- s, our fasting Scribe.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE. August 1,
The AMERICAN WHIG. [Numb. XXI.]
HOW highly soever the reverend members of the convention may value their own
rights and privileges, they certainly ought not to desire any new immunities,
manifestly tending to the abolition or infringement of the undoubted rights of
others. Did they really desire, or was there the least probability of obtaining
such an ideal bishop, as they hold up to public view, in order to lull us into
security, while themselves are prosecuting their scheme, for procuring a true
modern prelate, no other denomination ought in justice to give them any
opposition. Thus far we are perfectly agreed. But the matter of difference
between us is, that as the law stands they cannot have, nor indeed do they
desire, such a bishop as they would persuade the world they are soliciting for.
With respect to the impracticability of that project, it has already been
considered; and may perhaps hereafter be more ^ully discussed. I shall now
endeavor to convince the impartial reader, that they do not desire such a
bishop; but that this pretense, like a siren song, is only intended to delude
us to ruin. I am told the author of the appeal complains of it, as ill-usage to
be disbelieved in his protestations on this head. But whatever may be his
character, as a man of veracity (as indeed in no other instance should I
discredit his word) he cannot require impossibilities; and I flatter myself to
be able to convince any reasonable man, that to believe his declarations on the
subject matter now before us, is absolutely impossible. For besides the extreme
stupidity of confiding in the promises of this sort of gentry, when a darling
project is to be carried, any longer than they labor under an incapacity of
breaking them, it having been their constant practice to violate those kind of
engagements, whenever their designs were sufficiently matured to defy
opposition (as shall hereafter be abundantly shown from history) it is evident
from their present conduct, that a primitive bishop is as far from their
thoughts, as primitive Christianity. And can they desire us to take the word of
their champion in so momentous a matter, when it is so plainly contradicted by
the proceedings of the convention? Have they in their petitions, have they in
their letters, for a bishop, said a single syllable about a primitive one? Have
they not prayed for one, without mentioning any limitation or restriction? Is
not the settlement the Dr. talks about, a mere nonentity? and their refusal to
publish their petitions, an unanswerable argument, that they will not, that
they dare not, disclose their real intentions? Nay it appears by the appeal
itself, that were such a bishop really to come, he is to be transformed into a
downright pontifical sovereign, as soon as ever the episcopalians have
sufficient power, to ride the other religious denominations. We have therefore
other reasons for disbelieving their specious pretenses besides what may be
drawn from that insatiable thirst of power, of which they betray such violent
symptoms. Our suspicions are not barely grounded on their panting after
deanaries and prebendaries, as the heart pants after the water brooks: We have
the declaration of their own advocate, that they are determined to enslave us
as soon as they can. For only attend to the gradual evolutions of his scheme;
mark the progress of his reasoning, to convince the world, of his desiring only
a harmless bishop; and you will find how widely the doctor differs from -- the
doctor. The bishops, says he, to be sent to America (page 79) shall not
interfere with the properties or privileges, whether civil or religious, of
churchmen or dissenters. No places of civil power are to be sought for, nor
accepted of. No taxes to be imposed. -- All this is plausible enough; and had
he stopped here, our faith had not perhaps been totally non-plus'd; though the
bare consideration of the quarter it came from, had been sufficient to give it
a little dash of incredulity. But in page 111, we stumble upon a very different
story. Here the masque is dropped; and the hitherto disguised humble
petitioner, for a plain primitive apostolic innoxious bishop, appears an open
sturdy arrogant claimant for civil power, and worldly riches. So arrogant that
whoever is opposed to his claim, that is to say, whoever wants to hold him to
his own word, before plighted with great solemnity, and without reserve, is to
be considered as a bad subject. If bishops, says he, should be invested with a
proportionable degree of civil authority, neither would there be any reason for
complaint. But is not their interfering with civil authority, a manifest
interfering with our civil privileges, contrary to the word of God, as well as
to the doctor's prior profession, and most explicit promise? Yet this is no
cause for complaint. He has indeed good reason to wish it should not be
complained of, since a more dreadful evil is so close at its heels. For it
seems the deprivation of our civil privileges, is to be attended with the
emptying of our purses. His lordship's investiture, with civil authority, will
not satisfy the whole of this gentleman's demand. For what prelate would be
content with power, without riches? We are therefore to be taxed for supporting
him, in all the pomp and splendour of an American Viceroy. But see in what a
sneaking, mealy-mouthed, half-choak'd hesitating, claiming, disclaiming,
denying, avowing, bungling, manner, this contraband commodity is smuggled into
port. Shall we not be taxed (page 107) for the support of bishops? I answer not
at all. But should a general tax be laid upon the country, and thereby a sum be
laid sufficient for the purpose, yet I believe such a tax would not amount to
more than four pence in L 100, and this would be no mighty hardship on the
country. He that would think much of giving the six-hundredth part of his
income, to any use the legislature of the country, should assign, deserves not
to be considered in the light of a good subject. I can seriously say, I never
met with any book in my life, that contained so much tergiversation and
hypocrisy, in so short a compass. Pray, what does the gentleman mean by a sum
sufficient for the purpose? What purpose is it that any sum is wanted for?
Cannot a primitive bishop govern the clergy, ordain and confirm, without
four-pence in the L 100 of our estates? It is therefore beyond all question,
whatever airs the gentlemen of the convention may give themselves, on our not
believing things incredible, that it is really (notwithstanding all
protestations to the contrary) the modern, splendid, opulent, court-savoured,
law dignified, superb, magnificent, powerful, prelate, on which their hearts
are so intent; and of what would be deemed sufficient for his purpose, I shall
before I conclude this paper, give the reader a specimen. I ask further what
does he mean, by telling the world that four-pence in the L 100, would be
sufficient? Is not this representing us as immensely rich? And are not our
enemies at home keenly enough bent on loading us with taxes, without having
their stomachs stimulated by this gentleman's resounding our imaginary
affluence? For how many millions must we not be supposed to be possessed of, if
four-pence in L 100 would produce such a sum as I shall presently show, would
be thought but barely sufficient for the purpose? Has not his trumpeting our
riches, for which there is no more foundation than for his impeaching our
loyalty, and equally ridiculous with his pretensions of hearing the sound of a
trumpet that never sounded, a natural tendency to whet the appetite of those,
who, like so many harpies, are gaping for our substance? Does not the Dr. know,
that we groan under distresses unspeakable? That we are involved in debts
insolvable? That with respect to trade, to cash, to business of every kind, the
colonies were never in a more deplorable condition? How unfriendly then to his
native country, to instill such false notions of our wealth, into those who will
probably turn them to our undoing? -- And what does he mean by its being no
mighty hardship? Pray why should the people, to gratify his pride and ambition,
be laid under any hardship? king David scorned to build an altar on the
threshing floor of Ornan, without paying him the full price, 'tho the generous
man offered it to him gratis. He wanted not other people to pay for his
religion; nor to serve God at the proper costs and charges of Dissenters.
Again, who can tell how great the hardship must be, before the gracious and
candid Dr. Chandler will allow it to be a mighty one? Would not he think it a
hardship, and a mighty one too, to be obliged to pay one farthing in a hundred
pounds, to the support of any other religious denomination in the world? And is
this doing to others, as he would that they should do unto him? However
compliant this gentleman may imagine himself to be, before the experiment has
been tried upon himself, to unconstitutional and partial impositions under
color of law, others do not always measure the mightiness of a hardship by the
quantum, but by the partiality and injustice of the tax; and its being made a
precedent for greater impositions. On these principles it was, that the late
stamp act was so vigorously opposed; and on these principles it is, that the
tax levied on the non-episcopalians, for the episcopal churches in several of
the counties in this province, has always been complained of as a hardship; and
that by people who deserve as much to be considered in the light of good
subjects, as the doctor, or any of his fraternity. And who told him that the
legislature of any province, or of any kingdom, is so unaccountable and
omnipotent, as that every subject, who approves not of every act they pass,
deserves, on that account, the censure he has been pleased to bestow? Does he
not know, that in all free states, that part of the legislature especially,
which is composed of the representatives of the people, is entrusted by the
people for certain purposes; and that should they violate their trust, they
would deserve blame; and that consequently no subject for blaming them, would
himself deserve to be blamed? Are his notions of passive-obedience and
none-resistance so sublimated as to think, that if a future legislature of the
colony in which he resides, should establish popery, he would forfeit the
character of a good subject, for thinking much of paying four-pence in L 100 to
the support of the Romish religion? But as he is preparing the way for the
proceedings of some future assembly, under episcopal influence* we are
anathematized by way of anticipation, should we so much as lisp our discontent
against a tax bill, of the nature of what follows.

For the purchase of 500 acres of land, in the suburbs of the city of New York,
whereon to build an episcopal palace and offices, to make flower and kitchen
gardens, with orchards, meadows, pastures, arable land, and a small deer park,
for savoury meat, etc. at L 60 per acre; which is much lower than land now sell
for. (...) the sum of L 30,0000000. For building his Lordship's palace,
offices, etc. (...) at least 25,0000000. For purchasing the furniture for his
lordship's palace 3,0000000. For buying six coach horses, four cart horses and
3 saddle horses 3^00000. For buy^^g a gilded coach, chariot chair, and
harnesses, etc. 5000000. For building a cathedral, a vestry-room, the bishop's
courthouse with a front, altar, chancel, table, great bells, and a set of
music bells, all consecrated 35,0000000. For a set of fine organs for said
cathedral. 1,400.0000. For buying a steeple clock for said cathedral, that
chimes every quarter of an hour. 1500000. For building three genteel churches
for each county in this province; that is 33 in all, at L 4000 each 132,00000
00. For buying a glebe or parsonage of 300 acres, for each of the said
churches, and necessary buildings for the incumbent -- at a medium each L 2000
66,0000000. For buying 33 cambrick surplices and square caps, one for each
church, and 3 for the cathedral 2400000. For 33 fine prayer books, gilded,
illuminated, embossed, and clasped; that is one for each church, and three for
the cathedral -- at L 5 each 1800000. 293,7800000.

Item to the standing yearly salary of the Bishop of New York, which wi'the
emoluments should be equal to the governor's 3,0000000. To the chancellor's
yearly salary for the present only, equal to the chief justice's. 3000000. To
the archdeacons yearly salary, as assistant to the bishop 1,0000000. To the
dean of the chapter, his yearly salary 5000000. To six prebendaries or canons,
to form the chapter, each L 300 per annum. 1,8000000. To eleven rural deans,
one for each county to be ordained as soon as the bishops arrive; their yearly
salary at L 250 each 2,7500000. To thirty rectors newly ordained, that is three
for each county in the province, except the city of New York, at L 400 each.
12,0000000. To four organists for playing the cathedral organs, their yearly
salary at L 50 each 2000000. To eight cancillators for assisting the organists
in psalmody, the salary of L 20 each 160,0000. To a musician for playing the
music bells, and chiming the great bells on chanting days, and great festivals.
300000. L 21,7400000.

The aforementioned several articles and salaries are, I believe, as moderate
as would be thought sufficient for the purpose; and at this rate, in order to
raise the annual sum expended on the hierachy (after having paid the two
hundred and ninety-three thousand, nine hundred and eighty pounds, for
accommodating his lordship with his domestic appendages) the province must be
supposed to be worth one hundred and thirty millions, four hundred and forty
thousand pounds. A pretty piece of intelligence truly to transmit to old
England! But it being impossible to raise the sum required at the rate of 4 d.
in the 100 l. the Dr.'s episcopal legislature will be obliged to make a
different calculation; and as the precise value of the estates real and
personal of the good people of this colony is, at present, unknown, it will be
necessary for his lordship, after the ancient and laudable example (and which
in all probability they will christen, as they now do confirmation, by the name
of a divine ordinance) of William the conqueror, to introduce a doomsday book
of all our estates and effects, and who can tell but, according to that survey,
instead of four-pence in the L 100, we may be saddled with L 5 in the L 100, to
raise the above primitive and apostolic stipends. And is this the boasted
moderation of the convention? And do these people pretend to be the disciples
of that Jesus, who had not where to lay his head; or the successors of those
apostles, who traveled without scrip or purse? Good God! what an imposition on
the reason of mankind! what a shocking abuse of the divine name and authority!
By all that is dear and valuable, my friends and countrymen, I entreat and
implore you not to suffer yourselves to be deceived, by the idle pretense of a
primitive bishop; when they, maugre all their refinements in artifice, so
plainly discover their real intentions. Of all bondage, spiritual bondage is
the worst. But we are to be involved in bondage, both civil and ecclesiastic.
Pray gentlemen, ponder this momentous matter. -- If you do not consider,
posterity will feel. First or last it will be known who are friends to the
liberty of the country; the convention who thirst for an hierachy, that would
end in our utter destruction, or the author of the American Whig, who is
laboring to avert it. In so glorious a cause I despise their weekly calumnies,
and that matchless abuse and virulence, with which the tories (for such we have
lately discovered among us) have ever persecuted all who stand in their way.

In the above calculation, I have only taken notice of the field officers in
the sable regiment. -- I have made no allowance for Subalterns (whom a man may
number, that can count the stars of Heaven.) For as soon as the bishops arrive,
we must expect, as indispensable concomitants, a great number of Vicars,
Curates, etc. These are to be settled up and down, through every town and country
in the province, which has but three or four families, that for their
unhypocritical behavior, have been expelled church communion with the precise
ones; and having manfull ^^^rned episcopalians, have found a cordial welcome,
and uni^^^^rupted tranquillity of conscience, in the gentle and indulgent bosom
of the church. The new clergy having such slender flocks, will not be too
deeply engaged in visiting, catechizing, etc. to dabble in politics and
acquire what Dr. Chandler calls a proportionable degree of civil authority;
which having also left unsettled, he has put me to the trouble of ascertaining.
I therefore suppose, that the office of a justice of the peace, will be deemed
a proportionable degree for a Curate; that of the first judge of a county
court, for a rector; the station of a councillor, for a Dean; and the rank of
governor, for a bishop or primate. Considering however the Doctr's superior
merit, as advocate-general for the appellants; and that as in times of yore,
the church was wounded through the sides of Dr. Sacheverel, and is now most
lamentably lacerated in the personal identity of Dr. Chandler, I doubt whether
he will think himself proportionably recompensed, with less than the several
ascending gradations of Rector Sharp, who after having mounted to an
Archbishopric, became lord high treasurer of Scotland, general of all its
forces by sea and land, and commander in chief of his Majesty's guards.

Q.

A KICK FOR THE WHIPPER. [No. X.]
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
Semper ego auditor tantum, nunquamue reponam?

JUVENAL.
To Sir ISAAC FOOT,
SIR,
BEING no lawyer, I shall not attempt a formal rejoinder to, but beg leave, as
an ordinary by-stander during the present process in chancery, to make a few
very obvious remarks on, Richard Pleadwell's (for I cannot consider it as the
appellant's) labored replication.

Par. 1st. He protests "that the matters and things in the answer of the
appellees contained, are insufficient to be replied unto," and that, it seems,
because they are (as he is pleased to call them) untrue. Now to such an
ignorant fellow as I am, nothing seems, at least so well to admit of a reply as
an untruth; but Mr. P. scorning such ordinary business, appears ambitious of
the honor of replying to real truths, and desirous of trying his abilities at
defending the contrary. He in effect says, "the appeal was not prosecuted
merely for the aggrandizement and exaltation of the episcopal churches on the
ruin of all other Christian denominations in his Majesty's American dominions."
In which, by inserting the word merely, he at once injures the Whig's
correspondent, and betrays himself and his client, for the word merely is not
used by William Peer Williams, and as used by Mr. P. amounts to an
acknowledgment, that said aggrandizement on said ruin, was at least partly
aimed at by the appeal. If by the good will, liking and approbation of the
episcopal churches in general, with which he avers and insists the appeal was
instituted etc. he means their formal concurrence, I beg leave to doubt of the
truth of his assertion; -- if thereby he means their silence, supposed
expressive of assent, I shall not dispute the point with him; silent they
doubtless were, knowing perhaps as little of the appeal or its subject matter,
before its publication, as the non-episcopalians themselves; of which last I
never yet heard a single person say he thought it just and reasonable, or that
he had no objection to make to the proposed introduction of a bishop.

Par. 2d. 3d. 4th and 5th. Our repliant (whoever he be) not only speaks of
several things as manifest, which are by no means so, but pretends to know so
well the consciences and hearts of Dr. Ch -- r and the convention, that I am
authorized to conclude, that the council for the appellant is either the
convention, the individual appellant himself, or some simple mortal, who out of
the folly of his own heart, has without any conscience at all, t^^^en it into
his head to patronize the cause. That it is the convention in a body, I Am not
inclined to believe; for it were a sad case indeed, if no one in so respectable
body as between 20 and 30 missionaries met in order to write against Whigs,
could excogitate something new, without tiring the court with nauseous
repetitions. The appellant himself is surely a man of too much sense to chew
such an insipid cud over and over again, or to make such positive declarations
as to what had or had not entered into the hearts of the convention: Nor would
he certainly have retained as council such a simpleton as Richard Pleadwell. It
is therefore manifest, that he is some stupid pettifogger, the fire of whose
zeal has exposed him to his own charge (par. 6th) of having surreptitiously,
wilfully and corruptly, contrary to law, taken upon himself to appear as
council for the appellant, and made him as liable as he supposes the council
for the appellees to be, to a writ of maintenance.

On par. 6th and 7th I have to observe, that with regard to the point in
question, it matters not whether the American episcopal clergy be rich or poor,
reasonable or exorbitant in their claims, potent or impotent, whether there be
a dean and chapter or not, and whether the king's Conge d'elire can or cannot
obtain in America; whether there is or is not a manifest propriety and fittness
in point of policy, that the king should be the head of the church, wherever
it is established by law; whether the church of England is or is not
established in the colonies; or even whether the Doge of Venice, is or is not
Mayor of the city of New York. -- However I say these things may be, the
conclusion drawn from the statutes produe'd, remains incontestible, and is
confirmed (if that can be any confirmation) by even the oaths of the
subscribing English clergy, in spite of all Mr. P. has said, who would fain
mince down an absolute dependence upon, into a derivation of certain powers
from human laws. Those statutes were not as (Mr. P. mistakenly supposes)
advanced to prove "that there can be no right of episcopacy exclusive and
independent of human laws;" but that there actually is no such right within the
realm of England. And since non dat quod non habet, since all the prelates of
Great Britain can by consecration confer no diviner right than they have
themselves, it is manifest, that the right of episcopacy derived from England,
in whatever manner bishops may be appointed, can never become more divine in
America. So that on the whole Mr. Pleadwell pleads very ill; and his two
paragraphs under consideration, as well as the divine right of episcopacy
evidently are equally nugatory with the divine right of geography. Were we to
reason in Mr. P's way, we might say, "one might as well ridicule the divine
right of ordination as the divine right of popery," this last being indeed an
higher degree of episcopacy; but the truth is, with regard to divine right,
episcopacy differs as much from ordination as in practice episcopacy does from
preaching; which difference is evident from the pious examples of most of the
bishops in Great Britain.

In replying to the second cause of demurrer, respecting tithes, Mr. P.
alleges, that a bishop's title to them cannot be tried by an ejectment at law
(as Mr. Williams for his client had asserted) but (o^^ miserable blunder! oh
unlucky expression!) in a spiritual Court, the very thing we are afraid of!
poor P. your tongue I dare say, itches to plead such a cause.

The true meaning of the word profert in law I know not; but this I am clear
in, that if all Dr. Ch -- r 's representations are just (however insensible,
repugnant and contradictory the terms may be) the West India negroes, though
infidels, must needs be virtual churchmen.

For overruling the 4th cause of demurrer, Mr. P. comically eno'conceives it
"sufficient to find that an harmless bishop is known in the gospel", but alas!
reasoning from the gospel of Jesus Christ, to the laws of Great Britain, will
never answer. Harmless bishops, in the true sense of the word, there have been,
and I doubt not are; but such I aver are not as such, known in the law.

Mr. P. it seems, protests against the sentence given by the appellees as
premature, on pretense that the issue between the parties was not duly joined.
What was wanting to a right issue, I wish this jurisprudent gentleman would
inform the public.

Par. 8th, No. X. Mr. P. in circumlocutary phrases tells us, "that from time
immemorial it has been manifest, that some persons ever will disapprove etc."
He must needs be a long-headed fellow, to discover the connection between time
past immemorial and time future indefinite, and from (...) events of time past,
positively to foretell those of time to come. However luminous apparent and
notorious, he may call certain ideal matters of discovery, I fancy it will ere
long be luminous, apparent and notorious, not to All the good people of this
province, but to the generality of Americans, that Mr. P. as well as Squire T.
and Dr. C. (if they are all different persons) and some others, have
groundlesly and maliciously endeavored to fix the charge of sedition on
anti-episcopalians. Mr. P. it seems, despises the disapprobation of the
appellees Dr. C. appealed to. -- What! slight the opinion of the court, and
charge its decision as impertinent and immaterial! What a brazen faced fellow!
Kick him out of the court.

As to the conventional petitions, if they are indeed so unexceptionable as is
pretended, it is mighty strange we cannot see them produced in court; for I dare
say, the bare word of no partizan, whatsoever will be taken on this occasion.

That the appellees or their ancestors in America, (it matters not which, it
seems) have ever persecuted the church, i. e. to be sure, the church of
England, is by no means certain; and indeed to endeavor to make her a
church-militant, had been a silly attempt in any, for such she always has been
in America, and that not a church militant defensive, but a church militant
offensive; having always very characteristically promoted her own interest at
the expense of other churches, and she is now evidently militating, as she has
lately been stratagematizing to become a church, triumphant, rampant and
gubernant.

The charter of uninterrupted succession, you know, Sir, we care not 100 times
more about than we do about episcopacy; so that (of two evils choosing the
least) I say, if the church of England, will but keep her bishops (which the
church of America needs not) at, home, she is welcome to monopolize the
charter, for aught that cares.

Sir, your humble Servant, OBABIAH LISTEN.
Schenectady, July 1 1768.
From Mr. GAINE's GAZETTE, August 8.
A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG. [No. XVIII.]
By TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
2 TIMOTHY iii. 13. -- Evil Men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving
and being deceived.


IN the XIIIth Number. of the American Whig, the American Churchman again makes
his appearance. Concerning this writer, I have now two or three conjectures to
make, which seem to me to affect the merits of his paper; and I think there is
considerable presumptive evidence to support them. My first conjecture (which
has been before hinted at in my VIth Numb.) is, that this American churchman is
only the American Whig, who has put on the appearance of a churchman, that he
may the more effectually deceive and destroy. The hints for this conduct, he
might possibly borrow from an ancient adept in this same trade of deceiving,
who we are assured by good authority, can, when occasion requires, transform
himself into an angel of light.

My second conjecture is, that he is some paltry retainer to the law, or has
got some pitiful post; and that he is afraid of having his consequence, or,
what may be of greater consequence to him, his fees, lessened by the arrival of
a bishop: This may be the reason why he is so violently "opposed" to bishops
and spiritual courts.

My third conjecture is, that this American churchman is some delinquent, who
having suffered on the other side of the atlantic, according to his demerits,
in a spiritual court, thinks he may safely vent his spleen and malice at the
distance of a thousand leagues.

These conjectures appear probable to me; I may however be mistaken; I pretend
not to infability: That I leave to their holiness, the pope, and the American
Whig. Which of them has the best right to it, they may at their leisure
determine between themselves. But that the American Whig has very high
pretentions to infallibility: and that he never will suffer the pope to ingross
it all to himself, may be made very evident by a few queries, viz. What
evidence has the American Whig, that the clergy want not such a primitive
bishop, as is specified in the appeal; but on the contrary, a modern, splendid,
opulent, court-favoured, law-dignified, superb, magnificent, powerful,
bloody-minded, Sin promoting, conscience-killing, soul-destroying,
hell-deserving prelate? -- Ans. His own infallibility. -- What evidence has he,
that in the seven abominable petitions, which he says were sent to England by
the convention, the loyalty of the dissenters was impeached? -- Ans. His own
infallibility. What proof has he, that these petitions were hatched by a few
warm missionaries in the provinces of New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania;
and that the church people in general, nay, almost universally, are opposed to
the introduction of bishops into America? Ans. His own infallibility. -- The
reader may pursue this hint at his leisure: I have a few words more to say,
concerning courts.

No person that I have heard of, ever proposed the establishing of spiritual
courts in America: It is a mere bugbear, with which the American Whig, and his
understrappers, endeavor to frighten the good people of these colonies. And if
the spiritual courts in England, deserve all the severe things that he has said
of them, I fancy it is owing, neither to the constitution of those courts, nor
to the judges, but to the lawyers. If any one doubts, whether the common law
courts even in this province, are in some degree of bad estimation, let him ask
the people, -- To what is this owing? -- To the judges? -- By no means. They
are all of them men of excellent characters, and do honor to the posts they
fill. Is it owing to the constitution of the courts? That cannot be imagined.
Is it not therefore owing to the evil practice of some of the lawyers, that our
courts are sunk in the opinion of the people? Ignorance and avarice, will, I
presume, produce much the same effects in a lawyer, that they do in a
clergyman. Let those among the lawyers whose abilities. integrity, love of
justice, and contempt of riches, exempt them from the above accusation, -- let
them I say, expose the unworthy members of their profession, who, by perplexing
the plainest cases, by artificial delays, and exorbitant demands, have sunk an
honorable and useful profession into such a degree of contempt, that in the
judgment of the majority of the people of several counties in a late election,
a lawyer was deemed unworthy of a seat in our assembly.

Our American churchman affirms that, It was the violence of a few bigots, that
obliged the government to shut up the convocation; -- at the same time he
allows the meeting in convocation, or synods, to be a privilege or right,
perhaps essential to the well-being of the church of Christ. This is such a
reflection upon the justice of the government, as none but a madman or a Whig
would have made. -- There were a few bigots in the convocation, therefore the
government, -- the kings of the house of Hanover, says the American Whig, I
think, in one of his papers, -- have deprived the church of England of a right
essential to the well-being of the church of Christ. -- Can this be true? Would
a Christian government, or a Christian King, for the fault of a few men,
deprive a national church of a right essential to the church of Christ? Verily,
Mr. American churchman, I have more reason than ever to fear, that your manners
are corrupted by evil communications; and that your new companion, the American
Whig, has taught you the scurvy trick of lying for, -- what you may possibly
think, -- the truth.

The American churchman censures the conduct of the clergy, for presuming to
address or petition the king upon the subject of American bishops, without
asking leave of the governors of the provinces, of the bishop of London, and
some of the laity. -- such I suppose, as himself and the American Whig. --
Whether this precaution was wholly omitted, or how far it was neglected, some
people may hereafter be informed, to their no small astonishment. But I have
always understood, that subjects of the crown of England, have a constitutional
right to petition the king for the redress of their grievances, without asking
leave of any person on earth. Why then may not the clergy exercise this
constitutional right, as well as other subjects? If it is said that they are
not aggrieved; I reply, that they are as capable of knowing when they are
aggrieved, as other people are. -- Is it no grievance to be obliged, at a very
considerable risk and expense, to cross the atlantic for orders? Is it no
grievance, when a church becomes vacant, to be obliged to wait a year before it
can be supplied; oftentimes two or three years, and sometimes eight or ten? Is
it no grievance, in case a clergyman behaves disorderly, to have no superior
to call him to account, nearer than 3000 miles? Is it no grievance, to be
deprived of what we really believe to be an apostolica^ rite? -- These, we
think, are grievances, although the American Whig, and his underlings, affect to
treat them as trifles. And for the redress of these grievances, we think we
have a right to petition the king; as good a right as any other subjects have
to petition for the redress of such grievances as they find themselves
suffering under.

The American Whig, and the American churchman, have frequently affirmed, that
a vast majority of people of all denominations, are violently opposed to an
American episcopate; -- that a majority of the church people are as much
against it as others. -- This I will not believe, even though his Holiness the
American Whig should pawn his infallibility for the truth of it. -- I remember
in a late election, the cry of, no bishop in New York, did no good to those who
maliciously bellowed it forth. And in a neighboring county, where the same
faction set up an ecclesiastical weathercock for a candidate; after all his
preaching and praying, the cry of no bishop, had just the same effect as it had
in New York; -- nobody minded it. -- Besides, other people can judge, as well
as American Whigs; and I have the greatest reason to believe, there are ten
people of other denominations, who are willing and desirous of having bishops
in America, for one churchman that is against it.

There are many other things in this XIIIth number. of the Whig, that are very
exceptionable, which I have not room to take notice of. In short, I doubt
whether there is a paper in the nation (observe, I include all the colonies) of
the size of it, that contains so many aberrations from the truth, and from
sound reasoning -- ten thousand pardons of the courteous Mr. Wm. Livingston,
for encroaching so much upon his property, as to make use of one of his
rhetorical flourishes.

To the honor of the university of Oxford, which this writer so foully
asperses, it ought to be remembered, (and therefore I repeat it) that the first
public opposition to the arbitrary measures of king James the second, began
there; even at the time when he was complimented and flattered by the
dissenters; who in their fulsome addresses to the king, on account of the
unconstitutional suspension of the penal laws, styled the Roman catholics,
their good brethren. An address of this kind was sent from the independent
teachers of the town of Boston, in New England. -- In short, at this period,
the dissenters did every Thing in their power to rivet those fetters, that the
king was forging for the nation, until they found the opposition against him
was likely to succeed; and then they shifted about, not choosing to be of the
losing side; for the children of this world are wiser in their generation than
the children of light.

THE following letter privately left at my printer's containing demands that I
can by no means comply with, unless I previously obtain the consent of my
constituents, -- the members of the church in America; -- I am constrained to
publish, in order that they all may have an opportunity of canvasing it: Not
that I should have dreamed of publishing a private letter, had not an utter
disability to comply with the American Whig's own proposal, by any other means,
compelled me to it. This must plead my excuse for an action which nothing but
absolute necessity will ever induce a man of honor, or even of common honesty,
to commit.

N. B. The original will be left at the printer's.

TIMOTHY TICKLE.
NEW YORK, 1st August, 1768.
To TIMOTHY TICKLE, Esqr
SIR,
I Am not in reality that foe to the church and an American episcopate, which
my past schemes, and interest, necessitated me to appear. This declaration will
undoubtedly much surprise you; but is, nevertheless, as true as surprising; and
I now heartily own to you, (but it must be in confidence; for it is not yet
time to throw off the mask, and publicly declare my true sentiments,) that I
think it highly reasonable you should have a bishop, upon the plan Doctor
Chandler has proposed. Nor do I, from the most mature deliberation,
consideration, and examination, conceive any danger to arise from the
completi^^ of his scheme, maugre my brawling to the contrary.

You must notwithstanding my severity upon you hitherto, confess I have
talents; which talents I now determine (provided you come into my scheme)
strenuously to exert in your cause.

You have no doubt, looked into my Whig of this day, and observed my estimate
of the expense of his lordship's demesne, etc. etc. which amounts to L.
293,980,^00,^00. Now, Sir, if the convention will enter into treaty with me,
and engage, that I shall be chief agent and undertaker for his lordship; I will
for that sum, purchase for him 500 acres of fine land, conveniently, agreeably,
and beautifully situated; and engage to erect thereon, a palace, and offices
complete and suitable; also, all the other buildings in the said estimate,
nobly designed. and elegantly executed; with bells, furniture, carriages,
cat^le, etc. etc. opposite. And further, I will immediately upon their
ratifying such engagement, desert my present cause, friends and junto, (except
those I can persuade to come over with me) commence a strenuous, zealous, and
indefatigable assertor of the rights and privileges of the church; and the
propriety, necessity, usefulness, and harmlessness of an episcopate.

On the other hand, if you do not accept my proposal, I will with redoubled
vigor, inveteracy, spleen, and malevolence, continue to persecute, abuse,
insult, and vilify you, your church, and its clergy, with all my powers, and
all my interest.

'Till I have your answer, and the resolution of the convention on the above, I
am Sir, most cordially yours,

The AMERICAN WHIG.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, August 8.
The AMERICAN WHIG. [Numb. XXII.]
THE American Whig asserts in his first number, that Dr. Chandler, and the
convention, do not want a primitive Christian Bishop. Upon this Mr. Seabury has
been pleased to say, that "the Doctor and the convention (gentlemen at least at
respectable as himself) meaning the author of the Whig, are in fact accused of
the grossest falsehood and deceit, pretending to ask for a bishop only upon the
plan proposed in the appeal, while it is not the primitive Christian bishop
they want; which he, Mr. Seabury, calls a piece of effrontery and malice. This
gentleman, as respectable as he is, appears to be so transported with passion,
that less regard is to be paid to his assertions, since such intemperate heat
often hurries men into expressions, which, when composed and unruffled, they
cannot but condemn. But in the same mistake persists the moderate and candid
Dr. Chandler, in the conclusion of his celebrated tory -- advertisement. And
Hierocles, who writes with singular seriousness and solemnity, repeatedly
affirms, and (...) notable affectation of gravity, that it is certain the D^^
(...) the convention do want, and desire only, a true pri^^ bishop. Thus if
strong reiterated, and serious assertions, will prove it, they are in a fair
way of gaining their point. And since they so strenuously insist on the
sincerity of their professions, which is undoubtedly, in the present
controversy, of the last importance: I shall, in this paper, endeavor to show,
by pointing out sundry material differences between the primitive bishop and
the bishop mentioned by Dr. Chandler, that they cannot expect to secure the
public credit, notwithstanding the solemnity of their protestations.

1st. The primitive bishop was chosen by the people, over whom he was to
preside: It was by the popular suffrage, that this or that man was appointed to
this or that cure; as appears abundantly from the writings of the fathers. And
the canons of the primitive church fully recognized this right of the people,
to choose their own bishop; and declared, that without such election, they
should not be considered as bishops. But the bishop described by Doctor
Chandler in his appeal, is not expected to be chosen by the people, over whom
he is to preside, but is an officer, for whom application has lately been made
to our superiors by the clergy of several of the colonies. He is one for whom
addresses have been made to the throne, and earnest solicitations to the
sovereign from time to time, to appoint him. Page 50.

2d. There was one or more primitive bishop or bishops in every city, or town,
where Christianity was professed. The apostle Paul appointed, that there should
be elders or bishops ordained in every city, or town, of the island of Crete.
And though Crete was but an island, yet being very fruitful, it supported many
inhabitants; and is celebrated for its hundred cities. Thus, according to the
apostle's direction, there were to be in this one island many bishops. Nor was
there any thing peculiar in the circumstances of those islanders, that rendered
it necessary to have more bishops there than elsewhere. It was the common
practice of the primitive church to have bishops thus numerous, and thick
settled, as appears from the most ancient ecclesiastical records: The fathers
often mentioning several hundreds, on various occasions, convening together, in
different countries. But the Doctor's bishop is to preside over not only a
great number of towns, but of colonies and provinces. He frankly acknowledges,
that three bishops on the continent are the most that have been mentioned. 107.
Thus every town was, in the primitive times, to have a bishop or bishops; but
three bishops can now preside over a vast tract of country of near 2000 miles
in extent, from Newfoundland to Georgia. The primitive bishops were to feed the
flock which was among them. But this gentleman's bishop is to feed those who
are distant from him, fifty, a hundred, or a thousand miles; or rather not to
feed them at all. For,

3d. According to primitive institution, Bishops were to be apt to teach, and
to take heed to all the flock -- to feed the church of God. But Doctor
Chandler's bishop is not to be a constant preacher; nor, as far as I can learn
from him, to preach the gospel at all. How then should he feed the flock? And,
if he should even preach, how can he feed flocks so numerous and remote? -- But
his business is not with the flock, but chiefly with the clergy, as if they
were such a disorderly set of men, as peculiarly to require a bishop to keep
them in tolerable regulation. But if this be true, how does it agree with the
society's abstract, 1765. p. 58, in which they inform us, Mr. Palmer,
missionary, at New Haven, takes occasion, from some reflections cast on the
missionaries, to bear the strongest testimony to their unblameable conduct; of
whom he thinks he may with truth say, that he does not know of any one
missionary in New England, who does not behave with ministerial prudence; and
who is not blameless in his life, and faithful i^^^ the discharge of all the
duties of his function. Can a^^^ equal good character be given, with truth, of
the inferior clerg^ in England or Ireland, who are under the immediate eye
o^their bishops? -- And since the missionaries sustain so unsullied a
reputation, can there be any necessity for sending a prelate into this country
to govern them? Such a superior may make them worse, but there is no
probability of his making them better.

4th. The primitive bishop was to discipline all offenders; such as sinned
before all, they were to rebuke before all, that others also might sear; and to
reject H^reticks after the first and second admonition. These are directions
given to Timothy and Titus, by the apostle Paul, whom the Doctor supposes to
have been primitive bishops. Page 6. But according to his account, of his
American bishop, he is not to discipline the laity at all; no, not so much as
to make any attempts of this nature. It is only with regard to the clergy that
it is proposed, to establish a strict discipline. Page 31.

5th. The bishop whom our author mentions, and whom he professes that he and
the convention desire, is a gentleman whose coming he represents to have been
hindered by the changes of government -- the revolutions of power -- the
opposition of contending parties at home -- the intrigues of foreign courts --
and the attacks of neighboring kingdoms and states, etc. But such occurrences
were no obstacles to the settlement of primitive bishops in the apostles' time.
We hear of no such complaints in the new testament. The opposition of
contending parties in the Roman empire, etc. did not prevent the apostles from
appointing Christian bishops.

6th. The bishop of the appeal is to be a grand personage, for whose support
and dignity, great preparations have been made, and are still making; and after
all, the Doctor is not certain they will be sufficient, without a general tax
of four-pence in the L 100. P. 107. He shows that a committee has been
extraordinarily appointed, to find out ways and means for the maintenance and
support of bishops in America. -- That eight hundred and twenty-six pounds,
seven shillings and five pence sterling. has been expended in purchasing and
repairing a seat for the residence of his American lordship -- that it has been
proposed that the revenues of certain lands in St. Christophers, be applied to
this purpose, viz. the maintenance of two bishops -- that a fund has been
appropriated for this end, which already consists of several thousand pounds
sterling (probably not less than ten) -- And that as many have given liberally,
on the distant prospect of its being wanted, it is not to be doubted but, if a
bishop or two were once fixed in America, others would make still larger
donations. These, in all probability, will make a very considerable revenue.
And yet the Doctor seems to think, all this may not be sufficient; and
therefore grants there may be a four penny tax laid on all the inhabitants; and
certainly he was not disposed to cede any thing, to the disadvantage of his
cause, unless he has great reasons to force him to believe it was intended to
be taken into the scheme of the episcopate. Now this four penny tax on all the
inhabitants, as trifling as he is pleased to represent it, would make a
prodigious sum. But were there any such preparations made, and funds provided
for the maintenance of the primitive Christian bishops? Was it by any divine
institution appointed, that bishops must be thus rich and magnificent? Are
great wealth and superb palaces necessary prerequisites to a primitive bishop?
Where is the divine command, or primitive example, of so grand a prelate? What
example could such a bishop set his poor flock, save that of pride, ambition,
the love of the world, and temporal pomp and grandeur?

Let the impartial reader duly consider the preceding remarks, and then say,
whether there be not an evident and essential difference, between a truly
primitive Christian bishop, and the lordly ecclesiastic described by our candid
appellant? Is there no difference between one who is voluntarily chosen by the
people, whose capacity and fidelity they have tried, and can confide in, and
one imposed on them by the state, of whom they know nothing? Is there no
difference between liberty and slavery? Is it not a privilege for the people to
choose their own bishops? Why then did Christ, the great king and head of the
church, confer it upon them; Why did the primitive Christians so highly prize
it? Why so earnestly contend for it? -- Is there no difference between having a
bishop or bishops in every town, and but one or two on this vastly -- extended
continent? Is there no difference between a bishop who feeds the flock, and
takes heed to them all, and one who does not feed them, nor take any care of
them, being wholly employed about the clergy? Is there no difference between
one who faithfully administers the descipline appointed in the gospel, to all
the proper subjects of it, and one who will not so much as attempt to
discipline any of the people, be their offenses what they will? Is there no
difference between a personage of such immense wealth, of such dignity and
grandeur, as to eclipse the governors of provinces, and strike the populace
wherever he approaches, with greater dread and reverence than the supreme
magistrate; and the humble and lowly bishop of the primitive church? If a man
can see no difference between them, he must labor under a tory-jaundice, or be
totally blind.

The colonists have not as yet, that I know of, made any objections against the
episcopalians' having primitive bishops. Such I believe would give no umbrage
to persons of other denominations. The Moravians have their ^ishop; the
Sandimanians have, or lately had, their bishop at Danbury in Connecticut. Has
there been any alarm in the colonies? No. And the episcopalians may have, I
doubt not, a thousand primitive bishops, without any molestation. They may make
every missionary a bishop, without giving any sort of uneasiness to the
colonies, provided they adhere to the primitive pattern.

Hence it is evident, that Dr. Chandler and Mr. Seabury, Aristocles and
Hierocles, have not the least reason to make such clamor about conscience. For
what is it that they plead conscience in this affair? Is it for a primitive
bishop in every town, to preach to his people, and feed his flock with the
sincere milk of the word, and discipline disorderly members? Who has ever
opposed this? Will they solemnly declare, that they are conscientious in
desiring a bishop of such immense wealth, power and grandeur, as to be able to
protect and defend them? Let them produce the divine rule that lays any
obligation on-their consciences, to request such an unscriptural officer as
this grand, opulent, powerful, spiritual lord, and we cordially acquiesce. Nor
have they hitherto given any security, that this same state-created political
bishop shall not aspire even after greater dignity and dominion than the Doctor
has been pleased to assign him at his first arrival. Will they promise he shall
not? But who is authorized to oblige either him or them to perform those
promises? This same order of men have promised, as fair as possible, at two
memorable periods, -- the restoration and revolution. But as soon as they got
into power, they affected to forget all their engagements, and utterly refused
to fulfill them. Let them remember this, and learn from their former conduct,
what little regard is to be paid to their most solemn protestations. R.

I have received an excellent letter on the divine right of episcopacy, from a
member of the Dutch church, which shall be inserted in due season.

WHEREAS by an advertisement in the Mercury, evidently wrote by a person, who,
by the disappointment of an American bishop, has beyond all question been
deprived of his senses; the author of the American Whig is called upon to prove
the genuineness of a copy of a letter, wrote by one of the missionaries to one
of his majesty's chaplains, and published in the American Whig No. xx. -- The
author begs leave to acquaint the public, that conceiving it utterly beneath
his character to commence a correspondence with so raving a slanderer, and
altogether improper to expose the names of persons of the most spotless
reputations (whom the production of the proofs will render it necessary to
mention) to the extreme virulence and malice wherewith the said advertiser
will, while nameless (to judge by the sample already exhibitted) undoubtedly
pursue them; and thinking it, at the same time, highly incumbent upon him to
convince the world of the authenticity of the said copy, whenever any of the
persons hereafter mentioned shall think proper to call it in question, without
concealing his name; he promises that if any member of the convention or any of
the missionaries, will, under his hand in print, deny the said copy to be
genuine, and, with any tolerable decency, desir^ to be convinced of the truth,
the author of the American Whig shall think himself obliged to produce such
proofs, as will be fully satisfactory to the public, for which be will appeal
to that respectable tribunal.

The American Whig.

A KICK FOR THE WHIPPER. [No. XI.]
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
Ne Suitor ultra crepidam.

PLINY.
SOME weeks ago Squire T. warned us of a new, and it seems very sensible,
correspondent; and now (No. XI.) behold the man himself! -- Enter Agricola. --
Well! if Squire T. meant either subjectively sensible, as a wasp, or
objectively sensible, as a Billingsgate fish-woman, Agricola is a sensible
fellow indeed. But to speak seriously, he seems to have only gnawed over again
bones of contention; twenty times bedrivel'd before, or (like a true clown as
he seems to be) to have raked together all the chaff, straw, and rubbish of
calumny, scattered by others, in order to make an ecclesiastico-political
bonfire. I at first designed to have answered him, with all the dignity of
silence; but lest the propriety of contempt, should be construed into the
convenience of neglect, I shall make a few remarks on what, for that reason
only, deserves notice.

This pragmatical peasant, in the close of his piece, affects the air of an
original writer, pretends to have "exposed the designs, etc. of the
Independents," and plumes himself on the occasion, as though he himself had been
the first, nay single, discoverer of the gunpowder plot; and yet has, in fact,
only aped his superiors in the art of scandal, and, like a parrot, tortured our
ears by chattering over all the foul language of every passenger. But what
merit, but that of telling falsehoods, with a better grace than his
predecessors, could this miserable mortal (in his great vanity) hope to
exhibit, in collecting all the fiddle faddle of the present day, by different
hands, gleaned from the rampant unbridled press-scandal of 1753; and murdering
the poor lies by mere dint of repetition? Nay, who, but less than the least of
all partisans, would not have foreseen, that such stale groundless allegations
as his, by putting the public again in mind of past transactions, could scarce
fail of injuring, instead of promoting the cause of the party he flings dirt
for? What a despicable figure must such a scribbler make in the eyes of every
one, who considers what episcopal zealots almost four score years ago, and on
every convenient occasion since, have attempted! Every non episcopalian, on
hearing Agricola again talk of the ambitious schemes of the insidious faction,
their engines of malice, misrepresentations, false suggestions, and hypocrital
pretenses" charge them with "mischief-making in the Dutch church," fret at the
Independent Reflector and Watchtower, and boast o^ "the moderation of the
church of England, etc." will naturally recollect the arbitrary conduct of Gov.
Fletcher, the ministry acts, the tyrannical persecutions under Ld. Cornbury,
the attempts of a certain party to monopolize marriages under Gov. Clinton, the
artifices they used to establish a party college, their rage at, and defamation
of, a patriotic writer, their mean invasion of the liberty of the press, and
dastardly invocation of the aid of the secular arm; and he will very readily,
and, I dare say, very justly conclude, that Agricola, being stimulated by his
ghostly zeal to bellow somewhat for the church, repeats those violent
exclamations (which are but echoes of echoes) merely because he has nothing
else to say; as they doubtless were originally made with the same view with
which a felon pursued cries, stop thief!

But what Agricola chiefly bawls about, is the persecution of the Quakers in N.
E -- Now were I as greedy for gold. and possessed of as much brass, as he, I
would plumply deny the fact; but I must (as they say) speak truth and shame the
devil, while I sorrowfully own, that the poor Quakers were indeed cruelly
persecuted formerly, by non-conformists in New England; but I cannot conceive
how, under our present circumstances, the fact concerns us, unless some of us,
who may be their posterity, are about to have their iniquities visitted upon us
by the persecutions of some of the clerical zealots of the church of England;
and I dare challenge the most censorious of all the hotheaded missionaries, to
lay his hand on his heart and declare, that he in his conscience believes, the
present Independents, or Presbyterians, have the least design or desire to
persecute so harmless a people as the Quakers, or even that he cares a rush (if
the church can but rise superior to all kinds of meeting houses) whether they
have or not. However I must not forget to put Agricola in mind of the
persecutions in England, in the reign of Charles II. during which, for about 20
years, the poor Quakers suffered fines, confiscations, personal abuses and
imprisonment, by which many died, transportation, banishment, etc. and indeed
every thing short of hanging, and ask him who were the actors in those scenes
of cruelty! And I appeal to the world to determine, whether churchmen have not
always been as remarkable, as Independents, for persecuting practices, as well
as principles, and indeed whether those principles are not too evident in
America, though want of sufficient power, at present, prevents their reduction to
practice.

On the whole, I would seriously advise Agricola, to re-exchange ecclesiastical
politics, for his native agriculture, and laying down his pen, prudently return
to his Plough; just giving him, for the subject of his rustical meditations,
the words of a very late writer, viz. that they are only the mere tools of a
court party, or the narrow minded bigots among the inferior clergy, who, to
serve their low purposes, do now and then promote the cry, that the church or
the state is in danger.

Priestly's ESSAY. L. From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, August 15. A WHIP FOR THE
AMERICAN WHIG. [NO. XIX]
By TIMOTHY TICKLE, Esquire
The following letter I insert with much pleasure, and am high obliged) as I am
confident the public will be also) to the worthy gentleman, who did me the
honor to write it.

TIM. TICKLE.

O Navis, te reserunt in mare
Novi fluctus.
HORACE.
To the good people in AMERICA.
My dear Countrymen!
I HAVE long remained a silent spectator of those commontions which designing
men have been endeavoring to excite among you. A regard to your welfare, and a
dotestation of such iniquitous attempts, forbid me any longer to keep silence.
The well-being of religion, is productive of well-being to the state, and
consequently to every individual. Can those men then be your friends, who are,
and have ever been, endeavoring to prejudice the cause of Christianity, and to
bring its ministers into disgrace? I appeal to every man whose judgment is
guided by reason, not by prejudice, whether the author of those inflammatory
papers (the Whigs) seem not rather to be heated with the fire of intemperate
animosity, than glowing with the pure flame of patriotism! Why else this
assiduity to raise suspicions and envyings in the minds of Dissenters against
the established church? Why all these wanderings from the direct tract of the
subject, to point out the blemishes of churchmen? This studious inquisition to
extract poison from every luxuriancy? Cor.
"Charity hops all things, believes all things.

Attend, my countrymen, to the merits of the cause, without being infatuated
with the siren voice of sophistry, or the intoxicating breath of calumny! --
Prejudice, like love, is blind to the blemishes of the subject it admires.

The members of the church of England in America, esteeming themselves (as
loyal subjects of the crown of Great Britain) justly entitled to the liberties
and privileges which are granted to every other denomination, viz. Those
privileges which are essential to her well-being, and without which she
considers her government as lax, irregular, and defective; humbly supplicated
their superiors that these inconveniences might be removed, and their church
thereby be supplied without difficulty, with clergymen ordained after that mode
which they esteem purest; and their youth enjoy the apostolical rite of
confirmation. These advantages, (as consequences of obtaining an episcopate so
circumscribed in it is powers as to be incapable of injuring others) they still
entertain reasonable expectations of receiving, both from the favorable
reception of their petitions, -- from the justness of the request, and the
prior movements of their governors to the same end.

Though they flattered themselves, their countrymen could have no objections to
so reasonable a demand -- a demand founded on liberty of conscience, and those
rights which are bequeathed them by magna charta, the richest donation of their
forefathers! the first article of which declares -- The church of England shall
be free, and have her rights entire, and her liberties uninfringed; -- Yet that
their countrymen might not entertain the least discontent or suspicion, they
explained the plan with the most studied openness -- avoided every appearance
of harshness, and considered the objections that had been offered, with the
greatest mildness and temper; and proposed examining any others that should
arise, with decency and charity.

I beseech you to reflect, like men conscious of the advantage of Christian
unanimity, what have been the consequences of these candid proceedings.

Doctor Chandler, and the convention, were accused of falsehood -- of not
desiring a bishop under the restrictions they declared. -- What proof was
alleged in confirmation of so blackening, so weighty a charge? Not one! indeed
I would appeal to the least discerning of my fellow citizens, whether men, in
their situation, would thus convict themselves of so apparent a falsehood, by
publicly professing they desired bishops so limited, and petitioning for them
in the full enjoyment of their powers. -- Such an allegation brands them at
once with the character of the greatest villains, and simplest fools.

Your attention has also been palled with sophistical and unnatural
interpretations of sentences -- by words tortured into unlawful meanings, and
then chastised for being so. And a certain gentleman, once deemed peerless in
erudition, (has, to the sorrow of his friends, the astonishment of his enemies,
and the great diversion of you, the public) employed that time which might have
been better spent in the service of his country, in elaborately spinning from
his almost exhausted brain, well wrought exhibitions of cobweb-wit. -- But
unfortunately! they have been so delicately thin and tender, that they have
fallen to pieces at the least touch of examination, and been sadly disordered
and discomposed by the rude breath of enquiry.

In order to raise your resentment against the clergy of the church, they have
endeavored to make Dr. Chandler accuse other denominations of disaffection to
the crown of Great Britain. To effect this, they quote a sentence from a
paragraph of his appeal, where, investigating the causes which might possibly
be supposed to operate, against the appointment of an American episcopate, the
Doctor says as follows; Our condition seems to imply, and strangers may
conclude from it, that there has been something grossly amiss, and
unprecedented in our behavior, which has brought down upon us the displeasure
of our superiors, from whom we might otherwise expect, at least, that common
protection and indulgence, which is so generously and properly afforded to all
others. But while we thus suffer, we are not apprehensive that it can be owing
to the displeasure of our superiors, as we are conscious of no crimes, with
regard to the state. On the other hand, we claim a right to be considered as
equal with the foremost in every due expression of fidelity and loyalty. -- No
trumpet of Sedition was ever heard to sound from our pulpits. -- No seeds of
disaffection have been suffered more privately to be sown in our houses. The
last sentence of this paragraph has been stretched to answer their purpose; but
I am confident that none who confiders the whole tenor and intent of it, can be
thus imposed on: However, let me illustrate the innocence of it by a familiar
instance. Should a number of men be allowed the enjoyment of certain
privileges, on condition they were obedient to a law enjoined, and a part of
them, by some means or other, remain unpossess'd of those privileges, -- and
they, in order to obviate any surmises of their sufferings being occasioned by
a breach of the condition stipulated, should (endeavoring to vindicate their
innocence to the world) assert They were equal in fidelity to the foremost of
their neighbors, -- That they had never publicly or privately transgressed
the law in question; could such assertions be ever interpreted as injurious to
their neighbors? No! common sense, in spite of the sophistry of
misrepresentation, must determine, they are consentaneous with their duty to
their neighbors and themselves. But the paragraph of the doctor needed not
this vindication; for any man who takes a cursory view of the appeal, will find
a sufficient refutation of all the invidious inferences which malice might be
inclined to draw from it, in a note at the bottom of the page, -- wherein he
says, This declaration is not intended to imply any accusation of others. --
His majesty's American subjects of all denominations, belonging to the old
colonies, have always professed sentiments of loyalty; and the author believes
they have generally been sincere in those professions. Nothing certainly could
have been more honorable and generous than this declaration: It might (one
would have imagined) have silenced their censure, though it were ineffectual to
conciliate their gratitude. -- But remember, serpents will turn the sweetest
fruits into poison.

Another method which these enemies of peace, have taken to raise an odium
against the church and her clergy is, to disgorge their invectives of
"persecution," -- of the Terrors of excommunication, -- and the power of a
bishop's pastoral staff. etc. When I dare affirm, and they must be convinced
themselves, that they can produce no recent instances of the severity they
insinuate. Like envy, they obscure the amiable and magnify the disagreeable
side of characters. They declaim on obsolete laws, enacted in times when
universal bitterness prevailed; forgetting the moderation which now diffuses
itself; and drawing the picture of the present church after the image of it in
the days of popery. The English bishops have, for a long course of years,
behaved in the exercise of their authority with such mildness and complacency,
as to extract praise even from the dissenters themselves. Doctor George Bensen,
an eminent dissenter, makes this open acknowledgment. -- The church of England
with its present candor, spirit of toleration and charity, appears to me, to
be the best establishment on the face of the earth. See his life of Jesus
Christ.
D. E. Jablonski, an unprejudiced foreigner, in a letter to Dr. Nicholls, from
Berlin, among other things in favor of the church. writes thus, -- On account
also of her government, among all the reformed churches, she comes nearest to
the pattern of the primitive church, and is deservedly esteemed the brightest
star in the Christian heaven; the chief glory of the reformation; and the
securest defense of the gospel against popery; and no one can refuse her
communion without schism. Yet I so follow and honor the church of England, as
not to hate, but pity your Presbyterians; the greater part of whom, I believe,
trained up in hereditary prejudices, act with a good conscience; but some among
them abuse the simplicity of the rest. Relation des mesures qui furent prises
dans les annees 1711, 12, 13, pour introduire la liturgy anglicane dans le
Royaume de Prusse et dans electorat de Hanover, p. 46, 47.
There was no necessity however, of appealing to these testimonies; for let the
charity and benevolence of the English clergy, so generously displayed in
encouraging, and. assisting every design either for the promotion of
literature, the relief of the distressed, or the propagation of Christianity,
redden (it possible) the cheeks of these partial inveighers, with a blush of
remorse and confusion!

But if they will still continue to open those wounds of our ancestors, which
time has mostly closed, let them take care lest men draw the veil of obscurity
from the execrable perfidy of their forefathers; who, under the color of
obtaining liberty of conscience, perpetrated the most impious crimes, and
endeavored to deprive all other denominations of that blessing they pretended
themselves so much to value. Indeed from the cruel opposition of these their
sons to the interests of the church, the world has reason to suspect they are
ready to perform that unequaled impiety their fathers bound themselves, by the
second article of their solemn league and covenant, to perpetrate. -- We will
(swore they) without respect of persons, endeavor the extirpation of popery,
prelacy, (that is church government by arch bishops, bishops, etc.) lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues, and that the lord may be one, and his name one in the three kingdoms.
Rush worth vol. 5. p. 478. Clar, vol. 2. p. 287.
such are, and were the men, who boasted so much of love to religious liberty,
and instances more gloomy than this are exhibited in the glass of history. --
But humanity shudders at the dreary prospect!

They have likewise objected that the Dr. mentions the plan on which bishops
are to be sent in a mincing, mumbling, etc. manner; for an answer to which I
imagine the following extract will be (at present) sufficient. It has long been
settled by our friends and superiors at home, and the clergy of this country
have often testified their entire approbation and acquiescence therein, -- That
the bishops to be sent to America, shall have no authority, but purely of a
spiritual nature, such as is derived altogether from the church, and not from
the state. That this authority shall operate only upon the clergy of the
church, and not upon the laity nor dissenters of any denomination. That the
bishops shall not interfere with the property or privileges of churchmen or
dissenters. -- That in particular they shall have no concern with the probate
of wills, letters of guardianship and administration, or marriage licenses, nor
be judges of any case relating thereto; but that they shall only exercise the
original powers of their Office as before stated, i. e. ordain and govern the
clergy, and administer confirmation to those who shall desire it. -- This,
without any reservation or equivocation, is the exact plan of an American
episcopate which has been settled at home, and it is the only one on which
bishops have been requested in our general or more particular addresses. Chand.
App. p. 79.

Another project they have made use of, to excite a disapprobation of the
scheme proposed, is malevolently to suggest that the Dr. and convention, were
the first and only authors of it. But can these men be ignorant (or do they
imagine your ignorance equal to their presumption) that for almost a century
back, renewed instances have been made from governors of Provinces, ministers,
vestries, and private persons, for settling bishops in America? -- That the
plan of sending them, with those abridgements of their powers proposed, has
been long constituted. -- That a committee extraordinary has been appointed to
find out Ways and means for the maintenance of Bishops in America. -- That they
have already obtained a fund sufficient. -- Whoever would be more certified of
this truth, will find it clearly stated in the abstract of the society's
proceedings in 1713, 1714, -- in an answer to Dr. Mayhew's observations, -- and
in Doctor Chandler's appeal.

The reason why the scheme has not before this been carried into execution, may
possibly be ascribed to the commotions that immediately after disturbed the
nation, -- the weighty business which engrossed the attention of our superiors;
-- but more probably to the neglect of the missionaries in not making repeated
urgent addresses: -- For by the earnestness and zeal of their petitions, the
government we may suppose would, in a great measure, judge of the necessity and
urgency of the case. --

-- Silence in such a state would be most criminal!

From these, and other instances (which I shall hereafter fully consider) you
may determine the candor, and honor of these boasted defenders of your
religious liberties. Latent angues in herba -- suge! long sage! The man who
errs through ignorance is to be pitied; but no character is more to be detested
than his, who knowingly errs, and willingly leads others into error.

New York, Aug. 4. 1768. A CITIZEN.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, August 15.
THE AMERICAN WHIG. [No. XXIII.]
And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest
not the beam that is it thine own eye?

Mat. vii. 3.
DR. Chandler tells us in his advertisement, that the appeal was written with
real and great seriousness -- that he neither knows, nor believes, nor
suspects, that he has misrepresented a single fact. It is extremely
disagreeable to me to discredit the word of any gentlemen, where it can
possibly be avoided. But I cannot compliment away my reason and conscience to
please any man. I therefore freely declare, that I believe he has
misrepresented many facts; and am willing to lay before the tribunal of the
public, some of the reasons of this my belief. In the 30th and 31st pages of
the appeal he writes thus, The power of the church is of a spiritual nature,
and the utmost effect of it in this world is the cutting off, and rejecting,
those members, which are incurably and dangerously corrupted. This punishment,
which has been commonly known by the name of excommunication, however it was
dreaded in the purest ages of Christianity has lost much of its force in this;
wherein altars are set up against altars, and churches against churches, and
those who are rejected by one, may be received by another. -- The charge of
priestcraft, so long hackney'd by infidels and libertines, would be sure to
fall upon the clergy, should they have courage to speak up in defense of it. In
this state of things, the restoration of the primitive discipline seems to be a
matter rather to be wished for, than seriously attempted, by those in
authority. Accordingly no attempts of this nature will be made, under an
American episcopate; the discipline of the church, so far as it relates to the
private members, will be left as it is, and nothing farther will be done, than
refusing the communion to disorderly and scandalous persons, which every
clergyman may now refuse, and ought to refuse according to the rubricks. This
whole account I take to be a very great misrepresentation of the matter,
notwithstanding the real and great seriousness with which, the Dr. assures us,
it was written, and that for the following reasons.

1st. Excommunication in the church of England, exposes those who are the
unhappy subjects of it, to many and great temporal inconveniences, and
grievous hardships. They are not allowed to commence an action at law; nor to
be a witness, advocate, or juror; nor to make a will; nor be an executor; nor
to receive Christian burial. Is it not then a misrepresentation of this matter
to assert, that the power of the church is of a spiritual nature; and that the
utmost effect of it in this world is the cutting off, and rejecting, those
members, which are incurably and dangerously corrupted? This may be true of the
church of Christ, according to her primitive constitution. But who can believe
it is true of the church of England? does he mean to adopt the distinction that
has sometimes been made, between the church of England and the church of
Christ? Or does he think that all such persons should be literally cut off,
destroyed, and murdered?

2d. The reason he assigns why church discipline and excommunication has lost
much of its force, in the present age, is because altars are set up against
altars, and churches against churches; that is, because there are many who do
not join in communion with the church of England. But this is contrary to the
account which other writers, of his own church, give of this matter, who are at
least as learned and honest, and serious, as himself. The true cause of the
great want of gospel discipline in the church of England, and why it has lost
much of its force, we may learn from bishop Burnet. Hist. reform. part iii. p.
330. The proviso that had passed in K. Henry the eighth's time, that continued
the canon law then received in England, till a code of ecclesiastical laws was
prepared (which, though attempted and well prepared, was never settled) has fixed
among us many gross abuses, besides the dilatory forms of those courts, which
make all proceedings in them both slow and chargeable. This has, in a great
measure, enervated all church discipline." "Discipline, says another, is lost,
and will not be permitted by the state, which by virtue of conge d'elire's,
quare impedits, prohibitions, etc. have made themselves the sole and ultimate
judges, not only of all bishops and churches, but of their excommunications,
and every exercise of their spiritual jurisdiction. Case of the regal. and
pontif. p. 166. Must it not then be a very gross misrepresentation of this
fact, and an unjust aspersion on other protestant churches, to lay at their
door the weakness, or rather the want, of discipline in the church of England;
when it is thus ingenuously confessed by bishops themselves, to proceed from
her present constitution, and close alliance with the state? Or is a falsehood
the better for being written with great solemnity and seriousness?

3d. Another thing which has greatly weakened discipline in the church of
England, is the Sacramental test, by which all the officers in the army and
navy, etc. are obliged to receive the sacrament, let their lives and practices
be ever so debauched. Indeed Dr. Chandler says, that, every clergyman may now
refuse, and ought to refuse, the communion to disorderly and scandalous
persons, according to the rubricks. But then he should have added, if he would
give a full representation of the matter, that an action lies against the
minister who shall refuse it to them, though he knows, sees, and hears them to be
never so unqualified. Case of the regal, and pontif. p. 179. The sacramental
test, which enjoins it so strictly on all officers to receive, supposes that
the ministers are obliged to grant them the sacrament; and if any minister
should dare to refuse it, the officers know where they can have their remedy,
in spite of Dr. Chandler and his rubricks. I leave it then to any candid
person, whether he has given a fair representation of the discipline of the
church of England, in his appeal; though it was written with real and great
seriousness.

4th. Other protestant churches do not take it upon them to discipline those
who do not profess to belong to them; so that men's withdrawing from one
denomination, and joining themselves to another, frees them from that church to
which they formerly adhered. And Dr. Chandler, seems to represent this to be
the case with the church of England, when he assigns this as the cause, why
excommunication has lost much of its force, that churches are set up against
churches, and those who are rejected by one may be received by another. But it
is well known, that where the church of England is established, she considers
all that are born and live within her precincts as subjects of her discipline.
And the more that any dissent from her worship and communion, with the more
severity they may expect to be disciplined. Suppose for instance, that a
Presbyterian in England or Ireland commits an offense worthy of ecclesiastical
censure, and makes proper Christian satisfaction, to the acceptance of the
Presbyterian church, to which he belongs, yet he may depend upon being cited to
the bishop's court, and forced to pay them their fees, and satisfy their
exorbitant demands. And thus, as one expresses it, after the Presbyterian
church has purged them of their scandal, the episcopal church purges them of
their money. -- And that the episcopal missionaries in the colonies, have some
imagination of their being invested wit^ power and authority, over all other
denominations, is not unlikely. Why else did Dr. Johnson, the great advocate of
their church, address letter after letter to his dissenting parishioners? For
if they were Dissenters from his church, how came they to be his parishioners?
-- Now since the rulers of the church of England, have not been inclined to be
more merciful, but rather more severe to protestant Dissenters, and to chastise
them with rigor for their scandals and refractoriness, how is it possible that
Dr. Chandler's account should be true, that their separation, and erecting
other churches, has weakened their discipline? And when the episcopalians have
scourged protestant. Dissenters, with such unmerciful severity, and continue to
harass them in their spiritual courts at home, is there not something very
queer in charging them with weakening their discipline? Ought he not with real
and great seriousness to review this striking misrepresentation?

5. The Dr. says that the discipline of the church, so far as relates to
private members, will be lest as it is, etc. Would not any impartial reader
take it from this representation, that the church of England had some proper
discipline, where she is established; and that she had some kind of discipline,
though of a less perfect kind, in the colonies? Must it not therefore appear
surprising, to hear that the church of England herself confesses she has no
godly discipline, for persons guilty of nototious sins? Thus, Brethren, in the
primitive church there was a godly discipline, that at the beginning of lent
such persons as stood convicted of notorious sins, were put to open penance,
and punished in this world, that their souls might be saved in the day of the
lord; and that others punished by this example, might be more afraid to offend.
Instead whereof, until said discipline be restored again, which is much to be
wished for, it is thought good, etc. Agreeable to this, Dr. Whitby takes
notice, that the church of England observes no church discipline, and the
liturgy itself teaches them once a year, to wish the godly discipline of the
primitive church restored. However they have substituted something else in its
stead. And whether the prosecutions of their spiritual courts, and the
oppressions and harrassings of those, who have had the unhappiness to taste of
their mercy, etc. which has prevailed in the mean time, has not been a very
ungodly sort of discipline, is no great difficulty to determine.

But, it may perhaps be said, we have never known any such terrible doings in
this country. True; and we have never had any bishops here. The missionaries
are only simple presbyters, who, according to the Doctor's scheme, have no
right to meddle with the keys of discipline. The exemptions, bishop Burnet,
settled by papal authority, do put many parts of this church in a very
disjointed state; while in some places the laity, and in others presbyters,
exercise episcopal jurisdiction independent of their bishops; in contradiction
to their own principles, while they assert a divine right for settling the
government of bishops, etc. The famous Cartwright was imprisoned two years by
Archbishop Whitgist, because, that being only a presbyter, he had appointed a
form of public penance, or satisfaction, for a person who had been guilty of
fornication. I never understood that the missionaries showed any great
disposition to offend their superiors, by attempting to meddle with discipline.
What idea then could the Dr. intend to convey, by saying that the discipline of
the church, so far as it relates to private members, will be lest as it is? Is
it this important and momentous idea, that, even after the arrival of a bishop,
nothing will be nothing still? Or does he, by these words, mean to assure us,
that the bishop will not erect his spiritual courts, and bring us under the
lash of his ungodly discipline, which is substituted by the church of England,
instead of that which obtained in the primitive church! But what authority has
this poor simple presbyter to control his superiors, and to govern and give
law to his bishop? Must not this be looked on as arrogance with a witness?

6th. He seems to lament that altars are set up against altars, and churches
against churches; and those who are rejected by one, may be received by
another. Who would have imagined that a gentleman, who professes so much
candor and moderation, should be grieved at the toleration, and repine that
others are allowed liberty to worship God, according to the gospel and their
consciences? Would he have the penal laws revived, and extended to the
colonies, and all the churches of other denominations pulled down, and his dear
episcopal church erected on their ruins, and all the inhabitants compelled to
conform to her? Will nothing but such power content the episcopal missionaries?
Can they never be easy, but when they are harassing their peaceable neighbors?
Those who are rejected by one church, may be received by another. One would
naturally think from this, that when the episcopal church among us, was about
censuring and excommunicating scandalous sinners, other protestant churches
were ready to receive them, and in fact, took them into their communion, and
protected them from her discipline. It is truly astonishing that the Dr. and
his brethren could publish such an insinuation as this, in this country, where
it is so well known, that the episcopal churches of the missionaries are
generally first founded by, and afterward receive a great part of their
increase or additions, from those persons who refuse to make Christian
satisfaction, for those scandalous crimes they have committed. This is a common
proverb in New England, of any person who falls into any open notorious sin, --
well, he will make a churchman now. Who is there that does not know, that the
episcopal churches are a common receptacle, or city of refuge, for disorderly
and scandalous persons? It is necessary to speak thus plain, because the Dr.
appears to affect ignorance or forgetfulness in this matter.

He says, we live in an age when the voice of reason will not be heard, nor the
strength of arguments regarded, although supported by the declarations of Heaven,
on the subject of church discipline -- the charge of priestcraft, so long
hackneyed by infidels and libertines, would be sure to fall upon the clergy,
should they have courage to speak in defense of it. In this state of things,
the restoration of the primitive discipline, seems to be a matter rather to be
wished for, and desired, than rationally attempted by those in authority.
Accordingly no attempts of this nature will be made, under an American
episcopate. This is a very extraordinary passage, upon which I propose the
following queries.

1st. Does it not appear from this passage, that the episcopal clergy in
general, and the missionaries in particular, have not courage to speak in
defense of the primitive discipline, though they are fully convinced it is
supported by the declarations of Heaven? And that we are not to expect any
thing better from the bishop, whom the Dr. and the convention pretend to
desire, for the very purpose of this restoration? Is not this to hold the truth
in unrighteousness, and basely to betray the cause of Christ, according to this
plain and honest confession which is here made? Can such a bishop be a
primitive bishop? Were they intimidated by libertines and infidels? 2d. Whether
men, who have so little fidelity and courage to defend, what they profess to be
supported by the declarations of Heaven, as the Dr. represents, be worthy the
name and character of the ministers of Christ? Infidels and libertines do not
pretend to believe the gospel, but to consider it as an imposture. No wonder
they disregard its solemn declarations; this is but acting agreeable to their
character. But what shall we think of Christians, who profess to believe it,
and yet pay no suitable regard to it? What shall we think of those, who assume
the high character of Christian teachers, and yet avow that they will not speak
up in defense of the express declarations of Heaven? Do such ministers and
bishops remember, that they are set for the defense of the gospel? And that
when they thus cowardly desert their post, they yield up the Christian cause
into the hands of its enemies? Can we rationally expect any benefit from such
missionaries, and such bishops? 3d. Does Dr. Chandler think, that there are
more Libertines and Infidels now, in proportion to the Christians in
Great Britain or the colonies, than there were in the time of the primitive
church? If there are not, why should this be alleged as a reason to neglect
church discipline? Would not this have been a reason, equally cogent against
its first institution? If it cannot be rationally attempted now, how was it
actually effected then? Does not this language of Dr. Chandler, suppose there
is something in the gospel very absurd, foolish and unreasonable, since it
cannot be rationally attempted by those in authority? Or will be say the
primitive discipline was not of divine institution? -- And if it was not, why
is it to be wished for and desired? Or is it the recalling of the toleration,
and the revival of the penal laws, which he and his brethren wish and desire?
4th. Can it be supposed that the missionaries are very sincere, in wishing and
desiring the restoration of the primitive discipline, when they are so ready to
receive into their churches, all those who refuse to submit to it in the
churches where it is practiced? and when their increase so greatly depends upon
their want of it? Do not actions speak louder than words? --
A KICK FOR THE WHIPPER. [No. XII.]
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
-- nil fuit unquam.
Sic dispar fibi. --
HOR.
AGRICOLA having made his exit, Squire T. reenters, (No. XII) without one
conscious blush, exclaiming against repetition, for which he and his
correspondents are so notoriously remarkable.

According to him the Whig's account of the origin of English Dissenters is
fictitious; -- I shall not make it my business to produce authorities in its
vindication, but adduce the testimony of Squire T. himself to prove, that his
own is inconsistent and therefore erroneous: I will not be confident that it
was his own invention; for he had probably some invisible assistance. Par. 2d.
He plainly gives us to understand, that the first puritans were and learned
clergyman, who fled to Geneva from the persecution of Q. Mary, and there
"contracted a love and esteem for the Genevan discipline, etc." -- that
returning to England in the reign of Q. Elizabeth, and becoming discontended,
because they were disappointed of a restoration to the parishes they had
deserted, they (though too pious to separate from the Church) out of resentment
began to set up for a more pure and thorough reformation. And par. 3d. he tells
us (as Probus had told him) that Jesuits in disguise, "first broached the novel
scheme of a parity of ministers," and metamorphos'd the Puritans into
Dissenters. Now what a jumble, what an ff, what a fiddle faddle, what a farrago
farraginum is here! Squire T's allowing that the first Puritans were men of
piety and learning, who loved and esteemed the Genevan discipline, amounts to
at least an implicit acknowledgment, that conviction of conscience was the true
source of Puritanism; and yet he afterward insinuates, (if he does not more
than insinuate) that they set up for a more pure and thorough reformation, out
of pure spite, arising from disappointment. The reformation he owns, was "far
from complete," at the death of Edward VI; and yet he calls the Puritans
troublesome, because they endeavored to complete it. -- Alas! I beg Squire T's
pardon, for I just now recollect, that the reformation was previously completed
by the parliament and convocation, the former having already passed the act of
uniformity, and the latter established the 39 articles. The Puritans had at
Geneva tasted, and "contracted a love and esteem for," the scheme for a parity
of ministers," and (to go no higher) King Henry VIII. himself, Archbishop
Cranmer and others had handed it about long before, as what they thought had a
primitive and evangelical taste; but according to Squire T. it was a novel
scheme and Jesuits were the first that broached it; in order to foment the
discontent of the Puritans.

Par. 4th He seems to be nettled at the Whig's hint concerning making priests
of the meanest of the people, and in revenge suggests a supposed parallel
between "some in these days" and Jeroboam. A sly stroke that! however I cannot
help saying, that (as Jeroboam's was a political schism, and as there is a
great disparity between parity of families and parity of ministers) it seems as
though Squire T. would fain have betrayed his readers into an opinion, that
Jeroboam was a Presbyterian.

Par. 5th We have a pretended typical analogy between the high priests,
priests, and- Levites of the Jewish, and the bishops, presbyters and deacons of
the English church; from which Squire T. seems fond of inferring the divine
institution of the latter. But, unless he supposes, that an Archbishop is no
more than primus inter pares, his analogy is incomplete, and there is no ground
to infer the divine institution of the English, any more than that of the pagan
or popish, from the Jewish hierarchy; or to suppose that a British Metropolitan
has in reality a divine commission any more than a pope or cardinal, or even an
ancient Roman pontisex maximus. Of this, Squire T. seems half sensible himself,
for he durst say no more than, " possibly no great absurdity will follow from
supposing. that God has done the same in the Christian (as he did in the
Jewish) church," and yet he says, "if the Whig and his associates are so
wilfully blind, that they will not see this" -- (this what? why this)
possibility, -- he can pray for them, that they may have eyes that can see" it,
etc. though he could find a prayer in the liturgy for his purpose, and should be
able to read it, I Am apt to believe it would never be answered; for I fancy
both the Whig and his associates will always see, that very probably this very
great absurdity will follow from his typical analogy, viz. that the hand, the
surplice, the cassock, the sash, etc. being as much typify'd by the
breast plate, the ephod, the robe, the girdle, etc. are as much of divine
institution, as are (according to the analogy) the offices of those that wear
them. While reading in the Whip about Jewish Clergy, I cannot help fancying I
see the Right Reverend Father Aaron, completely equipped in British Canonicals.

Par. 7th. Squire T. pretends, the Whig "cannot possibly have any just ground of
quarrel with the church of England, for preferring the episcopal, any more than
with that of Scotland, for preferring the Presbyterian form" of church
government; since he supposes the supreme head of the church established no
particular form whatsoever. But here he has not only misrepresented the Whig's
expressions concerning models, by substituting, "such as they thought most
convenient for them; instead of such as best answered the ends, etc of
church government, but has either carelessly or desigedly overlooked his
exception of a few general canons -- inculcated by Christ, as a preservative
against that execrable spirit of pride, which by his omniscience he foresaw
would soon arise in the churches. These general canons, which Squire T. I dare
say, is not entirely unacquainted with, will sufficiently justify the Whig's
objections against episcopacy, and clear him of the charge of (what is, in the
Chandlerian cant of the times, called) real and direct persecution.

Par. 8th. Squire T. (Quixot-like) combats a phantom of his own creative
imagination, or (to speak of him more characte^^^ically) forces the Whig into
an attitude he had never assumed, in order to thrash him the more conveniently;
i. e. for argument's sake, be suppose it to be the Whig's opinion, "that the
Presbyterian form was instituted by the apostles," and then most manfully
knocks him down with his own concessions, which it seems are not the truth
however, because (according to Squire T.) they are not the whole truth. So have
I seen a child, who had just been engaging in crambo and push-pin, build with
cards what an ant would have thought a lofty structure, and immediately, with
Herculean or Sampsonical vigor, and intrepidity, demolish it to its foundation
in an instant. However after all, it is evident the Whig supposes neither
episcopacy nor presbyterianism (strictly speaking) are of either divine or
apostolical institution; and therefore Squire T. might have spared himself the
trouble of quoting his concessions, in which I suspect he meant to act the
angler, who gives the poor stupid fish line, to see how prettily he will play
with it. Dr. Ram-chicken and others, who are no sportsmen, make no such
concessions; or if they did, it were no matter, nor should we be obliged to
clear away all Squire T's interrogatory dirt; since those who can drink out of
a fountain, may justly scorn to sip at a stream that runs through a Puddle.
Perhaps it may be scarcely worth while to take notice of that great divine
Squire T's expressions, such as instituted by the apostles, apostolical
institution, etc. however I cannot but think, they must needs sound oddly to all
but such as acknowledge a mortal, a mere man, as the head of the Church.

A.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, August 22,
A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG, [No. XX]
By TIMOTHY TICKLE, Esquire
What Grotesque Instruments of Vengeance has BICOTRY set on Foot! -- To do
them Justice, it must be owned that what they want in Teeth, they have in
Venom; and they know -- where there Strength lies.

WARBURTON.
I Beseech the public to pardon me for inserting any thing rerelative to Sir
Isaac Foot, -- that lowest and most despicable of all low and despicable
Scribblers, -- with whose name it was my solemn purpose, not to contamminate my
paper; but to treat it with that silence, and contempt, with which every man of
sense and candor has treated it hitherto. And I doubt not but the public will
be the more ready to pardon me, when I assure them it is not out of choice that
the following piece has a place in the Whip; but merely to gratify a worthy
correspondent, and manifest my respect for him. The ingenious author discovers
a generous, tender regard for the reputation of his friend, who had been
attacked, -- very feebly attacked by this knight of a sorrowful figure. Mr.
Pleadwell's good sense, wit and humor, place him beyond the reach of such
weak, malevolent calumniators. However, his friend shows the goodness of his
own heart, in thus interposing in his behalf. He also shows himself a master of
the controversy now debated before the public; and very well qualified to
develope that sophistry with which the American Whig, and his noble Coadjutor,
Sir Isaac, would obscure a very plain Subject. It is paying no great compliment
to Mr. Pleadwell's friend, to say he has exposed, refuted and demolished the
Numb. of the Kicker which he has taken in hand. His abilities would triumph
over a much more respectable adversary. And let it be observed, that the Lion
who rends a Tiger, an Elephant, or some other animal of a nobler kind, can do
no more to the long-eared, braying Ass, should it provoke his Vengeance. -- The
very ingenious and worthy Citizen's second production, will appear in my next
T. T.

To TIMOTHY TICKLE, Esquire
SIR,
As in Mr. Parker 's last Week's Gazeite under No. X. of the celebrated Sir
Isaac Foot 's paper, entitled, A Kick for the Whipper, there are some remarks
upon Richard Pleadwell's Replication, mixed with very low and illiberal
reflection upon his character; and as I suppose Mr. Pleadwell 's attention to
his farm at this season of the Year, is of more importance to him, than to
admit of his engaging in a controversy with Sir Isaac; so I have taken the
liberty as an unknown friend to appear for him, and to send you a few thoughts
upon the subject. It may be proper to observe, that although Sir Isaac has
published this number under the name of a correspondent, yet it bears in every
respect so strong a resemblance to his own productions, that throwing aside the
fictitious correspondent, I shall consider Sir Isaac himself as the author of
it.

Yours, etc. Pleadwell's FRIEND.
New York, Aug. 8, 1768.

I Fear it may be thought too low a stoop for me, even to take notice of the
much neglected Sir Isaac Foot; who notwithstanding his unparralled insolence
and effrontery has hitherto passed unmolested, through a succession of weekly
papers. I once heard it said, that he discovered himself to be a man of sense,
but that he wrote like a fool. Both parts of the assertion may possibly be
true, though I confess the character of the fool is so striking in his
compositions, that the man of sense is lost under its glare. His performances
might however all have been buried in eternal oblivion, and have perished with
the name of their doughty author, had he not made a personal attack upon my
friend Richard Pleadwell; he it seems, in assuming the honor of contending
with Mr. Peer Williams, his brother lawyer, has exposed himself to to the
virulence and rudeness of Sir Isaac Foot; who in point of politeness and good
breeding, is not less defective, than he is in the knowledge of the subjects
upon which he presumes to write.

Sir Isaac (under the feigned character of Obadiah Listen) professing himself
to be no lawyer (as I verily believe he is not) and apoligizing at the same
time for his ignorance, wonders that Mr. Pleadwell should decline replying to
an untruth, and be ambitious of entering upon the defense of the contrary. In
behalf of my friend Pleadwell, it might be sufficient to remark, in answer to
this sagacious sentiment of Sir Isaac; that lawyers in their pleadings are not
bound down to such nice rules of composition, as will bear the piercing eye of
so great a critic as he is, who passes over no imperfection in his adversary's
style. Perhaps this assuming knight imagines it to be his prerogative to Kick
every man he meets with in the road to literary ^ame at which he is aspiring;
and it was indeed, Mr. Pleadwell's misfortune to fall in the way of such a
light footed antagonist, in the little excursion he had made toward Sir
Isaac's imperial territory.

Suppose he were to be told that lawyers, by a kind of necessity imposed upon
them, are much shackled with forms in their pleadings. That though it be true,
that these forms are not always much to the purpose, at least for matter of
real substance, yet while the lawyer in the course of his profession is obliged
to submit to them, Sir Isaac may glory in the high privilege and honor of
inventing modes of composition that are equally lifeless and unsubstantial. The
lawyer pleads prescription an ancient Usage as his apology; Sir Isaac has none
but his ignorance. Thus much may suffice to show, that he has gained nothing by
this shrewd remark upon Mr. Pleadwell's introduction to the replication.

Our valiant knight first levels the full weight of his g^ammatical artillery,
against an unlucky word that dropped from Mr. Pleadwell's pen. What was it? Why
he asserted that the appeal was not instituted merely for the aggrandizement of
the episcopal churches on the ruin of all other Christian denominations. What a
pity was it, that this word merely, should have been thrown out thus to expose
Mr. Pleadwell's cause; for does it not turn his argument directly against
himself? Whatever is not done merely for any purpose, is certainly done in part
for that purpose; but the appeal was not instituted merely to aggrandize the
church on the ruin of others, therefore it was designed in part to promote such
aggrandizement. Fie upon it, my friend Pleadwell, how came you to reason so
unguardedly? Had you tested your remark by a Syllogism, the self-condemning
conclusion would have stared you in the face, You have given up the point in
one single expression; for do you imagine that other Christian denominations
ought to suffer the church of England to grow, if she stands but one hair's
breadth in their way? -- That if dissenters think it inconvenient that she
should rise in plenitude of her strength, they ought not by all means to oppose
her? That if they desire to grow up, be strong and flourish themselves, they
must not be glad to see the episcopal churches weak, maimed and impotent? That
a bishop if he does no other harm, than that of rendering the terms of
admission of the clergy into the church, as easy as those of other
denominations, will not by this means in part aggrandize the church upon the
ruin of others? -- For should the clergy of the church of England increase in
numbers as the dissenting clergy do, might there not soon be as many churchmen
as dissenters in the country, and would not this weaken and almost ruin the
dissenting interest? Should we not see the plain and humble meeting houses,
commonly so called (I mean it not by way of derision, but distinction) shrink
beneath the superb and towering spires of episcopal churches? Where can all
this end, but partly in the aggrandizement of those churches upon the ruin of
all others?

Thus Mr. Pleadwell may see the full force of his own argument, pointed against
himself. It is not easy however to be conceived, that if such an accidential
aggrandizement of the episcopal churches as this is, should take place in
consequence of a bishop's arrival among us, it would be at the expense of one
right taken from any other denomination. For is it not reasonable that the
church of England: considered merely as a society of Christians, should be
cherished with the natural and internal succors of her own strength as derived
from her frame and constitution? -- That what is very necessary to her very
being and existence, should at least be easily attainable? The enjoyment of
these, is and must be a perfect right which every church may claim, and is
entitled to. All dissenters have and exercise this right within themselves,
which they are enabled to do from their mode of ordination and form of church
government. Were it possible to turn the tables upon them, and for the church
(having the full powers of ordination here) to say, that the dissenters should
not have a single clergyman ordained, except he went to England; and that they
should forever be obliged to go there, notwithstanding the means of ordination
might easily be brought nearer home, would they not complain that we were
building up our churches upon the ruin of theirs? And if so, have we not just
right to make the same complaint?

Counselor Pleadwell doubtless must have a high sense of sir Isaac's
politeness, in the several epithets bestowed upon him: namely; that of "
Simpleton, stupid pettysogger, and fiery zealot;" and in charging the
replication with being full of nauseous repetitions, and comparing it to an
insipid Cud ekewed our and over again. Such reflections as these, to a man of
Sir Isaac's refined taste, must doubtless have appeared extremely delicate. I
confess myself unequal in this department to contend with him, and must
therefore leave him in possession of this mean and glorious triumph over his
antagonist.

Having made this discharge from the ebullition of his ill nature, he now
condescends to attack Mr. Pleadwell's argument; and this he does in effect, by
saying that it matters not whether the church and clergy in their present state
in America, are the proper objects of the statutes refered to by Mr. Peer
Williams; nor whether the church of England is established in the colonies, or
not: For that, be this at it will, the conclusion drawn from these statutes
remains incontestible, to wit, That there actually is no right of episcopacy
within the realm of England, except what is derived from human laws. The
Bishops in England, says he, can confer no other right than they have
themselves, therefore any such right derived from England, cannot be more
divine in America than it is there. That is, in other words, it must be just
such a right as the bishops have in England, viz, a right merely derived from
human laws, with every power that there belongs to the office. -- This to be
sure will at once bring the law dignified prelate into our land, and establish
spiritual courts among us, -- The bishop will spin all the officers of this
court out of his very bowels; create a dean and chapter by the breath of his
mouth, rear the church hierarchy out of nothing, and hold his seat in the
American house of lords. For all these are appendages that belong to the
existence of a British bishop.

Sir Isaac's mistake lies in confounding things that are in their nature
entirely distinct. The bishop's right as to his powers of ordination is no more
derived from the laws of England, than the apostle's commission to Timothy to
go and preach the gospel, was -- There are indeed superadded powers which they
claim, founded in the connection which the law has formed between their offices
and the state. But this is adapted to the peculiar policy of Great Britain,
where the church of England makes a branch of the constitution, and perfects
the political system. Not so here; For where is the theater upon which their
spiritual lordships can exhibit this grand machinery of political power (...)
-- But especially if the church of England is not established in the colonies,
upon what foundation is the bishop to build the vast structure of legal
ecclesiastical dominion, which at least presupposes such establishment? Must he
not in such case, rather of necessity be like a primitive bishop in a strange
land unsupported by the secular arm? Upon this principle the requisite^ for
completing the character of a British prelate are wanting; and among the rest,
that essential one, the very legal existence of the church itself. -- Can the
branches flourish, where the tree is not planted; or can power, which is but a
mode or quality, be conceived of, without the subject in which it exists?

But suppose the church of England really to be establish^^, yet it will by no
means follow that prelacy in America, must be accompanied with all the powers
that appertain to it in England. -- Our state and circumstances must be like
theirs, otherwise we cannot argue from a parity of reason in both cases, and
not only the state of things, but our opinions must be first entirely changed
in America, to favor the introduction of high wrought British prelacy. -- As
to my own part, though I wish to see a primitive bishop in America, yet I never
desire to behold one cl^thed with civil power, nor would I ever bow the neck to
ecclesiastical tyranny.

As to the rest of the performance under consideration, it is so trifling as
not to deserve the least notice. I shall therefore take leave of Sir Isaac,
after begging Mr. Pleadwell's pardon for officiou^^y giving in his behalf, this
rebuke to so rude and insolent a scribbler.

PLEADWELL's FRIEND.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE person who, the American Whig says, has beyond all question been deprived
of his senses, by the disappointment of an American bishop, presents once more
his compliments to the said Whig, desiring that he would leave the original of
the letter, pretended to be written by a missionary, at his printer's; and for
the reasons before assigned. He likewise would be very glad to know who those
persons of the most spotless reputations are, with whom his worship has the
honor to be acquainted; and begs leave to ask, whether it is advisable for a
missionary, or any one else, to expose his name to the candid Whig? He would
likewise be much obliged to the Whig, if he would be so kind us to inform him,
what American bishop has been disappointed; whether lately or long ago; by what
means, and in what expectations: The writer of this advertisement having never
met with the account in history, -- nor having so much as heard, that we ever
had a bishop in this country to be disappointed.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, August 22.
THE AMERICAN WHIG. [No. XXIV.]
DR. Chandler laments the deplorable situation of the church of England in
America, and represents, in doleful accents, her present state of grievous
oppression; from dissenters I presume he must mean, since he will not say, her
oppression is owing to the discountenance of his Majesty, the parliament, or
the Bishops of England. I confess it is the first insinuation of the kind, that
ever I heard; and am confident the Dr. would find it very difficult to support
his complaint by a single instance: Nor is it possible to conceive how this can
be the case, as the episcopal church is the peculiar object of protection, in
every government where his majesty has the appointment of the commander in
chief; there not being one king's government on this continent, whose governor
is not a member of her communion. On the other hand, that the dissenters have
been oppressed by the church of England in America, abundant proof may be
adduced; and lest this should be thought a groundless assertion, it may not be
amiss to produce a few instances. The first English presbyterian minister that
over applied for a license, to preach in New-Yor^ was peremptorily refused
permission; and afterward underwent the hardship of a severe imprisonment, for
no other crime than that of preaching the gospel in a private house, to a few
people of his own persuasion. -- The assembly of that province, at a time when
the church of England had no existence in it, and when more than nine tenths of
the members were dissenters, established a provision, for the support of a
protestant ministry, in several of the counties; plainly designing it for any
protestant ministry. Of this provision, the church of England very soon
artfully availed herself, and has ever since appropriated the same, to the
exclusive maintenance of her own clergy, though nine tenths at least of the money
raised by the act issues from the estates of people of other denominations. A
striking proofs, truly of the boasted equity and justice of that church, in
drawing from dissenters a support of a religious constitution which they
conscientiously disapprove and renounce! -- In this province also, about forty
years ago, the episcopalians, with open violence, seized upon a presbyterian
church and parsonage, of which they kept illegal possession for the space of
twenty years. These are a few of the many instances of oppression, which
dissenters have experienced in this province. In Virginia, where the church
has a general provincial establishment, loud have been the complaints of
persecution, which the episcopalians have exercised toward protestant
dissenters, whose ministers, for the attrocious crime of preaching the gospel,
have there been frequently harrassed, and cited before courts and magistrates,
and refused even the privileges of the toleration-act. Though this may seem a
digression from the subject of an American Bishop, it appeared necessary to
vindicate dissenters, from the unjust insinuations contained in Dr. Chandler's
pamphlet; and to show from what quarter religious oppressions, in these
colonies, have heretofore arisen.

The Dr. urges the necessity and utility of an American episcopate, to raise
the church of England from that state of deplorable oppression, under which she
has so long groaned, to support her dignity, and advance her growth in the
American colonies. But I am surprised, that any man, who has resided but a few
years in this country, and especially a native, who cannot but be thoroughly
acquainted with the genius and disposition of its inhabitants toward an
ecclesiastical hierarchy, should seriously set himself to urge a measure, that
has so manifest a tendency to interrupt the peace, impede the population, and
(...)-inkindle a flame in his Majesty's North-American dominions. -- How warm a
friend soever such an advocate may be, to the religious establishment in
England, he certainly acts the par^^^^an enemy to the civil interest of his
sovereign and country. The greatest ^ealot for episcopacy among us, must be
sensible of the unconquerable aversion of nine tenths at least of his
countrymen (among whom are great numbers of the church laity themselves) to the
introduction of Bishops, under any pretended primitive form. Were it even
possible to procure a dignitary of the church of England, clothed with those
primitive episcopal powers only, with which the Dr. tells us he is to come
invested; and were he to make his first appearance in the garb of the
inoffensive sheep; it would be impossible to divest Americans, whose ancestors
have felt and fled from the tyranny of those holy men, from the apprehension of
their soon becoming devouring wolves. But how artfully would these gentlemen
impose upon the credulity of the people, by suppofing a Bishop of the church of
England, will be sent to America thus deplumed of the necessary and inseparable
appendages, annexed to the episcopal office in the English hierarchy, by the
common and statute law, from the origin of its constitution. The king and
parliament, under whose forming hand that church rose into existence, must
entirely new-frame and model her constitution, before a bishop, of the ancient
primitive Christian stamp, can emerge from her bosom. But supposing the British
parliament (whose wisdom we presume will ever prevent them from prosecuting a
measure, that appears to have so unfriendly an aspect upon his Majesty's
interest in the colonies) should constitute and American episcopate, and, in an
especial manner, should preclude his lordship from tithes, from holding
ecclesiastical courts, and the exercise of any spiritual power but that of
ordination, confirmation, and government of the clergy -- yet will not this
primitive, this inoffensive ecolesiastic, be constituted a member of his
Majesty's council, where he shall happen to be resident? And who, not wilfully
blind, does not see what an influence this would give him, when strengthened
with an interest in the whole bench of the spiritual lords? Ever intent on
aggrandizing their great Diana, and extending their hierarchy, by the
conversion of protestant dissenter^, to their favorite idol episcopacy (solid
piety being an object of subordinate consequence) With such zealous and
powerful coadjutors, what will his lordship want, but an ascendancy in the
house of representatives, in order to procure episcopal establishments, with
the amplest annua^^evenues, throughout every county. Nor will he be able to
support the dignity of his ecclesiastical character, and the expense of his
episcopal equ^age, with less than three thousand per annum, in addition to the
small allowance, with which it is probable he would appear among us. Under
these views of a bishop (and these (...) the views of nine tenths of the
colonists) the introduction of his lordship into America, would throw the
people into convulsions, greater than those which the late stamp act
occasioned, by so much more as they esteem their religious liberties, of more
importance than their civil. How unfriendly then are the advocates for the
measure, to the tranquillity of this country, who desire (and they cannot but
desire it, as they must be convinced it would be the unavoidable consequence)
to see the confusions and disorders of the year 1765 repeated; for I am
confident the generality of the people would more quietly submit to three
stamp-acts, than to the exertion of the English ecclesiastical hierarchy, in
these regions of unshackled religious liberty. To avoid the oppressive rigours
of episcopal dominion, their pious ancestors came over to these then
inhospitable shores. No wonder then their descendants, equally tenacious of the
rights of conscience, should start at the threatened unsheathing of an
Antichristian sword among them, which forced their fathers to fly from all
their temporal possessions, and the land of their nativity. No wonder averse to
an order of men, whose aspiring genius and servent zeal for ecclesiastical
discipline, they have reason to apprehend would continually prompt them, to
draw or force men from the religion of their forefathers; of the scriptural
purity of which they have too high a conviction, ever to abandon; nay, would
risque their all in defense of, rather than sacrifice at the empty shrine of
episcopacy. The candor, lenity, spirit of toleration, and charity, which it is
now said, is so conspicuous in the church of England, is most soothingly urged
as an argument to conciliate the acquiescence of dissenters, of all
denominations, in the favorite plan of an American episcopate. With so much
mildness, tenderness and moderation (says Dr. Chandler) have the English
Bishops, for a long course of years exercised their authority, as scarcely to
have afforded an instance of reasonable complaint, especially to dissenters.
But pray let me ask the Dr. -- Did this boasted mildness, tenderness and
moderation, shine out with so clear a luster, when very lately at their
council board, their lordships of Canterbury and London purposely appeared, to
oppose so inconsiderable a request, as that of a charter of incorporation to
the presbyterian church in New York, even after the lords of trade, to whose
consideration the petition was referred, had reported, that they saw no reason
to refute the prayer of the petitioners. And that so trifling a favor, has
been frequently refused to both English and Dutch presbyterians in this
province, is a matter of general notoriety. These are illustrious instances,
surely, of the friendly disposition of the church of England, and her
benevolent prelates, toward their protestant fellow Christians in America! --
We glory in being subject to a prince, the maxims of whose government in these
regions, sacred to freedom, have always been equally favorable to Protestants,
of every Christian denomination, and restrictive of ecclesiastical domination,
from every quarter. And I am so far from thinking with Dr. C --, that there are
"peculiar reasons of policy" to induce his majesty, to adopt his favorite plan
of an American episcopate, that I am clearly of opinion, there are peculiar
reasons of policy, which totally and absolutely oppose it. And this I doubt not
still more abundantly to evince, in the course of these papers.

A KICK FOR THE WHIPPER. [No. XIII.]
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
-- ut nec pes nec caput uni
Redatur forma. --
HOR.
FOR our next entertainment, Squire T. very genteelly sets before us the
relics of several former meals, not furnished but hash'd up by one of his
under-cooks, the marrow and gravy, any the very guts, of which, is the old tale
about Jesuits; they seem to give him great satisfaction; but we beg to be
excused swallowing, though stale as they are, we shall venture to taste some of
the dishes.

The first course is dressed in a particular manner by the scullion, acknowledged
to be his own invention, in which we have serpents, spawn, foam, venom, stings,
Egyptian onions, wine of fornication, etc. The two last ingredients indeed he
speaks of as exotics; however his master has probably more than enough of the
last, stored in his cellar; and of the first, growing rampant in his garden.
But, for the present to lay aside allegory, the quintessence of T. P's letter
seems to be contained in that notable passage, in which he calls us of the
faction, the real spawn of that envenomed brood who burst the bonds of
gratitude, justice and, religion and in a torrent ( a torrent of brood!)
overturned altars, levelled churches, and laid waste principalities and and
powers. This really seems to be somewhat too high a charge; but however truth
requires that we should do justice to the character of the church, by frankly,
freely and sincerely, confessing, that we, as well as our fathers have at least
wrestled with "principalities and powers," with the rulers of the darkness of
this world, -- and even with the spiritual wickedness in high places.

The second course, which Squire T. calls an extract, is such a mingle-mangle,
such an hodge-podge, such an olla podrida, that I dare say, very few of the
guests will be able to relish it. Squire T. says "it breathes such an air of
truth, that he imagined it would be injustice" not to order it to the table;
but for my part I affirm, it blows such a blast of nonsense, that I am almost
poisoned with the bare smell. In plain English, it is one of the most stupid
pieces I ever saw in a periodical paper, and though I were assured that it was
written by my great-grandfather (for it pretends to antiquity) I would frankly
acknowledge my self great-grandson to -- a dunce. Reader, give me leave to
point out to you some of the beauties of this piece.

In the beginning we are told, that the English nation has been so unhappy as
to suffer the most terrible convulsions, and to lie, and that constantly, in a
fatal posture of confusion and disorder upon the account of religion; and yet,
it seems, it has had an establishment, and an happy one too, ever since the
reformation. Afterward we read of the sinking of papal obedience in opinion;
the realms of Great Britain bearing a figure; of protestantism, as a revolt
from the faith; of a fortification, having one bastion only, etc. etc. etc. But
the flower of all the beautiful nonsense, the reader may see, in the close of
the 2d paragraph, in which we are given to understand, that the church of
England has an enemy; -- that enemy is St. Peter's sword; -- that sword is
capable of the passion hope; -- the object of that hope is universal monarchy.
-- that monarchy cannot be obtained without undermining not one only, but each
of the foundations, of no less then all the constitutionS of the church; --
this undermining is a glorious design; -- and, in order to accomplish it, the
sword inspires itself, and all its engines, with -- (with what? -- courage?
no!) with application and diligence. Now who but the most consummate block-head
would ever have thought, that the church's grand enemy was a sword; that a
sword could hope any more than a bayonet, or be a king, any more than a
pike-staff; -- that a sword would think it glorious (for what can hope can
think) dig under stone walls like a mattock; or that it should be able to
inspire itself, or even its engines (whatever they may be) with application,
any more than that Squire T. should inspire T. P. with correspondence, or
himself with flagellation?

But, criticism apart, this is but the third time we have already had the tale
of the Jesuits, on ^o better than Probus's, Squire T's, or Antiquemodernus's
authority; but whether it be true or false, is a question of as little
importance to the present dispute, as whether the first moving cause of the
reformation, was or was not a sneaking inclination Henry the VIIIth had, to
have Anne Bol^yn for a bedfellow; but if it be true, I cannot help thinking
there is a great resemblance (at least in some respects) between those Jesuits,
and most of the society's American missionaries; for if the first were
invincibly industrious to ruin the establishment of the church of England, the
last are no less so to debauch the Non-Conformists of America, and indeed they
are much more artful in making Proselytes; for knowing that a kingdom divided
against it self cannot stand; they are too wise to revile (what those they mean
to ensnare have already but an indifferent opinion of) the British hierarchy.

The company being pretty thoroughly disgusted, with what they have tasted of
Squire T's entertainment, seem not fond of regaling themselves with his desert,
his pretended plate of Italian fruit; and therefore -- here, boy, take away
these crab-apples.

To the PRINTER,
SIR,
Please to give the following a place in your next paper.

FOR some time past I have observed a controversy in some of our colonies
respecting the introduction of English Bishops among us. -- Dr. Chandler
appealed to the public, to know if they had any objection, why one or more
bishops should not be sent to America: -- and laid before them, the
restrictions with which they were desired, -- viz. -- That the bishops to be
sent to America, shall have no authority, but purely of a spiritual and
ecclesiastical nature, such as is derived altogether from the church, and not
from the state. That his authority shall operate only upon the clergy of the
church, and not upon the laity, or dissenters of any denomination. That the
bishops shall not interfere with the property or privileges, whether civil or
religions, of churchmen or dissenters. That in particular, they shall have no
concern with the probate of wills, letters of guardianship, and administration,
or marriage licenses, nor be judges of any cases relating thereto. But that
they shall only exercise the original powers of their office, namely, ordain
and govern the clergy, and administer confirmation to those who shall desire
it. Appeal to the public, p. 79.
Several objectors have appeared. A periodical paper, published in New York,
entitled the American Whig, -- the Sentinel, in Philadelphia, etc. Though the
former, it seems, does not object against bishops with the above restriction:
The Appeal says he, asks nothing but what is highly reasonable. American Whig,
No. 1.
But affirms, that it is "altogether impossible" to have Bishops, on the terms
proposed. Much has been written pro and con -- and perhaps a great deal foreign
to the purpose, and unbecoming the professors of Christianity. As the cause is
debating before the tribunal of the public, I would beg leave to give the
sketch of a plan, whereby they may be better enabled to form a right judgment.
-- Suppose some judicious, impartial person, should collect all the pieces that
are, and shall be, published on the subject; -- and exhibit weekly, or monthly,
in our public prints, the substance of all the arguments made use of, attending
only to the merits of the cause. -- This might be done by way of dialogue, in a
short, expressive manner. -- But I foresee an objection that will arise. Where
shall we find the judicious, impartial person? It must be confessed the
objection is weighty; and it is to be lamented, that there are such animosities
and divisions between those, who enrol their name among the followers of the
prince of peace, -- But as there are many persons in our colonies of good
abilities, natural and acquired, it would be uncharitable not to believe that
some of them, have so great a sense of the Deity -- so zealous for the glory of
God, and the good of mankind -- so far from being bigoted to this, or that,
particular party, that they would disdain to blow up the sparks of party
spirit, or to transgress the laws of truth and decency. Should such a person
put in execution the plan proposed, or something of the like nature, and
endeavor to sow the seeds of peace and harmony among his fellow creatures (so
necessary at this juncture, for our political interest) I doubt not but the
sincere Christian will thank him for his labor of love; and that he will see
the accomplishment of that promise, made us by our Divine Redeemer -- Blessed
are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.

PHILANTHROPOS.
--, in New Jersey, July 28, 1768.
From M. GAINE's GAZETTE, August 29. A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG. [No. XXI]
By TIMOTHY TICKLE, Esquire
Pursuant to the promise I made in my last paper, I now insert the ingenious
CITIZEN's second address, and am persuaded, that the many just observations,
and judicious reflections it contains, together with the candor and sound
reasoning which run through the whole, will procure it the same favorable
reception from the respectable public, which his first address met with. Happy
were it for us, if others would thus employ their talents to serve the cause of
truth, instead of prostituting them to the sordid purposes of sowing discord,
abusing their fellow subjects, aggrandizing a party, and endeavoring to raise
it on the ruins of other denominations of Christians! And all this from motives
of malice and self-interest!

T. T.

Ex defendendo quam ex offendendo uberior gloria comparatur.

CICERO.
My COUNTRYMEN;
UNHAPPY it is for man, that some of his species entertain a savage desire of
gorging their animosity by giving pain to others. Restless and discomposed in
themselves, they love to see all things ruffled and disordered around them.
Like some lion of the wood, they proudly survey the havoc and carnage they
have occasioned, and feast their misanthropy on the wounds of public
tranquillity. They delight in displaying the dark side of subjects; in clouding
beauties, and pointing out deformities. Such (I am sorry to say) appear the men
on whose measures I have undertaken to animadvert. A sincere love to religion
and my country, has only engaged me in this task. The Christain, that truly
esteems the former, cannot but endeavor to promote every undertaking that may
advance its interest, and oppose every procedure that has a manifest tendency
to disserve it; and the honest man, who sincerely loves the latter, will find
it his duty to detect and resist every iniquitous attempt, to disturb the
happiness of society, and endanger the welfare of his country, by sowing the
seeds of jealousy, or kindling the fires of party spirit.

It has ever been the practice of those, who were endeavoring to subvert any
constitution, whether of church or state, (with design to raise another more
agreeable to their inclinations) assiduously to harangue the populace on its
defects, to enumerate and magnify every stain, but to overlook every beauty or
advantage; and to exaggerate and censure those deficiencies which necessarily
attend every government, as if only to be found in, and peculiar to the one
they dislike -- This scheme (however unjust) is craftily political, and too
seldom fails of success. For as the generality of men have neither leisure nor
abilities to enter into an exact examination, they depend on the opinions of
those who they imagine have the opportunities and wisdom necessary. The love of
liberty, the enmity to corruption, and assiduous regard these politicians
profess, conciliate their esteem. The frightful picture of magnified blemishes
they hold up, together with a desire of novelty, most natural to ignorance,
inflame the passions of the populace, and so root their prejudice, that they
become, in a great measure, invincible. They are led by degrees to be at last
guilty of crimes, they would at first have thought of with horror. This was the
ease soon after the reformation in Germany; as in avoiding one extreme, men
most commonly are precipitated into the opposite (and sometimes more dangerous)
one. A sect was raised under pretense at first, of only reforming some of those
things, which they imagined not yet sufficiently pure. The founders began to
preach up a greater perfection in morals; from hence they proceeded to reprove
all who were any way observers of civility and decency; to pronounce it sinful
to possess the conveniences of life: And determining that all other books were
pernicious, they met, and burnt all they could obtain, but the Bible. When they
had got to this eminence, their mask began to tremble and fall off. They termed
all ministers but their own, "wicked idolaters of antichrist's synagogue." They
said that all kingdoms should be destroyed to make room for the kingdom of
Christ, and labored in abolishing the execution of justice, because Christ
has said, "resist not evil," and in bringing on a community of goods, because
Christ and his apostles were an example. Their teachers stood up as advocates
for "absolute liberty, free and impartial liberty," preaching against
magistrates, and that all men should be on a level. Such doctrine of
re-reformation were sure to be eagerly swallowed by a licentious rabble.
Accordingly when their numbers had great^ increased, they pretended the earth
was given them by the Lord, and formed themselves into associations to take
possession They laid aside all disguise; And these preachers of mortification,
thought it lawful to take six or seven wives apiece. They, who at first
affirmed justice and judgment to be merciless cruelty, now accounted their
hands sanctified by being inbrued in Christian blood. They who at their
emersion, forbad their followers possessing the conveniences of life, and
suing for their right, thought at last it was agreeable to God to turn their
adversaries out of their houses, and to enrich themselves with the pillage of
their goods -- which being laid to their charge, their answer was, "the time is
come, according to our Savior's promise, that the meek shall inherit the
earth." Vide -- Guy de Bress cont. Perreur des Anabaptists. Vide Sleiden and
Hortensius.


Parallel to this was the behavior of those men, who in the reign of Charles
I. set out with a pretense of obtaining liberty of conscience, and afterward,
as they increased in power, increased in the insolence of their demands; and
not content with a free toleration, would force all denominations to fall down
and worship the brazen Idol of Presbytery, which they had set up. But I forbear
drawing the comparison.

You may learn from these instances, my countrymen, to suspect those men who
are not contented with the freest enjoyment of religious liberty that ever
nation allowed, but will ever continue oppugning and disturbing the peace of
their fellow Christians. If there be a church, which (in the opinion of the
wisest legislatures) is best suited, from its principles and government, to the
constitution of the late, and is accordingly so interwoven with it, that the
one must be rent and torn to pieces with the other; -- And another, whose
spirit is directly opposite, whose professed principles, and constant practices
are, to endeavor the destruction of all other denominations -- whose members,
although they do not ex hypothesi condemn the doctrines of the church of England,
will, nevertheless, in the opinion even of one of their friends ( Rapin, in his
dissertation on Whigs and Tories,) never be contented till they have entirely
destroyed it, and have given evidence of their intention in their solemn league
and covenant, etc. every wise people will support the one, and the cautious of
the other. A change in government must ever in the event be precarious; and no
friend to his country would wish any in our happy one. It must certainly then
be unsound policy in any man, to endeavor to raise discontent in the minds of
the people, by calumniating that religious establishment which the laws of our
country think most worthy their particular favor and protection. These
short-sighted politicians should likewise consider, that they give no
favorable character of Americans, when they say, "the introduction of a
dignitary of the church of England, clothed with those primitive episcopal
powers only, with which Dr. Chandler tells us he is to come invested, would
meet with an unconquerable aversion of nine-tenths at least of his countrymen;
among whom are great numbers of the church laity themselves; See the American
Whig. No. 24.
and would throw the people into convulsions greater than those which the late
stamp act occasioned." Good heavens! that a public writer should dare to offer
such an assertion in the face of the world -- or not blush to be so
contradictory to himself! -- Who would ever imagine it was the same American
Whig, who says in his first, and some subsequent numbers, that it would be
unreasonable to deny churchmen a bishop so circumscribed in his powers as the
Dr. represents him -- that for his part, if he could believe the scheme to be
such, he would wish it "good speed" -- Such contradictory injurious assertions,
would justify the severest censure. But charity stops my pen, and bids us, my
countrymen, forgive the flights of passion in so passionate an author; and wish
him for the future, a clearer head, and better heart. -- religion will ever
have its adversaries; and those who engage in its service, must expect a
continued assault from them. But the most dangerous enemies, are those internal
ones, who makes the name of Christianity subserve the purposes of interest. --
These, though they may sail smoothly along while religion is in their favor, yet
should any particular denomination thwart their course, will hesitate at no
measure, however unchristian, that will promise them success. -- By the
political craft of such men, many in this country have been infatuated to
entertain the most injurious prejudices against the church. Of a more mild
temper were their chief and best forefathers, -- who say, in their letter to
the bishops, clergy, and people of the church of England, whom they call their
fathers and brethren -- from on board the ship Arabella, upon their departure
for America, dated April 7, 1630, entreating their prayers for prosperity, in
the following words.

Mr. Hutchin. Hist. Massach. Bay, Vol. I. Appendix. No. I.
We beseech you therefore, by the mercies of the Lord Jesus, to consider us as
your brethren, standing in very great need of your help, and earnestly
imploring it. And however your charity may have met with some occasion of
discouragement, through the misreport of our intentions, or through the
disaffection or indiscretion of some of us, or rather among us; (for we are not
of those who dream of perfection in this world,) yet we desire you would be
pleased to take notice of the principals and body of our company, as those who
esteem it our honor to call the church of England, from whence we rise, our
dear mother; and we cannot part from our native country, where she especially
resideth, without much sadness of heart, and many tears in our eyes; ever
acknowledging, that such hope and part as we have obtained in the common
salvation, we have received in her bosom, and sucked from her breasts. We leave
her not therefore as loathing that milk wherewith we were nourished there; but
blessing God for the parentage and education, as members of the same body,
shall always rejoice in her good, and unfeignedly grieve for any sorrow that
may ever betide her; and while we have breath, sincerely desire and endeavor
the continuance and abundance of her welfare, with the enlargement of her
bounds in the in the kingdom of Christ Jesus. -- Be pleased therefore, Rev.
fathers, and brethren, to help forward the work now in hand, etc. etc. Signed
by John Winthrop, Gov. Richard Saltonstall, Isaac Johnson, Thomas Dudley,
William Coddington, and many more.

Thus spoke the fathers of these degenerate sons, who, like the children of
Edom, cry, "down with her, down with her even to the ground." The most bigoted
churchmen will acknowledge, that the best institutions are mixed with
infirmities. Very just is that aphorism of Mercurius Triysmegistus, (...) to
purge goodness quite and clean from all mixture of evil here, is a thing
impossible."

What reason then can be assigned, and in what manner can it be construed
pertinent to the subject controverted, thus invidiously, by every unmanly,
ungentlemanly, and unchristian method, to raise in the colonists a disaffection
to the church and clergy? Not to mention those many infantine but illnatured
witticisms with which every paper is checquered, unworthy the notice of a man.
-- They have represented her as unchurching every other society of Christians
-- Her clergy as enemies to the reformation and revolution, and disaffected to
his present majesty. -- They have painted the character of a bishop, (though
divested of temporal power) in the most odious colors. These are charges of
the greatest importance; and though they are delivered in that vague
indeterminate manner the Whig so studiously affects, in my next shall mere with
particular consideration -- for the present, I would recommend it to the
author, that if the overboilings of his spleen force him to make frequent
evacuations, plentifully to discharge it on those vices and dangerous
amusements, which are at this season particularly prejudicial to his country --
instead of casting it in the face of those men, and on that establishment,
which is an honor to the English nation) to the great comfort of all deists
and libertines, and to the great nuisance of all his majesty's honest, liege
subjects.

Satire unjust "admits of no defense;"
"For want of "Charity" is want of sense."
POPE. I appeal to you, my countrymen! A CITIZEN.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, August 29.
THE AMERICAN WHIG. [No. XXV.]
To the Author of the AMERICAN WHIG.
SIR,
TO believe that among the Christian clergy, there is an order called bishops
jure divino superior to the rest, is to be an episcopalian. But to wish to see
these bishops clothed with worldly honors, wealth, and power, and turned into
lords, is papistical, repugnant to the spirit of Christianity, and utterly
inconsistent with the principles of sound policy. Every protestant churchman
will therefore, while he approves the humole apostolic shepherd, detest the
proud prelatic Pontiff, as a dangerous character, that sprang up in the
churches, under the dominion of antichrist. Such being the vast difference
between a Bishop and a Prelate, what wonder that a country, not yet duped by
the clergy, should eye the project of introducing an episcopate, with all that
jealousy which an attachment to liberty necessarily inspires; especially when,
in spite of all the address of the partisans of the scheme to conceal their
true aim, they have given so many proofs, that Prelates, and not Bishops, are
the characters they wish to see established among us.

Whether this is sufficiently proved, must be left to the public to determine.
If the introduction of prelacy, to subjugate the colonies to the tyranny of
priests, is the object of Dr. Chandler and the convention, it becomes every
true son of the church -- every friend to Christianity, and lover of this
country, to rise up and set his face like a flint against a scheme of so
pernicious a tendency. The temporal powers of the Bishops in England, were
popish investitures, and there are not wanting instances of pious Bishops, in
every age since the reformation, who have lamented these annexations as
exposing them to interruptions and cares, foreign to the original design of
their spiritual offices, unfriendly to religion, and impediments to the
restoration of primitive purity.

Having the honor to agree with these worthies of our church, and conceiving
that if the establishment of an episcopate in America, was left to the sole
management of the clergy here, and the bench of Bishops in England, it would
participate largely of a prelatical mixture; and that it was indeed impossible
to be otherwise, without an alteration of the law, I thought it my duty, though a
churchman, to assist in awakening the public to a salutary vigilance, to
convict the missionaries of their indecent neglect of the government, the
laity, and the Bishop of London their superior, and to vindicate our church in
general from the odium of a measure, contrived by a few meddling priests, to
advance their own interest, and naturally productive (unless certain
preliminary securities are given) of the most tragical consequences, to these
weak and exposed dispersions of the empire. -- With these views, I shall
continue my correspondence with you, and trust my letters to your candor,
provided my sentiments are not changed. -- Concerning the style I am not
solicitous; and it is therefore submitted to your correction.

That the majority of the episcopalians are not chargeable with this pestilent
enterprise, shall be the scope of this letter, in order to remove any
suspicions to the contrary, which the guilty contrivers of the plot are falsely
and wickedly endeavoring to propagate. This may be argued from the character
and principles of the American churchmen; the conduct of the petitioners for an
episcopate, and the nature and method of their defense, against the attacks
they have received.

As to our character, it is notorious to all the world; and nothing but malice
itself, can prompt any man to deny, that in principle we are as distant from
the tories, as any Whigs or low churchmen in England. Few, very few Americans,
avow the absurd and slavish doctrines of passive obedience and non resistance;
nor can any persuasion claim the honor of a more zealous attachment to
revolution principles, or a sincerer, more fervent and steady affection to the
protestant succession, and the present reigning family. As asserters of
liberty, who excelled us in the late memorable opposition to the stamp act?
Nay, permit me to mention it with triumph, that the Virginians are almost
universally churchmen; and though their ancestors, as cavaliers, were obliged to
fly to these distant regions, for their attachment to the cause of that
unfortunate prince king Charles the first, and it might thence have been
supposed, that nonresisting principles were deeply sown in the minds of their
posterity, yet this was the people who first publicly and boldly resolved to
vindicate the liberties of the continent, and dared to deny, that the commons
of America owed allegiance to their fellow subjects of Great Britain.

The Americans are plain in their manners, virtuously disposed; neither puffed
up by a love of pomp and luxury on the one hand, nor dispirited by poverty on
the other. -- Long accustomed to freedom, jealous of their rights, and watchful
of the undue extent of the prerogative. Hence it is, that in all their public
expenses in government, they are the most frugal oeconomists in the world. This
is the known character of all the provinces. Episcopal and non-episcopal. --
And if none will dare to assert, and I am sure none can with truth and justice
assert the contrary, how improbable that a people so principled, should be
solicitous for domineering masters of any kind, or in the least disposed to
countenance a measure which, considering the infant and feeble state of the
colonies, will inevitably expose them to the dominion of the clergy. To this
very day the episcopalians of Virginia, where there are no dissenters to check
their power, are so far from a blind devotion to the clergy, that the public
provision for them extends only to two churches in a county, with an allowance
to each incumbent, of a little more than L 200, per annum. A sum scarce
sufficient for their decent support.

And that this is the general spirit of the continent, the whole priesthood,
superior and inferior, on both sides of the water, must long have been
sensible. -- The chief end of erecting the society for the propagating the
gospel, according to the testimony of the Bishop of Landaff, was the
establishment of episcopal authority in this country; and yet we have seen more
than half a century roll away, without accomplishing a design easily effected,
could the Americans have been prevailed upon to open their purse strings. --
ever suspicious, that under the cloak of episcopacy, prelacy might steal in,
and esteeming spiritual courts a hardship, infinitely greater than a Bishop's
absence, we have hitherto resisted the solicitations of the lower clergy, and
the influence of the right reverend bench, from the reign of king William to
the present day; and since the southern colonies might, if they pleased, have
easily given their lordships a safe port to land in, and the political
objections, now started on the part of the government against the scheme, had
no weight in queen Ann's time, the conclusion is irresistible, that all the
provinces owe their exemption from prelatic power, in, a very eminent degree,
to the discountenances that an episcopate has steadily received, from the
episcopalians themselves.

The conduct of the conspirators of this plot, is a further proof, that they
are a contemptible miniority. -- Had the project been devised or avowed by our
communion in general, a due respect would have been shown to government, and to
the Bishop of London, in the means of giving it success. Such marks of wisdom,
prudence, and temper, would have appeared in every step taken, as became a
denomination so numerous, loyal, and wise. How obvious was the plan, which even
common sense seemed to dictate. -- In the southern provinces, where the
episcopalians have the power in their own hands, what more is requisite than a
joint petition of governor, council, and assembly, to the throne, for his
majesty's approbation of a law, for the establishment of an episcopate, in the
colony requesting it. And if nothing more was aimed at than primitive
episcopacy, what colony so poor as not to be able to support a hundred Bishops
of apostolical grandeur -- This, when effected in any province, would, in all,
remove the objection arising from the danger, and expense of a voyage to Europe
for ordination; and in the colonies, where the legislative power is divided
among protestants, of different denominations, if the misconduct of the clergy,
and the want of confirmation, rendered our people uneasy, we might urge the
legislature to favor the extent of the other episcopates, or the introduction
of Bishops of our own, and if that failed, the access to the crown, for its
influence was open; and thus the scheme would have advanced, in proportion to
the benefits experienced, and the security we could gradually obtain against
the pride of prelacy, so deservedly dreaded by the whole continent, and so
naturally to be apprehended from a precipitate introduction of episcopacy,
archieved by clergymen alone.

In this way, no umbrage would be given to the government, nor could the Bishop
of London have complained of a contempt of the authority he claims, under the
countenance of the royal instructions, long usage, and our own voluntary
concurrence. -- Measures of this kind could have given no just offense, and
measures less prudent and temperate, the whole church would never have approved
-- But fully sensible, that our denomination was generally disaffected to the
least mixture of prelacy, and therefore would either not concur in the project
of an episcopate, at a juncture so unseasonable as the present; or proceed in
it with a wise deliberation, disgustful to priestcraft, recourse was had to
art. -- The enterprise was concealed from the laity. -- Less than twenty
dependant clergymen arrogantly presume to represent all the churchmen, in
America, and in our names, complain even to the king himself of distresses
never felt, and to ask as a boon, what (until security, ten thousand times
beyond the value of all they are worth in the world, is given to us) would be
esteemed by every sensible churchman in America one of the most fruitful
sources of mischief and oppression; I mean an increase of the power of the
clergy. It is not long since we were told in a pamphlet ascribed to one of the
greatest dignitaries of the church of England, that Bishops would be sent to
America, as soon as the people were disposed to receive them. His Grace is,
perhaps, by this time convinced, that he presumed too far upon his own
influence in the cabinet; but it is not improbable that this hint inflamed the
zealots, who transmitted the seven petitions, which have given so much offense,
-- Fortunately to us, so slender a subscription was less evidence of the
popularity of the cause, than the author of the pamphlet expected, and hence
they were laid under an inevitable necessity, of divulging the secret to the
laity. That all ranks might be drawn into an approbation, of what the clergy
had contrived, Mr. Chandler was dubbed Doctor, and employed like a wild Irish
mourner, to utter sighs, groans, and lamentations for hardships -- hardships
unparalled, hardships, which, till this memorable appeal appeared in print,
were never thought of, unless by a few high-flying necessitous zealots of the
gown.

This, Sir, is a short but true history of the late attempt to introduce
prelacy, -- The clergy, and but a few of these, are the authors; and it is to
facilitate that design, that we lately hear of their frequent assemblies under
the name of the convention. -- A practice unknown to the ecclesiastical
constitution of England, and to which his lordship, the Bishop of London, will
doubtless very soon, in justice to his character, apply a suitable remedy.

Our general discountenance of the petitioners is the last proof I shall
advance, of our abhorrence of their scheme. Prelacy, odious as it is, has had
apologists of abilities, and their desences have been artful and specious; but
was ever a set of projectors at a more ridiculous plunge, than the present
pretended desenders of our church! -- Judging from their weekly productions,
it is cle^^ that not a man of learning or genius amongst us will come out to
their aid. -- Such we have, and they are as willing to vindicate the rights of
the church, as they lately proved themselves able to maintain the civil
liberties of this continent. But apprised that an episcopate will introduce the
tyranny of priests, and the inquisitorial oppression of spiritual courts, not a
man of sense will take up his pen in so pernicious and disreputable a cause. --
Hence the distress and extremity of the convention, and the pitiful scribblers
they have retained in their service. -- Wit and sophistry might have concealed
the nakedness of the cause from the vulgar, and a talent for ridicule could
have stung an opponent, and diverted the public. -- But the projectors are
unsupported, abandoned, and unpitied. -- The inference is natural, that not a
man of abilities in all our churches is on their side, and for that reason the
press groans under a weekly medley of repetition, wrath, buffoonery, nonsense,
and falsehood. -- In truth, Mr. Whig, all America (a few Tories excepted) is
averse to clerical domination, and almost every episcopalian in this country,
can subscribe himself as I do, a friend to humble primitive Bishops, but a
detester of modern, proud prelates, and therefore.

An AMERICAN CHURCHMAN.

A KICK FOR THE WHIPPER. [No. XIV.]
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord are
these.

JEREMIAH.
To Sir ISAAC FOOT.
SIR,
THE following is designed as a Kick for a general fault of of the Whipper, in
his erroneous and continual abuse of of the word church; you see it is preceded
by instruction, which doubtless is the best way of correction. For this, I
claim your promise made in your first number, and am

Sir, your humble Servant, A friend to truth.

A SHORT Catechism, for the instruction of all in general, and of tories and
high-churchmen in particular.

1 Q. What does the word church signify? A. Like the Greek word Ekklesia, it
for the most part signifies a number of professed Christians who meet together,
in order publicly to worship God, 1 Co. xiv. 23, 25. and elsewhere. In a more
strict (but yet more comprehensive) sense, it means all real Christians or
members of the universal invisible church, Ephesians. v. 25, Colos. i. 18. etc. but
the word Ekklesia translated church, is sometimes used with more latitude to
express a congregation of Jews, Acts vii. 38. and even to denominate a
promiscuous rabble (Acts xix. 32.) in the Theater at Ephesus which, for 2 long
hours, cried, Great is Diana of the Epesians. 2 Q. Does the word church also
signify the house in which people meet for divine worship? A. Yes; 1 Cor. xiv.
35, and elsewhere. 3. Q. What do you think of the word meeting? A. It is
expressive of all that the word church is, (if the purpose of public worship be
implied) and seem equivalent to the Greek word Sunagogee, used James ii. 2. 4.
Q. Does this word also signify the house in which people assemble for the
purpose aforesaid? A. Yes it oftentimes does; though it is common expressly to
say meeting house; nor would Church-house be an improper expression, were it
but authorized by custom. 5. Q. Are then the words church and meeting
synonimous? A They are indeed, whether applied to the people formed into
congregations, or to the house in which they assemble. 6. Q. But how can the
word church or meeting be applied to houses? A. Houses set apart for public
worship are figuratively called after the assembly of worshippers. 7. What
think you of those, who, meaning their own dear selves, say, not our church,
but the church, and generally express the word CHURCH in capitals, as though they
were afraid the unwary reader would mistake, or think too meanly of them, and
on the contrary, express the word meeting diminutively as possible? A. They
virtually exclude all denominations of Christians but themselves out of the
church universal, out of which according to scripture there is no salvation;
and thus pattern after papists, who affirm that the church of Rome alone is the
Catholic or universal church. But to put a more charitable construction on
their way of expression, it is probable, they know not what they say, nor
whereof they affirm, for they will hardly condemn what they call a sincere
honest Presbyterian. 8. Q. What think you of the words church and meeting as
applied to houses so called? A. That they may be promiscuously used, without
regard to the denominations of Christians therein assembling. Thus, e. g. We
may properly eno'^ say, Trinity meeting house, St. Paul's meeting house, Old
and New Dutch meeting house, Old and New Presbyterian meeting house, etc. or on
the contrary we may call them all CHURCHES (especially if we have reason to
think there are at least some real Christians who assemble in them) without
giving offense to any but the most consummate Bigots. 9. Q. What do such Bigots
deserve? A. To be kicked out of the company of gentlemen and catholic
Christians. 10. Q. Who appear to be of the number of such Bigots? A. Tabitha
Kettle and her cook-mates.
My humane catholic correspondent must excuse my informing the public that I
have luckily discovered him to be a respectable member of the Dutch church.

To Sir ISSAAC FOOT.
SIR,
AS you have not thought it worth your while to take any notice of the file of
soldiers, conducted by the magnanimous Sergeant Plain Truth, destined, in
conjunction with Capt, Tickle's irregulars, to antagonize the rear of the
Whig's army, and as I have been so curious as to take a review of them, I beg
leave to send you the result.

Supposing them truth-landers, they must be a rabble of recruits from different
provinces; for there are, it seems, not only past and present, (but would you
believe it!) even future truths, about half the whole in number. They appear on
the parade in masks, but through the rents in their regimentals, tattered with
long wearing, I discovered the complexion of foreign mercenaries. Instead of of
cock-ades they were white roses. I need not tell you, they are well furnished
with spatterdashes. Though perfect dwarfs, they strut and bluster most
gigantically, and though very puerile in appearance, are mighty pert, sancy,
brazenfac'd fellows; but as great braggadochios as they are, they are horribly
afraid of a Watch Tower, etc. They have a kettle drum, which being empty makes
a great tinkling, and their standard seems to be a rag of the scarlet W --. In
lieu of muskets they carry blunder-busses, and instead of swords they wear
dungforks. Their balls indeed are lead; but their powder though it smells strong
of brimstone, contains little or no salt of Peter; so that their cartridges do
little more than burn, hiss and bounce, waste paper, stink and die.

I am, Sir, your humble Servant, ARGUS.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE. Sept. 5. [No. XXII.]
TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
Quousque tandem Catalina! Abuteris patientia nostra? Nihilne consensus bonorum
^^^nium, nihil horum or a vultusque te commovere? Patere tua consilia non
cernis?

CICERO.
My dear Countrymen,
RELIGION is confessedly so advantageous to society, that every reasonable man,
must endeavor to advance it, even through a political view of increasing the
happiness of that community of which he is a member. The evidence of this truth
seems almost always to have been so conspicuous, that since the first origin of
government, every prudent legislature has taken care to establish some
religion, and afforded a competent maintenance to the ministers of it. The
ultimate advantages of honesly, and obedience to government, were not
sufficiently evident and glaring, to restrain the Fallies of ambition, or the
unresisted desire of unlimitted freedom; the future rewards therefore of
virtue, and punishments of vice, were necessary to establish that order and
harmony so requisite to the just motion in the springs of every political
system. But the duty of supporting religion receives stronger enforcements,
when we consider that the one we are now to promote, is the Christian religion;
-- a system which has not only the most undoubted evidences of truth, but is
framed by its precepts and spirit, more especially to favor the well-being of
society, -- convinced of this, the government also to which we are subjects,
from a number of denominations professing Christianity, but differing for the
most part merely in external modes, has chosen one which she thought most
concording in its polity with the state; most agreeable to the major part of
the nation; and most fitted in its principles and regimen, to promote the
happiness and unity of the kingdom. -- As Christians therefore, it is our duty
to advance the general interest of Christianity. -- And as members of society,
particularly to favor that form of church government, which though it was at
first indifferent, yet ceases to be so by the establishment of the civil
magistrate. An establishment which has cost a million of lives; for which our
forefathers willingly suffered the severest deaths! An establishment, which
the wisest politicians, whether native or foreign, account an honor to
Britons; the nicest adapted to monarchical government, and best constituted to
preserve liberty, learning and true religion; and to diffuse principles of
benevolence, patriotism, and concord. -- Whoever therefore endeavors to libel
it, or prejudice its ministers, is either an enemy to his country, or
endeavors to show his love in a very dangerous and illconceiv'd manner. As it
is necessary to the support of this religion, and the divine author of it
himself has appointed, that certain officers should be set apart to inculcate
its doctrines, administer its Sacraments, and watch that all things may be done
to edification; so it is equally necessary, in order to their due performance
of these offices, that the people entertain and esteem for their function, a
reverence and regard to their characters, and a favorable opinion of their
virtue. Wherever therefore sentiments contrary to these are promoted,
religion must certainly suffer, and our country consequently suffer with it.
There is naturally in most men a baneful proneness to rejoice in the discovery
of blemishes and imperfections in those, who by their superiority in station,
are supposed to be possessed of superior virtue. It is the fault of weak minds,
that they endeavor not to raise themselves, but to debase others to an
equality with them. Vice delights to suppress a consciousness of her own
deformity, by partial comparisons of it with aggavated representations of the
deformity of others: Hence may proceed that avarice of magnifying the defects
of clergymen; that eagle-eyed observation of their infirmities; and that
unsatiated avidity with which the most nauseous tales of calumny (concerning
them) are swallowed down.

An esteem and reverence for another, is requisite to engage us to listen
heartily to, and earnestly practice his advice: The enemies of Christianity and
society, conscious of this, have ever made it their study to affix the vilest
stains on its ministers, and to debase the order as low as possible; knowing
that, according to its success or decay, religion would be weakened or prosper.
-- In this they have been but too successful! The Christian priesthood, instead
of being held in the most honorable light, serves as a theme for the puerile
satire of every dough-scull'd top, prating buffoon, or illiterate debauchee;
who expiatate over their Cups on the luxury, avarice, folly, and intemperance
of the clergy.

But not content with this victory, these "foes to ecclesiastical influence,"
have marched farther into their enemies territories, and (considering the
church-establishment as the strongest bulwark, against their success) have
incessantly aimed their fire at her clergy, -- tota armenta sequantur. -- With
ammunition the papists gladly supplied them; to their standard have flocked in
greedy troops, shoals of those prostituters of humanity, who live on the
imperfections and tumers of the body politic, as nauseous vermin on the sores
and excrescencies of the animal body. From these the cry of priestcraft,
persecution, clerical luxury, and ambition, has been re-echoed, 'till the sound
has grown agreeable and natural to all those, who either know very little of,
or care not much, for religion. -- But what is more melancholy, these attacks
are made in such a manner, that no defense can properly or sufficiently be
provided. The vices of any individual (as in all societies there will be some
faulty) are spread over the whole order. The suspicions of the people are
immediately raised, -- their reverence for the office diminishes, -- and an
inattention to, and contempt of, instruction, follows. Such a flagrant attempt
and procedure against the episcopal clergy, is, my countrymen, confessedly
pernicious; at this season, when unanimity and peace are essentially necessary
it is particularly dangerous; that it should be performed by our countrymen, and
by those who profess themselves lovers of their country, is almost incredible;
but that it should be done by Christians, and by Protestants, and by those
whose particular duty it is to extend the influences of protestanism, is the
most unparalleled and nefarious machination!

The clergy of the church of England in America, ( This the author can
pronounce with the greater confidence, as by his station and experience, he has
had greater opportunities of scrutinizing their conduct, -- and as a layman,
can speak with the greater propriety and readiness.
a body of men who have always behaved themselves so as to deserve the esteem
and regards of their fellow subjects) influenced by a love to religion,
petitioned for the enjoyment of those privileges, without which they saw, and
still perceive, the church must infallibly decay, as not being able to supply
herself with ministers, and being destitute of that government and discipline
which she requires. That no unreasonable suspicions might be entertained by
other denominations, they published their plan, and in the most mild and
Christian manner, appealed to the world for the reasonableness of it. -- In
return for this candor (blush, charity!) their Characters have been loaded
with the most undeserved reproach, delivered in the most rancorous
recriminations of asperity. 'Twas sufficiently injurious (a very heathen would
have imagined) to accuse them of falsehood, -- of being ambitious
ecclesiasties, -- of representing their countrymen as disaffected to
Great Britain, -- of endeavoring to en^lave their fellow subjects. -- But must
they be stigmatized as enemies to his present majesty, and the illustrious home
o^ ^^^^nover, and only to be retained in obedience by dependence?

It Is true the friends of those men may say, that such affirmations as these
last, and those beforementioned, will be (...) disservice to the clergy; as
all men of sense must be satified the authors are not in earnest, and only make
use of them to inspirit their party and color over their designs. -- But hae
nugae sacra ducunt in mala. -- In an affair of such consequence (as they say)
to America, every circumdance deserves to be considered with the greatest
seriousness and impartiality. Let them then point out to us those persons whom
they have thus accused of breaking the most solemn oath whereby they all have
bound themselves at their ordination, by being disaffected to the present
government. Truth, justice, religion, and the injured characters of men who are
zealously engaged in the service of religion and their country, demand this! --
without doing this, they cannot but be considered, not as those friends to
truth and their country they would appear to be, but as somenters of discord,
and enemies to religion and society. -- But it is the manner of these
politicians (as it is their interest) to wave coming to the point; and like
Proteus, when bas^led in one shape, to twist themselves immediately into
another. Such juggling however will not satisfy men of consideration,
respecting this circumstance. Inadvertent errors demand a charitable
forgiveness, -- but premeditated malice deserves censure and abhorrence.

In order to raise the resentment of other denominations, it has also been
asserted, that the church of England deems all the foreign Protestant churches,
no churches. To this objection (although it will doubtless receive a proper
confutation from the clergy) I would just answer, -- that the laws of England
require, that every one who officiates in the church, should receive episcopal
ordination, and consider none but such as have received it, as clergymen. A law
framed to prevent confusion and disoder. And it is highly reasonable that none
should enjoy the immunities, set apart by a society for a particular use,
without complying with the terms required. A free and extensive toleration is
allowed them, and even churches have been raised for them at the public cost.
The chief dignitaries also of the church have ever held them in the highest
estimation, -- thought, as their first sounders did, their ordination excusable
through the necessity and urgency of the case, -- never scrupled, when abroad, to
receive the Sacrament in their churches, -- and continually kept up a friendly
interconrse, correspondence, and confidence with them. Neither were bishop
Burnet and others, wanting in their endeavors to promote a closer union with
them. Even Laud, (whose unhappy name has been so much and so injuriously
stigmatized) held a friendly correspondence with the protestant churches: See
his letter in 1639, to the Swiss divines, in the Praestantium viorum Epistolae,
Ep. 552. where they are called by him Confrates mei Charissimi; and of their
letter to him he says, It was agreeable to me on a double account, as it was
their's, and exhorting to Christian peace. Such men ought they to be, who are
members of the same body, and who believe and profess the communion of Saints.
And in 1629, he writes to Vossus with great mildness, and concern for the whole
reformed church, and for peace among divines, in Ep. 471. And he says to him
in 1633, It is a mere invention that the English bishops desired to extend
their jurisdiction over the foreign Protestant churches: A thing which they
never so much as dreamed of. Ep. 528. The late Doctor ^ake likewise, in his
letters to Le Clear, and Jablonski, expresses the warmest affection for them:
And particularly in a letter to the first, dated April, 1715, he declared his
abhorrence of the thought considering them as no churches, Unionem arctor em
inter omnes Reformatos procurare quovis pretio vellem. i. e. I would purchase a
closer Union among all the reformed, at any rate." D. E. Jablonski, a learned
foreign Protestant, whose word may be relied on, informs us a certain fact,
that from the beginning of the reformation, the church of England had always
held a brotherly correspondence with the foreign Protestants. That it was not
more effectual, he lays the fault, not on any English bishops, but on the
English Presbyterians; who, to strengthen their own faction, endeavored to
slacken this cord of amity, by representing the reformed in Prussia, as holding
tenets in opposition to this church -- Les Presbyteriens d' Angleterre ont sait
leurs efforts pour reldcher ce lien, dans la vue de sortifier leur parti, --
relation des mesures qui furent prises dans les Aunees 17^1, 12, 13, pour
introduire la Liturgy Anglicane dans le Royaume de Prusse et dans le
Vicctorate de Hanover, 1767, No. xii. p. 73.
. After so strong a testimony as this, -- you must be convinced, my countrymen,
that as these weekly defamers of the church, intend their paper only as a
vehicle of slander against her; so they hesitate not to deliver the most
palpable misrepresentations, in the most solemn air and guise of truth. -- Qui
vult decipi decipiatur. The advocates for the church desire you only to read
over the appeal, and consider the subject with impartiality -- No advantages
the clergy seek from the episcopate proposed, but the advancement of religion.
They see with regret half their churches without clergymen to officiate in
them. The prospect is alarming to all who have the welfare of the church at
heart, and ought to be so to all who have a sincere regard for religion. They
only desire what reason, justice, liberty, the laws of their country, and the
grand treasure of Britons, Magna Charta, allows them.

Who dares think one thing, and another tell,
My heart detests him at the gatss of hell.
POPE'S HOMER. A CITIZEN.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE. Sept. 5.
THE AMERICAN WHIG. [No. XXVI.]
A brief view of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as it is at this Day practiced in
England: Addressed to Sir Nathaniel Curzon, Bart. and the rest of the Gentlemen
of the Committee appointed by Parliament, for enquiring into the Abuses and
Corruptions of Ecclesiastical Courts and Jurisdictions. (First printed in the
year 1733.)

GENTLEMEN,
AS the grand inquest of the kingdom of Great Britain, have devolved upon you
the trust of enquiring into the abuses and corruptions of ecclesiastical courts
and jurisdictions, give me leave briefly, and in miniature, to represent to
your view, a contracted scheme of those courts and jurisdictions in England;
whereby it will appear what an incredible sum is yearly drained and squeezed
out of the people's purses and estates by such ecclesiastical officers and
spiritual persons, who make gain their only godliness.

But as my intent here is not to intermeddle with their doctrines of faith, or
practices in religion, I shall only at present enquire, whether a great cause
of the impoverishing of this nation, is not occasioned by an over-numerous body
of ecclesiastics among us, and by the exactions, extortions, and oppressions,
of what are called spiritual courts and jurisdictions.

In order to this enquiry, I beg leave to recite a maxim or observation of the
lord Verulam, (which will be found to contain an eternal truth) viz. That a
smaller number who spend more and earn less, do sooner wear out an estate, than
a greater number that live lower (meaner) and gather more; so it is (says he)
with an overgrown (i. e. a numerous and luxuriant) clergy. For they consume the
labors of others, but bringing in nothing to the stock.

And that the stock and produce of the English nation, is in a great measure
swallowed up and devoured by the numerous body of our ecclesiastics, and their
jurisdictions, courts, and officers, will I believe evidently appear, if you
consider the following observables, respecting those persons, and their courts
and jurisdictions.

I. We have here in England two provincial Archbishops, Canterbury, and York;
each of which has his princely retinue for the support of his temporal
grandeur, as well as a numerous body of spiritual officers, for the exercise
and execution of his ecclesiastical jurisdiction and authority.

In the number of their temporal retinue, we may reckon their stewards and
baliffs of lordships, manors, lands etc. stewards of their households,
gentlemen-ushers, ushers of their halls, comptrollers, yeomen of their horse,
secretaries, house keepers, purveyors, butlers, cooks, etc.

And among the latter, their suffragans, vicars-general, guardians of
spiritualities, chancellors, officials, commissaries, deans, archdeacons,
registers, deputy-registers, advocates, apparitors, projectors, cum multis
aliis.

And as the officers and attendants of these archbishops are of two kinds, so
are their courts. viz.

1 Courts temporal, as courts ^eet, courts baron, customary courts, courts of
franchises and privileges, courts of piepowder, (for some of them keep fairs
and markets) and other like courts. 2. Courts spiritual, as the courts of
arches (to Canterbury) prerogative courts, courts of delegates, consistory
courts, or courts of audience, courts of faculties for granting licenses and
dispensations (with diverse others.)
II. Next, as to bishops (who in most things imitate archbishops) we may
observe,

1. That within England we have twenty-four diocesan bishops. 2. That these
have also their several trains of domestic officers, servants, and attendants,
both temporal and spiritual.
But as I shall not at present enter into a disquisition of their estates in
lordships, manors, lands, palaces, gardens, etc. so I shall here wave all
enquiry into the state of their temporal revenues; my present intention being
chiefly to remark on their ecclesiastical or spiritual courts and
jurisdictions. -- Wherein I observe, that our twenty four bishops have, to
assist them in the exercise and execution of their spiritual jurisdiction, the
following officers, viz.

24 Suffragans, if not double the number, with their attendants. 26
Chancellors, with their attendants. 26 Registers, with their attendants: 26
Deputy registers, with their clerks, etc. 26 Gentlemen apparitors, 52, or more,
proctors: and 150, or more common apparitors.
With many other officers, notaries, clerks, and attendants.

Note, Bath and Wells, as well as Litchfield and Coventry, have their distinct
courts, i. e. one in each division of those dioceses.

There are also under these archbishops and bishops at least, 60
Arch-deaconries. And to these belong, 60 Archdeacons courts; which consist of
60 Commissaries or judges of those courts; as also 60 or more surrogates, or
deputy commissaries. 60 Registers, with their deputies, scribes and clerks. 120
Proctors ( i. e. if we allow but two to each court.) 200 or more apparitors,
with a multitude of promoters and informers; cum aliis Officiariis.


See of the exercise of their jurisdiction hereafter.

But further, besides the beforementioned officers, we may observe another,
who, in their ecclesiastical economy, is called a dean, in latin Decanus. For
that, it is said, in his first institution, he was to preside over ten parishes,
which was therefore called a deanery.

But deans are now with us distinguished into four or five kinds, viz.

1. Cathedral deans; these, with their respective chapters, have in many things
a concurrent jurisdiction with the bishop of the diocese: And some authorities
they have which are independent of him. The number of this kind of deans in
England and Wales is twenty-four: For at St. David's and Landaff they have no
cathedral deans, the office of dean being there exercised by the bishops
themselves. 2. Collegiate deans, some whereof have all the concomitants and
attendants of a cathedral dean, except that of having a bishop at their head;
such a dean is that of Westminster college, etc. 3. Exempt deans, i. e. such as
are exempt from episcopal jurisdiction, as having an independent ecclesiastical
jurisdiction within their own particular precincts; such a dean is that of
Battle in Sussex, who is, or may be, invested in his deanery by the king's
letters patents, and needs no institution or induction by the bishop or
archdeacon. Quaere, of the dean or provost of Eaton college, if an exempt, etc.
4. Non-Exempt deans, i. e. such as are not so exempt as aforesaid. These are
generally donatives in the archbishops, and consequently have a peculiar
jurisdiction derived from them; such are the deans of the arches (and St.
Martin le Grand) in London; the dean of Bocking in Essex, with some others
under the archbishop of Canterbury: And I have heard of the like under the
archbishop of York, but can at present give no certain account of them. 5.
Rural deans; these originally had no judicial powers, being only substituted by
the bishop to assist him in granting administrations and probates of wills. But
I am informed, that at this day diverse of those deans have arrogated to
themselves a species of jurisdiction. Though it is said, their chief business is
only to feast the clergy at visitations, for which they have a license to raise
contributions within their deanries. -- See Nelson's rights of the clergy. 252,
253, etc.
And seeing we have mentioned cathedral deans, I shall here beg leave to give a
specimen of the several parts or members whereof the cathedratic choir or body
is usually composed; which, taking our pattern from that at St. Paul's, stands
thus:

1 Bishop, 1 dean, 1 subdean, 1 praecentor, 1 chancellor, who has under him
diverse scribes, clerks and officers; 1 treasurer, who has an officer called a
sacrist or sacristan for a coadjutor, and this sacrist has 3 or 4 attendants
called viergers. There are also 5 archdeacons, 30 prebendaries, 12 petty
canons, 6 or 8 vicars choral, and about 24 choristers and singing boys, besides
other officers and attendants: The whole number of officers and attendants in
this and other cathedrals amounting to about 150, and in some, as I am
informed, to near 200.

And if any person is desirous to know the several procurations, synodals,
pensions, payments and perquisites appropriated to each of the abovementioned
officers within the diocese of London, let him peruse Mr. Newcourt's
Repertorium Canonicum, vol. I. fol, 58, 102, etc. And by an account taken from
the second volume of that book, I find that, in the single county of Essex,
there is yearly paid to the bishop and archdeacons, in procurations, pensions,
and synodals only, about 500 l. per annum.

And upon the whole account, which may easily be deduced from the foregoing
view and specimen, I think it will evidently appear, that the number of
spiritual officers and attendants belonging to archbishops, bishops,
archdeacons, and cathedral deans only, will amount to more than 20.000 persons,
besides preaching ministers. And that these receive for their maintenance one
with another, at least forty pounds a man yearly, which will amount to at least
eight hundred thousand pounds per annum. A surprising sum! And when we consider
that many of those officers, instead of forty pounds per annum, do make two,
three, or four hundred pounds per annum, by their ecclesiastical employments, I
conceive the above computation may well be extended to ten hundred thousand
pounds per annum. All which is extorted and squezed out of the people's purses,
merely to support ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction.

A KICK FOR THE WHIPPER. [No. XV.]
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
-- moveat cornicula risum
Furtivis nudata coloribus --
HORACE.
"I Have never yet heard it disputed in" any one that I have been in of several
companies (to the credit of their respective members be it spoken) whether it
be possible the writer of the letter Squire T. has thought fit to publish in
his Whip, No. XIV. No. 1. can be an Independent in any sense; or whether this
piece is in reality any thing else than a letter from T. Tickle, Esquire to his own
dear self;" for both "these questions were (nem. con.) unanimously decided in
the Negative." Far from having any "objections against this opinion" I shall
lay the reasons assigned before the reader.

1. The style is exactly Squire T's. When we have seen a man 14 weeks
successively, we cannot easily mistake his phyz. especially if he has singular
seatures; and by this time the public can be no stranger to Squire T's. 2. The
sentiments, such as reeking from the lash of public indignation, etc. are very
characteristical of such a leather-dresser as he. 3. No scribbler but Squire T.
is remembered to have published so many inconsistencies and puerilities, i. e.
such a quantity of nonsense as is contained in the letter under consideration.
4. The writer winces like a galled horse at an observation in the 6th Sentinel
(which is perhaps but too just) concerning the clergy in general. As this
observation (however it may be as to others) is indisputably just with regard
to most of the episcopal clergy, and is indeed peculiarly expressive of the
genius of hierachy; this writer, if really an Independent, must, while he in
effect calls the teachers of his own particular sect, Children of Darkness,
have an unaccountable sympathy with the clergy of the Church, and write more
out of tenderness for the success of episcopacy, than zeal for the right
conduct of Independency. 5. The many contemptuous expressions he uses, e. g.
Preshyterian parsons, teachers, sect, ^hersites, Otway's witch, protectors,
Zion, etc. betray him to be, not the Independent he personates, but a wolf in
sheep's clothing. 6. He unnecessarily endeavors to scandalize what he pretends
is his own profession (par. 3d and 5th) and blacken Indepeatents; and at their
expense makes fulsome and undeserved complements to the church, her prelates
and inserior clergy. 7. He writes not, like an Independent, with the honest
candor of ingenuous acknowledgment (and what denomination has not some faults
to acknowledge?) but with all the virulence of episcopal party pride and
insolence; and yet fancies he looks as while as alabaster, while he (poor
soul!) appears to the public as black as the jetty Ethiopian. 8. In his sly
but virulent insinuation, "and why they did "think it probable, becomes not me
to say" par. 4. he shows himself to be a malicious enemy of Dissenters; and
yet, 9. In par, 6th is hypocritically shy (because of his profession forsooth)
of calling the members of the church of England, what I can with great pleasure
in spite of my profession, call some of them, viz. "A good part of British
subjects in America." 10. Through the whole of his letter this pretended
Independent says not a syllable in favor of Independency, but acts the part of
a champion (and a miserable one too^ poor rogue) for episcopacy: In short, as
servilely as Squire T's pen, he evidently expresses whatever the Whipper would
have.
These are the reasons I have to assign, why we are to consider this
letter-writer, not as an Independent, but as an Hanger-on, and why Squire T. is
believed to be the man; I fancy the public will judge them decisive.

Par. 4. This writer boldly challenges our evidence with regard to the
conventional petitions (which he possibly flatters himself are still concealed
in their original darkness) but let him not be too impatient for its
publication, or too sanguine as to the judgment of the public. The first may be
sooner than he could wish, and the last unexpected.

The sophistry of par. 6th must needs be evident to all who have read whatever
has been written during the present controversy; however I will just observe
that the sum of the whole is this, That we are enemies to liberty because we
cannot confent that those who have always abused it should be invested with a
liberty of encroaching upon our Liberty.

As to good old Dr. Chauncey, he evidently has candor enough, and (in spite of
his years) intellectual vigor more than sufficient, to show to the world (were
he properly called upon) whether or not he has wretchedly, wickedly or weekly (
one, all or neither) "imposed upon the public;" so that it were as absurd in me
to stand his second against this pretended Independent, as to undertake to
defend a generous Hercules, against the impotent attacks of an insignificant
Gnat.

On the whole, this scribbler certainly meant to ape the American church man in
the Whig; but for want of abilities, (poor fellow!) he has, instead of an
Adonis, "chizzel'd out a Thersites, and, while his pencil aspired to the
pourtrait of a Venus, it has only daubed out the frightful figure of -- a Witch.

Z.
A 2d letter from Obadiah Listen is come to hand; but as Sir Isaac Foot is
neither surprised at the nonsense nor provoked by the scurrillity of Squire T.
or Pleadwell's Friend, he hopes his correspondent will excuse his letter's
lying by till the Whip No. XX. comes in course to be considered when he may
depend upon its insertion.



From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE. Sept. 12. A WHIP FOR THE AMERICAN WHIG. [No. XXIII.]
By TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
Were their Scheme to succeed, -- instead of uniting Protestants, it would sow
eternal divisions among them. Their own Sects, which now lie dormant, would be
soon at Cuffs again with each other, about Power and preferment. -- Neither is
it very difficult to conjecture from some late Proceedings, at what a Rate this
Faction is like to drive, wherever it gets the Whip and the Seat.

SWIFT.
To TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
SIR,
I Am a Church of England Man, but, neither violently prepossessed in favor of
my own principles, nor spiteful toward those who belong to any other
denomination. The greater part of my friends and relations are Presbyterians,
or Congregationalists; principally the latter. An intimate acquaintance, and
mutual Interchange of kindness betwixt me and them, has made us hearty friends
to each other; nor can a thousand Whigs and Sentinels, persuade them that I am
a persecutor, a Savage, a Jacobite, a Papist, an Idiot, or a Heathen: Some of
them, I have reason to think, sincerely pity the persecutions I suffer, as well
from zealous, reviling pens and tongues, as from want of a minister and
sacraments, which my conscience and reason direct me to; the want of
confirmation for my children, and a ruler of my church, to whom I might appeal
upon occasion.

Now I think all dissenters ought to be of the same compassionate disposition,
and as we ought not to envy them the privileges they enjoy, so ought they to be
willing that we should enjoy privileges equal to theirs. Since the church has
been so extremely indulgent, as to suffer them without molestation or
restraint, to enjoy almost the whole power of America, they ought to show
themselves worthy of this indulgence, by appearing the readiest people in the
world to remove the shameful oppression which lies upon us: By doing this, they
will show a laudable gratitude, will establish a permanent unity betwixt
themselves and us, and will induce our superiors in Europe to secure them a
perpetual enjoyment of their present advantages; perhaps to extend greater
favors to them.

If some late designs, which have been suggested to me, should succeed, I am
certain that America would not be a happy place even for Dissenters of any
denomination whatever: For suppose that all episcopal clergymen should for the
future, be prevented from landing in America, by threats of assassination (as
it is so often boasted the bishop is prevented, and if the bishop can be thus
prevented, why not the clergy?) would that oblige us to come under an
Anti-episcopal American establishment, or into the Presbyterian Communion? No,
if the church in Virginia, Maryland, New York, or even Connecticut, should
fall, she will fall like a person of strength and courage. However lukewarm and
indifferent churchmen may at present appear, you will find that we have no
relish for mean Kirk-Slavery, nor any Inclination to be dealt with like the
Quakers and Anabaptists of New England, in the last century. We will sooner die
by their swords in war, or flee to Sweden. Denmark, or Holland for protection,
than be dragged by Kirk-Officers to their Cutty Stool, or see our friends, the
peaceable and benevolent Quarkers, hanged or whipped at the cart's tail through
three towns of New England.

Supposing every denomination of Dissenters should concur (as I think they will
not) in extirpating the Church; would there not ensue as much jealousy and
strife among different sects against each other, as there now is in some sects
against the Church? It is well known, that the most violent opposers of the
Church in the middle colonies, defire to introduce an establishment of
Presbyterianism: To the success of this plan, they imagine the religious
establishment of the kingdom of Scotland will greatly contribute; for with
regard to religious establishment, England and Scotland are two distinct
kingdoms as much as ever they were.

In all New England, there are but eleven Presbyterian Congregations; whilst
there are thirty Quaker Churches, thirtynine Anabaptist, about 50 Separatist
Churches, about eighty congregations of the Church of England, and 586
Congregational meetings. Were all the Church people massacred, or put to death
by persecuting Presbyterian laws, is it probable that the other 700 religious
assemblies would peaceably submit their necks to the yokes of Presbyterian
Tyranny? It Is madness to suppose they would; indeed they have on all occasions
peremptorily declared that they would not. Neither can I think the numerous
Quakers in Pennsylvania will ever indulge the encroaching, persecuting scheme,
of American Presbyteries. Whatever the Anabaptist or Dutch Calvinist Churches
may do (both which the Whigs are by every Stratagem attempting to bring
gradually and imperceptibly into the Scottish religion) it is very unlikely the
Lutheran Churches will ever put their neeks into the Synod's yoke.

The leading men of the American Dissenters plainly appear to have a settled
design of clearing America from episcopal errors, as their phrase is; the first
step of which work is, to prevent by menaces, our having a bishop to ordain for
us; the next step will doubtless be to forbid all Church Clergymen landing in
America: Then perhaps we shall be forbid the Use of the common prayer, as in
Cromwell's Time; and at last be banished on pain of death, like the Quakers of
New England. And what consequence can be expected from these happy proceedings?
What but mutual railings. envy and persecution among the numerous, zealous and
widely differing sects? Therefore for the benefit of dissenters as well as
Churchmen, I pray God to defeat the plots of such cruel American Whigs "as
turn religion "into rebellion, and says into faction."

NOV-ANGLUS.

The End of the FIRST VOLUME.

