A Fish caught in his own Net.

AN EXAMINATION Of Nine Sermons, from Matt. 16.18. Published last Year, by Mr
Joseph Fish of Stonington; WHERE^^ He labors to prove, that those called
Standing Churches in New England, are built upon the Rock, and upon the same
Principles with the first Fathers of this Country: And that Separates and
Baptists are joining with the Gates of Hell against them.

In Answer to which; Many of his Mistakes are corrected; The Constitution of
those Churches opened; the Testimonies of Prophets and Apostles, and also of
many of those Fathers are produced, which as plainly condemn his plan, as any
Separate or Baptist can do.

BY ISAAC BACKUS. Pastor of a Church of Christ in Middleborough.

Go through, go through the Gates; -- gather out the Stones, Lift up a Standard for
the People.

Isa. 62.10. Separation generally hears ill in the world, and yet there is a
separation (...) to the mind of God: He that will not separate from the world
and false worship is a separate from Christ.

Dr. Owen's Eshed. p. 36. BOSTON: Printed by EDES and GILL, in Queen Street,
MDCCLXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
PEACE is so lovely in itself, and is so essential to happiness, that all would
be accounted friends thereto. The direction from above is, seek peace and
pursue it: and the cry from below is peace, peace! Yet there is a great and
important difference between the two languages; for the divine voice is, love
the TRUTH and peace; and the way prescribed to promote union is, speaking the
TRUTH in love. Zech. 8.19. Ephesians. 4.15. But the two grand engines to support the
contrary cause are deceit and violence. Which cause the Prince of peace came
into the world on purpose to destroy; and wherever his truth prevails, it
breaks up that sort of peace. Hence the charge exhibited against one of his
greatest ministers, by men of principal note in the world for religion and
order, was, We have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition
throughout the world. Acts 24.5. And it was not only so among the Jews, but
also in the capital of a Roman colony; when the power of truth had cut off the
hope of an unlawful scheme of gain, the magistrates soon had a complaint laid
before them, that, these men do exceedingly trouble our city. Acts 16.20.

However, this conduct both in Jews and Heathens, is so plainly exposed in the
bible, that the whole christian world will condemn it; and who will dare to
appear now to plead for a peace contrary to truth? Instead of that, truth is
set upon as high a pole among protestants, as the cross is among the papists:
and every author that writes, has got the important word wrote in some place,
where the reader may not fail to see it. Yet the^ has been such galling of one
another in perverse disputed and striving about this and other words 1 Timothy
6.4, 5.
in our day, that some serious people are ready to condemn all disputing, at
being a principal cause of all the confusions that appear in our nation and
land. Though if after the confused noise, and garments rolled in blood, with the
great perplexities which were produced by many defeats that we met with in the
beginning of the late war, any had said, we had better be easy as long as we
can, than to oppose the enemy any more; such advice would hardly have passed
for good policy, or for a token of true regard to our peace and welfare.

All rational attempts to remove calamities, are levelled against the causes of
them; and as deceit and violence have been the causes of all our woes from the
beginning, so a great part of the work of God's servants in all ages has been
to point out and expose the deceits of false men; which has often produced what
the prophet speaks of, viz. A voice of the howling of the shepherds; and says
he, my soul loathed them, and their soul also abhorred me. Zech. 11.3, 8. And
things of like nature have appeared in our times, but none are willing to be
accounted the idol shepherds; each one would turn it off to others; and many
ministers in our land have been laboring these 20 years to fix the odious
character upon a number of people who have withdrawn from their societies.
Among whom Mr. Fish has lately distinguished himself, by attempting to open the
rise, cause and tendency of these separations and the errors of the
anabaptists, in a volume of about 200 pages. This I have been requested by
christian friends to write some reply to; but as I have several times, exposed
some of my thoughts on these subjects, to the world. I repeatedly told my
friends that I thought I had done my part in that way. At length it was urged
that many of the first leaders in separation were gone off the stage, and
scarce any left that are so fully acquainted with the circumstances and manner
of the first separations, as I have been. This argument prevailed so far, that
I agreed to take and read the book and act as light might appear. And when I
came to read it, no doubt remained whether it ought to be answered or not, though
the doing of it was far from appearing a pleasing lot to nature. For whatever
pleasure it may yield, to appear to the public in matters that are pleasing, or
for amusement; yet in war, to be distinguished as a mark for every one to shoot
at, that nature dreads. My unequalness to the task was still a greater
difficulty; for though it was an easy matter to point out many of Mr. Fish's
mistakes and inconsistences, so as to render his performance contemptible; to
do the subject justice, would be nothing less than to lay open the religious
constitutions of the whole country, and many transactions which deeply affect
the characters of many noted men.

Yet to omit it now, could not be done with a clear conscience; for Mr. F.
says, If I have in any instance, mistaken facts, or misrepresented persons or
things, I desire it may be corrected. Preface p. 4. And after a long discourse
on those things, he says, The foregoing errors, principles, and groundless
offenses which they took, the charge of all which must lie upon them until they
purge themselves. p. 164. Therefore to be silent now, would be a letting many
things pass for truth, which I knew were not so, though many others did not know
it. Mr. F. tells us he hopes, if there are any mistakes, it will be looked upon
as simple and undesigned. To which I would say, I desire always to avoid the
evil of judging the counsels of others hearts, and to judge righteously
according to what is made manifest. But as he has manifested that he has
mistook the rule itself, throughout his book, I leave him and others to
consider how simple or undesigned such a mistake can be; or what less can be
expected than false actings upon a false rule. Three witnesses are allowed to
prove any point, both by divine and human law: and that number shall suffice
for the present to prove that he has mistook, and acted contrary to the golden
rule in the affair before us.

1. No man, or community can think it reasonable to have their character drawn
only by their imperfections without any of their virtues: yet Mr. F. after a
long attempt to draw the separates "picture to the life," says, Whatever good
things they have among them, they have them not as separates, but in common
with other christians. The things that I have told you of above, are their
characteristicks. p. 160.

2. None can be willing to have the character of their whole denomination taken
from evil persons and things which may be picked out among them: yet in the
midst of this labor to draw our picture, he says, I would not here be
understood to represent them all to a man, as advancing and uniting in every
one of the particulars abovementioned; but some of them held one, some
another. p. 142.

3. No man can rationally be willing to be deprived of the liberty of hearing
and judging for himself in important matters; nor to be condemned by others
without a fair hearing; yet this is the very labor of Mr. Fish's whole book;
for a principal reason given for his writing it, in the first page of his
preface is, that a considerable number, if not the greater part of his few
remaining people, inadvertently favored the separate teachers, so far as to
frequent their meetings. And a special article of advice, in the conclusion is
Go not after them nor follow them. -- How can you, with any good conscience,
after I have shown you from whence they arose, their principle, spirit and
tendency. p. 191. Thus his whole drift appears to be to keep his people from
hearing and judging for themselves. And he has condemned us without a fair
hearing: for accounts of our principles and practices have been published by
various hands, and at different times for these 18 years; yet it does not
appear through his whole book, that he has paid any regard to them, even so much
as to point out our mistakes or inconsistencies, (as doubtless he might have
found some such;) but the chief of what he has held forth to the world against
us, is upon his own bare word.

I suppose the chief thing which blinded him in these affairs, was a conceit of
his good design therein; for speaking of "the grievous things" which he has
written both against separates and baptists, he says, Neither of which should I
have meddled with, could I at this day, have seen how to plead the cause of the
churches (that our brethren have separated from) which I believe to be the
cause of God, without showing the younger and reminding the elder among my
people, how and wherein this sacred cause has been injured. Pref. p. 4. Now
it is no new thing for men under a strong conceit that they are engaged in a
good cause to put good meanings to bad actions of their own, and bad meanings
to good actions of others; yea and to esteem men's works for the persons sake,
instead of esteeming the person highly for his work's sake. And this temper
will prompt men to think that evil don't belong to the sacred cause that they
are in, and that good don't belong to the opposite party, but are intruders on
each hand; and they would attribute the evil among themselves to others, and
the good among others to themselves. And is it not from hence that our author,
when he is going to reckon up a catalogue of the evil of the times, says, If
the separates are not the only guilty persons, or not MORE guilty than some
that pretend to be of the standing order, yet it is manifest that the following
disorders are owing chiefly if not entirely to the SEPARATIONS? p. 172.
Observe, it is only some, and they but pretenders to be of the standing order
who are allowed to be guilty, while the real guilt is laid chiefly if not
entirely at the separates doors. On the other hand he says, I know not of one
principle or practice, among them that is agreeable to the gospel, but what
they learned in our churches. p. 113. This is a fine way indeed of treating
mankind!

However I trust it will yet be made manifest, that it was what God taught us
by his word and spirit, of the corruptions which are allowed, yea and pleaded
for to this day, in those churches that caused us to separate from them. But as
it seems beneath the dignity of these learned gentlemen to take notice of
laymen's writings, I would, to help Mr. F's eyesight a little, just point him
to one who calls him a layman as he does us; and who has got a title as much
above him, as he has above us. He has only the title of reverend, but one who
has the shocking title given him of reverend Father in God, preached a sermon
on Feb. 21. 1766, before the society which supports the church ministers that
are sent into this country; wherein he declares that ' PERSECUTION for OPINIONS
was the most abominable of all the errors of the antichristian church.' Bishop
of Glocester's ^mon before said Society. p. 9.
And his sermon abounds with the word charity, and he allows that our fathers
were driven into this land for conscience sake; yet speaking expressly of those
colonies where presbyterianism is established, and remains in its ancient
PURITY, he says, That very people, whose fathers were driven for conscience
sake into the waste howling wilderness, are now as ready to laugh at the bible,
as at their fathers ruffs and collarbands. Page 12, 13.
Here is a character given to the world of Mr. Fish's churches, by one who
stands so much above them, that he treats them just as these ministers do us,
namely to accuse without any proof but great swelling words of their own. And
this very accusation from the bishop, is given as the reason of their
continuing their labors among us, instead of going on to gospelize the
savages, which he allows to be the original design of that society: Page 8.
for he says, We might well leave these factious people to themselves, did not
a miserable circumstance still call for our rejected charity; I mean, the
spreading of GENTILISM in the colonies themselves. Page 11.


And if we were to judge by his account it might be thought that such
heathenism abounded the most in Connecticut of any part of the land; for by the
list of their missionaries at the end of the bishop's sermon, it appears that
they have a third more of them there, than in any other colony in America: though
it looks more rational to me to suppose that the clegy's power being carried to
the highest pitch there, is the cause of it. This prelates conduct in this
matter has been justly complained of as an open violation of the laws of truth
and equity; yet if he were allowed our authors method, to claim all that is
good among us to his side, because our fathers came out of the church of
England; then he might possibly find some such persons in New England as he
speaks of, though likely he might find ten to one of that character in his own
diocese.

The common name that his charity prompts him to give dissenters in that sermon
is fanatics. Now I suppose a proper definition of that name is, that it is one
who is puffed up with a fancy that he has got some ^ew discovery to make to
others. And if so, what shall we think of the bishop of Gloucester? for he gives
it in his sermon as a new discovery which he had made, that the savages ought
to be civilized as well as christianized; and he attributes their little
success in times past, chiefly to the want of knowing, or want of attending to
that maxim. Whereas to have told the plain truth, he must have informed his
honorable audience, that the reason why they had done so little to christanize
the Indians, was because they had spent almost all their labors among the
English, and in the most wealthy places that they could get footing in. And if
he could have stooped so low as to have looked into the life of Mr. John Eliot
in the last century, and the life of Mr. David Brainerd in this, he would have
found, (that instead of a new discovery) the very maxim he speaks of was known
and acted upon, both in the past and present age, by the most zealous and most
successful laborers to bring the Indians to true christianity, that America
ever saw.

The bishop proceeds to charge the colonists with the dreadful crime of yearly
stealing slaves from the opposite continent, and sacrificing of them to their
great idol the GOD OF GAIN. p. 25. And he says, Nothing is more certain in
itself, and apparent to all, than that the infamous traffic for slaves,
directly infringes both divine and human law. Nature created man free, and
grace invites him to assert his freedom. p. 26. Who then could think but that
this great society for the propagation of the gospel, would set all these
slaves at liberty as fast as they could? But behold! The case is altered. For
governor Cordington of Barbados, (instead of setting his slaves free)
bequeathed a plantation stocked with them to this society; which now is
declared to be a pious intention in the done, God out of this evil (says the
bishop) having made us the honored instruments of producing good. p. 29. And
the good which he talks of is, that while they reap the profits of those
slaves, they would use them well, and so set a good example to others: And he
says, It would be impie^ to suspect that the society will not persevers in
making this use of so fortunate a circumstance. p. 30.

Here is a glass for Mr. F. to look into. A professed minister of Christ, at
the head of a society, composed of the chief dignitaries of the church, and of
several lords in the state, after exclaiming against persecution,
characteriseth the colonists as fanatics, factious gentiles, yearly practicing
the worst of heathenism, even the sacrificing of human creatures to an idol;
and this from the same truth that tells of pious designs in all the proceedings
of his own party, and that charges it as impiety, even to suspect their
perseverance therein! And all this to move people to contribute money to that
Society* yet churchmen have as great a hand in the slave trade as any.
But think thou, O man, that judge them that do such things, and do the
same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God?

Perhaps some are ready to cry, Who is this, that presumes to correct bishops
and ministers at such a rate? Answer, he is a person of very little note in the
learned world, and never was a member of their schools. Indeed they have given
him a few titles; as sometimes he has been of a credible family, and so it was
wondered at that he would go with such a despicable people; yet anon he was
pronounced a young upstart, not to be regarded. One sentence declared him to be
a crafty deceiver; the next an honest gumphead. Sometimes 'twas asserted that
he was pursuing worldly gain; and at another time they declared that he had
little or nothing for his labor, and spent his own estate: but neither so did
their witness agree together.

The truth is, what little he does know, was gained in the school which Dr.
Franck speaks of, where the highest wisdom is, to know Jesus Christ and him
crucified; and wherein things are taught in an experimental way. Hence the
reader will find several lessons in the ensuing pages, repeated in that manner:
and though he is not insensible that telling of experience, is treated with
contempt by the fashionable christians of our day, yet he is not daunted at
their sneers, while he sees the chief apostle of the circumcision taking this
method to satisfy his brethren; and the great apostle of the Gentiles doing the
same before his learned persecutors, when they were complained of, for leaving
the customs of their fathers, Acts 11.4* -- 18. and 22.1 -- 21. One special
order of that school is, Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather reprove them. But all things that are reproved, are made
manifest by the light. This he takes to be a sufficient warrant for improving a
fair opportunity to attempt to hold up light to his fellow men, and to labor
to convince all he can, be they ever so much above him, wherein they have
mistook darkness for light; and he expects the same from others.

He would be far from representing Mr. Fish as singular in what he has now
published. No, his sermons are a proper specimen of what has often been
delivered from pulpits in our land, for more than 20 years; and being persuaded
that many worthy men, both in public and private stations, have not known the
true state of these affairs, therefore the author was induced to enlarge more
upon them, than his love of brevity would otherwise have permitted. And may we
all so speak and so hear and do, as they that shall be judged by the law of
liberty.

Middleborough, March 25. 1763.
The Introduction. Containing some brief Remarks upon the Characters which Mr.
Fish gives of a Church of Christ.
THOSE who desire to bring any controversy to a just issue, will endeavor to
hold up what light they can, concerning the merits of the cause, and not amuse
or perplex others minds with things foreign from the things in hand: therefore,
as Mr. Fish begins his preface with this information, that The special occasion
of the following discourses was, the revival of the spirit and principles of
separation and anababtism; I shall endeavor, according to the light I may be
favored with, to attend closely to these points, and show wherein the
difference between us lies, and the grounds of that difference.

I heartily concur with him that the truth which Peter confessed, or the person
of Christ, of whom this confession is made, is the rock, upon which Jesus
Christ resolves to build his church; and that Peter was one of those lively
stones, or precious materials of that building. page 3. But I cannot say so of
some of the characters which he gives to describe the church of Christ by; the
first of which is,

That Jesus Christ has but one church in the world, and that it is the same
which it always was. To explain which he says, We gentile believers were
graffed in among the Jewish believers, making one church. As the apostle Paul
shows, Romans 11.17. And the whole is but the continuation of the same church,
from the beginning of the world. p. 6.7. It is readily granted that the
invisible church is always the same; but that is not what Mr. F. intends: for
he has just before said, I mean to speak of Christ's visible Church upon earth.
-- which contains both good and bad, true believers and nominal. And his sixth
charctter of the church is only an explanation of this: which is, that The
church of Christ has always consisted of visible believing parents and their
children bound together by covenant to be the Lords. p. 22. And after some
discourse upon Abraham's covenant he says, Hence it appears that believing
parents cannot enter into that covenant which God made with Abraham, without
taking their children with them. -- They therefore that take God for their God,
but not the God of their seed, equally so; they leave out half, or the greater
part of the subjects of it. p. 24, 25. He adds If any say that this promise To
thee and thy seed after thee, under the gospel, intends thy seed or children
when they are grown up, or become actual believers; and not while they are in a
state of infancy, I apprehend the exposition will not stand. And after citing
Deuteronomy. 29.10, etc. he says, Here you see, that great and small, parents and
children, even little ones, stand forth in a body, that they might all enter
into (or renew) covenant with their God. -- Which shows that children, even
infants were always reckoned a part of that body or church, which the Lord
gathered in Abraham's family. p. 25, 26.

It Is true that this was the constitution of the church which was gathered in
Abraham's family, as appears from verse 13 which is, That he may establish thee
to day for a people unto himself, and that he may be unto thee a God, as he
has said unto thee, and as he has sworn unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to
Isaac, and to Jacob.

But when Mr. Fish says, Is it not altogether reasonable to suppose that the
christian church is made up of the same materials that the jewish church was?
The answer must be No, by no means; because God has said the contrary; and it is
perfect madness to set up our suppositions and reasonings against divine
revelation. Now that God has said the contrary, appears from Jer. 31.31, 32.
Where he says, Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new
covenant with the house of Israel; not according to the covenant that I made
with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand, to bring them out
of the land of Egypt. Those who stood forth then as a body to enter into
covenant, though they had seen great signs and miracles; yet the Lord had not
given them an heart to perceive, eyes to see, nor ears to hear, unto that day.
But of this new covenant he says, I will put my law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people;
and they shall all know me from the least of them unto the greatest of them,
says the Lord. The constitution, priesthood and ordinances of the jewish
church, served unto the example and shadow of heavenly things; but this is a
better covenant which is established upon better promises. That old covenant
Israel brake, and he regarded them not: But this new covenant is established
upon better promises, which are, I will, and they shall. Heb. 8.5 -- 13.

I cannot imagine that it is possible for words to express more plainly than
these do, that there is an essential difference between the materials, as well
as the forms of the two churches; even the same that there is between shadow
and substance, flesh and spirit, type and antitype. All Abraham's natural seed
were circumcised, and God said, my covenant shall be in your flesh; and all his
seed in a gospel sense have the law written in their hearts, and their sins
shall be remembered no more. Heb. 10.16, 17. Accordingly it was such as gladly
received the word, and such as should be saved, that were added to the church,
in the apostles times, Acts 2. And when some of a contrary character got in,
they are said to creep in unawares, Gal. 2.4. Jude 4. Therefore I think we may
justly return our author's question, and say, Is it not altogether unreasonable
to suppose that the christian church is made up of the same materials the
jewish church was, since the holy Ghost has so plainly declared the contrary?

Having given a few of my thoughts upon Mr. Fish's first mark of a true church;
and also of his sixth which explained it, I come to his second, which is, that
the churches "Foundation is one, and ever the same." p. 7. This is strictly
true of the invisible church, but the leaders of the visible church when Jesus
came, where builders who set at naught this glorious cornerstone; and he shows
that none build on the Rock but such as hear his sayings and do them, Mat.
7.24. Faith comes by hearing: and those who hear and believe with their
hearts, ought to confess with their mouths, and obey all Christ's commands, and
thus they are built up for an habitation of God through the Spirit. In this sense
I would join with him.

His third mark is, that Christ Jesus was always the head and king of his
church. p. 9. So he is: and I heartily concur with him that our Lord Jesus has
done enough to make us tremble at the thoughts of attempting any thing, in his
house and worship, which he has not directed us to do, much more any thing that
he has forbidden.

Our authors fourth character is, Christ's church has always been furnished
with officers of his appointing. p. 11. Here again we agree in general truths;
but when he comes to trace the order down from the beginning, why was his
memory so short as never to mention the prophets in the jewish church, while he
enlarges upon the case of the priests and Levites? Perhaps he might think the
latter would best agree with his notion of a line of succession; but he may
find himself mistaken there. For after the return of the Jews from Babylon,
some of the children of the priests, sought their register among those that
were reckoned by genealogy, but they were not found: therefore they were, as
polluted, put from the priesthood. Ezra 2.62. Now if the power of ordination is
not in the church, but is wholly committed to the ministers of the churches, as
Mr. F. expressly holds (p. 80.145.) then, according to this plain example, every
minister who cannot produce the register of his ordination, as being derived in
an uninterrupted line down from the apostles, he ought as polluted to be put
from the ministry. And where will he and his brethren be then?

Indeed he would have us think that they have such a register where the very
names of such a line is preserved. p. 18. But it seems by the margin that it is
in Latin, and as we are come out of the Latin church, we shall expect to hear
it in English before we believe it. Paul's charge is not to give heed to fables
and endless genealogies, which minister questions, rather than godly edifying.
1 Timothy 1.4. And how fully have these words been verified in the disputes which
catholics, prelates, and presbyters have had upon this affair these many
hundred years? and it still ministers question which are as much unresolved, as
when they began the dispute.

Our author's fifth character is, that The church of Christ is a confederate
people, a people in visible covenant with God and with one another, p. 19. This
is true, and so is his seventh, that it is further known by special ordinances
which God has given it, p. 34. Though it ought to be remembered that the false
church has covenants and ordinances as well as the true, only the true church
endeavors to keep to the divine pattern; while the false, adds inventions of
her own. These are therefore by no means so plain marks to distinguish the true
church as his eighth and last is; viz. that Christ's church has always had, and
always will have his holy spirit dwelling in it. p. 44. This is a great truth;
for if one church as well as person, have not the Spirit of Christ, it is none
of his. Thus I have given a little touch upon the characteristics which Mr. F.
has given of the church: two of them I think are not true, in the others we
agree in general, though when we come to apply them the difference between us
will more distinctly open in many particulars.

Part. I. The constitution which Mr. F. pleads for, opened, and proved to be
essentially different from the first churches in this Country.
When Mr. Fish comes to apply these characters, he, to prepare the way
promises several things, the substance of which are, That the rule is perfect,
but the best of men are imperfect, so that when they come with honest hearts to
apply divine rules, they differ so widely in their opinions upon some modes of
worship, as to render it difficult, if not impracticable for them to worship
harmoniously together: which shows the necessity as well as grounds of mutal
forbearance, and should make us cautious how we give hard names. These are
weighty considerations, and if they had continued with due weight upon his mind
through his following discourses, it would doubtless have prevented my troubling
him in the affair; but since it has proved to be otherwise, I will also give
mine opinion; and then leave it with the reader to judge for himself.

Our author first applies his rules to those which he calls standing churches,
and he says, We have sufficient reason to be comfortably satisfied that these
churches are true churches of Jesus Christ. p. 78. As to their constitution, he
says, They are in general of the congregational way; and although in many parts,
particularly in this Connecticut.
colony, they are for mutual benefit, consociated or united together by
agreement, yet they remain congregational, p. 79.

This title, as I understand, is derived from the fathers of this country,
therefore we must look there for its true meaning. Now Cambridge platform says,
the church since the coming of Christ is only congregational, therefore neither
national, provincial nor classical. National churches have their parishes, for
managing the common affairs of their worship, who yet are under the government
of the whole: But the plan before us in express distinction therefrom, has the
whole power of church government in each particular church, power to open and
shut, to choose and refuse, to constitute in office, and remove from office.
This is the express meaning of the name, as it is explained by our fathers who
gave it: And though they freely improved the advice and assistance of other
churches, yet it was sisters or equals, who still had the whole right of
government within each church.

And are the standing churches such? No, Mr. F. has not got two pages forward,
before he lays down this as the first thing which ought to be corrected in the
churches, viz. The imposition of hands at the ordaining of elders, which, says
he, I apprehend the gospel has committed wholly to the care of the presbytery,
or ministers of the churches; but is by the indulgent Cambridge platform,
disposed of to the brethren, at the pleasure of the church. p. 80. Thus while
he usurps the name, because it is credible, he denies a principal point in its
meaning, and directly sets up a power above the churches; for, if the power of
ordination is not in the church, then she must be beholden to a power without
her, and so above her, to give her office-authority. But our fathers had seen
too much of this spiritual tyranny, to be willing to come under it again; and
as they knew that the church of the living God, is the pillar and ground of the
truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. John 3.9, 10.
they rested the matter there, and desired with Timothy to behave as they
ought, in the house of God; but not like Diotrephes to love a pre-eminence over
it. However Mr. F. would have it that their practice was not agreeable to their
principles, and says Plymouth church "attempted not to ordain a minister merely
as a church," of brethren only, with their own hands." p. 84. But Mr. Prince
who knew as well as he, informs us concerning the first church in Salem, that
on Aug. 6. 1629. They proceeded to ordain their ministers; as also Mr. Houghton
a ruling elder; being separated to their several offices by the imposition of
the hands of some of the brethren appointed by the church thereto: Governor
Bradford and others, as messengers from the church of Plymouth, being by cross
winds hindered from being present in the former part of the service, came time
enough to give them the right hand of fellowship. New England chronology p.
190, 191.
If any say these ministers had been ordained by bishops before, I answer, that
they were now out of that order, and we are expressly told that one of them was
" silenced for nonconformity," New England cronology, Page 182.
And they did not hold the indelible character, but were, as we have just seen,
so consistent as to know that to constitute in office, and remove from office,
are acts belonging to the same power, therefore, as they were put out of
office, by the same power that put them in, they were now ordained anew. The
like was done to Mr. Wilson the first minister of Boston. Indeed a late
honorable historian tells us, concerning him, that all joined in a protestation
that it was not a renouncing of the ministry he received in England, but that
it was a confirmation, in consequence of their election. Mr. Hutchinson's
history of the Massachusetts, vol. I. p. 419.
Upon which I would desire leave to observe, that none could have reason to
think that they renounced his right to improve his ministerial gift; but it is
plain that they judged this ordination to be needful to put him into the office
here. And the same author informs us in the next page, that one distinguishing
character of a congregational church is, That there is no jurisdiction to which
particular churches are or ought to be subject, by way of authoritative
censure, nor any other church power, extrinsical to such churches, which they
ought to depend upon any other sort of men for the exercise of.

Here the point turns: We all hold it proper occasionally to improve the advice
and gifts of other churches, while all are equal as to power: but all ministers
who think they have a power to impart to another church, which that church has
not within itself, and has not a right to exercise without assistance received
from abroad; they are not congregational men, let them pretend what they will.

Another great point in the congregational plan is, that the "power to open and
shut," is in the church as a body; and therefore that they all ought to hear
and judge of the evidence that any give of their right to be received as
members. Dr. Increase Mather says, There is no congregational man, but he
reports to the church something of what the person desiring communion with
them, has related to him; which the presbyterian does not, only declares his
own satisfaction, and gives the brethren a liberty to object against their
conversation. Mitchel's Life. dedicat. p. 23.
And he tells us, that in the declaration of the faith and order of the
congregational churches in England, given at Savoy, Oct. 12. 1658. They
declare, Ibid. p. 24.
That the members of particular churches are saints by calling, visibly
manifesting their obedience to the call of Christ, who being further known to
each other, by their confession of says, wrought in them by the power of God,
declared by themselves, or otherwise manifested, consent to walk together
according to the appointment of Christ. The doctor further says, It is evident,
that the church (and not the officers only) have power given them by Christ to
judge who are meet to be put out of their communion. Matt. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.12.
Then they must needs have the like power as to those that are to be taken into
their communion. And is this the way now of the churches Mr. F. pleads for? No,
I never knew an instance in my day, of any who were admitted into any of those
churches, by declaring personally the says wrought in their souls; and a great
part of them have now dropped even giving written relations.

This leads us down to a third article of difference which is the root of all,
namely, the matter of a gospel church. We have already seen that Mr. F.
supposes that the christian church is made up of the same materials that the
jewish church was. But the Cambridge platform expressly says, The matter of a
visible church are saints by calling, 1 Cor. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.1. and that the church
under the law, was national, which since the coming of Christ is only
congregational; therefore neither national, provincial nor classical. Yet Mr.
Fish has the face to tell the world that their churches are, in general,
properly congregational. And then goes on to produce the testimony of president
Oaks in favor of that plan, as the "highest step that has been taken toward
reformation;" to which he says, The venerable Dr. Increase Mather adds the
weight of his approbation, p. 80. After which, a long quotation is produced
from the doctor in favor of the college, from whence almost all the churches
were supplied with ministers; yet he stopped a little too short at last; for that
venerable author's next words are these, viz. Nor are the churches like to
continue pure golden candlesticks, if the college, which should supply them,
prove apostate. And in the same book, he lets us know what he means by that
dreadful name, The deb^sing, says he, the matter of particular churches must
needs corrupt them. A learned and renowned author (i. e. Dr. Owen) has
evidenced that the letting go this principle, that particular churches ought to
consist of regenerate persons, brought in the great apostate of the christian
church. The way to prevent the like apostasy, (says Dr. Mather) in these
churches, is to require an account of those that offer themselves to communion
therein, concerning the work of God on their souls, as well as concerning their
knowledge and belief. Mitchel's life. dedicat. p. 27. and 16.
And he tells us Ibid. p. 10.
that Blessed Mr. Mitchel would frequently assert, that if it should pass for
current doctrine in New England, that all persons orthodox in judgment, as to
matters of faith, not scandalous in life, ought to be admitted to partake of
the Lord's supper, without an examination, concerning the work of saving grace
in their hearts, it would be a real apostasy from former principles.

And are ministers now of these sentiments? A worthy gentleman told me that he
sat a number of years at Marblehead, under the ministry of He has been
president of Harvard College this 30 years.
Mr. Holyoke, before he was elected president of the same college that these
words were directed to; and that his common method of admitting members into
the church was without giving them any relation of experiences at all, either
verbal or written; and that has now got to be a prevailing custom in many parts
of the country. Yet ministers pretend to be upon the same foundation with those
fathers. But here is a treble testimony that they are apostates therefrom. And
Dr. Increase Mather had such a view of its coming on, that he said in the year
1700, that If the begun apostasy should proceed as fast the next thirty years,
as it has done the last, surely it will come to that in New England, (except
the gospel itself depart with the order of it) that the most conscientious
people therein, will think themselves concerned to gather churches out of
churches. See the preface to his vindication of the order of the churches in
New England.


Now we may form some judgment how far this apostasy had proceeded, when our
separation began, more than forty years afterward, by a sort of pastoral
letter, which all the ministers in Windham county published against us; wherein
they say, This notion of a pure church, as separating the converted from the
unconverted, is contrary to the revealed will of God. This is as evident as any
thing can be by that way of evidence, in diverse parables of our Savior, p. 20.
The first parable which they refer us to, is that of the tares of the field, in
Matt. 13.24, etc. And they say, Our Savior explains it to his disciples, as you
see from verse 37. Where he says, The field is the world; in which therefore is
this kingdom of heaven. The good seed are the children of the kingdom; but the
tares are the children of the wicked one. Both the one and the other are in the
kingdom of heaven which is in this world, i. e. the visible church, p. 21. And
after giving their thoughts upon several other scriptures, they say, There are
many other texts which might be urged, and plainly show, that it is the will of
Christ, that all those who make an outward credible profession of christianity,
should be admitted into his church, and though unconverted be there among the
wheat the honorable vessels, so long as he has a church in the world, that they
may be under proper ordinances for their conversion, and for the trial of his
people, and their usefulness to them, etc. p. 23.

I leave the reader to judge how near this doctrine comes to what Mr. Mitchel
and other fathers call apostasy, and also how current this doctrine has past,
when the ministers of a whole county, have published it to the world; and world
only remark here, that they have done like those who formerly made void the
divine command by their own traditions; for as they have contradicted our
savior in explaining the parable of the tares, and the field which he says is
the world, they say is the church; so they have made void his command in this
very affair. His command is, Let both grow together: but their practice has
said, No, they shall not; for as soon as any appeared against their schemes,
they would not let them grow, nor enjoy their natural rights. Mr Finley, who
has since been president of New Jersey college, happened to come in those times
to New Haven, and only for his preaching to the separates there, he was taken
up by civil officers and carried out of the colony; and those who belonged
among us, that ventured publicly to improve their gifts without the ministers
license, were not suffered to enjoy worldly privileges, but were taken up one
after another, and cast into prison. Yea, these very men who cried so loud for
Peace, yet prepared such w^ against those who would not put into their moth^,
Micah ^ 5.
as not only to load them with slander and rep^, but also to send their
servants, and takeaway their goods by force 1 Samuel 2.16.
This was done in many places, till the practice became so odious that none
would buy such goods; and then they took to seizing their persons. I have an
account before me of no less than eleven persons who were seized thus and
carried to jail in Norwich only in 8 months, after June 17, 1752. one of which
was a widow 54 years old who belonged to another church, where she attended,
and did her part toward the support of divine worship, according to her
conscience, and had no concern with the parish minister; therefore she did not
think that the rate which was demanded for him was just: yet for her refusing
to pay it, she was taken, and, though a weakly woman was carried to prison in a
dark rainy night. One told them then that it looked like the works of darkness.
But the christian character she bore, and the christian temper which she and
others then discovered, greatly weakened the cause they designed to promote
hereby.

Not long after, a gentleman in the same place, was imprisoned for the same
cause, while he stood a representative for the town, in the general court.
About the same time a single woman of a good character, in Raynham, was
confined more than 12 months in Taunton goal, which the minister might have
prevented by crossing out, only an eight penny rate. At length the evidence she
gave of true conscientiousness in the matter, caused such uneasiness among that
minister's own people, that they raised money and went and set her at liberty.
This is but a little sketch of what has been done of that nature, in various
parts of our land.

If any say, Why are these odious things published now? I answer, Is there not
a cause? When the Jesuits complained a few years ago to the king of Spain, that
many things were published against them, and desired him to forbid it; his
reply was, The way not to have faults published, is not to commit them. These
are often called, standing churches; therefore one design of this is to show
what they stand upon; even the same that other national or provincial churches
do, -- civil authority. Hence, how often do they tell us, "That if it where not
for the support of the civil powers, their churches would soon be broken up?"
And an author of great note has lately told the world that, After all that may
be said in favor of the constitution, the strength of it lay in the union
declared with the civil authority. Mr. Hutchinson's history of the
Massachusetts, p. 434.
And he gives us an instance of what the authority did to preserve order more
than a 100 years ago. He says, Ibid. p. 188.
"In 1653 the general court restrained the north church in Boston, from calling
Mr. Powell to be their minister, who had the character of a well gifted, though
illiterate man. And about the same time he tells us, They laid a large sins
upon the church at Malden for choosing a minister without the consent and
approbation of the neighboring churches, and allowance of the magistrates. And
he says Mr. Hubbard observed upon that occasion that, All men are naturally so
wedded to their own apprehensions that unless there be a coercive power to
restrain, the order and rule of the gospel will not be attended.

I am much obliged to his Honor for the ingenuous account which he has given us
of former times: yet I shall take the liberty to say, that if he was not
unaw^es, a little wedded to his own apprehensions, I hardly think he would have
called this, a just observation; for elsewhere, speaking of the tests which had
been imposed by authority in both Englands to produce uniformity in religion,
he says, Both the one and the other must have occasioned much formality and
hypocrisy. The mysteries of our holy religion have been prostituted to mere
secular views and advantages. Ibid. p. 431.
Now the test referred to, restrained civil freemen from choosing any into civil
offices, who were not church members; and is it not as bad to restrain the
Lord's freemen from choosing any into office in his church, who have not been
members of human schools of learning?

"The experience of all reformed churches," is appealed to for proof, that this
coercive power is needful to keep the order of the gospel: but the same appeal
might more justly be made, to prove that the clergy, when thus supported, have
been the most tyrannical of all men; which has often served to harden infidels
against all gospel preachers. A plain reason why such men have been the most
tyrannical, is because they claim authority, more immediately from the higher
power, than others do. Though civil authority is of divine appointment, as well
as ecclesiastical; yet the highest civil rulers know, that they are set up and
supported by men, while the others claim a commission from God. Hence they have
often assumed authority over the very rulers that set them up.

And since we are often represented as rebels; Mr. Lord who has been a minister
in Norwich, the place of my nativity, above fifty years, expressly compares our
separation to a rebellion in the STATE, Sermon at Mr. Hart's ordination, p. 18.
And he with six other ministers as plainly compared us to Core and his company,
in their preface to Mr. Dickinson's dialogue, p. 7. Now observe Core raised a
rebellion in Israel, where ruler, priest and ^aws were appointed immediately
from heaven; and where the church was not national: yet it has been the
constant method of these, who pretend to be congregational men, for these 20
years, to compare us to Core, which naturally implies, that they think
themselves to be like Moses and Aaron,
I will a little further lay open my views of this affair; which are, that, as
civil rulers ought to be men fearing God, and hating covetousness, and to be
terrors to evil doers, and a praise to them who do well; and as ministers ought
to pray for rulers, and to teach the people to be subject to them; So there may
and ought to be a sweet harmony between them* yet as there is a great
difference between the nature of their work, they never ought to have such a
union together, as was described above.

For, 1. The holy ghost calls the orders and laws of civil states ordinances of
man, 1 Pet. 2.13. But all the rules and orders of divine worship are ordinances
of God; and it defi^ the earth under its inhabitants, when these laws are
transgressed, and ordinances changed. Isa. 24.5. And one of his laws is, AS
EVERY man has received the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as
good stewards of the manifold grace of God. If any man speak, let him speak as
the oracles of God; if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability which
GOD GIVES: that GOD in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ. 1 Pet.
4.10, 11. But this law and order has been so much changed in our land, that
churches have not looked so much at the ability which God has given, as to the
titles which man has bestowed. I say titles, for many of their ministers have
not gifts to deliver a sermon without reading; notwithstanding their name of
being learned men. And yet it is called, the order of the gospel, now, to have
such men's persons in admiration so as not to choose any others into the
ministry, lest man's glory should be brought down, while we are represented as
proud rebels, for not owning them as such.

2. The civil magistrates work is, to promote order and peace among men, in
their moral behavior toward each other, so that every person among all
denominations who does that which is good may have praise of the same; and and
that all contrary behavior may be restrained, or forcibly punished. And as all
sorts of men are members of civil society and partake of the benefits of such
government, therefore they ought to be subject, and pay tribute to rulers. Romans
13.1 -- 6. But the work of gospel ministers is to labor to open men's eyes, and
to turn them from darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan unto God.
Acts. 26.18. And as any kind of force tends to shut the eyes rather than open
them; therefore Christ's special orders to his first ministers were, Freely ye
have received, freely give. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your
words; when ye depart out of that house, or city, shake off the dust of your
feet, Mat. 10.8, 14. This should be a testimony against them, that Christ's
ministers had not forcibly taken from them so much as the dust of their city,
Luke 9.5.

But we have a set of men in our day, who profess to be Christ's ambassadors,
and yet they act so contrary to these orders, that if they once can get footing
in a town or parish, let people dislike them ever so much, they will not go out
without a considerable quantity of white or yellow dust. Yea, we have had
several instances, wherein both church and society have been wearied out with
these men, and have voted them out of their meeting house, and yet where a
little number would follow them, they have held meeting in their own house for
months or years, and then have applied to the powers which these churches stand
upon, and they have forced the whole parish to pay the minister for all that
time. And one minister has lately found out, that for any to come and profess
to preach the gospel freely, without being chargeable to their bearers; is so
far from being an evidence that they are the true ministers of Jesus Christ,
and sent by him, that it is ( extraordinaries excepted) an argument why they
should be suspected, Mr. Fish page 63.65. Extraordinary, is a great word, and
great things are done by it. The power of Christ in qualifying men for the
ministry, without going to colleges for them, is hereby limited to the apostles
days; and all are rejected with contempt by Mr. F. who do not now receive their
gifts at college, and their authority from "authorized hands," p. 15, -- 17.
And these "authorized hands," by the help of this word have got such an
extraordinary power as the apostles never had. For the apostles were only
witness for Christ, and as such pointed out to the church, what qualifications
officers should have, and said, Brethren look ye out among you such men, Act.
8. and 6.3. But these pretended successors of the apostles, assume a power to
limit the church, in her choice to such as they have approbated; which I trust
will be ^de evident to be a power which the apostles never had.


This is indeed an extraordinary discovery, and he seems not a little pleased
with it. And it must be acknowleged that if this be a true discovery, we are in
a deplorable case; for we used to think the gospel's being freely preached to
the poor, was a convincing evidence that the Messiah is come, (Mat. 11.5.) And
if it is not so, we have been hitherto deluded, and must look out for new
teachings, if not for a new bible.

However we will endeavor to search our old bible a little more before we part
with it. The passage which our author attempts to draw this new discovery from,
is 2 Cor. 11, 12. Now a material point, in order to come at the meaning of the
text, is to know what those false apostles gloried in. Our author supposes
that they gloried in preaching freely without taking any thing for it: but in
v. 20. speaking of the same persons, Paul says, Ye suffer if a man bring you
into bondage, if a man devour you, if a man take of you, if a man exalt
himself. The clause, take of you; Dr. Gill says, the Arabic version reads, --
Took away their goods from them by force. This they did to exalt themselves:
and if we look back to the foregoing chapter, we shall find, that the ways of
these teachers, was to commend themselves, and despise the apostle: His bodily
presence, say they, is weak, and his speech contemptible. When he first
appeared among that people, he wrought at tent-making, on week days, and
reasoned in the synagogue every sabbath. Acts 18.3, 4.
And his preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom. 1 Cor. 2.4.
Therefore they despised him, and commended themselves, as being men who made a
much better appearance, and taught in a more agreeable manner than the
tent-maker did: but says he, Do ye look on things after the outward appearance?
2 Cor. 10.7, 10.
-- It was a special command of our Lord, Judge not according to the
appearance, but judge righteous judgment. And he gives this rule to judge by,
namely, He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory: but he that seeks
HIS glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness in him. John
7.18, 24.


This is the rule to try all teachers by. The occasion of its being given was,
the different opinions that people had concerning the teacher of teachers, some
saying, He is a good man, others saying, Nay; but he deceives the people: and
a particular difficulty which labored in their minds concerning him, was, that
he had never learned letters in their way. verse 12.15.
Therefore he says, judge not according to the appearance; yet this rule was
not attended to among the Corinthians; and instead of it, those teachers who
despised the apostle, measured themselves by themselves, and compared
themselves among themselves: but he durst not make himself of their number. 2
Cor. 10.12.
These things show what those teachers gloried in. And Paul declares his godly
jealousy over the Corinthians, in the beginning of this 11th chapter; and his
fear lest their minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ. Therefore to prevent their being further imposed upon, (though it be
folly for a man to commend himself, yet) he would answer a fool according to
his folly, to prevent their being wise in their own conceits. And he sets out
to compare notes with them, and says, I suppose I was not a whit behind the
very chiefest apostles. And as to the low appearance which he made among them,
he asks, Have I committed an offense in abasing myself, that you may be
exalted, because I preached to you the gospel of God freely? And proceeds to
show how he had received support from other churches to do them service: and he
takes a solemn oath, that no man in their regions should stop him of this
boasting; not because he did not love them! But, says he, what I do, I will do,
that I may cut off occasion from them which desire occasion, that wherein they
glory, they may be found even as we: for such are false apostles etc. Now if
they had gloried in preaching for nothing, it is certain from v. 20. that the
Corinthians knew that they practiced the contrary; and Paul would not have
said, -- even as we, to that. Wherefore Dr. Gill Exposition of the
new testament, vol. 2. p. 7^3.
thinks his meaning is, That these men were desirous that he would take wages,
because they did; that in this respect he might not excel them, and that they
might be able to plead his example and authority, and so get an occasion of
extorting more money from the Corinthians: wherefore to cut off all such
occasion from them, the apostle resolves to take nothing himself; that whereas
they boasted they were equal to, or superior to the apostles, they might be
found, would they follow their example, even as they, not taking any money at
all of them, and poor, working with their own hands.

I cannot find the least account of their glorying in preaching without wages;
but I have shown something of wha^ they did glory in: and the apostle proceeds
further and says I speak foolishly; are they Hebrews? so am I: are they
Israelites? so am I: are they the seed of Abraham? so am I are they ministers
of Christ? I am more. Thus he shows that as to outward appearance he could vie
with them; while in real services and sufferings for Christ, he vastly exceeded
them. Yea, while they had taken much from that church only for a show of
service, he had done them much real service without taking any thing at all of
them.

I shall close this head with this remark; that while Mr. F. seems pleased with
what he though it would do great execution against us, he has unawares involved
himself in a sad dilemma: for if the case be as I have represented, he stands a
fair chance of falling among false teachers: but if his sense of the text be
right, he shows a want of Paul's temper, and instead of cutting off occasion of
being called a hireling, he still pleads up for that scheme, which often
extorts wages from such as receive no service from them, instead of doing real
service without wages as Paul did. At the same time he endeavors artfully to
blend a free support to ministers, and a forced one together; whereas there is
as much difference between them, as there is between the power of truth in the
mind, and the power of the civil sword on the body. The first is abundantly
clear in scripture, the other has no warrant there.

3. Another difference between civil and ecclesiastical government is, that
civil states if large, have various degrees of offices one above another, who
receive their authority through many hands, down from the head, and that often,
more according to estate or favor, than merit: but it is the reverse in Christ's
kingdom; he forbid the first notions of this in his disciples, and expressly
told them that it should not be so among them, as it was in earthly states,
Mark 10.43. Luke 22.26. An obvious reason of this difference is that an earthly
king cannot in person see, to but little that is done in his kingdom, and
therefore must trust other to manage affairs for him in his absence; but Zion's
Kin^ is present every where, and sees to all that is done, an^ tells every
church, I know thy works: and he takes ca^ that the faithful are supported and
rewarded, and that the unfaithful are corrected or punished. If civil officers
a^ resisted or abused, it is found necessary, in order to maintain the dignity
of government, to inflict corporal punishment on the offenders, if within the
state, and to take up the sword against abuses from abroad. And I suppose it is
a true maxim, that civil government and a defensive war will stand or fall
together. Hence Jesus said, If my kingdom were of this world, then would my
servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews: but now is my
kingdom not from hence. Joh. 18.36. Therefore the dignity of his government is
maintained, not by carnal, but by spiritual weapons: and not by resisting, but
patiently bearing evil treatment. Hence when one of his chief officers was
greatly abused he said, Being reviled, we bless: being persecuted, we suffer
it: being defamed, we entreat: we are made the filth of the world, and are the
offscouring of all things unto this day. 1 Cor. 4.12.13. And the way in which
the saints finally obtain victory over the dragon and his angels is, by the
blood of the lamb, and the word of their testimony; and not loving their lives
unto the death. Rev. 12.11.

I have been the more particular on these things, because the core of our
difficulties lies here. And if the kind reader finds here but an imperfect
description of the way of the churches acting upon truth, in distinction from
all earthly powers, let him remember that this is a highway that has been very
much unoccupied in later ages, and men have gone in by ways: but it is hoped
that this good old way will speedily be opened so plainly that fools shall not
err therein: and if this weak attempt may be owned as any means thereof, that
will over-balance all the world's reproaches on that account. The confounding
of civil and ecclesiastical affairs together has done amazing mischief in the
world: and as Dr. Cotton Mather observes The reforming churches flying from
Rome, carried some of them more, some of them less, all of them something of
Rome, with them, especially in that spirit of imposition and persecution, which
has too much cleaved unto them all. This was the worst mistake that our fathers
brought with them to this land; and though their posterity will generally explode
those bitter fruits; yet few of them seem to be sensible of the root from
whence they sprang. What our Lord said of serving two masters, may in some
sense be applied to the joining of these two powers together; one or the other
will carry the day, and they have each had their turns in our land. Under the
old Massachusetts charter, none could be so much as freemen in the state, till
they were members of the church; and such as afterward fell under
church-censure were not allowed to sit in the court. And struggles on these
points were a principal cause of loosing that charter. But now the scale is so
far turned, that it is a professed rule with many ministers, not to deal with
any person in the church for moral evil, 'till they are convicted in the state.
A great turn indeed!

As nearness tends to beg^t likeness, so there have been several attempts made
in our land, to establish various degrees of power in ecclesiastical, as there
is in civil rule. This was tried for above sixty years ago in the Massachusetts
province; but it was prevented there; yet Mr. Saltonstal who had quitted the
pulpit in New London, for the governors chair in Connecticut colony, brought in
the scheme there soon after for a clasicial power in each county, that men
might appeal to, as they do from an inferior to a superior court! and after
much contention it was, established by law; only with this reserve. That as
many as would, might dissent from it. My honored grandfather, Joseph Bac^us
Esquire with the other representative from Norwich, soon felt the effect of this
new power; for as they had thought it duty to oppose it in the court, so they
did also in the church. But Mr. Woodward the minister was resolute to bring in
the scheme there, and got a majority on his side; therefore rather than come
under such a yoke, they, with a considerable part of the church withdrew, and
held a separate meeting three months; and then the minister consented to have
the matter tried by a council, though in the mean time he had laid them under
church censure; an account of which being conveyed to the general court, the
representatives were not suffered to sit therein. Such were the early effects
of this new power. However, after many councils and much fatigue, a sum of
money prevailed with that minister to quit his place, And rarely can any
society now, get rid of a bad minister, but by that means.
and the church in Norwich resolved to continue upon their old platform.

These and suchlike things prevented that new plan, called Saybrook
regulation, from taking so deep effect as many intended it should: yet they
obtained one great article of power thereby, which they have generally held
ever since, and that is the licencing of candidates for the ministry, and so
limiting the churches to such in their choice of pastors. Yea this spiritual
court has attempted to deprive churches of their pastors who were already in
office: one notable instance whereof, I will mention. In the beginning of our
glorious revival of religion in the land, New Haven consociation made some laws
against ministers preaching in others parishes, if they were desired to the
contrary: Laws of the same nature were soon after carried into the general
court and passed there.
soon after which, Mr. Philem^n Robbins of Branford, (who was a great friend to
that work of God) received a letter from the pastor of a Baptist church in
Wallingford, which informed him that though they were of different sentiments
about the form of religion, yet as they agreed in the essentials, they desired
him to come and preach among them. This he thought to be a reasonable request,
and therefore appointed a meeting among them in the beginning of the year 1742.
But before the appointed time came, he received two letters, one from some of
the inhabitants of that town, the other from some neighboring ministers, which
informed him that they did not think it would be for the best for him to preach
among that people, and desired he would not; but gave no reason at all. Yet
because he would not put by a meeting which he had appointed merely at their
request, without any reason given, he was first excluded from the consociation,
and then complaints were received there against him, from a few of his
disaffected people; upon which he made an attempt to get reconciled again to
the ministers, but found it could not be done upon any lower terms, than
confessing that he did wrong in preaching to that baptist society as he did.
That he could not in conscience do; so they parted, which opened a wider door
for complaints than before, and so many were carried in, that a consociation
was appointed in his own town to try the case, and a citation was sent to him
to come and answer to many articles.

Hereupon Mr. Robbins called his church together, and laid these articles
before them, with answers thereto; and the church manifested satisfaction
therewith: and as they found that the church was originally settled according
to Cambridge platform, and had never voted an alteration; they now voted to
abide by their old constitution, and appointed Mr. Robbins and others to go and
inform the consociation that they denied their jurisdiction, and would not be
tried by them. This was accordingly done; yet this spiritual court declared
that they had jurisdiction of the case, and went on to hear and try charges
against him, without any to answer for him; and drew up and published their
judgment that Mr. Robbins was criminally guilty of the breach of the third the
fifth and ninth commands, and many gospel rule, and so warned all to beware of
him, 'till he made satisfaction therefore. Mr. Robbins, having copies of these
proceedings, published them to the world, in 1747. Afterward four of the
inhabitants of Branford (if I remember right their number) went to the general
court with a complaint that the town still held this condemned man for their
minister, and prayed the court to turn him out of his place. This caused a
great turn in the rulers minds; and I know not who will now appear to justify
their conduct; and yet I fear there are but few who are convinced that the root
of all this mischief lies in man's trying to modle church affairs according to
worldly rule. In civil states particular men are invested with authority to
judge for the whole; but in Christ's kingdom each one has an equal right to
judge for himself. Indeed there is a likeness in this respect that all politic
bodies have their limits and their power extends only to those within their
bounds; but then the limits of civil jurisdiction is fixed by earthly power,
and that of the church is only by voluntary consent; for Christ will have no
pr^d soldiers in his army.

Paul said to the church of Corinth, What have I to do to judge them also that
are without? do not ye judge them that are within? But them that are without,
God judges. Therefore put away from among your selves that wicked person. And
after they had proceeded according to this direction, he calls it, a punishment
which was inflicted of many, 1 Cor. 5.12, 13. 2 Cor. 2.6. Now Christ's church
is either particular, or universal. All the churches that are described in the
bible, as having the power of discipline are particular, in which each member
has his right to judge; as in this at Corinth, another at Ephesus, etc. The
affair recorded in Acts 15, is only of one particular church which sent to
another for advice in a controversy concerning principles; and the apostles and
elders, with the whole church returned an answer accordingly. But now when men
assume a power above particular churches; as they have neither divine rule to
support their conduct, nor earthly power to compel others to come to their bar:
therefore they are obliged to act contrary both to scripture and reason.

I have been thus particular, not to injure any man's person, but only to open
the nature of that constitution in ^der to show the true cause of our
separation therefrom. It was observed long ago, that facts are stubborn things,
and cannot be altered to suit men's notions or interest: and having shown from
facts what the constitution of those called standing churches is, viz. that in
general they are national or provincial, and in Connecticut, classical; I shall
come on to open facts concerning our separation. Mr. Fish treats of the
baptists before the separates; but as that inve^ts the order wherein providence
has carried on the work, I shall not follow him therein.


PART II. The cause and manner of our separation, with the particular points of
difference between us and the standing ministers.
I Fully agree with Mr. Fish, that about 26 years ago. There was the most
wonderful work of God, that ever was known in this part of the world, both for
the extent and visible appearance of it. p. 114. I am also of his mind, that
there was a mavelous mixture of almost every thing good and bad, -- for while
the spirit of God wrought powerfully, satan raged maliciously, and acted his
old subtle part to deceive. p. 115. And several of his observations concerning
Mr. James Davenport I believe are just, but others I think are not so.

He must be a great stranger to the bible, who does not know that in times of
great declension, teachers are generally as much, if not the most corrupt of
any; therefore in a reformation, those corruptions are always more or less
exposed, and warned against. And when Mr. Davenport had his eyes opened to see
the dreadful case of ministers as well as people, he having been trained up
among ministers who claimed most of the power to themselves, was more easily
led to the extreme, of openly declaring of his judgment concerning several
ministers, and so of calling people to separate from them, because he judged
them to be unconverted. And a number of separations were produced by that
means; but those separations were not from the general constitution of the
churches; they were only from particular ministers. Whereas our separations
begun several years afterward, and upon quite different principles; yet Mr.
Fish would lay them all at his door, while he speaks highly of Mr. Gilbert
Tennant, who traveled and preached in the most noted places in New England, in
the beginning of that work.

But did Mr. F. never see the sermon on the danger of an unconverted ministry,
which that "son of thunder," as he calls him, published soon after, from Mar.
6.34? wherein, after drawing the character of Pharisee-teachers, and showing
how people should be pitied, who have such teachers, he says, If it be so, --
then what a scrole and scene of mourning and lamentation, and woe is opened I
because of the swarms of locusts, the crowds of Pharisees, that have as
covetously as cruelly, crept into the ministry, in this adulterous generation*
who as nearly resemble the character given of the old Pharisees, in the
doctrinal part of this discourse, as one crow's egg does another. It is true
some of the modern Pharisees have learned to prate a little more orthodoxly
about the new birth, than their predecessor, Nicodemus, who are, in the mean
time, as great strangers to the feeling experience of it, as he. They are blind
who see not this to be the case of the body of the clergy, of this generation
-- Alas his not it the case of multitudes? If they can get one, that has the
name of a minister, with a band, and a black coat or gown, to carry on a
sabbath days among them, although never so coldly and insuccessfully; if he is
free from gross crimes in practice, and takes good care to keep at a distance
from their consciences, and is never troubled about his insuccessfulness; O!
think the poor fools, that is a fine man indeed. p. 11.12. It must be confessed
that his language is sharp and cutting, like Luther's formerly; yet many of his
reasonings are weighty; of which at present I will only give two extracts more;
one is in his answer to that complaint, that his principles will cause
contentions among people; to which he says, The proper cause of sinful
divisions, is that enmity against God, and holiness, which is in the hearts of
natural men, of every order; being stirred up by the devil, and their own proud
and selfish lusts. And very often natural men which are the proper causes of
the divisions aforesaid, are wont to deal with God's servants, as Po^har's wife
did by Joseph: they lay all the blame of their own wickedness at their doors,
and make a loud cry! p. 16. The other extract is in answer to a saying which we
have often heard, viz. That it is a mere fiction to tell of getting good when we
go over the parish line, because as they say, we are out of God's way.

To this Mr. Tennant answers, That there are three monstrous ingredients in the
objection, namely a begging of the question in debate, rash judging, and
limiting of God. p. 18 They beg the question who suppose we go out of God's
way, because we go over man's line: and how rash is it to judge that others get
no good, only because they don't go in their way? And such are much more
inexcusable than the Jews were, if they think to limit divine blessings to any
particular house or spot of ground. Now Mr. F. ought to know that we read and
considered these things in those times, as well as what Mr. Davenport said:
yea, and so we did the writings of a divine of greater note than either of
these, who in those times said, We that are ministers, by looking on this work,
from year to year, with a displeased countenance shall effectually keep the
sheep from their pasture, instead of doing the part of shepherds to them, by
feeding them; and our people had a great deal better be without any settled
minister at all, at such a day as this. Mr. Edward's thoughts on the work,
1742. p. 134.
And in the next page he observes that The times of Christ's remarkably
appearing, in behalf of his church, and to revive religion, and advance his
kingdom in the world, are often spoken in the prophecies of scripture, as times
wherein he will remarkably execute judgments on such ministers or shepherds, as
don't feed the flock, but hinder their being fed, and so deliver his flock from
them, as Jer. 23d. throughout, and Ezekiel. 34. etc.

These things we knew had much of reality in them, and Mr. F. or his brethren
might as well undertake to prove, that deep waters are good to drink, when they
are soul'd ^ith mud and dung; or that it is good feeding in pastures which are
all trodden down, as to prove that a great part of the preaching which we had
in those days was clear gospel, or good food for souls. Sheep which are not
unruly, will my hard to get food out of neighboring pastures, rather than
starve in such barren places; and if they are pushed and beat for it, that will
scatter them abroad the more. And I speak as I expect to answer it before HIM
who has said, he will judge between the fat and (...) cattle, I know this to be
a real cause of our separations: and the evidence of its being so, will more
and more open as we go on.

The same views of a holy God, which gave many to see their woeful polluted and
undone condition, led them also to see that they dwelt in the midst of a people
of unclean lips. Isa. 6.5. And when any had a manifestation of Christ to their
souls; like the woman of Samaria, they wanted to invite all to come and partake
of the same blessings: but this gave offense to many, who would say, You must
not judge. But that was so far from preventing, that it naturally produced a
judgment in young converts, that those who were offended at such free
invitations, were strangers to vital religion: and doubtless many exceeded due
bounds in that way; yet to be more severely dealt with therefore, than others
were for the vilest crimes, (as many were) this had no tendency to convince
them that they were wrong, or their reprovers right.

Farther, such as had an appetite given them for the pure gospel, could not
help seeking often to hear the sincere milk of the word; and consequently to
hear it from the clearest preachers, if they went a few miles further for it.
They also frequently assembled themselves together, and exhorted one another,
with mutual advantage; 'till at length some were ready to say concerning some
exhorters, much at the women sang concerning a youth in Israel, 1 Samuel 18.7. To
this Mr. F. bears me witness, p. 138. But great offense was taken at such
things, and at length the ministers in general came into an agreement to try to
stop them; and now a great part of the preaching that was to be heard at home
or abroad, was concerning imprudencies and disorders, and especially against,
what they called, lay-exhorting. Our author owns that these things were
frequently, and perhaps too often handled, p. 142. Yet because people would not
patiently hear such preaching he says, Sound doctrine was what they could not
endure. Though I am glad he is so honest as to add, that he means only such
branches of doctrine, as took away (what he calls) false notions in religion;
-- for, says he, as to many other found doctrines, they relished them well. p.
163.

I am far from thinking that we were free from mistakes, and false notions in
those times: Who can understand all his errors?

But ministers ought to know that there is a vast difference between living
persons, and a dead image, which the workman hews^ o^ hammers into what shape
he pleases* yet because we would not be cut and hammered into their shape, we
have been treated as rebels ever since. Mr. Fish would have it, that when we
turned from them, we set up teachers who were "exceeding raw and unskilful in
the word of righteousness," p. 119, 170. Which may lead us to consider the
particular grounds of our separation, and of the difference between us.

I. Of judging others.
THIS has been much complained of in our day, and Mr. F. delivers high charges
against us in that respect: but a calm view of his and others conduct on that
head, might cause the same remark about judging, that bishop Burnet made
concerning persecution, viz. that it looked ^s if the only quarrel they had
against it was, because they had not the managing of it themselves. Our author
tells a long story of how he and his brethren preached much better than the
separates, but I suppose he had forgot that Paul durst not make himself of the
number of such as commended themselves; and measured themselves by themselves.

So Dr. Chauncy, who wrote a great volume against the work 25 years ago, set
down rash and uncharitable judging as one of the greatest evils of that day.
And though he talks much of the scriptures, yet his evident standard is,
themselves* for he says, I freely confess, had the ministers of New England
lost their character as men of religion, by any deportment of themselves,
contradictory to the gospel, I should have found no fault with any
representation of them as bad men; nay, dangerous enemies to the kingdom of
Christ: for I am clearly of the mind, that a visibly wicked minister is the
greatest scandal to religion, and plague to the church of God: nor is it a
hurt, but a real service to the cause of Christ, to expose the characters of
such, and lessen their power to do mischief. See Dr. Chauncy's Thoughts on the
state of religion in New England. 1743, p. 141.
Thus he allows that if there had happened to have been a number of visibly bad
ministers among us, it would have been a real service, and not hurt to expose
them. But he has judged it to be otherwise; therefore for others to judge the
contrary, is a sure evidence of their being rash and uncharitable men!

The first whom he names, as guilty of this daring crime, is Mr. Whitefield;
and he begins his evidence against him, with telling us that he seldom
preached, but he had something or other, in his sermon, against unconverted
ministers: and that afterward in his journal he expressed "his fear lest many,
nay, the most that preach, do not experimentally know Christ. Ibid p. 140, 141.
And to prove this to be an abuse of the standing ministers now, he says, Hear
the opinion of that eminent man of God Dr. Cotton Mather upon this head: page
142.
who said, There is not that spot of ground upon the face of God's earth, which
can proportionably match New England for ministers. But when was it so? why I
find by his life, that this opinion was published in 1691, when (as the
following words express) No man became a minister in these churches, 'till he
first became a communicant; and no man became a communicant, until he had been
severely examined about his regeneration, as well as his conversation. If any
minister do misbehave himself, he soon hears of it, and becomes either a
penitent, or a deposed man.

This was Dr. Mather's testimony of the order of the churches in that day; but
"what a degeneracy has come on since then! This same man of God said 24 years
afterward. There may be much chaff in the church. -- Now, it is prophesied Mat.
3.12. He whose fan is in his hand, will thoroughly purge his floor. But verily,
it must be with more than a little shaking that the sanning work will be
carried on. Again he says, There shall be men, qualified like, and influenced
by, the angels of God; these Boanerges's, and sons of commotion, shall fly
through the midst of heaven, having this everlasting gospel to preach unto the
inhabitants of the earth. And our glorious Lord will shake heaven, and shake
the earth, and shake all nations, till this glorious gospel be complied
withal. Dr. Mather's Sermon from Hag. 2, 6, 7. in 1715, p. ^5, 2^.


Here reader take notice, when a passage from that author seemed to suit Dr.
Chauncy's turn, then he is an "eminent man of God;" but in this now quoted,
which so exactly agrees with the work which he opposed, see if Dr. M. escapes
the charge of enthusiasm. The main objection which he advances against the work
that was carried on under the ministry of those sons of Thunder, is that,
wherever it takes place, the subjects of it, too generally are uncharitable to
neighbors, to brethren of the same community to relatives, to ministers in an
especial manner. Dr. Chauncey's thoughts p. 170.
That is, when their eyes were opened to see that they were men of unclean
lips, they saw also that they dwelt in the midst of a people of unclean lips:
and this caused "more than a little shaking in the churches." And as it is
evident that Dr. C's notion of charity was, to have a good opinion of the
ministers and churches, as they stood; so because the instruments and subjects
of that work, had not such an opinion of them; therefore he judges of them as
enthusiasts, quakers, and what not? See Romans 2. Many ministers will not approve
of this conduct in Dr. Chauncy, who yet treat us ash did them. Let us come to
plain facts.

The first of our separate churches was at Canterbury; and the separation began
in this manner. The parish called a man to preach to them, who had been
licenced for that purpose, by the association in that county. But after the
church in Canterbury had made trial of him, they judged him to be destitute of
those essential qualifications that ought to be in a minister of Jesus Christ;
and therefore refused to join with the society in their choice. And, as the
society persisted in their choice, and were justified therein by the ministers,
the church at length withdrew, and met at a private house. After which the
consociation was called; and under their direction, a number of the members
openly renounced the former principles of the church, and put themselves under
Saybrook regulation, and chose Mr. Cogswell, whom the society had called
before, and got him ordained as their minister. And they afterward, sent some
of the members of the church to prison, for not attending on his ministry; yea,
and threatened to prosecute Mr. Buell for staying in the town to preach the
gospel, upon the desire of many members of the church, without the vote of the
society. Vid. Mr. Paine's view of the churches. 1752. 27, 18.


These and many other facts, Mr. Solomon Pain published 16 years ago, and
appealed to courts, ministers and people for the truth of them; and I never
heard any deny them to this day. Here reader is the plain state of our first
separate church. It is the first church in Canterbury, who retain their ancient
principles, their records, and other furniture of the church: and are called
separate, only because they refused to give up their judgments to the clergy
and the world, I say the world; for the law requires no other qualification to
make a voter in their parishes, but a certain quantity of worldly estate.
in so important an affair, as the choice of a guide for their souls. Indeed
that association in their letter against the separates, p. 41, 42. say, If
there be any of us, whose ministry is not edifying, or who dispense not the
word as we ought, -- you ought to use the means which Christ has appointed for
our conviction and amendment, or rejection. And they declare the churches have
liberty to choose their own way of church discipline, whether Saybrook
platform, presbyterian or congregational. And yet in the next breath they
accuse the separates with rejecting the ministry and churches of Christ, and
setting up without any divine institution. Whereas, the very act of this
church, which they are condemned for, was adhering to the congregational plan,
and taking the only gospel way they had left to clear themselves of a minister,
whose preaching was not edifying to them.

I say the only gospel method they had left; for the church had called a
congregational council before, and after he was ordained against the vote and
solemn warnings and entreaties of the church; -- all the settled ministers of
the county left the church: -- and Mr. Pain went to the general assembly in
behalf of the church, with a petition, showing them that the church was usurped
over, and oppressed, and prayed them to interpose, and forbid the society,
oppressing the church to support that minister: but the court granted them no
relief. No, but for many years afterward, their goods were spoiled, (...)
persons haled to prison for that minister's support; and after their own pastor
was ordained, he was prosecuted, and fined for marrying a couple, because they
would not allow him to be truly ordained.

Mr. Fish says, the qualifications of teachers, are to be judged of by the
ministers of Christ; -- which trial lay-teachers refuse to submit to. p. 147.
and quotes several texts out of Timothy and Titus to prove it: whereas those
epistles are to direct ministers concerning their behavior in the church, not
over it. Our Lord commends the church of Ephesus, that they had tried them
which said they were Mr. Pain's view of the churches page 17. to his preface p.
7.
apostles, and were not: and had found them liars, Rev. 2.2. And the true
apostles, while they gave to the first gospel chruch, a description of what
sort of men should be chosen into office in their presence, they did not
pretend to nominate any; but said, Brethren, look ye out among you, such men.
Act. 6.3. And Paul expressly shows, that letters of commendation in his time
were TO and FROM THE CHURCH, 2 Cor. 3.1.

But these ministers now, arrogate the power to try, and approbate ministers,
wholly to themselves; and assisted in causing a division in the church of
Canterbury, because they would not submit to that power, contrary to the
doctrine which they had learned, in the gospel. Here therefore, the text which
they often cast upon us, is strictly applicable to them. Mark them which cause
divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned; and
AVOID them: for they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own belly; and by good words and fair speeches DECEIVE the hearts of the
simple. Romans 16.17.18. They were as truly the cause of that division, as ever
King Charles was, of beginning the civil war by invading the rights of the
Parliament.

There was an early dispute among the apostles about greatness: but their
master told them that if any man desired to be first, the same should be last
of all, and servant of all. Whereupon John discovered how their ambition had
operated: it had moved them to forbid one who was acting in Christ's name,
because, says he, he follows not us. Mar. 9.35 -- 38. Yet what now is the
import of their noise against separates, but this, They follow not us? Our Lord
repeatedly warned his disciples against assuming such a lordly power as civil
rulers have, and said. So shall it NOT BE among you. Mar. 10.43. Luke 22.26.
And Peter exhorted elders not to be as lords overGod's heritage. 1 Pet. 5.3.
But one of Mr. Fish's brethren, in the same county. County of New London.
who is a trustee of Yale college, asserts that the Rights conveyed by the
keys, -- belonging to the eldership only, are as distinct from the right of
private members, as the rights of a magistrate are from those of a freeman, in
a civil community. And adds that, the express charge given them, not to lord it
over God's heritage, supposes them to have such rights and powers above, over
and distinct from, and independent of the church. Which assertions he would
support with this notable argument, viz. It Is not possible they should be in
danger of abusing a power, they never had. Vide Mr. George Beckwith of Lyme's
second letter against lay-ordination, p. 58, 59. His first letter was dedicated
to governor Fitch, and then he compared ordination to the swearing a magistrate
into his office, after the freemen had chosen him, p. 26. But before his second
letter came out, the freemen had dropped his patron, and several magistrates out
of office for favoring the stamp act. And what will he do now? for this
comparison will by no means suit his turn? Why he slips over, and in his second
letter compares power of ministers to that of the "governor of a province, by
the King's commission," p, 42. This is a fine comparison indeed! for such a
governor can negative counselors, and the acts of the general court: Yet by
the way such power is too great to be conveyed by a long succession: if the
governor dies, or is removed, the province must be without one 'till a new
commission is granted, directly from the King, and the people have no choice in
the affair. Thus Mr. B. by wandering from truth, has involved himself in a sad
dilemma; for at home his governor is left out of office by the people, and that
power he would not allow the church; and abroad governors have commissions
directly from the King; but he has no such thing to show.
To which I answer, that* if they cannot abuse a power they never had; yet the
experience of all ages proves, that they are prone to assume a power which
Christ never granted: yea, which he has expressly forbid. If ministers would
leave their worldly comparisons, and attend only to divine rule, I believe they
would find that it belongs to the church with them to try ministers; and common
people have the best advantage to know how men behave in their daily walk, and
have as good right as any, to judge what gifts are edifying, and what
experiences are clear. What then are those ministers doing, who assume the
power to themselves to judge for the church, and to sorbid all who follow not
them? Indeed there is one qualification that is greatly set by, which common
people are supposed not to be fit judges of. This bring^ me to speak,

II. Of Learning.
UPON this Mr. F. advances a formal charge against us, and says While we give
the separates credit for this verbal concession, that learning is a good thing,
and that they don't despise learning, we must charge them with saying, in the
next breath and confirming of it by practice, that there is no need of any more
than common learning (nor indeed any necessity for that, if they have but the
Spirit) to qualify men for the work of the ministry. And accordingly they
choose unlearned men, and have none but such for their teachers. Neither do
they use the means for obtaining any better accomplishments: which show^ that
they make no account of colleges, and superior schools of learning to educate
their sons. p. 165.

This you see is laid against us all without exception, and he often repeats it
in that manner, and our practice is appealed to for the proof of the charge:
then let that be examined.

Mr. Elisha Pain of Canterbury, was one of the greatest lawyers in that colony,
before he left the law for the gospel; and some of the ministers approved of
his preaching, 'till they found he would not conform to their schemes: he is an
ordained pastor among the separates to this day. His brother Solomon, who was
the first pastor of that church at Canterbury, had been a leading man in the
town, and had been their representative in the general court. Mr. Josiah
Cleaveland, of that church sent two of his sons to college, and you shall hear
how they were treated.

" Yale college Nov. 19. 1744.

Present, the Rector and Tutors upon information, that John Cleaveland, and
Ebenezer Cleaveland, members of this college, withdrew from the public worship
of God in the meeting house in Canterbury, carried on by Mr. C^gsha^l a
l^cenced, and approved candidate for the ministry, preaching there at the
desire of the first parish or society in Canterbury, with the special direction
of the association of the county of Windham; and that they the said
Cleavelands, did go to and attend upon a private saparate meeeting in a private
house for divine worship, carried on principally by one Solomon Pain, a
lay-exhorter, on several sabbaths in September or October last. The Scholars
owned the facts, and gave in the state of the case to them, and showed that
they met with the major part of the church, which they belonged to. I shall not
trouble the reader with any more than the close of their first answer which
was, That neither the major part of the members in full communion, nor any
other persons in any parish or society, have any right or warrant to appoint
any house or place for worship on the sabbath, distinct and separate from, and
in opposition to the meeting house, the public place appointed by the general
assembly, and the parish; but on the contrary, all such places and separate
meetings, are prohibited by the ancient laws of this government.

Whereupon it is considered, and adjudged by the rector and tutors, that the
said John and Ebenezer Cleavelands, in withdrawing and separating from the
public worship of God, and attending upon the preaching of lay-exhorters as
aforesaid, have acted contrary to the rules of the gospel, the laws of this
colony, and of the college; and that the said Cleavelands, shall be publicly
admonished for their faults aforesaid; and if they continue to justify
themselves, and refuse to make an acknowledgment, they shall be expelled.

"Thomas Clap. Rector." They were expelled accordingly, and became teachers
among the separates. And as the heads of the college then published this
account; and Mr. Pain in his view of the churches, transcribed it, p. 13 --
15, in 1752. And as we have some other ordained pastors, who have considerable
skill in both the Greek and Latin tongues; and three members of one separate
church in Norwich, have each brought up a son at college within these few
years, one of which is now a tutor of Yale college; and as a like number have
been sent to college from Windham, beside some in other places; I leave Mr.
Fish to consider how he can answer what he has said, either to God or man.

However, though his charge is far from truth, yet it is readily granted, that we
have a great dislike to some sorts of learning, especially the art of disputing
against the truth, as well as for it, the art of making easy things hard,
instead of making hard things easy; such oppositions of science, we 1 Timothy 6.20
have no likening to, nor of the art of handling the word of God deceitfully,
and twisting things into any shape to suit men's own turns. Such things as
these, I take to be the leaven which our Savior warned his disciples against;
for what he calls doctrine in one place, he calls hypocrisy in another. Mat.
16.12. Luke 12.1.
And what shall we think of our author upon this point? Speaking of ministers
work, he says, Our Lord has shown us, that LEARNING is eminently useful, yea
even necessary, Isai. 50.4. The Lord God has given me the tongue of the
learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season, to him that is
weary. Intimating that he should not have known how, without a learned tongue.
p. 175.

When I read this, I confess it caused this enquiry in my mind, If Mr. Fish
knows no better, than to construe this scripture so, where is his learning? and
if he does, where is his honesty? His controversy with us is about human
learning, whereas that text expresses divine learning, as plain as words can
possibly do; and there is great reason to think, that the prophet here
personates HIM, who though he were a son, yet learned he obedience, by the things
which he suffered, and being tempted, he is able to succor them that are
tempted. Did any Pharisee ever abuse scripture, to impose upon people, worse
than this?

Let us consider another scripture, namely, 2 Timothy 3.6. which our author gives
us a large comment upon, in order to guard against those that oppose their
churches, and closes it by saying, This design is hid from vulgar eyes, by the
plausible covering or pretense, of setting truth in a clearer light, and
building up the church on a better footing, and of purer materials, p. 70. Now
we may take notice, that the apostle makes no distinction in the text, between
public and private houses, for he often taught both publicly and from house to
house; but what he points out false teachers by, is, the manner of their
getting in, and the work they do when they are in. As to the first, they creep
into houses: and we all know that creeping is opposite to going upright,
therefore when Peter dissembled, Paul withstood him to the face, because he
walked not uprightly, according to the truth of the gospel; and that concerning
introducing the Jewish schemes into the christian church, Gal. 2.11 -- 14. I
leave Mr. F. to consider how well this will agree with his notion, that the
christian church is made up of the same materials, that the Jewish church was.

I remember that Mr. Edwards in his farewell sermon at Northampton, warned that
people of their danger of being imposed upon, for he said, he knew the art that
some young ministers had got, of disguising their principles, 'till they could
get into place, and then they would corrupt people's minds by degrees. This
leads to the other branch of the text under consideration, which is, that when
those teachers are got into houses, they lead captive silly women laden with
sin, led away with diverse lusts. And how many have there been in our day, who
have appeared in a Calvinist garb till they have got settled, and then as fast
as any women or others came laden with sin, to talk with them about their souls
concern, they would lead them to the church, instead of leading them to Christ
first, and so they are settled down in a form of Godliness; and this sort of
men, will soon deny the power of it. verse. 5. And they are ever learning, and
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, v. 7. Instead of that, they
are truce breakers; false to the principles which they professed, and break
through their solemnities and engagements; and so are Traitors, v. 4. And if we
had no such men in our land, can it be thought, that we should have heard Judas
cried up so much as we have? I mean not to reflect upon any man's person, but
only to hold up the plain truth, and leave all men to judge for themselves; and
where any such men are found, God's command in ver. 5. is, From such turn away.
Mr. F. pretends, that those teachers were for building the church, "of purer
materials" than others; whereas the text speaks expressly of that sort of men,
who have the form, but deny the power of godliness.

This leads us to another article of difference between us, which is,

III. The Nature and Power of the Spirit.
OUR author's last and most distinguishing character of the true church is,
that, Christ's church has always had, and always will have, his holy spirit
dwelling in it. p. 44. This spirit he says, has always been distinguished from
the spirit of antichrist, by his purity, meekness, gentleness, and patience.
The true church of Christ, in whom his spirit dwells, has never been a bitter,
fierce, revengeful, persecuting church, but the reverse. Whatever degree of
such a spirit, has at any time crept into his church, so far as to influence
some individuals, it has ever been a blemish to her character, -- been disowned
by Christ and his church, condemned and exploded. p. 47. To this I say, amen
with all my heart; by this let the controversy be decided; in order to which,
other facts must be laid open.

It has been already observed, that we agree in judgment, concerning there
having been a most glorious out-pouring of the spirit in our day, for the
conviction and conversion of many souls: but I think the same spirit led us to
see the corruptions of the ministers and churches, so as to leave them, while
Mr. F. holds the contrary. Here we part, and I have laid open the state of our
first separate church, and a little of the treatment they met with, from the
other party. Now we will proceed further. Though we had diverse separate
meetings, yet 'twas more than a year after the breach at Canterbury, before we
had any new church gathered, and many were in hopes that ministers would come
to better terms, but their hopes were disappointed, for none were allowed to
preach, without the ministers license; and I will here insert their own
account, how one of our teachers was treated, by the authority which these
churches stand upon, and leave others to judge what spirit it discovered.
Omitting the introduction, the charge was, Paine's view of the churches, p. 20
-- 22.
That Elisha Pain of Canterbury, in the county of Windham, who is not a
settled, and ordained minister, did on the 10th day of April, A. D. 1744. go
into the third parish in Windham, in the county aforesaid; and in said parish,
in the house of Benjamin Cleaveland, there said Pain did publicly preach, and
exhort in matters of religion, both as to doctrine and practice, to a great
number of people then present, that were notified many days before the said
Pain was to preach at said Cleaveland's house, as before mentioned, as by
presentment on file may appear. The said Pain confessed the facts, and
pleaded, this court has no jurisdiction of this case, as on file. "Windham,
ff. Sept. 22. 1744. a justices court." Present, Nathanael Huntington, justice
of peace. And now the prisoner at the bar, being brought before this court, for
preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ, and exhorting a number of people (as
presentment) pleads, that this court has not jurisdiction of this case; for
that the facts complained of, are warranted by the law of God and the King, and
therefore not tryable by any court, or law inferior thereto; and this he is
ready to verify judgment.

"The above written is a true copy, Elista Pain as on file."

Test. N. Huntington, justice of peace.


This court having considered the pleas of the prisoner, do judge them
insufficient, and say, That this court has jurisdiction of this case, and the
said Pain refused to make any other plea: whereupon it is considered by this
court, that the said Elisha Pain shall become bound, to the treasurer of the
county of Windham; in a recognizance of one hundred pound lawful money, to his
peaceable and good behavior; that he the said Pain, will not again offend in
the like kind, between this time, and the sitting of the county court, to be
holden at Windham, in and for the county of Windham, on the second Tuesday of
December next, and then appear at said court, on said day, and take up his
bond, unless the court shall see cause to continue the same, and pay cost of
this prosecution, and stand committed until bond is given. Cost allowed, two
pounds thirteen shillings, old tenor bills. The said Pain refused to give bond
as abovementioned, or any ways to comply with the judgment, and was committed
the day and year above-written.

Nathanael Huntington, Just. peace. "The above-written, is a true copy, as on
record."
"Test. N. Huntington, Just. peace."
I shall only just desire the reader to observe, that there appears nothing
wanting here, to make him a good preacher, but only the ministers license, for
he preached and exhored, both in a doctrinal and practical way; and who could
think that such treatment from the other parties, could convince us that we
were wrong, and they right? It was far from doing it; but on the other hand, it
convinced us that they had turned so far out of the gospel line, that we ought
not to follow them.

And on Oct. 9. 1745. A new separate church in Mansfield was gathered, and they
made choice of Mr. Thomas Marsh for their pastor, who had for many years been a
deacon in the second church in Windham; and they appointed his ordination to be
on Jan. 6. 1746. But the day before, many of the standing ministers met in that
town, and at the same time Mr. Marsh was seized by an officer, and carried to
Windham Goal, for preaching sometime before, without license from the
ministers; and on the day proposed for his ordination, as a great assembly were
engaged in religious worship, there came up a dozen or fourteen ministers, and
desired a conference with this new church; hoping likely that now the shepherd
was taken, they might scatter the sheep. What they talked of, was to try to
convince them of their errors; but when they had begun with that old argument,
"Take him Jailer!" that powerful argument upon the body; what free access could
they rationally expect after that, to convince the mind? They complained
afterward, of meeting with noisy treatment, and who could expect less?

The writer of this, happened to be a spectator of the transactions of that
day, and though but young in years, and experience, yet he endeavored carefully
to observe what was done. Some of those ministers had been as great promoters,
and others as great opposers of the late revival of religion, as any in the
land: and the promoters of the work were put forward, and as they came up, they
were saluted something in this manner, viz. one would say, Dear Mr. P. you was
the instrument of my conversion, and where are you now? Another, Dear Mr. M.
you was the means of awakenings my soul, and will you now fight against the
work of God, and others to like purpose. And afterward they were publicly
addressed by one of the fathers in the separation, Mr. Solomon Pain.
as hear as I can remember, in these words, You dear ministers of Jesus Christ,
who were as heralds a few years ago, to found the gospel trumpet through the
land, where are you now? are you not joined in confederacy with those who, your
own consciences testify, are enemies to the work of God?

They showed no disposition to answer such questions, but made several attempts
to get the church together by themselves, 'till they found it could not be
done, and at last they read off a remonstrance, which they had drawn up against
these things, and so departed. That church in Mansfield, the next month, chose
and ordained Mr. John Hovey for their pastor, which was the first ordination
among these churches; and after Mr. Marsh was set at liberty, he was ordained a
colleague with him, in July following. The third separate ordination, was of
Mr. Solomon Pa^ at Canterbury, Sept. 10. 1746. and there were fi^e more such
ordinations before that year was out, one of which was near Mr. F. at
Stonington; and he gives a long story of his own behavior, and of the treatment
he met with, upon that occasion; in order to show how bad the spirit of
separation was, p. 156. etc.

I would always abide by what we begun upon, under this head, that the spirit
of Christ is not a fierce, bitter, and revengeful spirit, but the reverse; and
that wherever such a spirit appears, it is a blemish to any people; and that
treatment which he describes was so to us; but then he, and all ought to
consider, that Solomon says, surely oppression makes a wise man mad; and if
what we had met with was not oppression, I confess I know not what may be
called so; and the bitter words which he sets down, were uttered by a poor
Irishman, who could not read, and was never set up as a teacher among our
churches, but put himself forward at that time; and if others did not, then
rebuke him for it, what has been said above, may in some measure account for
that.

Mr. F. owns, that there is a great alteration among us since, and says, It Is
readily granted that they are, now much more moderate and civil, than they were
in that day, -- are very peaceable, kind, obliging good neighbors. But, says
he, what does this reasoning argue? why, it only shows that they have lost a
degree of their original spirit as separates. p. 158. But stay; our author has
forgot himself: As little learning as we have, we used to think, that we
understood so much of logic as this, that if the cause was gone, the effect
would cease: therefore if so great a degree of the spirit of separation is
lost, he need not have troubled himself, nor others about it. But he has drawn
out things, to such a length, that he will have hard, work to bring his two
ends together^ for he begins with informing the world, that the occasion of his
writing, ws the revival of the spirit of separation, yet before he has got
through his book, he contradicts it, lest he should allow that we were governed
by a good spirit in separating.

He calls this labor of his, An "unpleasant task"; and well he might, for it is
hard work to strive to blind the truth. In order to finish this task, he says;
The rashness and soverity of that spirit, which these poor brethren were
influenced by, appeared in such accusations, as respected the hidden man of the
heart, p. 159.

This brings me to speak,

IV. Of knowing Christians.
WHEN we first appeared against, having the worthy, and the unworthy partake
together at the Lord's supper, (which was a principal reason of our fathers
separation from the Church of England) ministers told us, as I have before
proved, that tares and wheat must grow together in the church, 'till the
harvest: for they knew there were many both in public and private stations,
who, notwithstanding their form of godliness, appeared as plainly against the
power of it, as the tares appeared by their fruits in the field. But because we
would not confound church and world together, as they did, they shifted about,
and accused us with assuming God's prerogative to search the heart; while they
asserted, that we could not know who were saints, and who not. And when 'twas
replied, that Christ said, ye shall know them: the return would often be, What,
are you infallible? Whereupon disputes have ensued, which have often been
carried to extremes on both hands. I confess with shame that I have sometimes
been thus ensnared, and so have given occasion to those who desired occasion
against us.

And doubtless confidence has been carried beyond evidence, in many instances;
and I suppose many have been more concerned to keep up a good opinion of such
as they have received for christians, than they have to discharge their duty
toward them in a gospel manner. And who will say he is clear of fault in these
things? May all strive for greater reformation in them. But what is this writer
doing, when he often charges us with wilfulness in our way? and because we were
not turned back by Mr. Davenport's retractions he says; They held fast deceit,
they refused to return. p. 128. Again, he says, The strength of their delusion
seems to lies very much in this, that they cannot call their conduct in
question. p. 186. This is the man who accuses separates, with judging others
hearts! See Romans 3.1 -- 3.

Mr. F. knows that our chief disputes, have been upon ^sibilities and not
secrets. The first thing which he advances, to prove that separates had a bad
spirit, is that, They endeavored to draw off from us, every true believer, or
christian, (in their sense of the word) and would have left a congregation
behind them, of nothing but such as they judged to be hypocrites and graceless
persons: without the benefit of one saint to assist them, in the affairs of
their souls.

And he directly turns to the parable of the tares, as a sure proof that this
was wrong; and adds, as a great agravation of their crime, that they would call
others to, Come out from among them, and be separate; with this reflection, If
they are christians, why don't they come away from the Shades of Babylon! p.
154. I suppose the use of the word Babylon here, was thought as criminal as any
of their language; but as its signification is, confusion or mixture, is there
not at least the shades of it, where civil and ecclesiastical affairs; church
and world are confounded together, as we have proved they are in our land? and
the text referred to, is a call to come out from, and not be unequally yoked
with unbelievers, 2 Cor. 6.14 -- 17. Creatures that are unequally yoked
together, are not like to work to any advantage.

Old Mr. Mitchel's thoughts are worthy of His life, dedication p. 17, 18.
notice here, which were thus expressed; The over-enlarging of full communion
of, or admission of persons there, upon slight qualifications, without
insisting upon the practical and spiritual part of religion, will not only lose
the power of godliness, but in ^e time, bring in profaneness, and ruin the
churches these two ways. 1. Election of ministers, will soon be carried by a
formal, looser so^t. 2. The exercise of discipline, will by this means be
rendered impossible, discipline falling, profaneness rises like a flood; for
the major part wanting zeal against sin, will foster licentiousness. It is not
setting down good rules, and directions, that will salve it; for the
specification of government, is from men, not from laws. Let never so good a
form of government be agreed upon, it will soon degenerate, if the instruments,
(or men) that manage it, be not good. Solomon tells us that words fitly spoken,
are like apples of gold, in pictures of silver* and I think these words of Mr.
Mitchel are such; and (...) Mr. Fish often refers us to this godly man; I would
desire him to turn and look into this glass himself. If this great man thought,
that it would ruin the churches, to have many loose members to vote for
ministers in the church; what would he have said, if he had seen the clergy set
up the world over the church in that affair? as we have seen them do, which
caused the first separation. I say set up the world over the church; for the
law requires no other qualification to make a man a voter for a minister in
their parishes, but a certain quantity of worldly estate: and such voters
turned the church in Canterbury out of the meeting house; and then two members
of it, because they would go with the church, without the camp of such men,
they were turned out of one of the fountains, which Mr. F. would confine us all
to for ministers. This is not a judging men's secrets, for they are open facts
in the sight of the sun. But what a spirit does our author discover, in his
reproaching and condemning us, as apostates from the sentiments of our ancient
fathers? He spends several pages to try to prove, that the ancient church at
Plymouth was like the standing church now, and not like the separates, from an
account of that church, which is given in the appendix to Mr. Robbins's
ordination sermon; and after picking out a few passages, which are chiefly the
opinion of the writer of the account, now in the year 1760, he then refers it
to the reader to judge how little resemblance there is between them and us, p.
84. But in that same account, p. 32. we are informed, that the church managed
the whole affair, both of inviting and calling ministers, and that the first
instance that appears of the towns voting in the case, was seventy nine years
after their first coming to Plymouth. In the same account p. 21. we have an
information of three members of that church, who were ordained to the pastoral
care of other churches Viz. Mr. Jonathan Dunham at Marthas Vineyard; Mr. Samuel
Fuller, the first minister in Middleborough; and Mr. Isaac Cushman the first in
Plymton. Mr. Cushman lived to old age, and I have heard many that have sat
under his ministry speak of him as a faithful and successful labourer.
that were, what Mr. F. calls lay-teachers; yet this was done fifty-six years
after Harvard college was founded.

We don't pretend to take those fathers as our perfect pattern; but what I
complain of is, Mr. Fish's pretending to produce their example to support his
cause, and to condemn us, and then call others to judge upon the case; while he
conceals these material points, which are for us, and against him. I will also
add here, that Mr. Prince gives it as the foundation principles of those
fathers which came to Plymouth, that their church officers after being chosen
and ordained, have no lordly, arbitrary or imposing power; but can only rule
and minister with the consent of the brethren; who ought not in contempt to be
called the la^ty but to be treated as men and brethren in Christ, not as slaves
or minors. And that no churches or church officers whatever have any power over
any other, church or officers, to control or impose upon them: but are equal
in their rights and privileges, and ought to be independent in the exercise and
enjoyments of them. New England chronology. p. 92.
Yet now these men who pretend to be their successors, have got so high an
opinion of their own learning and knowledge, as to assume such a power as our
fathers abhorred.

Is not he a servant who has not liberty to act as he thinks best, without
leave from another? Yet such a power is now claimed by ministers over their
people, as not to allow them to have liberty to ask any minister to preach in
their parish without their leave; and nothing is more common, than for them to
call all such, lay men, which are not introduced into the ministry in their
way. Our author is abundant in it, and Mr. Beckwith, who as I observed a little
back, claims a lordly power in plain words, he uses the lay-terms about 30
times in thirty pages. Many people love to have it so; Therefore that apostolic
man (as Dr. Watts call him) professor Franck, after exposing many excuses for
the fear of man, says, To which may be added that pernicious distinction,
derived from Popery, and whereby those that are preachers, or designed for that
office, are called spiritual men, and the rest of the people lay men: whereas
indeed all true christians be they in what state they will, must be spiritually
minded, as St. Paul teaches, 1 Cor. 3.^6. Romans ^.9, 14. -- But we don't think
of this, and scarcely know, what the name christian imports, viz. one anointed
with the spirit of Christ; and therefore think our selves sufficiently excused;
when we can say: I am a layick, and no spiritual man. It is not to be
expressed, what horrid mischief this wicked distinction is the cause of, and
what deep root it has taken in men's minds: insomuch, that the devil himself
could hardly have found out a better way, to persuade people, that one is not
as much bound as another, exactly to order his life in all things according to
the rule of God's word. Accordingly satan fails not presently to show his
claws, whenever this spiritual priestly office, commended to all christians, is
earnestly pressed and inculcated. Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor,
and not suffer sin upon him, says God, Lev. 19, 17. Not to teachers alone, but
to all in general. Those were the sentiments of one of the greatest reformers
in Germany near seventy years ago, see Fear of man, page 11^ -- 117.
And is not he a minor, who must have another to act for him, and he only yield
a silent consent thereto? and how near to this is the custom of our land,
concerning admissions into churches? I observed before, that I never knew a
single instance in the standing churches, of any members being received upon a
verbal declaration to the church, of what God has done for his soul; no,
instead of that, the ministers have assumed more to themselves in that respect,
than the judges do in our civil courts; for there they ordinarily insist upon
having the witnesses personally present, where all persons concerned, may hear
their testimony from their own mouths, and have liberty to ask what questions
they think proper; the fear of witnesses blundering in their story, shall not
excuse them from giving their own account, even before great men; for interest
is concerned, and they are afraid, written evidences would impose upon them:
Yet in this case, where the interest of Christ's church is so much concerned,
that as Mr. Mitchel observes loose admissions will ruin the churches; here none
are allowed to witness a good confession with their own mouths before the
church, but the ministers have turned them off with written accounts, which
have often been framed by some body else, for those who are about to make an
open appearance as God's witnesses. Nay there are some godly persons among us,
who declare that when they were admitted publicly into the church, the
minister read off an account, different in material points, from what they gave
to him in writing, and so made them silently assent to a lie!

From written experiences, great numbers, especially in populous places, have
now dropped giving any account thereof to the church in any way: and yet these
ministers would fain make us believe they are going in the same way which our
fathers set out in, when they first came to this country: but let us hear their
own testimony in the affair.

Capt. Roger Clap, one of the first inhabitants of Dorchester, and who was many
years captain of the castle in Boston harbor; he in writing of what they went
through says, I took notice of it, as a great favor of God unto me, not only to
preserve my life, but to give me contentedness in all these straits? insomuch
that I do not remember that ever I did wish in my heart, that I had not come
into this country. -- The Lord Jesus Christ was so plainly held out in the
preaching of the gospel unto poor lost sinners, and the absolute necessity of
the new birth, and God's holy spirit in those days, was pleased to accompany
the word with such efficacy upon the hearts of many; that our hearts were taken
off from old England, and set upon heaven. -- Many were converted, and others
established in believing, many joined unto the several churches where they
lived, confessing their faith publicly, and showing before all the assembly
their experiences of the workings of God's spirit in their hearts to bring them
to Christ; which many hearers found very much good by, to help them to try
their own hearts, and to consider how it was with them; -- oh the many tears
that have been shed in Dorchester meeting house at such times, both by those
that have declared God's work on their souls, and also by those that heard
them. In those days, God, even our own God did bless New England. Christian
history Vol. I. p. 72. You may take notice that this was their practice in the
several churches where people lived.

Accordingly old Mr. John Eliot of Ro^bury said, It is matter of great
thankfulness, that we have Christ confessed in our churches; by such as we
receive to full communion there. They open the work of Christ in their hearts,
and the relation thereof is an eminent confession of our Lord; experienced
saints, can gather more than a little from it. It is indeed an ordinance of
wonderful benefit; the Lord planted many vineyards in the first settlement of
this country, and there were many noble vines in them; it was their
heavenly-mindedness which disposed them to this exercise, and by the upholding
of it, the churches are still filled with noble vines; it mightily maintains
PURITY of churches: it is the duty of EVERY Christian. It is a thing that gives
great glory to the Lord Jesus Christ; and young converts are thereby
exceedingly edified; and the souls of devout christians are hereby ingratiated
one unto another. The devil knows what he does when he thrusts so hard to get
this custom out of our churches. For my part, I would say in this case, get
thee behind me satan; thou give an horrible offense unto the Lord Jesus
Christ. Let us keep up this ordinance with all gentleness; and where we see the
least spark of grace held forth, let us prize it more than all the wit in the
world. Mr. Elliots life p. 68.69.
This was the testimony of one of the most faithful and successful ministers
that New England ever saw; wherein he boldly ascribes to the devil any attempts
that were made to thrust that custom out of the churches: yet now that custom
is treated with contempt by many ministers, who still would be accounted the
true successors of those pious fathers.

Indeed our author has got a fine way to get along here, which is by turning
off such things for imperfections, and he says the order of the churches was
more perfected and established afterward in the year 1662. p. 80. Here we
shall learn what his notion of perfection is; for in that year was the synod
which brought in (what we have called) half way members. Mr. Chauncy president
of the college, and Mr. Davenport of New Haven, both opposed that point in
print, as a great corruption instead of perfection; and Mr. Eleazer Mather of
Northampton, who was in that synod, wrote soon after to Mr. Davenport that
There was scarce any of the congregational principles but what were layen at by
some of other of the assembly; as relations of the work of grace, power of
voting of the fraternity (or brethren) in admission, etc. Mr Hutchinson's
history vol 1. p. 224.


Mr. F's. notion of the order of the churches being perfected then, makes me
think of a story concerning a minister who descended from a member of that
synod, who though his conduct was not good, yet boasted of treading in his
grandfathers steps; whereupon another minister of greater note said, He had got
his grandfathers imperfections to perfection. Though Mr. Mitchel was then
active in bringing in what he called the middle-way; Yet the importance of
being careful how persons were admitted to the Lord's Supper, still lay upon
his mind, and he wrote his tho'ts thereon on Jan. 4. 1664. Wherein, among other
things, he brings in this objection, viz. Why may it not suffice, for a man
publicly to say, I believe on Christ, or do unfeignedly repent of my sins? Or
to consent to such expressions being read, or propounded unto him, without any
more ado? His answer is 1st. He that can groundedly so say, or profess before
God, angels and men that he has unfeigned faith and repentance, can say
somewhat more, particularly to show the reality of his acquaintance with those
things. And if he cannot say it, groundedly, it is not meet to put him so to
say, 2d. He that either cannot or will not say any more than so, he renders the
truth of his faith and repentance, suspicious so that a rational charity,
cannot acquiesce in it. Mr. Mitchel's life. p. 16.


There has been a great deal of smother raised in our day to hide or get over
these self evident truths, many have been for lowering the profession so that
it might not imply saving faith in it; but Zion's king says He that is not for
me is against me; and he declares that publicans and harlots go into the
kingdom of God before those who said, I go sir; and went not. Halting between
two opinions; a pretending to be for God, and yet not being truly so, has
always been one of the greatest evils, and most fatal snares that any men can
be taken in. And as to the noise which many have made against our principles as
though they tended to perplex sincere minds; this argument has justly been
retorted back again: for none will pretend to admit persons without some sort
of qualification or other: and it is vastly more difficult to determine the
point concerning moral sincerity, than gracious sincerity; for the first is
only restraints and influences upon a person, while the other is a living
principle within him; and I think this is an unanswerable reason which Mr.
Edwards gives, why the latter, and not the other, makes meet members for
Christ's Church, namely that moral sincerity is transient, and may be entirely
lost; but a gracious principle abides for ever. As to the frightful consequence
which some draw, that if none but gracious persons ought to be received to
communion, then we can never know whether our communion is right or not, in
this world: Old Mr. Shephard gave a sufficient answer thereto an 120 years ago,
in these words.

"Q. What members ought every particular visible church "to consist of?

A. Christ being head of every particular church, and it his body, hence none
are to be members of the church, but such as are members of Christ by faith, 1
Cor. 1.2. 1 These. 1.

"Q. But do not hypocrites, and no true members of Christ "creep in?

A. Yes: But if they could have been known to be such they ought to be kept
out; and when they are known, they are orderly to be cast out. Mat. 25.1. 2 Timothy 3.5. Rev. 2.20. Tit. 3.10. His first principles of the oracles of God. p.
25, 26.


I have been the more particular on this head, because all the controversy
turns very much upon it, and since Mr. F. says the separates admitted members
not so much upon outward evidence, as upon inward fellowship or feeling. p.
145. I will add a little more concerning that matter: and I doubt not but many
have had confused notions concerning fellowship, and have often put the effect
for the cause, i. e. have taken what they felt toward other, for the evidence
of others good estate; whereas all affections toward others, are caused by what
is some way or other manifested from them; and if what others manifest be
genuine evidences of grace, then our love thereto is genuine; but if what
others manifest is not genuine language or exercises, and we are delighted
therewith, those affections in us are as corrupt as the causes which produced
them: hence Jesus says, First cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then
shall thou see clearly to cast out the m^t^ out of thy brothers eye. And though
the word, feeling is often cast upon us as a term of roproach, yet as certain
as the bible is true, all those professors that don't love one another with a
pure heart, have but the dead carcass of religion. And as a principal means of
begetting and increasing this love, is declaring to each other what God has
done for our souls; so our Lord says, Every tree is known by his own fruit, --
a good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth that which is
good: And the beloved disciple says, That which we have seen and heard, declare
we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us, etc. And to show that
our sentiments are not singular, as well as for the edification of the saints,
I will here transcribe a little of what was wrote in the last century, by one
who is allowed to be a man of as great learning and piety as any in his day.

I mean Dr. John Owen, who, after observing how men are liable to mistakes in
various ways, and giving cautions accordingly, he proceeds to speak of some
duties which cannot be performed without some knowledge of others state, and
also of the way wherein it is attained," 1st. There are, says he, many duties
incumbent on us to be performed, with and toward professors, which without
admitting a judgment to be made of their state and condition, cannot be
performed in faith. And in reference unto these duties alone, it is that we are
called to judge the state of others. For we are not giving countenance unto a
rash uncharitable censuring of men's spiritual conditions, nor unto any judging
of any men, any other than what our own duty toward them does indispensably
require. Thus if we are to lay down our lives for the brethren, it is very meet
that we should so far know them so to be, as that we may hazard our lives in
faith when we are called thereunto. We are also to join with them in those
ordinances wherein we make a solemn profession, that we are members of the same
body with them, that we have the same head, the same faith and love: we must
love them because they are begotten of God, children of our heavenly father;
and therefore must on some good ground believe them so to be. In a word, the
due performance of all principal mutual gospel duties, to the glory of God, and
our own edification, depend upon this supposition, that we may have such
satisfying persuasion concerning the spiritual condition of others, as that
from which we may take our aim in what we do.

2. For the grounds hereof, I shall mention one only, which all others do lean
upon. This is pressed, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. As the body is one, and has many
members, and all the members of that one body being many, are one body, so is
Christ: for by one spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews
or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have been made all to drink into
one spirit. They are all united unto, and hold of one head; so is Christ
mystical, that is, all believers under Christ their head. And this union they
have by the inhabitation of the same quickening Spirit, which is in Christ their
head, and by him they are all brought into the same spiritual state and frame;
they are made to drink into one and the same spirit; for this same spirit
produces the same effects in them all, the same in kind though differing in
degrees, as the apostle fully declares. Ephesians. 4.3 -- 6. And this spirit is in
them and not in the world, Joh. 16. And as it gives them a naturalness in their
duties one toward another, or in mutual caring for, rejoicing and sorrowing
with one another as members one of another. 1 Cor. 12.25, 26. So that it
reveals and discovers them to each other, so far as is neccessary for the
performance of the duties mentioned, in such a manner as becomes members of the
same body. There is on this account a spiritually natural answering of one to
another, as face answers face in the water, they can see and discern that in
others whereof they have experience in themselves, they taste and relish that
in others which they feed upon in themselves, and wherein the lives of their
souls do consist; the same spirit of life being in them, they have the same
spiritual taste and favor. And unless their palates are distempered by
temptation or false opinion or prejudices, they can in their communion taste of
that spirit in each other, which they are all made to drink into. This gives
them the same likeness and image in the inward man, the same heavenly light in
their minds, the same affections; and being thus prepared to judge and discern
of the states of each other, in reference unto their mutual duties, they have
moreover the true rule of the word to judge of all spirits and spiritual
effects by. And this is the ground of all that love without dissimulation, and
real communion that is among the saints of God in this world. If these are
omitted, there is an end of all profitable use of church-society. Churches
without this, are but mere husks and shells of churches, carcases without
souls; for as there is no real union unto Christ without faith, so there is no
real union among the members of any church without love, and that acting itself
in all the duties mentioned, let not this ordinance be in vain. Dr. Owen on the
130th Psalm, Edition at Edinburgh 1749. p. 325. to 328.


These were the sentiments of those ancient fathers, who were in contempt
called Puritans, because they labored to have the church brought to the pure
standard of God's word; yet how are poor creatures treated now, for their
attempting, (though very imperfectly) to repair the old wastes, the desolations
of many generations? Isa. 6.4. We come,

V. To speak of what Ministers Power really is, and how they come by it.
WE have seen much already of what power they pretend to have; but it is needful
to open what authority Christ has really given to his ministers. And the plain
account in his word is,

1. That their authority is not over the bodies, but it concerns the souls of
men. Obey them, -- for they watch for your souls, Heb. 13.17. And, 2. They have
no power to make rules, nor to govern others judgments, but only to explain the
rules which are made, and labor to move others to regard them. Not for that we
have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy: for by faith ye
stand, 2 Cor. 1.24. I speak as to wise men: JUDGE YE what I say. 1 Cor. 10.15.
Hence, 3. The peoples obligation to regard and follow any teachers, depends
upon their teaching right. We have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty,
not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by
manifestation of the truth we commend ourselves to every man's conscience in
the sight of God. 2 Cor. 4.2. They who teach right, teach by practice as well
as word. Paul says, Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them which
WALE so as ye have us for an ENSAMPLE: and he warns them against persons of a
contrary walk, who mind earthly things, Phil. 3.17 -- 19. Again he says,
Remember them whic have^ the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word
of God: whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation, Heb.
13.7. Note, we are not to obey and follow them in an implicit, or customary
way, but each one must consider, and follow others no further than they see
that the and of their conversation is, Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to
day, and for evermore, v. 8. Yea, 4. People are so far from being under
obligation to follow teachers, who don't lead in this way, that they incur
guilt by such a following of them. The apostle John, speaking of the doctrine
of Christ, says. If there come ANY unto you; and bring not THIS DOCTRINE,
receive him not into your house, nor bid him God speed; for he that bids him
God speed, is PARTAKER of his evil deeds, 2 John 10.11. And the great apostle
of the gentiles says, Though we or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel
unto you, than that which we have preached unto you, (and than, that ye have
received) let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8, 9. And now, where is the power that is
derived by a local succession from the apostles? And which many hold their
authority from as ministers, and carry it so high as to forbid those who follow
not them, even though the reason of it were a matter of conscience, because they
really believed that such ministers neither preached nor practiced agreeable to
the gospel.

Paul was so far from establishing such a local power, that, to guard against
all such pretenses, he states the case upon the highest pitch of all creature
authority, viz. apostles and angels: and leaving all Peter's successors out of
the question, he brings it up to the apostles themselves, and says, Though WE
preach any other gospel than that ye have received; nay, if an angel directly
from heaven should do so, let him he accursed. Our modern ministers would evade
all this, by telling us that they don't pervert the gospel, and that it is our
erroneous judgments, or perverse will, that makes us leave them; but Paul
instead of assuming any such dominion over others faith, says, judge ye what I
say; and he implicitly charges them to reject him if he should come to them
with another gospel.

Should any object that this allowing every one a right to receive or reject
ministers as they judge best, will bring ministers authority to nothing, and so
destroy such an order of men out of the church:

I reply, that it is so far from it, that this is the only way to establish the
gospel ministry, upon its right foundation: for as Christ's kingdom is not of
this world, but its foundation and support is truth, and his ministers are
furnished with that treasure 2 Cor. 4.7.
in their souls; so the manifestation thereof commends them to every man's
conscience, beyond what all others approbation can do. This leads us to view
how ministers come by their authority. When Zion's king ascended on high, he
gave gifts to man; a special part whereof were, pastors and teachers; for the
perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ. Ephesians. 4.8 -- 12.
And his command is, AS EVERY man has received the gift, even so minister the
same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. 1 Pet. 4 10.
This naturally opens the way for their being received into office in the
church, as gifts from her king. Peter told the hundred and twenty disciples,
that of the men which had companied with them, all the time that the Lord Jesus
went in and out among them, one must be ordained to be a witness with the
apostles of his resurrection: accordingly they gave forth their lots; and
thereby Matthias was put into that office. Acts 1.21 -- 26.
And after the apostles were endowed with extraordinary power from on high, to
witness for Christ, ver. 8.
yet they did not so much as nominate the seven men, who were to be put into
office in their presence, but said, Brethren, look ye eat among you seven men
of honest report, full of the holy ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over
this business. They did accordingly, and set the men before the apostles, who
prayed and laid their hands on them. Act. 6.3, 6. And in Acts 14.23. which
speaks of ordaining elders in every church; many learned men assert, that the
word which is translated, ordained, signifies the act of the church, declaring
their choice of those elders, by stretching out, or listing up the hands. See
the margin of Cann's bible; Dr. Watt's orthodoxy and charity, and Dr. Gill on
the place.
And when Paul had given to Timothy a particular description of the characters
of those who are to be put into the office both of bishops and deacons, he
declares plainly that his design therein was, that Timothy might know how he
ought to behave himself, IN the house of God, which is the church of the living
God, the pillar and ground of the truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. Observe, he had no power
over the church, but was to act as a leader in the church; and teach them what
sort of men are to be chose into office, and assist in placing them therein. It
is well known that the word elder in scripture, does not always mean persons in
office, either in church or state; but often is used only for persons of
superior gifts, age or experience; yea the name, when applied to officers,
seems to derive its original, from the custom of choosing such persons into
office; Elders among the Jews, were the most considerable persons for age,
experience, and wisdom, who constituted the council of the people; among the
primative christians, those of the first rank in the church were called elders
Dycht's dictionary.
and in this very epistle the word is plainly used in a sense, which does not
distinguish those who are in office from others, 1 Timothy 5.1, 2.

Upon the whole, I can freely leave it with every conscience to judge, whether
the scriptures carry the point a whit further than this, That leading men in
the primitive church, led in ordinations as well as other things. And who will
dispute that point with any body? Those who hold the power to constitute in
office, and to remove from office, to be entirely in the church, yet always
appoint leading men, (and such as are in office when they can be conveniently
had) to act in and for the church, in ordinations. Much stress is laid by many,
on the terms, commit thou, in 2 Timothy 2.2. in order to prove the power of
ordination to be inherent in them, who are already in office; but it has been
already proved, that the apostles themselves, (even though they sometimes
conveyed extraordinary gifts by laying on their hands, yet) did not pretend to
act in ordinations, only in consequence of the churches act; therefore they
properly acted as the churches mouth, in putting men into office, and charging
them to be faithful therein: and Timothy, and all other leaders, ought to be
very careful when they are called to assist in ordinations, to see that they
commit the charge of souls, only to faithful men. Paul in writing to this same
person, uses the same words, This charge I commit unto thee; and, I give thee
charge, as synonymous terms, 1 Timothy 1.18. and 6.13. And be the right of
ordination where it will, yet this is certain, that the direction is to commit
the charge of souls to faithful men; and none but such can truly be in the
gospel line; and when any creep in, under a sheeps clothing, who are not truly
such; when they discover by their fruits that they are false men, our Lord
commands his people to beware of them, Mat. 7.14, 15.

Another text which is often advanced to prove that ministerial power is handed
down by an external line from the apostles, is Mat. 28.18, -- 20. But I think
two things may be sufficient to evince the absurdity of construing that
commission and promise in such a way.

1. All the promises of God, are IN Christ Jesus; and the heirs of promise are
only such as have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us, 2
Cor. 1.20. Heb. 6.17, 18. How vain then must the attempt be, to apply that
promise to any who have not fled to the gospel refuge?

2. Our Lord connects precept and promise together in the text, Teaching them
to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world: Therefore this promise is so far from
supporting a succession of unconverted ministers, that it could not support
even the apostles themselves, if they turned aside from the line of truth; yea,
instead of the promise, the curse would seize upon an apostle or angel, if they
should turn off from the gospel way, as I have proved before. Should any say,
that those words of Paul are hypothetical expressions; i. e. supposing a case
for illustration, which is not granted, for it is readily allowed, that they are
so; but I would have people remember, that it is chiefly from such ways of
speaking, that they draw their pleas for unconverted ministers, as from 1 Cor.
13.1 -- 3. etc.

To show that my opinion about a line of succession is not singular, I will
transcribe some of Dr. Owen's thoughts thereon, which were published in London
1692. in a small piece called, "A guide to church fellowship and order,"
wherein he says, p. 47, 48. The office of the ministry, for the continuation of
the church state, and administration of all ordinances of worship unto the end
of the world, is sufficiently secured, (1.) By the law, constitution and
appointment of our Lord Jesus Christ, erecting that office, and giving warranty
for its continuance, to the consummation of all things, Mat. 28.20. Ephesians. 4.13.
(2.) By his continuance according unto his promise, to communicate spiritual
gifts unto men, for the ministerial edification of the church. -- (3.) On the
duty of believers, or of the church, which is, to choose, call, and solemnly set
apart unto the office of the ministry, such as the Lord Christ by his spirit,
has made meet for it, according unto the rule of his word.

If all these, or any of them do fail, I acknowledge, says he, that all
ministerial authority and ability for the dispensation of gospel ordinances
must fail also, and consequently the state of the church. And those who plead
for the continuation of a successive ministry, without respect unto these
things, without resolving both the authority and office of it unto them, do but
erect a dead image, instead of the living and life giving institutions of
Christ. They take away the living creature, and set up a skin stuffed with
straw. Thus far Dr. Owen.

Compare this with the opinions of the present day. Mr. Fish says, It Is true
indeed, Jesus did not go into the colleges or schools of learning, for his
first ministers: nor was there any need of such a step, while Christ himself
was personally present, to educate his sons. But they, whom he took into his
school, were chiefly unlearned and ignorant men: to whom, in a little time, he
gave such a measure of knowledge, learning and grace, as abundantly qualified
them for the great work, whereto he appointed them. p. 15. But now he says, The
separates having shut learning out of doors, have thereby deprived themselves
of the best means of obtaining and preserving the knowledge of pure divine
truths. p. 169. Neither do they know whether the bible is rightly translated,
ONLY as they have it from the learned. p. 167. And he says, our holding the
whole power of ordination to be in the church, is without any direction in the
whole word of God; and contrary to plain gospel example. p. 145. But Men says
he, Having the word of reconciliation committed to them, by authorized hands,
they become ambassadors for Christ, p. 17.

Here reader observe,

1. That I have proved that he charges us falsely, as to our shutting out
learning.

2. Here is an awful stroke against the divinity of Jesus Christ: for it has
been proved a little back, that the end of the conversation of true leaders is,
Jesus Christ the SAME yesterday, and to day* and for ever. But the end of Mr.
Fish's conversation is the contrary, and so is that of a great part of the
ministers of our land: About 13 years ago, Dr. Mayhew of Boston, plainly in
print struck against the eternal and essentia* divinity of our Lord Jesus.
Which occasioned Mr. Pemberton's publishing a sermon with an appendix, upon
Christ's power and divinity; to which Dr. Sewall, Mr. Prince, and Mr. Foxcroft,
wrote a preface, wherein they express their hopes that, By the blessing of
Christ, it may be of excellent service to guard many of the readers, from those
most dangerous suggestions against his adorable deity, which have been of late
unhappily published, to the great grief and offense of many among us.

They don't name either the author of book; yet this was the plainest testimony
that was published among us on that occasion, as ever I heard of: neither can I
learn that Dr. Mayhew ever retracted that dangerous and fundamental error; yet
after he died in July 1766, he was celebrated from the pulpit, and press, by
many ministers in town and country, as one of the brightest characters among
them. Dr. Chauncy, who formerly wrote so much to try to prove that New England
ministers had not forfeited their character, by any of their open conduct,
published a funeral sermon for him, wherein he greatly extols Dr. Mayhew; and
in a note, p. 28. he says, Two or 3 years ago a pamphlet appeared among us
under the name of an obscure person, without reputation; -- in which the Dr.
was represented as an enemy to the atonement made by Jesus Christ. The writer
of that piece (says Dr. C.) knew little of the Dr. or the true meaning of his
works. He might as well have taxed any minister in the town or province upon
this head. If I believed Dr. Chauncy's testimony in this, I should have a worse
opinion of that order of ministers than I ever yet had; for I have great reason
to believe, that Dr. Mayhew's writings, have done the most to corrupt peoples
minds, and to prejudice them against the pure doctrines of grace, as they were
held by the fathers of this country, of any one man in our land.

The obscure person without reputation, which Dr. C. refers to, is Mr. John
Cleaveland, who was expelled out of college, after he had been there about 3
years, only for his attending the worship of God, with the church which he was
a member of, instead of going to hear a candidate which the association and the
world had set up, in opposition to the church. He wrote against two of Dr. M.
sermons; and the president who expelled him, did himself so much honor on this
occasion, as to send Mr. Cleaveland a degree of master of arts.


For what less can be the import of saying, that Christ taught and qualified
men for the ministry, when he was "personally present," as he cannot or does
not do now; what less can it be than to say, he is not truly God by nature, but
only so by office, and that having set up officers in his kingdom, he has gone
to heaven, and left them to order affairs in his absence? God has often changed
his dispensations, but his nature and his grace remain ever the same. He
inspired men to write the scriptures, and gave them power to confirm his word
with diverse miracles; which is not necessary, since the bible is acknowledged
to be complete. But it is as great a truth now, as ever, that, No man knows
the things of God, but the spirit of God; and that each faint has received this
spirit, that they might KNOW the things that are freely given to them of God.
Yet Mr. F. declares that we don't know whether we have the pure divine truths
or not, ONLY as we have it from the learned. Whereas Paul says, my speech, and
my preaching was not with enticeing words of man's wisdom, but in DEMONSTRATION
of the SPIRIT, and of power: that your FAITH should not stand in the wisdom of
men, but in the power of God, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5.11, 12. And John says, little
children, ye have an unction from the holy ONE, and ye KNOW all things; and the
anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you: and ye need not that
any man teach you; but as the same anointing, teaches you of all things. And
he expressly declares, that it is the spirit of antichrist which denies this. 1
John 2.18 -- 27.

Then let Mr. F. look to it; for he has told us from Dr. Owen that the best of
human nature, if not united to the divine nature, is no better than sand to
build the church upon. p 56. Yea, and he has also given it as a clear mark of
Christ's church, that it always has his holy spirit dwelling in it. What
nonsense (if no worse) then is it, to tell of Christ's servants deriving their
knowledge of the truth and right to preach it, only from the hands of men? His
argument is that, There is nothing of inspiration in translating the bible.
Answer, there is as much of inspiration in that, as there is in transcribing of
it; and how many thousand times has that been done, before it came to the copy
that he has seen? and how does he know he has got the pure truth, as it was
wrote by inspiration? True protestants all confess, that the certain knowledge
of the truth, is attained only by the same way in the nature of it, which Paul
points out for the unlearned, to gain it by; even that when truth is rightly
delivered in words easy to be understood, he is convinced of all, he is judged
of all; and thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and falling down
on his face, he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth.
This is in the midst of the chapter, which is concluded with a precept which
these ministers often remind us of, viz. Let all things be done decently and in
order, 1 Cor. 14.9, 24, 25, 40. And a main indecency and disorder which is
therein condemned, is speaking in the church, in language not easily
understood. And who are more guilty of such disorders than these great
pretenders to learning! And what can be a greater plague to the church, than
the setting up men for ministers, who never came to this knowledge of the truth?

But here I am checked, for Mr. F. says, We approbate none for the work of the
ministry, without enquiring after, and obtaining some hopeful evidences of an
inward work of grace: and he says, that for separates to suggest the contrary,
shows a want of good temper, and of a tender regard to truth; for they might
know better if they would. p. 166.

I desire to be informed, how we shall know better. Does Mr. F. believe in his
conscience, that renewing grace is entailed to colleges? Mr. Edwards was far
from thinking so; for the same book where he would confine the ministers to
such as man had taught for that purpose; yet he says of colleges, They ought to
be so constituted, that vice and idleness should have no living there: they are
intolerable in societies, whose main design is, to train up youth in christian
knowledge and eminent piety. -- It seems to me to be a reproach to the land,
that ever it should be so with our colleges, that instead of being places of
the greatest advantages for true piety, one cannot send a child thither, without
great danger of his being infected, as to his mor^s; as it has certainly
sometimes been with these societies. Thoughts on the work, 1742. p. 349, 350.
And I suppose it has been more so since, than ever it was before.


A gentleman of considerable learning, told me, that he was once discoursing
this matter with an aged minister, not far from Mr. F. and asked him if he ever
knew one who had got his degree at college, denied an approbation, if he sought
it? He replied, that he had known one: but upon further enquiry, was forced to
confess that, that one went into another county and got an approbation there.
In fact, the right of trying ministers, which Christ gave to his church, and
commended her for exercising that power, in detecting false men, (Rev. 2.2.) is
now usurped by the clergy, and after they have thus robbed God's people of
their right, they charge them with want of a good temper, if they will not be
easy under such tyranny; and with a want of regard to truth, if they suggest
that ministers don't use that power aright.

I would be far from charging them all with this; for one of Mr. Fish's
brethren of as good credit as he, says of many who have taken degrees at
college. Alas, for the encouragement they meet with! No sooner do these light,
airy, fashionable young men, who evidently deny, oppose and banter, both
publicly and privately, the great soul humbling, and Christ exalting doctrines
of the gospel, and ridicule experimental religion as enthusiasm, and resolve
christian experiences into an over heated imagination, and disordered brain, if
not satanical delusion; I say no sooner do these young men come forth from the
feet of Gamaliel into the world, and begin to exercise their gifts, but they
are at once invited to preach and settle in the ministry; and there are
ministers and churches enough that will ordain them, notwithstanding the
testimony which the serious, and such as are concerned for the doctrines and
interest of Christ, bear against it.

This is too much the case at this day. We have frequent and flagrant instances
of it; he that runs may read it, and he is wilfully blind that does not see it.
And alas how dark the aspect on these churches! These things are a lamentation,
and shall be for a lamentation. Mr. Porter of Bridgewater's sermon at the
ordination at Freetown 1747. p. 27, 28.


Let these ministers make straight paths for their own feet, before they bear
so hard upon us again, for leaving of them.

Before I leave this head, I would insert a few passages taken from Dr. Owen,
who says, Dr. Stillingfleet denies unto the people all liberty or ability to
chose their own pastors, to judge what is meet for their own edification; what
is heresy, or a pernicious error, and what is not, or any thing of like nature.
This is almost the same with that of the Pharisees, concerning them who admired
and followed the doctrine of our Savior, John 7.49. This people which know not
the law. -- Yet was it this people whom the apostles directed to chose out from
among themselves, persons meet for an evangelical office, Act 6. The same
people who joined with the apostles and elders in the consideration of the
grand case concerning the continuation of the legal ceremonies, and were
associates with them in the determination of it, Acts 15. The same to whom all
the apostolical epistles excepting some to particular persons, were written. --
unto whom of all sorts, it is commanded that they should examine and try the
spirit of antichrist and false teachers. -- 1 John 2, 3. etc. That people, who
in following ages adhered unto the faith, and the orthodox profession of it,
when almost all the bishops were become Arian heriticks. -- This principle of
the reformation, in vindication of the rights, liberties and privileges of
christian people, to judge and chose for themselves in matters of religion, we
do abide by, and maintain.

Yea, says Dr. Owen, I shall not be afraid to say, that as the reformation was
begun and carried on by this principle: so when this people shall through an
apprehension of their ignorance, weakness and unmeetness to judge in matters of
religion for themselves, and their own duty, be kept and debarred from it; or
when through their own sloth, negligence and viciousness, they shall be really
incapable to manage their own interest in church affairs, as being fit only to
be governed, if not as brute creatures, yet as mute persons, and that these
things are improved by the ambition of the clergy, ingrosing all things in the
church to themselves, as they did in former ages, -- if the old popedom do not
return, a new one will be erected as bad as the other. Dr. Owen on the nature
of evangelical churches, vid. Dr. (...) Mather's vindication of the order of
these churches. p. 27.


I leave others to judge how near this comes to our day, with only observing,
that we have seen one who calls himself a congregational minister, not only
claiming great power in the church for himself and brethren, and judging others
hearts; but also claiming infallibility in his judgment: for he concludes his
long story of Mr. Davenport with these words, viz. Suffer me here, to drop a
word of awakening, to all you that have separated from our churches, that if
this confession of Mr. Davenport, together with the truths that have been, and
are yet to be told you, don't convince you that you have been, and still are
deluded, that is, deceived and turned aside from the way of truth and duty, in
the matter of your separating, you may, from your non conviction, KNOW FOR
CERTAIN, not only that you are thus deluded, but that your delusion is very
strong. p. 128.

It deserves particular notice, that this new infallible tribunal, delivers off
the sentence, as the old one used to do, from a fallible rule; which rule the
judge does not seem to understand very well himself; for Mr. Dapenport's
greatest error was, his assuming the power to himself to try ministers, and
then his openly "advising and urging" people to forsake such as he had
condemned, by a judgment formed, (in several instances) rashly, and upon slender
grounds, and it is expressly " such separations" that he condemned and
retracted; and the wrong which he particularly observed in exhorters, was their
being "puffed up." This is the rule that our new judge gives sentence upon: and
in p. 164. he says, Stand by thy self, come not near me, for I am bolier than
thou, (Psalm. 65.5.) is certainly the language of spiritual pride; but this was
the language of separating from our churches, because (as they said) there were
hypocrites in them, which they could commune with. But I think we may claim
liberty of a review upon this judgment: for the text says nothing concerning
separating good men from bad ones: others are allowed to be holy, but the proud
language is, I am holier than thou. Now this being the state of the case, let
us look a little forward, and observe that our new judge owns the separates to
be erring brethren, and obliging good neighbors; yet some of his concluding
advice to his people is, Go not after them nor follow them. -- How can you,
with a good conscience, after I have shown you from whence they arose, their
principles, spirit and tendency? They are separates; let them be so, let them
alone. p. 191.

Another article that Mr. D. confessed was his following impulses or
impressions, as a rule of conduct, whether they came with or without a text of
scripture; and neglecting to observe the analogy of scripture. This Mr. F.
declares to be our case, p. 140. and by others, all inside religion is often
treated with contempt under those names; as if none followed unreasonable
impressions, but those who are zealous in religion; whereas all men are more or
less guilty of such conduct: therefore I will insert bishop Burnet's thoughts
thereon, who says, There is a tyranny in most men's nature, which makes them
desire to subdue all others, by the strength of their understanding; -- this
imperious temper when it works upon subjects of religion, finds somewhat to
raise its spleen, that was of itself imperious enough before; and that which is
called fury and rage, when it is employed in other disputes, comes to be called
zeal, when it is turned toward the theories that relate to another world. But
when we consider what a sublime thing divine truth is, and what a poor low
thing the mind of man is, we shall see cause to blunt a little the edge of our
spirits, if they are too sharp in such matters. Man is much governed by fancy,
and fancy follows the texture of the animal spirits, which render many more
capable of apprehending objects, that are some way proportioned to them, and
more disposed to follow them; so that temper prepares men for some opinions,
and prepossesses them against others. With the greatest part of mankind,
education is so powerful that they are scarce ever able to overcome it; and if
education and temper have hit together, it will require a very extraordinary
elevation to rescue a man from their force. Preface to bishop Burnet's
translation of Lactantious's history of persecutors, 1687.


Let our antagonist duly consider this, and we shall hope to see him treat his
brethren in another manner than he has done, concerning their leaving the ways
that education inclines him to persist in. I shall finish Mr. Davenport's
affair with remarking, that though our author mentions his burning of books, and
attempting the same concerning clothes, and ornaments at New London; Which was
on March 6th and 7th, 1743.
yet he seems hardly sensible wherein the greatest mistake lay, in them
transactions; which according to my weak apprehension was, in venting their
resentment against things without, and not regarding what was within as they
ought: for if we could burn all the idols, books or heretics in the world, it
would avail us nothing, without charity in our own souls, which rejoiceth not
in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth. It is high time to come to treat a
little,

VI. Of the Manner of preaching.
MR Fish says, Writing down all that is judged expedient to deliver, at that
time, and praying for assistance in delivering, is no way inconsistent, but
incumbent duty. Eccl. 12.9, 10. Because the preacher was wise, he still taught
the people knowledge, yea he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order
many proverbs. The preacher sought to find out acceptable words, and that which
was written was upright, even words of truth. Answer, Solomon wrote his
proverbs and speeches, in order to spread them through the world, but who ever
thought that he read his prayer, and sermon at the dedication of the temple, 1
Kin. 8.? or his other speeches to the people. When writing for the press, and
writing for the pulpit, can be proved to be equal, then this text may serve the
turn it is brought for, and not 'till then. Forty five years ago Mr. Stoddard
called this reading of sermons a " late practice of some ministers;" 'twas an
upstart notion then, and he gives these reasons against it, viz. 1. It was not
the manner of the prophets and apostles. Barak read the roll that was written
from the mouth of Jeremiah; but Jeremiah was not wont to read his prophecies.
It was the manner of the Jews to read the scriptures in the synagogues; but
after that, it was their way to instruct and exhort men, not from any written
copy: Act. 13.15. Luke 4.17, 20.

2. " The reading of sermons is a dull way of preaching." Sermon called the
defects of preachers reproved 2d edition p. 15, 16.
And Dr. Watts says, A paper with the most pathetic lines written upon it, has
no fear nor hope, no zeal or compassion; it is conscious of no design, nor has
any solicitude for the success: and a mere reader, who coldly tells the people
what his paper says, seems to be as void of all these necessary qualifications,
as his paper is. Miscellaneous thoughts p. 106.
Yet old Mr. John Cotton, one of the first teachers in Boston, goes beyond
these later divines, and says, The reading of a sermon for preaching, is a
sinful manner of preaching; the difference will ever hold, between the word
read, and preached: they are two distinct ordinances. Mr. Cotton's answer to
Mr. Ball, p. 43. vid the end of Stoddard's sermon.
And I think these two reasons may evince the truth of his sentence: viz.

1. This reading method is a principal means of upholding ignorant and false
men in a way of imposing on mankind. We have proof by various evidences, that
several scholars in our colleges, both formerly and laterly, who either wanted
a capacity or an inclination for learning, have practiced the getting others to
make their lessons for them; and so by the use of notes they learn to impose
upon their tutors at college, and upon the people after they come from it.
Hence,

2. It has a natural tendency to make the word of God of none effect, which
requires saints to know their teachers, and to esteem them very highly in
love, for their works sake, 1 These. 5.12, 13. Whereas in this way, though people
may sometimes know that their minister reads other men's works; yet how can they
ever know when they read their own? One distinguishing character of false
teachers is, that they have men's persons in admiration, because of advantage:
and so instead of knowing and esteeming ministers for their works-sake, they
would have their persons in admiration for the sake of their great swelling
words and sounding titles. These are murmurers and complainers, who often
deliver hard speeches against the members of Christ. Jud^ 15, 16.

I heartily concur with the sentiments of an eminent minister in London above
20 years ago, who said, Paul's advice to Timothy is, meditate on these things,
give thyself wholly unto them. 1 Timothy 4.15. You will find it in spirituals, as
it is in temporals, the diligent hand makes rich. He that makes no preparation
before hand, what he should say to his people, tempts God to come out of his
ordinary way to his assistance, as he that trusts wholly to his own
preparations, makes a god of his gifts. Mr. John Hill's sermons, p. 215.
These words were delivered in an ordination sermon, from Luke 12.42, 43. where
ministers are called stewards; and as such they ought diligently to improve all
the advantages which are given them, to treasure up knowledge of divine truth;
and ever to trust in God for direction and assistance to bring forth out of
their treasure things new and old, as any occasion calls.

The method of true ministers, both in the jewish and christian church, always
was to preach by faith. 2 Cor. 4.13. We having the same spirit of faith, as it
is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken: we also believe, and
therefore speak. I am sensible that many will own that when a minister has
faith in exercise, he can preach better without notes than with them, who yet
say, he ought to have them, because he may be shut up. Others turn off the text
now cited to extraordinary times; while both of these insist upon Christ's
promise, Do I am with you always, as the main proof of their notion of
ministerial authority. Such confused work do men make with the bible! One while
that promise shall entail Christ's presence to such teachers as men have heaped
to themselves; and yet upon another turn, these same men are afraid he will not
be with them, and so have sought out inventions, to get along without him. This
brings us to speak,

VII. Of the way of Ministers Support.
WE are often told that they which preach the gospel, should live of the
gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14. but as often, as many have read this text to others, it
seems as though they had never yet road it to themselves; for the common practice
of our land says, "They which preach the gospel shall live of the law:" yea,
and not the law of God, but by the law of man; and however pious the persons
might be who first made the law; I think the evidences that have been before
exhibited, prove that the law in it self is of such a nature, as that which we
read of in Psalm. 94.20. For though some may think that those spoiling of goods,
and haling men and women to prison, which we have seen, is only an abuse of the
law; yet a little reflection may convince them of their mistake, and that the
use of it carries those things in its very nature. The great design of the law,
is to make all the inhabitants of the town or parish, pay what the rulers say
is their part toward the incumbent ministers support; and the natural language
of all that are attached to that way is, If others are not made to do their
part, I will not do mine, and where all the people love to have it so, they may
get along without such open violence: but when any happen to be convinced that
the way is wrong, and so will not give what is required, they are naturally led
to take it by force. God said of the priests, who practiced so formerly, that
their sin was very great, 1 Samuel 2.16.17. And how vain is it, for men to say
otherwise of such practice now?

Many plead in this case, that promise to the church, that Kings shall be her
nursing fathers, and Queens her nursing mothers. But what an odd story would it
be, for any to tell of very kind parents, who manifested such a tender regard
for their children, that they would rob one child of his food, or cast him into
a dungeon, to uphold another in grandeur! Power must be exerted in families or
kingdoms to restrain one person or community from injuring another; but nothing
can bring any to act aright in the performance or support of divine worshp, but
light and truth. Hence when the place and furniture for worship, was to be
provided in the wilderness with costly materials; though the great lawgiver,
could infallibly have prescribed each man's part by law, if he had been pleased
so to do; yet he took another method. For Moses spoke unto all the congregation
of the children of Israel saying, This is the thing which the Lord commanded,
saying, Take ye from among you an offering unto the Lord: whosoever is of a
willing heart, let him bring it, an offering of the Lord; gold, silver, etc.
Exodus 35.4, 5. So when the temple was to be built, David appeared as a nursing
father in Israel, and set his affection to the house of his God, in such a
manner, that of his own proper goods, he gave thereto, three thousand talents
of gold, and seven thousand talents of refined silver: and by his instruction
and example, he moved other fathers and rulers to offer willingly for the
house, above 5000 talents of gold, and a 10,000 talents of silver, beside great
preparations of other materials. 1 Chronicles. 29.3 -- 7. This was the method which
was taken to prepare a place for worship, both in the wilderness, and in the
promised land. And as to the performance of worship, the constant Languague of
the divine direction was, that every person of all ranks should bring-his
offering, which God had prescribed. And though I know but little, yet in all that
has been said upon these controversies, I never could see any proof from the
bible of any allowance of the use of coercive power, to compel any to bring
their offering, even under the law, where church and state were one: how much
less then can it be warrantable under the gospel, where Christ's kingdom is not
of this world? Do ye not know, that they which minister about holy things, live
of the things of the temple? and they which wait at the altar, are partakers
with the altar? EVEN SO has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the
gospel, should live of the gospel. Live or the gospel (as one observes) not of
the act of civil authority, not of a certain bargain made with the people,
containing a bond of stipulation: but this is the order of it; those whom
Christ sends, profit the people, and the church becomes bountiful, and the
fruit the gospel produces maintains the preachers of it.

Paul in speaking of its effects among the Phillippians says, Not because I
desire a gift: but I desire fruit that may abound to your account. Phil. 4.17.
And he says to the Galatians, Let him that is taught in the word, communicate
unto him that teaches, in all good things: be not deceived, God is not mocked.
Gal. 6.6, 7. The manner as well as matter of this duty is ordained by him; and
he will not be mocked, Where men's fear toward God is taught by the precepts of
men, (Isa. 29.13.) there ministers and people will be principally concerned to
secure their own interest: but when creatures are taken out of the way, and
souls realize that all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of Him with
whom we all have to do; a regard to him will engage ministers to watch for
souls, as those who must give account, and to labor to support the weak, and
suffer all things, rather than hinder the gospel of Christ. Act. 20.28. -- 35.
1 Cor. 9.12. And a like view will engage people to know and esteem true
ministers, and not watch for their halting, but endeavor to stir them up to be
fulfilling their ministry, and also freely to communicate of their carnal
things to them, 1 These. 5.12, 13. Col. 4.17. 1 Cor. 9.11. Indeed, instead of
beating our fellow servants, each one would be concerned to approve himself to
his heavenly master, by a right improvement of all the spiritual or temporal
gifts, they are made stewards of; and to stir up each other thereto; by the use
of all gospel means; and leave courts, con^ables and prisons to be used to
discipline the lawless world. 1 Cor. 6.1 Tim. 1.9.
but takes notice of the ways of all those, who pay no regard to his command in
this respect, and also of those who conceit they have found a better way for
its performance, than that which God has prescribed; and he will deal with each
of them according to their works.

I am sensible that this is a darling point with many, who will make a dreadful
noise about consequences: and in particular, they often tell us, that, If it
was not for this support of religion by law, a great part of the people would
be mere heathens. Ah! that is a dreadful thing indeed! But who are heathens?
Paul's account of them is, that they had some knowledge of the truth, and yet
did not practice agreeable to it, but held the truth in unrighteousness; and
when they knew God, they glorified him not AS GOD Romans 1.18, 19.
Such were heathens in Paul's day; but things are so much changed since, that
we have a generation of christians now, who pay so little regard to God's
authority, that few of them would do any thing to support their teachers, if
man's authority was not exerted in the affair. The Lord says, I love judgment,
I hate robbery for burnt-offering. Now this is in a prophecy which Jesus
expressly applied to the gospel days; Isai. 61.8. Luke 4.22
and herein is a promise that Zion's mourners shall be comforted, and
strengthened to build the old wastes, and repair the waste cities, (or churches)
the desolations of many generations; and that Christ's ministers shall be
honored and liberally supported among the gentiles; and to prevent mistakes
about he manner of doing it, he immediately adds, I the Lord love judgment, I
hate robbery for burnt-offering, and I will direct their work in TRUTH, Isai.
61.1 -- 8. The priests were supported of old out of the offerings of the
people; even to has the Lord ordained, concerning his ministers now: but men
have ordained the contrary, and rob others, yea even the widow and fatherless,
to uphold the name of religion, and so think to cover themselves from the
reproach and wrath, which is coming on the heathen. Such people outdo Saul; for
he forced himself and offered, but they must needs force their neighbors to
offer. It is a duty incumbent upon all to exhort and stir up one another to
every gospel practice, in our several stations; and many will tell us that it is
an indifferent thing as to the manner of ministers support, if the duty is but
performed: so Saul in another case thought he had performed the commandment of
the Lord, because he had destroyed all, except the best of the sheep and oxen;
and they were proposed for a sacrifice to God: and when he is blamed for it, he
says the people spared them. Take notice of what a good design he had, to
maintain divine worship; and how fair his plea was; for the work he was sent
upon was to destroy utterly the sinners the Amalekites, and though ox and sheep
were named in his orders; yet his reason would say, "They are harmless
creatures, and what hurt can they do, now after their wicked masters are slain?
Especially when they are in Israel's hands, who intend to worship God with
them?" Let our modern reasoners produce finer pleas if they can, in the present
case: yet notwithstanding Readiness excuses, Samuel said to him, Behold, to obey
is better than sacrifice; and to hearken, than the fat of rams: for rebellion
is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubborness is as iniquity and idolatry:
because thou have rejected the word of the Lord, he has also rejected thee
from being King. 1 Samuel 13.12, and 15.13. -- 23. True obedience respects the
manner as well as matter of the duty, and where the word is express in both,
it is rejecting the word if we don't attend to both, and our conduct (especially
if we know better) is rebellion, instead of obedience, and such worship is
idolatry, instead of harkening to the true God.
So when destruction was declared of old, as coming upon a proud and sensual
people, under the metaphor of a sweeping tempest, the scornful men that ruled
them said, When the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come
unto us; for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our
selves. Therefore after speaking of the sure foundation which believers are
built upon, the Lord says, Judgment will I lay to the line, and righteousness
to the plummet, and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, etc. Isai.
28.14 -- 17. And as men often make a mock of such warnings, the prophet in ver.
22. says, Now therefore be ye not mockers, left your hands be made strong.

Mr. Fish insinuates that it is our lusts which move us to deny their way of
supporting ministers, and says, Let the lord of conscience judge, whether it is
not covetousness, (accompanied with wilfulness and disobedience, all founded on
weakness) rather than pure conscience, that enduceth the separates to forfeit
their honor, in breaking their own and their fathers civil covenants, to save
their money. p. 164. Did mortals ever hear such a reference before!

1. If he left the affair with the Lord of conscience, why does he publish such
reproachful suggestions to the world? for hereby we are stigmatized in this
world, while the trial is referred to that which is to come.

2. In the face of this reference to the great Judge, he has judged himself,
that we have forfeited our honor, to save our money, and if that is decided,
what then is left to the other Judge? unless it be what spiritual judges used
to refer to the secular arm, viz, the execution of their sentence, and
inflicting of punishment upon such as they had condemned.

3. Here is a falsehood in the face of his bill, for he charges us with
"breaking civil covenants," whereas we have no contention with him about civil
covenants; the point we are upon, is the support of religious worship. The
offerings of the people, out of which they who ministered at the altar were fed,
were as different from civil contracts, as their own houses were from the
temple. Covenants which are contrary to God's word, ought not to be kept. Did
Herod's covenant or oath excuse him in taking off John's head? But how are
these covenants made, that we should forfeit our honor in breaking of them?
Answer, the majority of a town or parish votes, to a candidate a certain sum,
to come and be their minister; and let them offer ever so much, the candidate
rarely takes up with the first proposal, and though it is often said by ministers,
that the "call of the people is the call of God;" yet it is commonly the worldly
sum that turns the scale. This is too evident in our land, to make a jest of;
and it has produced the same effects here as in the other England, where the
excellent Hervey cried out with his dying breath, Oh! why do ministers neglect
the charge of so kind a Savior; fawn upon the great, and hunt after worldly
preferments with so much eagerness, to the disgrace of our order? These, these
are the things, and not our poverty or obscurity, which render the clergy so
justly contemptible to the worldlings.

It is the majority of the people, be they saints or sinners, which make these
covenants, and John gives this as a distinguishing mark of false prophets, that
they are of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the world hears
them. 1 John 4.5. And the text which our author is laboring to apply to us,
when he delivered this sentence, is easily re^orted, viz. 2 Timothy 4.3. for it
were easy to show, that a great part of the congregations among us, will not
endure sound doctrine, and also that after their own lusts they heap to
themselves teachers, having itching ears. His sense of heaping to themselves
teachers, is, that they are plenty and cheap; and he says of separates, that
according to one grand principle of their churches, every one must exercise his
gifts in public, as he is impressed or moved by the spirit: which gives them
teachers, heaps upon heaps; besides their ordained elders, who are generally
taken out of the same heaps. p. 163 I have before shown that we hold* with the
apostles, that each one ought to improve the gifts which God has given him; but
to pretend that we hold all to have the gift for public teachers, is only to
give another proof of his being a false accuser, if not a fierce despiser of
those that are good. 2 Timothy 3.3. Instead of our having heaps of teachers, there
is such a scarcity of them, that the cries of hungry souls, constrain ordained
elders to be absent from their people, much more than they would think to be
duty, if there were not so many destitute flocks, while none can pretend, but
that there is a plenty of teachers on the other side, whom men have taught, or
made to themselves: and let every conscience judge which sort do most to
gratify men's lusts or itching ears. And as to being cheap, it is no new thing
for men to lavish gold out of the bag, Isai. 46.6.
to set up and adorn false worship, rather than to forsake all for Christ.

Our author insinuates, that we are not governed by pure conscience, but rather
by various lusts founded on weakness: but does he or his brethren take Paul's
advice and directions, about dealing with weak brethren? or rather is not the
liberty which they would allow, just the same with Pharaoh's; go ye, serve the
Lord: only let your flocks and your herds be stayed. "Good conscience men allow
(they say)
"but must be understood,
"To say as they themselves do say;
"or else it cannot be good.
"In ancient ages, when the english realm,
"And popish zealots, placed at the helm;
"To ^stablish that religion: tithes were fixed,
"By canon laws, with civil intermixed;
"Which formed the English constitution so,
"That after-ages cannot the tithes forego:
"And hence dissenters are obliged there,
"To pay incumbents, whom they never hear,
"Which some condemn, as a prelatic game,
"Who yet, by MAJOR VOTE would play the same;
"And LORD majority would claim the purse,
"For his incumbents: than which nothing worse.
"LORDLY diocesan, himself, can claim:
"So these two LORDS do differ, but in name,
"One pleading English laws, for his support;
"The other feigning acts of our own court.
"Alleging law, in a perverted sense,
"To render CHARTER grant, a mere pretense;
"And as if law and charter both intend,
"To crush one church, another to befriend:
"They Would make them mean, the same that Pharaoh said,
"Go serve the Lord, but let your flocks be stayed.
"But if one church be taxed, to serve another,
"No matter whether, done by this or ^other."
These lines are taken out of a letter, published in 1753, by the honorable
Edward Goddard Esquire late of Framingham, who was formerly one of his Majesty's
council in this province; who closed a former tract with these lines, viz.

"'It Is lordly power, not a due respect,
"To the ministerial function I reject."

Our fathers were not sensible at first, what evils these are attending the use
of coercive power to support religion. But our lieut. governor says, We find
nothing in the new charter, of an ecclesiastical constitution. Liberty of
conscience is granted to all, except Papists. Mr. Hutchinson's history, vol. 2.
p. 10.
And Dr. Mather informs us, that in a sermon to the first general assembly,
after Plymouth and Massachusetts colonies were united, from 2 Chronicles. 12.12. it
was declared concerning the civil magistrate, that, He is most properly the
officer of human society, and that a christian by nonconformity to this or
that imposed way of worship, does not break the terms on which he is to enjoy
the benefit of human society. A man has a right unto his life, his estate, his
liberty, and his family, although he should not come up to these and those
blessed institutions of our Lord. And of prosecuting such as dissent, he says,
These violences may bring the erroneous to be hypocrites; but they will never
make them to be believers; no, they naturally prejudice men's minds against the
cause, which is therein pretended for, as being a weak, a wrong, an evil cause.
-- The churches of God abroad counted, that things did not go well among us,
until they judged us more fully come up unto the apostolical rule, To leave the
otherwise minded unto God. Nor would I desire my self to suffer persecution
upon a clearer cause than that of testifying against our persecution of other
christians, that are not of my opinion. Magnali^, Book 7. p. 29.
I come to give my thoughts.

VIII. Of Covenant Breaking.
WE are often charged with this, and Mr. Fish says, The body of the separates
are truce breakers: for whereas they promised, to walk with us in holy
fellowship, in all gospel ordinances, they openly renounced communion with us,
when we the standing churches, were daily attending these ordinances of Christ,
agreeable to his institution. page. 173.

Now in order to view this matter in a just light, we should know what a gospel
covenant is; and Paul says, They first gave their own selves to the Lord, and
unto us by the will of God. And David says, I have sworn, and I will perform
it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. The engagement to God is
perpetual, and that to one another is conditional, by the will of God; which
makes it to be as incumbent duty to withdraw from persons or churches, who are
evidently corrupt, and will not be reclaimed, as to walk with those who are not
so. Some bring that text in the present case, which says of a saint. He
swears to his own hurt, and changes not: so he does, and he will keep God's
righteous judgments, let it turn out to his own hurt ever so much; even though
they put him out of the synagogua, or kill him therefore. God says to his
ancient church, I desired mercy, and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of God,
more than burnt-offerings: but they like men, have transgressed the covenant:
there have they dealt treacherously against me, Hos. 6.6, 7. The words are
expressly applied by our Savior, to those who were as zealous for learning and
order, as many among us, when they complained of his freedom and compassion
toward sinners. Mat. 9.13. And of his disciples plucking ^ars of corn on the
sabbath, to satisfy their hunger. Mat. 12.1 -- 7. And will not the same Jesus,
vindicate the cause of his disciples now, when they go over men's lines to get
food for their hungry souls? which was as I have proved the first cause of our
separation. One of the most frightful charges which our author lays against us
is, That the following disorders, are owing chiefly, if not entirely to the
SEPARATIONS, viz. The Lord's Day is awfully profaned, by numbers tarrying at
home, not finding a freedom to attend any public worship at all; and no
enqui^y is made after them, nor any care* (that I know of) taken of them by
authority, supposing they are at other meetings; for none knows where they
properly belong; others are present at one meeting, in the morning, and at noon
ride off in companies to other meetings, at a distance, it may be to hear the
separates; and after that, go and do as they please; pleading liberty of
conscience. p. 72.

This is indeed a terrible story, but many a Jesuit has told as frightful a
one, about the consequences of letting common people h^ve the bible; and with
as much truth as this: for all the argument turns upon this point, That because
many have abused liberty, therefore we must not let people use it. And though
both churchmen and dissenters have often amused people with their harrangues
upon liberty of conscience; yet, as Dr. Owen observes, When it comes unto the
issue, where a man is born, and in what church he is baptized in his infancy,
there all choice is prevented, and in the communion of that church he is to
abide, on the penalties of being esteeme^ and dealt with as a schismatic. In
what national church any person is baptized, in that national church he is to
continue, or answer the contrary at his peril. And in the precincts of what
parish his habitation falls to be, in that particular parish church is he bound
to communicate in all ordinances of worship. Dr. Owens guide to church
fellowship and order, p. 4, 5.
This is the sentence of the same author that Mr. Fish quotes, the most of any
one when he is showing the attempts which the gates of hell makes against
Christ's church. And he must be strangely blinded who cannot see that the case
among these, which our antagonist calls congregational churches, is exactly
like what Dr. Owen describes of national ones. I have already produced the
testimony of the heads of one of the colleges, that ministers would confine us
all to for teachers, wherein they say, That neither the major part of the
members in full communion, nor any other persons in any parish or society, have
any right or warrant to appoint any house or place for worship on the sabbath,
distinct and separate from, and in opposition to the meeting house, the public
place appointed by the general- assembly, and the parish. The general assembly
are the lawgivers for the church, and the parish are the executors thereof:
and we have instances in all parts of the land, of persons who would not
separate from the churches in general, if they might be allowed only the
liberty of going a little further over the parish line to join where they are
best edified; but that must not be suffered, lest one minister interfere with
another, for each one must look to his gain from his quarter: and the honor
also of the parish minister is concerned. It Is St. Paul's advice to Titus 2.15.
Let no man despise thee. Answer It Is great pity, that this text should commonly
be made use of as a cover to carnal preachers, and be perverted in favor of
their pride and ambition. -- They interpret whatever is done to their persons,
as an assault against their holy function, engaging themselves in worldy
contests, and pouring forth their malice and bitterness upon all those, who,
they suppose have affronted them. If a Child of God, and especially one of an
interior rank, deals plainly with them, they swell with anger, and tell him,
they are not accountable to him; he should meddle with his own business, and
not reflect upon the sacred order. Now people being very well acquainted with
the churlish temper of a great many ministers, they are afraid to speak to them
at all, or to do any thing which the ministers may interpret to be against the
respect due unto them: as for example, to frequent the sermons of others,
whereby they may be better edifyed, or otherwise to converse with God's
faithful servants. -- The way for ministers to avoid contempt, is to perform
their duty with all application and diligence, and by leading a blamless life,
word off the reproaches and censures of men. True it is, the wicked will speak
evil of them, belly and slander them, notwithstanding their unspotted life and
conversation; but it is no more, than smoke dissipated by the sun, and their
calumny will soon vanish away; for when they are known, no body will believe
them any more; but Christ's own lambs will then put an high value and esteem
upon the ministers of Christ. Dr. Franks's treatise against the fear of man. p,
91, 92, 93. Again he says, Every one ought to examine himself, whether he comes
truly in the Name of Christ; whether he be sent by him, and keep close to the
word of God; or whether, instead of God's word, he entertain his hearers with
fine critical remarks, histories, symbols, flourishes of wit, flowers of
oratory, and other suchlike human inventions; yea, whether he does in his
sermons wholly pervert God's ordinance by rejecting and calumniating those who
desire heartly to govern their lives by the gospel of Christ. He that hears
such a railer, does not hear Christ, but the Devil himself. p. 94. A farthing
is not despised, because we value it as a farthing; for it is coined for no
more* the same is the case, when we value an idle babbler according to his
worth. p. 89.


A glaring proof of this, has lately been exposed to the public. A number of
people in one part of Ipswich, withdrew from a minister, who openly appeared
against the revival of religion, above 20 years ago, and embodied into a
church, and made choice of Mr. John Cleaveland for their pastor; who had been
expelled out of college, as related before: yet a number of ministers, who were
friends to that revival, assisted in his ordination, and so received that
church into fellowship with the standing churches, and they afterward were set
off as a distinct society, by the general court. But as they were blessed with
a wonderful work of conviction and conversion among them four years ago, many
from neighboring parishes, who had received soul-deliverance there, were
desirous of joining to that church, and were accordingly received; which gave
so great offense that many neighboring ministers who owned it to be a good
work, yet have now refused communion with Mr. Cleaveland and his church, only
because they receive members over parish lines. A distinct narrative of these
things he published to the world, last summer. So that all the pretense of
liberty of conscience in our land, comes to the same issue that Dr. Owen speaks
of, even liberty to join with the parish church, or be esteemed a schismatic.

I heartily concur with him that, causeless separations from established
churches, walking according to the order of the gospel (though perhaps failing in
the practice of some things of small concernment) is no small sin: but
separation from the sinful practices and disorderly walkings, and false
unwarranted ways of worship in any, is to fulfill the precept of not partaking
in other men's sins. E^chol p. 37.
But (as he says elsewhere) Guide to fellowship p. 23.
an old opinion of the unlawfulness of separation from a church, on the account
of the mixture of wicked men in it, is made a scarecrow to frighten men from
attempting the reformation of the greatest evils. Again he says, churches are
not such sacred machines as some suppose, erected and acted for the outward
interest and advantage of any sort of men; but only means of the edification of
believers, which they are bound to make use of, in obedience unto the commands
of Christ, and no otherwise. Guide to fellowship, p. 71.
Once "more he says, A minister enabled by spiritual gifts, and engaged by
sense of duty to labor constantly in the use of all means appointed by Christ,
for the edification of the church, or increase of his mystical body, is
required in such a church, as a believer may conscientiously join himself unto.
And where it is otherwise, let men cry out of schism and faction whilst they
please, Jesus Christ will acquit his disciples, in the exercise of their
liberty, and accept them in the discharge of their duty. ibid. p. 37.
Thus far the great Dr. Owen; who immediately adds, that, If it be said, that
if all men be thus allowed to judge of what is best for their own edification,
and to act according unto the judgment which they make, they will be
continually parting from one church unto another, until all things are filled
with disturbance and confusion; I say, (1.) That the contrary assertion,
namely, that men are not allowed to judge what is meet and best for their own
edification, or not to act according to the judgment they make herein, may
possibly keep up some churches, but is the ready way to destroy all religion.
(2.) That many of those by whom this liberty is denied unto professing
christians, yet do indeed take it for granted, that they have such a liberty,
and that it is their duty to make use of it: for what are all the contests
between the church of Rome, and the church of England, so far as christians
that are not churchmen, are concerned in them? is it not in, whether of these
churches edification may be best obtained? If this be not the ball between us,
I know not what is. -- (3.) All christians, actually do so; they do judge for
themselves, unless they are brutish; they do act according unto that judgment,
unless they are hardened in sin, and therefore who do not so are not to be
esteemed disciples of Christ. To suppose that all things of spiritual and
eternal concernment, that men are not determined and acted, every one by his
own judgment, is an imagination of men who think but little of what they are,
or do, or say, or write. Even those who shut their eyes against the light, and
follow in the herd, resolving not to enquire into any of these things, do it,
because they judge it is best for them so to do. (4.) It is commonly
acknowledged by protestants, that private christians have a judgment of
discretion in things of religion. The term was invented to grant them some
liberty of judgment, in opposition unto the blind obedience required by the
church of Rome, but withal to put a restraint upon it, and a distinction of
some superior judgment, it may be, in the church or others. -- But to allow men
a judgment of discretion, and not to grant it their duty to act according unto
that judgment, is to oblige them to be fools, and to act, not discreetly, at
least not according unto their own discretion. (5.) The same is to be spoken of
gospel discipline, without which neither can the duties of church societies be
observed, nor the ends of them attained. The neglect, the loss, the abuse
hereof, is that which has ruined the glory of the christian religion in the
world, and brought the whole profession of it into confusion. Hereon have the
fervency and sincerity of true evangelical, mutual love been abated, yea,
utterly lost: for that love which Jesus Christ requires among his disciples,
is such as never was in the world before, amongst men, nor can be in the world,
but on the principles of the gospel, and faith therein. Therefore it is called
his new-commandment. The continuation of it amongst the generality of
christians, is but vainly pretended; little or nothing of the reality of it in
its due exercise is found. And this has ensued on the neglect of evangelical
discipline in churches, or the turning of it into a worldly dominion. For one
principle end of it, is the preservation, guidance, and acting of this love.
That mutual watch over one another that ought to be in all the members of the
church, the principal evidence and fruit of love without dissimulation, is also
lost hereby. Most men are rather ready to say in the spirit and words of Cain,
Am I my brothers keeper? than to attend unto the command of the apostles,
Exhort one another daily, left any be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin;
or comply with the command of our Savior, if thy brother offend thee, tell him
of it between him and thee. By this means likewise is the purity of communion
lost, and those received principal members of churches, who by all the rules of
primitive discipline, ought to be cast out of them. Guide to fellowship p. 74.


Dr. Owen has herein given so clear and full an answer to Mr. Fish's charges
against us, that I could not forbear transcribing more than I at first
designed: and let it be particularly noted, that either the neglect of gospel
discipline, or the turning of it into a worldly dominion, is, (in the view of
that eminent man of God) that which brings in confusion and ruin among
christian professors: and he is so far from Mr. Fish's mind, who makes the
separations the chief cause thereof, that he says, Ibid p. 52.
I do not know how far God may accept of churches in a very corrupt state, and
of worship much depraved, until they have new means for their reformation. Nor
will I make any judgment of persons, as unto their eternal condition, who walk
in churches so corrupted, and in the performance of worship so depraved: but as
unto them who know them to be so corrupted and depraved, it is a damnable sin
to join with them, or not to separate from them. Rev. 18.4.

I leave every rational soul to judge, whether there has not been many proofs
already given, that the churches which Mr. F. pleads for, are greatly corrupted
and depraved, in those very points which Dr. Owen speaks of. Our authors
proceedings have often made me think of a man, who had a mind to beat his
neighbor, and hastily takes a sword by the blade, to club the other with the
hilt; when it is only for the other to take hold of the hilt, and he may easily
run the aggressor through with his own sword. For my part, I am but a poor
soldier, and have a natural aversion to fighting; yet since I have seen the
truth, and people of God so much abused by Mr. Fish and his brethren, I must
return the charge, both of truce-breaking, and false-accusing, to their own
doors; for their covenant as ministers, was to feed Christ's sheep and lambs:
but instead of that, how have the green pastures of experimental religion been
frodden down, and the deep water fouled, i. e. the word of God corrupted by
them?

Mr. F's nine sermons, are a proper specimen of that treatment, which scattered
Christ's sheep in that day: and ever since, these sheep used their christian
liberty, Dr. Owen says of sincere believers, That in these persons there
resides an indefeazable right always to gather themselves into a church state,
and to administer all gospel ordinances, which all the world cannot deprive
them of. Guide to "fellowship, p. 52.
by joining together to worship God according to their own understanding of
divine rule; those ministers have been false-accusers of them, even down to
this time. The ministers in Windham county, in their association letter against
the separates say, p. 32. Another of these false and evil principles, which
some have drank in, and others are stricken with, is, that no other call is
necessary to a persons undertaking to preach the gospel, but his being a true
christian, and having an inward motion of the spirit, or a persuasion in his
own mind, that it is the will of God he should preach and perform other
ministerial acts: the necessary consequence of which is, that there is no
standing instituted ministry, or order of men, peculiarly appointed to that
work in the christian church, known and distinguished from all others, by the
visible laws of Christ's kingdom. From this falsehood (say they,) chiefly have
sprung up so many preachers and exhorters who are unconvincible, and will hear
no reason nor argument against their practice. Then they proceed to a long
train of arguments to prove the gospel ministry to be an institution of Christ.

But they might, with as much truth or propriety, have charged the separates in
general, with denying the Bible, because they did not come to hearthem explain
or corrupt it; and so have gone on to prove it to be the word of God: for we
have all along held, that gospel ministers are an order of men peculiarly
appointed to that work in the christian church, know and distinguished from all
others by the visible laws of Christ's kingdom, as strongly as they do, who
condemn us. It Is true we don't fix that order inaccademical degrees, nor in a
local succession; neither do we know men to be Christ's ministers by their
dress, or titles. And it is acknowledged that no arguments have convinced us, as
yet, that any are true ministers, because they have such a spirit of discerning
as to see covetousness, in such as choose to suffer spoiling of goods or
imprisonment rather than to pay what is demanded in an un-gospel way: while at
the same time they cannot see it in themselves, though they permit the widow and
fatherless to be distrained upon, rather than forego any part of what they
first agreed for. Yea, who can discern cevetousness in ministers abroad, who
appear willing to spend and be spent for the good of souls, and make no
demands, but only take what is freely given them; and yet cannot discern it at
home, where they can never have enough, but are often urging for additions to
the sum they first bargained for. Dr. Chauncy of Boston insinuates, that Mr.
Whitefield was moved to travel and labor as he did, from the undue influence
of too high an opinion of his own gifts and graces; and from a regard to
temporal gain. No one, (says the doctor) I believe besides himself, can tell
the amount of the presents, he received in this town, as well as in other
places, for his own proper use. Chauncy's thoughts, p. 36, 37. If no others
knew what Mr. Whitefield had freely given him; why does the Dr. meddle with his
secrets? That other ministers are not content with what they bargain for, is no
secret.


Neither are we convinced that those are following the humble Jesus, who accuse
others with pride and boasting, who attempt to improve their gifts without
these ministers license, and aspire to such greatness as to forbid them: while
they set up youths for ministers, who have not gifts, even after they have laid
their hands on them, sufficient to teach publicly without reading line by line
as children do their lessons.

I have observed that Dr. Chauncy himself owns, that it is a real service to the
cause of Christ to expose the characters of visibly wicked ministers, and
lessen their power to do mischief. And had I not been convinced that we have
many such in our land, who have been great causers of many divisions and
offenses, contrary to the doctrines of the gospel, who yet with good words and
fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple, I could by no means have been
willing to have followed them so far through their winding laberinths, many when
they meet with the word division or separation in an ill sense, they readily
apply it to such as the clergy have stigmatized under that name. But alas!
(says Dr. Franck) we never enquire, who is the cause of the trouble. Not they,
who earnestly contend for God's word, but they that will not receive it, are
the cause of all the noise and disquiet, and therefore ought to be punished:
but where the wolf is judge, the poor sheep always trouble the water. Treatise
of the fear of man, p. 87.


For the association to represent, because we hold to an internal call into the
ministry, that we hold to, "no other," is as unjust as it would be to assert,
because we hold to internal religion, that therefore we hold to nothing
external. And Mr. Fish is more inexcusable than they in saying we are
influenced rather by inward impressions, than by the plain word of God, or
manifest pointings of providence. And don't hold to the necessity of common
learning in ministers; but say, the less of learning the more of faith. p.
139.165.177. For our sentiments have been published by various hands which
express the contrary, and which, amidst all our mistakes, has been in a measure
confirmed by our practice; but it seems to be beneath the dignity of these
ministers, to take any notice of lay teachers writings, even though it be to
correct their mistakes, (a notable proof of their humility!) And the chief
which he advances against us before the world, is upon his word of honor. A
particular description of our sentiments concerning an internal call to preach
the gospel, was published 14 years ago, and therein it was observed, That
holding to an internal call; no way invalidates external ordination: for, as
when a soul is converted, though he has an internal right to all the privileges
of the church of Christ, yet he has not an external right thereto, 'till he is
openly received as a member: so a person that is called to preach, has not a
right to act in those things which are peculiar to an officer in the church,
'till he is publicly set apart therein. And a challenge was then made to all
men to show if they could, That God has let it any more in the hands of any
mortals, to say who shall be his ministers, and who not, than he has to say who
shall be his children, and who not. It was observed that he has given marks
whereby each may be known and received into their places. Now if these
principles were false, would it not have become Mr. F. much better, to have
pointed out wherein they are so, than to have cast out so many things against
us, which we deny? unless he could advance stronger proof therefore, than his
bare word.
I must not therefore let another of his charges pass without notice.

While Mr. F. is essaying to open the separates principles, he says, Their
first minister in this place (i. e. Stonington) was elected by revelation,
which was after this manner. The brethren at a meeting, appointed for the
purpose, having an impression, that if it was the Lord's will that they should
have a minister, he would show it to them, and reveal the man's name, or show
them the very man. Upon this, one of their number, in a vision or swoon, had a
revelation, that he himself was to be their minister: but the brethren not
having fellowship with him in his discovery, rejected his revelation; though he
declared to me he knew it to be from heaven. At the next meeting, and under the
like impression in a trance or swoon, 'twas revealed to another brother that
such a man, by name, was to be their minister; with which they had fellowship:
and him they chose, -- ordained, -- silenced, -- cast out of their church, and
delivered up to satan, in less than a year. p. 145.

As it happens, I was an eye and ear witness of the visible transactions of
that meeting, (for though he makes it two meetings, it was but one) therefore I
will give the plain state of the visible facts, leaving what is secret to
others. Mr. Matthew Smith of Mansfield, had preached upon trial, to that
church, a considerable time, 'till they thought proper to appoint a meeting to
seek for divine direction, and to proceed to the choice of a pastor, as they
might have clearness; and there happened to be several other teachers present,
one of which, when the question was asked about, what should be the method of
proceeding, in choosing a pastor? Answered, that if any see it to be their lot,
they should declare it. But little if any reply was made thereto; and soon
after, this man fell into a strange frame, and then made the declaration which
Mr. F. speaks of: which struck a visible damp upon the assembly, as being an
unexpected thing, and none concurred therewith. And the rest of the day was
spent in worship, 'till in, or near the evening, when some of the church got
into a labor with one of their brethren, upon some of his moral conduct, which
they judged not to be agreeable to rule: and at length he was brought to
confess it, which gave as visible a quickening to their minds, as the other
declaration had a damp: and a leading brother in the church being much
overcome, took hold of Mr. Smith (who was expected before to be their minister)
and told him he was the man to go before them; Here note, this has not been our
common method.
and all concurred therewith: and he was ordained Dec. 10. 1746. and he
ministered in word and ordinances to them, 'till the spring 1749. Then he went
off and left his flock; for which, after various labors with him, he was, by
the advice of a council, excommunicated on July 20. 1750. as I had the account
in a letter from a member of the council soon after, which letter is now before
me. Three or four years afterward, Mr. Smith returned and confessed his fault to
the church, and they forgave him. The man also who made that declaration, has
also seen clearly since how he was imposed upon then, as I have reason to
think, from the account he gave me of it, some years ago.

This is the true state of those affairs, as may be proved; and I leave the
reader to make his own remarks. But O New England! New England! whither art
thou fallen! Once it could be said of thee that, No man became a minister or
communicant in thy churches, until he had been severely examined about his
regeneration, as well as conversation; and if any minister did misbehave
himself, he soon heard of it, and became either a penitent, or a deposed man.
This is Dr. Cotton Mather's testimony, as it was cited by Dr. Chauncy, (p.
142.) to condemn Mr. Whitefield as uncharitable, for expressing his " fear lest
many, nay most that preach in New England do not experimentally know Christ."
Yet now, those who are making some imperfect attempts to restore that ancient
discipline, are thus publicly stigmatized by one of thy ministers, who
solemnly declares he does it with a good design, even to draw their picture to
the life, -- that they may be ashamed, p. 130. Yet as he has omitted two
strokes in the coloring, which have often been given out from the pulpits in
this land, and which have not been sufficiently detected to the public, I will
take this occasion to correct them.

In order to show the dreadful tendency of separations, ministers have often
mentioned, Ward's daughter that was taken from her husband, and John Smith's
wife who was poisoned with rats-bane. The facts were thus; one Ward had met
with the separates in Attleborough for a while, and had preached to such as
would hear him; but he never was received into their church. He had one only
child who did not live comfortably with her husband, and at length Ward took a
fancy that she had not got the right man; and so took her away, and gave her to
another: now though he was not a member with them, yet some of the brethren in
Attleborough, went as neighbors, and labored to convince him of his error;
but he persi^ed therein, and in the event was forced to leave his country. John
Smith was a member of Mr. Pain's church in Canterbury, but after a while he
declared that 'twas revealed to him that such a woman was to be his wife; and
when he was questioned upon it, he said he did not pretend to put away the wife
he then had, but providence would take her out of the way. This appeared so
dark that the church called him to account for it, and the pastor (as he told
me) openly told him in the church, that this principle carried murder in its
nature; but he would not hear the church, and therefore was cast out. And three
or four months after, he went to an apothecary at Norwich, and bought some
rats-bane; with which 'twas supposed, the woman he had a fancy for, poisoned
his wife; for which they were tried at Windham court; when (as I was credibly
informed) they took off such as were separates from the jury; and, to the
astonishment of many were acquitted; and afterward they were married together,
but lived and died miserably. This is the open state of those facts; and yet
they have been cast upon the separates, from one end of the land to the other,
as evidences of the bad tendency of their separation!

However, this is no new thing; it is an old stratagem of those who have the
form but deny the power of godliness, from whom we are required to turn away.
But (said a great reformer in Germany) who but a mad man would charge Christ
with the guilt of Judas? or blame the apostles and the godly presbyters of the
church at Ephesus for that out of their own selves there did men arise speaking
perverse things? Christian History vol. 2. p. 283.


Now reader thou art to judge for thy self. I have joined issue with Mr. Fish,
that the church of Christ in which his spirit dwells, has never been a bitter,
fierce, revengeful, persecuting church: but the reverse. And he has exerted all
his learning in an attempt to prove that the standing churches have that
spirit, and that the separates have the contrary character. And he has advanced
it as a principal evidence of their not having the spirit of Christ, that They
endeavored to draw off every true Christian, and would have left a
congregation behind them, of nothing but hypocrites and graceless persons. This
is brought to prove that they had not a kind and charitable spirit. But if he
had reviewed a text that stands as a mott^ in his title page, which calls him
to measure the pattern; and had observed that the rule given to measure the
form and fashion of God's house by, with the goings out and comings in thereof,
is, that, The whole limit thereof round about shall be, MOST HOLY: behold, THIS
is the law of the house. Ezekiel. 43.10 -- 12. And also had taken notice, that the
terms given to another prophet, upon which alone he should be God's mouth,
were, If thou take forth the precious from the vile. (Jer. 15.19.) And that the
holy spirit expressly commands us in the new testament, to Come out and be
separate from unbelievers; and to turn away from those who have the form, but
deny the power of godliness. 2. Cor. 6.14 -- 17. 2 Timothy 3.5. If he had duly
observed these rules, how could he ever have charged the acting upon them, as
the first evidence that those who acted so, had not the spirit that indicted
them; but that they had an unmerciful spirit because they would not go with him
and others in a contrary way?

Indeed the other text in his title page; ( They are not all Israel which are
of Israel,) plainly points us to the way that these ministers get along in,
concerning these affairs. They confound the constitution of the jewish and
christian church together; and shuffle and shift from one to the other, as
occasion suits: and then charge us with not distinguishing between the visible
and invisible church. They allow that the invisible church contains none but
the firstborn which are written in heaven. Heb. 12.23. But they would have the
visible church contain abundance more; and fly to the Jews, to parables, and to
hypocrites to support their notions. Whereas the proper notion of visible, is
the making manifest what was before invisible: hence says Paul, with the heart
man believes; and with the mouth confession is made. Therefore; an outward
show of what is not invisibly real, is hypocrisy. Mr. Clark of Salem, complains
of Dr. Gill, as not distinguishing between the external administration, and
internal efficacy of the covenant: and he says, A man may be in the covenant of
grace, in respect of its visible administration; -- and yet he may not be in
the covenant of grace in regard of its spiritual dispensation and efficacy.
This is the case of all ^lose hypocrites. And that is all the place in the
covenant which I can find that he has got for unregenerate children. See his
answer to Gill, p. 243.
Thus while they accuse others with not distinguishing things, they turn things
upside down, (Isai. 29.16.) at a sad rate.

The only reason why any beside regenerate souls get into the visible church,
is not owing to the rule, but to man's imperfection in acting upon it. Hence
old Mr. Shepherd, in answer to this question: Do not hypocrites, and no true
members of Christ creep in? says yes: But if they could have been known to be
such, they ought to be kept out; and when they are known, they are orderly to
be cast out. Mat. 25.1. 2 Timothy 3.5. Rev. 2.20. Tit. 3.10. His sum of the
christian religion, p. ^5, 26.
This is the sentence of one of the fathers who composed the congregational
platform: and I know not of a single member in all our churches, who could not
heartily subscribe thereto; and a principal cause of our separation was the
apostasy (as I have shown of those who still usurp that name) from these
principles, even so far as to say by word and practice of the church, what
Christ says of the world; Let tares and wheat grow together. And because we
would not join with them in this contradiction of our Lord, they have
contradicted that very command ever since in their practice.

Mr. Fish labors to prove, that we had a bitter persecuting spirit, because
many called those ministers, Hirelings and blind guides, who were greedy of
filthy lucre. p. 155. It Is acknowledged that we talked so, and thought so,
concerning many of them, and retain such thoughts to this day; and the reader
has now seen a little of our grounds for such thoughts. But we never thought so
of all those who are called standing ministers. No, but still retain a hearty
regard to many ministers and members in those churches as being saints: yet
truth is not to be parted with, for the greatest, nor the best of men. When
Peter and Barnabas were carried away with a delusive scheme of confounding the
jewish and christian dispensation together, Paul withstood them to the face,
because they walked not uprightly according to the TRUTH of the gospel, And
would not give place by subjection, no not for an hour. Gal. 2.5, 11, 14. yet
our refusing subjection, and openly withstanding these ministers after several
years trial, is "charged as a rash and hasty thing:" and Mr. F. tells much of
the wrong manner of the separates behaving then.

To which I would say, I heartily concur with Mr. Prince that, As for spiritual
pride and rash judging, -- some lately wrought upon, especially in hours of
temptation, have grievously exceeded, yet some hopefully renewed are freer than
others from those excesses: and, says he, I never knew the most grown, humble
and prudent saint on earth wholly without them; for if I had I should hold
perfection in the present state: much less can we expect the newborn convert
to be so humblewise, etc. as grown christians. Christian History for 4. p. 405.
But though our author is forced to own, that the separates have considerable of
a good temper and behavior among them now; yet after raking up many of the
rashest things he could find in former times, he says, Whatever good things
they have among them, they have them not as separates: -- The things that I
have told you of above, are their characteristicks, p. 160. He even outdoes the
Jews, for when they were afraid that a good work which Jesus had wrought, would
be taken is an evidence for him; they said, Give God the praise, we know that
this man is a sinner. John 9.24. But now, he implicitly says, give us the
praise; for he says, I know not one principle or practice among them, that is
agreeaable to the gospel, but what they learned in OUR churches. p. 113.

On the other hand his party have imprisoned at least five of our brethren only
for preaching without their license; Mr. Thomas Marsh, Elisha Pain, and Solomon
Pain at Windham, and John Pain, and John Palmer at Hartford. John Pain was
confined 11 Months.
and several scores of persons for ministers rates; beside several thousands of
pounds worth of goods, which have been torn away for the same purpose: yet not
a single instance is produced of the use of any violent methods on our side;
not so much as to rescue any of those persons or goods, nor to revenge upon any
for such injuries. Not unto us, not unto us, but to God's name alone belongs
the glory that we have been thus kept. One of Mr. Fish's greatest proofs of the
separates having a bad spirit, is some rash expressions a poor irishman used
toward him at an ordination, which he says others did not rebuke him for: but
I could have balanced them expressions with rash actions on his side. For at a
separate ordination in May 1750, in a county town, after a stage was erected
for the performing the work upon, and one of our elders had begun the worship
of God, he was violently pulled down, and the stage torn to pieces, in the
presence of the high Sheriff; one or more justices of the peace and the parish
minister, who altogether did as little to check it, as our leaders did in the
other case: and I could have balanced all his accounts at that rate. But I have
no liking to that method. I would speak it to the honor of God, that in later
years many of our rulers have acted worthily in their places, to check and
restrain such abuses. And since Mr. F. grants that the separates are now, "very
peaceable, kind, obliging good neighbors:" it is a public shame to him, and
many of his brethren that they will not let them live so.

PART IV. Remarks upon what Mr. F. has wrote concerning Baptism.
VArious corruptions of the present day, I apprehend had not been opened and
testified against, as they ought, which caused me to enlarge so upon them; but
baptism has been so often treated upon by better hands, that I had tho'ts at
first of passing over what Mr. Fish has said upon it, without notice; but for
several reasons I have altered my mind, and concluded to make a few remarks
upon that part of his book also.

And the first remark I shall make is, that our author takes the method which
many have done before him, and tries first to inflame peoples natural passions,
and then he is pretty certain to get his argument with them: for he says, The
church was always fond of her children, -- And can we now, without horror,
indulge the thought, either that Christ has cast them off, of that the church
is become as cruel as the Ostrich. p. 28. And having spent a whole page in such
exclamations, he then tells of fairly arguing the points: but if the first
point is gained, that the baptists principles are horribly cruel, what room can
be left for argument in the affair? for who will undertake to dispute for such
principles? Satan himself pretends kindness and not cruelty in his inticements.

It is strange to see how great and good men, have been blinded by this
stratagem. Dr. Mather tell us, that Mr. Elliot published an answer to Mr.
Norcott on baptism, and began it with these lines, viz. The book speaks with a
voice of a lamb, and I think the author is a godly though erring brother; but he
acts the cause of a roaring lion, who by all crafty ways, seeks to devour the
poor lambs of the flock of Christ. Elliot's life p. 57.
Now the lion is praised for his stately goings, but who would dare to come
near, or encounter with him, unless he had David's faith? Instead of that, each
one is for keeping their distance, and endeavoring to secure themselves and
their children against the terrible beast. Even so great a champion as Mr.
Mitchel, found his courage fail in this matter. For, when Mr. Dunstar,
president of Cambridge college, embraced the baptist principles in 1653, and
thought himself under some obligation to bear his testimony in some sermons,
against the administration of baptism to any infant whatsoever. Mitchel's life
p. 67.
Mr. Mitchel, after he had been to talk with him, found that it caused him to
scruple infant baptism, which he says, Made me fearful to go needlessly to Mr.
D. for methought I found a venom and poison, in his insinuations and discourses
against paedo-baptism. ibid p. 69.
And to secure himself against so great a danger, he says, I resolved also on
Mr Hooker's princple, That I would have an argument, able to remove a
mountaian, before I would recede from, or appear against a truth or practice,
received among the faithful. Mitchel's Life p. 70.
But how did he know that he was not resolving against the truth, and not for
it? We have his reasons therefore under his own hand: when he had been to Mr.
Dunster's, Dec. 24. 1653, he says, p. 68.69.
After I came from him, I had a strange experience: I sound hurrying and
pressing suggestions against paedo-baptism, and injected scruples and thoughts,
whether the other way might not be right, and infant baptism, an invention of
men: and whether I might with good conscience baptize children and the like.
And these thoughts were darted in with some impression, and left a strange
confusion and sickliness upon my spirit. Yet methought, it was not hard to
discern that they were from the EVIL ONE. First, because they were rather
inj^ed, hurrying suggestions, than any deliberate thoughts, or bringing any
light with them. Secondly, because they were unreasonable; interrupting me in
my ^dy for the sabbath, and putting my spirit into confusion, so as I had much
ado, to do ought in my sermon. It was not now a time to study that matter; but
when in the former part of the week, I had given myself to that study, the more
I studied it, the more clear and rational light I saw for paedo baptism, but
now these suggestions hurried me into scruples.

Though this may have passed for good reasoning with many; yet should a baptist
minister own that he had very much scrupled, whether his way was right or not,
but had concluded the scruples were from the evil one, because they were
attended with confusion and darkness, rather than deliberation in his mind; and
did not come by his own reasonings, but by means of talking with a great and
good For Mr. Mitchel esteemed and honored Mr. Dunstar as such to his dying day,
p. 70.
man, which happened not to be in the right time in the week, but too near the
sabbath: and that therefore he was resolved, that he would have an argument
able to remove a mountain, before he would recede from a practice which had
been received as truth among his faithful fathers. Also that he was fearful of
going near the gentleman who had been instrumental of shaking his confidence
concerning that old practice. If a baptist should task so, there would be
enough ready to tell him, that it was his striveing again conviction, that
caused such confusion and darkness in his mind; and we should heared more about
the baptists being wilful in their way than we have done yet.

The Lord gave this reason to Israel, why they should not oppress a stranger,
viz. For ye know the heart of a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the land
of Egypt. And I find the truth of that word in the present case; for I have
gone through the same hurrying and darkness, upon this point, which Mr. Mitchel
describes, and thought once that I had got clear of it, in the same way; and
also felt the like fear of disputing with others upon it, that he did. Neither
was it any creature that stopped me at last, from going on in that way, No, but
in my retired hours, this question was put to my conscience, (I believe) by him
who made me, where is it, and in what relation to the visible church do
baptized infants stand, who are not regenerated? This I was not able to answer;
for it was a settled point with me before (as it was with Mr. Mitchel) that
none but newborn souls ought to come to the Lord's Supper; and yet baptism is
the first ordinance in a christian profession, and his notion of a middle way,
between the church and the world, I could not justify: so that I found the
mountain to be on the other side of the question; and if Mr. Hooker, or any
others could have helped me to an argument able to remove it, I should have
gladly used it, rather than to be turned about again in this affair; but though I
sought diligently, by all means within my reach, for twelve months or more, yet
I never could find such an argument. Solomon says, The heart knows its own
bitterness: and none but they who have experienced the like, can tell what I
then endured; and instead of help from my brethren, they helped to increase the
burden: for one would say, It was my listening to the baptists, that caused all
this difficulty: while another would be as confident that it was the fear of
men that kept me from coming out in believers baptism.

Often did I think of Job's words, Were your soul in my souls stead, I could
heap words upon you. I see now that the chief thing that held my mind so long
in suspense, was not distinguishing as I ought between men, and the rule
itself. For when I looked into the word, I could read believers baptism
plainly, and nothing plainly of bringing infants thereto; but when I turned to
look among men, so many good ones would be brought up on one side, and bad ones
on the other, and I saw so much of a wrong temper in my baptist brethren who
had come out lately, that I said in my heart, I am afraid there is some secret
mischief in that principle. And I never could obtain deliverance in this
matter, 'till I was brought to cease from man, so as to leave good men and bad
men out of the question, and come to this single point; Nevertheless, what
says the scripture? And there I obtained as clear establishment about baptism,
as any other point in religion. And what I have endured, has taught me the vast
importance of the divine caution which we have, against judging the counsels of
others hearts. What they say and do, we have a warrant to judge upon, and to
labor to convince them where we think they are in the wrong: but to charge
them with being biased by corruption, if they don't presently yield to our
arguments; as it is a violation of the law of God, so no tongue can express all
the mischiefs which it has made among God's people, in all ages. And this
admitting men for part of our rule, is the grand source of all the abominations
in the earth. The first part of the Popes creed is the same with protestants,
and the first step he takes off from truth is, admitting the authority of
apostolical tradition: and the next article is in these words, viz. I do admit
the holy scriptures in the some sense that the holy mother church does, whose
business it is to judge of the true sense and interpretation of them; and I
will interpret them according to the unanimous consent of the fathers. Gordon's
geography in his description of the religion of Italy, p. 177, And upon these
two pillars, supported by civil power; stands the whole fabric of superstition,
which would as certainly fall, if they were removed, as ever Dagon's temple did
in Samson's day.
For wherever this enemy creeps in, among any denominations, it moves ministers
and people to slander those who differ from them, and to have men's persons in
admiration on their own side, because of advantage. Was it not this enemy which
unawares moved Mr. Mitchel to say, he found a venom and poison in the
presidents insinuations. When his church were so? vehement and violent, against
Mr. Dunstar, as to procure his removal, both from the college and from the
town, he could see the evil there; and told his brethren, That more of light
and less heat would be better, for he esteemed his tutor to be a " worthy and a
godly man." p. 68. Had Mr. Dunstar fallen into any scandal afterward, is it not
as likely we should have often heard of him, as we have of other scandalous
baptists? But since it was otherwise, ministers have been so cautious of
speaking of these things, that I suppose thousands, who have used his version
of the psalms in their worship, never heard nor thought that the principal man,
who composed them, openly renounced infant baptism soon after; though they have
often heard the madmen of Munster, cast as a reproach upon those who have no
more concern with them, than their accusers have with the builders of Babel.

Mr. Fish proceeds with the like caution, when he has occasion to mention the
president who succeeded Mr Dunstar, in order to show what regard the ancient
church in Plymouth had for learning, he brings in The great pains they took to
obtain the learned and eminent Mr. Charles Chauncy (afterward president of
Cambridge college) of whose settlement with them, they were disappointed. p.
82. But he never gives the least hint, that the only reason given, for his not
settling there, (in the account he takes this out of) is, that he held baptism
ought only to be by dipping or plunging the whole body under water, which
appeared so necessary to Mr. Chauncy, that he did not see light to settle in a
church where another practiced sprinkling, though he had liberty to act according
to his own mind. Appendix to Robbins's sermon p. 5, 6.
This account of what was acted but 8 years after Boston was settled, would not
answer, for one who was laboring to prove, that the holding dipping to be
necessary in baptism, was a new notion of some ignorant, rigid people. ^f this
be a fair use of learning, which he talks so much of, what can be unfair?

This reminds me of another of Mr. F's exclamations; after he has spoken so
much of the separates and baptists, he says, What then is like to become of the
cause that brought our pious forefathers into this land? p. 182. Answer, the
cause they came here for, was a reformation according to the word of God, and
the first churches, both of Plymouth and Boston, expressly covenanted before
God to embrace further light from his word, as it should be opened to them; and
governor Winslow tells us, that Mr. Robinson, pastor of the Plymouth people,
charged them before God and his blessed angels, to act according to their
covenant; for he was very confident, the Lord had more truth and light yet, to
break forth out of his holy word. New England chronology, p. 89.90.
What an injury then is done to their character, as well as to our own souls,
if we limit things to what they had attained, as if they did not mean to act as
they said?

Many ministers in our country will tell people that a strong confidence that
their souls are in a ^fe ^e, is hurtful; and that they must think that,
possibly they are not right, in order to examine themselves: but in this case,
all art must be used to prevent any scruples concerning ^ifant baptism, before
they examine it; so that they may not look into the bible, to see whether this
principle is right or not, but only to find something to prove it to be right,
and to fortify them against the horrible errors of the baptists. And if any are
resolved still to go on in that way, I leave them with Him who is able to
convince them of the evil of such conduct: b^ if any are desirous to hear
further of this matter, I would give them a few more of my thoughts upon our
author's manner of handling the scriptures, in this controversy.

He allows the baptists a place among the churches of Christ, and that they
have doubtless a number of godly persons among them, but says, We must think
they are in a grievous error, as to the matter in dispute between them and us.
p. 96. And he directly repairs to the promise in Acts 2.39. where he would have
us take notice that, "'it is not said that the promise shall be to your children:
but the promise is to your children," so it is, and as many as heard the call,
and gladly received the promise, were baptized, and the same day were added to
the church, even such as should be saved. And there is not a word of the
baptizing any but such, in the whole context. Mr. Fish says this would put
believers children upon a level with the heathen, who also shall be interested
in the promise, upon their believing. p. 97. And will he pretend that any are
interested in the promise of remission of sins and the gift of the holy Ghost,
beside true believers? He says this is the promise made to Abraham: let it be
so. Paul tells us, that Christ was made a curse for us, that the blessing of
Abraham might come on the gentiles, through Jesus Christ; that we might receive
the promise of the spirit through faith. The blessing comes through Christ, and is
received only by faith. A few verses forward Paul says, The scripture has
concluded ALL under sin, that the promise might be given to them that believe:
and concludes the chapter with saying, IF ye be Christ's, THEN are ye Abraham's
seed, and heirs ACCORDING to THE PROMISE. Gal. 3, 13, 14, 22, 29. The promise,
is of the gift of righteousness, and abundance of grace, which is only received
by faith; how vain then are all the pretenses, that any are heirs of promise,
but believers? The complaint against setting all men upon a level, in their
natural state, is as old as christianity itself: for the very work of the
messenger who came before Christ's face, was to level all outward distinctions
in the world; and nothing was more offensive to the Jews than the freedom which
our Lord discovered toward publicans and sinners; and the Jews conceit that
they had a better claim to the promise, than such persons, was the grand
obsticle in the way of their believing in Jesus; and so was the bar that shut
them out of the kingdom of heaven. And what less than this are those doing, who
conceit that natural birth, or any thing done by creatures, gives them or
theirs any better claim to that kingdom than other sinners? Paul was taught the
pernicious effects of that conceit, and therefore engaged against it with all
his might, and proved to the Romans, that both Jews and Gentiles were all under
sin: to the Ephesians that, We ALL were by nature the children of wrath, EVEN
as others; and to the Galatians, (as was just observed) that all were concluded
under sin, that the promise might be given to them that believe. And the very
occasion of his laboring as he did with the Galatians was because of some who
desired to make a fair show in the flesh, by introducing the national plan
under the christian name: but though Peter and Barnabas were carried away at
first with this scheme; yet he withstood them to the face, and showed them that
this was building again the things which once they destroyed; which things he
expressly points out to be the difference between Jews by nature, and sinners
of the Gentiles. Gal. 2.15.

What then shall we think of Mr. Fish, who declares that the promise remains in
full force to your children, upon your becoming christians, as it did while
Jews? And again that the gospel charter, secures the blessings of the covenant
to children, in the same breath that it does to the parents. p. 31.100. If this
is not building the middle wall of partition between the children of
professors, and others, I desire to know what is. That wall which Christ has
broken down, (Ephesians. 2.14.) and his apostles destroyed it; yet men have got to
building it again. And we are told, that it is for very good ends too; one of
which is to keep children under the faithful authorative watch and discipline
of the church. p. 99. These are fine words; but what is there in it, in our day
more than empty words? They tell us of some actings of this nature in former
times, but now they are only great swelling words.

But should they attempt to bring them into action now, Mr. Fish owns in the
same page that, The jurisdiction of the church reaches no further than to her
members. And he elsewhere disowns the name of a half way covenant, p. 92.
therefore they must be dealt with as complete members: and if they will come
into action upon this plan, then people will see where they are, and no longer
be amused with the name of congregational churches: for this is as truly a
national plan, as ever was in England or Judea: and then he must have his own
question returned, What is like to become of the cause that brought our pious
fore fathers into this land?

In order to show the dreadful effects of our principles, Mr. F. says, we not
only deprive our children of the churches watch, but implicitly bid them to go
and serve other gods. This he says is the consequence, "If I am not out in my
reasoning. p. 99. A caveat well put in; for it would make many suspect him to
be out of his reason, as well as out in his reasoning, to suppose that, the not
treating persons as Christ's servants 'till they gave evidence of their being
such, implied a bidding them serve other gods. Again (says he) by denying their
children the covenant and seal, they do eventually deprive them of the bible.
-- of a preached gospel, and all appointed means of grace: and cites, Romans 3.1,
2. to prove it and says, Upon the whole, may it not be said, of their church,
that it is like a flock without lambs, a vineyard without seed, an orchard
without a nursery? etc. p. 100.

I would answer these queries by putting others. Does learning consist in words
or in ideas? And does not every husbandman know, that lambs will become sheep,
and a nursury, appletrees without any other change but natural growth? and do
persons become Christ's sheep in such a way? He said to a ruler of the Jews,
That which is born of the flesh, is flesh: marvel not that I said unto thee, ye
must be born again. And have we masters in New England, that don't know these
things? As to the bible and other means for conversion, who will say that
children may not attend those means as well without sprinkling as with? And
Paul assures us, that the chief advantage of the circumcised children lay
therein; and none but such might enjoy those means, in the national church. The
apostles first commission to preach, was limited to the house of Israel: but
since the middle wall of partition is broken down, the gospel is preached
freely to every creatur^. As to our author's notion of securing these
privileges to children b^ an outward seal; we have proof enough in our land,
that it is not putting water on childrens heads that will either secure their
adherence to sound doctrine, or secure divine blessings to their unbelieving
souls.

Many, in order to make out some singular advantage to baptized infants, will
reach forward to another world, and say that if they die in infancy they have
good hope for them, but for others they have none; unless it be from the
uncovenanted mercy of God. I wish they would explain what they mean: if they
mean his sovereign mercy, I confess all my hopes for my self, as well as
children are derived from thence. To suppose that the work done, upon the
child, conveys grace, is naked popery, and to pretend to tell of a difference
in their future state, as the certain consequence of any outward performance of
creatures, is not two pence better. We have a book entitled The baptism of
infants a reasonable service, founded upon scripture, and undoubted apostolic
tradition; which was first printed in London, and has been lately reprinted in
Boston, which many of our ministers have been fond of. The author of that
piece, gives it as his mind, that all who die in infancy will have a state of
probation in another world, and that those who are baptized will have a better
state for trial than others. Here is a sacrament among protestants founded
partly on tradition, and a state is told of in the other world between hell and
a fixed state of happiness in heaven, where infants are to have advantage by
what ministers do here. O! tell it not in Italy, publish it not in the streets
of Rome!
Some in our parts have lately said, they could not pray for unbaptized
infants; and yet at the same time pretend to be servants of him, who came to
seek and save that which was lost. I don't charge Mr. F. with this; only take
this occasion to testify against such abominations. Others who are not so
corrupt, say we must do our duty to our children, and leave the event with God;
but the difficulty is to prove this to be duty. All must allow that infant
baptism is not expressed in scripture, 'tho many think it is implied therein;
but we have found a very great difference between the jewish and christian
constitution of the church, and in particular as to hearing the oracles of God.
What godly people have mainly fixed upon, as the advantage of bringing children
to this ordinance is, the obligation which it is supposed both parents and
children are laid under thereby.

Mr. F. says, Are not the reins of family government and discipline, thrown too
much upon the neck of children (there being no covenant bonds to hold them)?
And is not family prayer sadly neglected among the baptists? and are they not
commonly defective in their religious observation of the Lord's Day? p. 101.

Answer, It is to be lamented that these evils too much prevail in all parts of
the land, among all denominations; but I have reason to think there is a
considerable reformation, on these accounts, among the baptists lately. O may
there be much more! A few considerations on family prayer, which I thought duty
to publish two years ago, were at their desire printed a Newport, and have been
kindly received in that colony; for which I am bound to give thanks to God. And
I hope my fathers and brethren, will yet be more engaged by an agreeable walk,
to cut off occasion from them who desire occasion, and give evidence to all,
that believers baptism has no natural tendency to make people neglect the
duties of private or public religion: The joining of these evils with the very
name of a baptist, has long been an engine to guard peoples minds against
looking into their true sentiments; whereas there is no more natural relation
between those evils, and our principle about baptism, than there is between
true learning and a haughty persecuting behavior, which have often been put
together on the other hand. The sentiments of our baptist brethren in England,
who have had long experience in these things, as they were published in a
letter of advice to their brethern, from an assembly of 15 churches, met at
Burton in Glocestershire Aug. 16. 1765, I will give a little extract from. --
Take care of stretching your family worship to an unreasonable length, or
performing it unseasonably: let it not be deferred too late in the morning, lest
your hearts should be engaged in the hurries of business, and entangled in the
cares of the world; nor put it off till the last thing in the evening, lest you
should be overcome with drowsiness, and thus yawn out a prayer, instead of
groaning out one.

Be strict in observing the weekly day of rest, and not contented with
attending upon public worship, let it be the sabbath of the Lord in all your
dwellings: Keep your children and servants much under your eye: insist upon
their remembering something of what they have heard: put them upon reading the
scriptures; what is above their capacities explain to them, and close the day
with recommending them to God.




Upon a close view, I am fully convinced that our fathers were greatly mistaken
in this matter, and the effects plainly evidence it; for, 1. How often can we
hear these children of the church making remarks on the loose walk of
professors, but if they are turned to their own walk, they are ready to reply,
I am no professor; plainly supposing that their obligation to regard divine
rule, depends on their own act; for they naturally imagine that they have as
good a right to act for themselves now, as their parents had to act for them in
infancy. Paul, when speaking to heathens, reminded them that we are the
offspring of God, and therefore are under indispensible obligations to seek
him, and act as depend^nt creatures on him in whom we live, and move, and have
our being. Act. 17 -- 27.29. And he urges on christians, the importance of
giving more earnest heed, to the things revealed in the gospel, from the
consideration of the greatness of the things in themselves; the evidence they
come with; the importance of them to us, and the account we must give for them,
or for our neglect of them. Heb. 2.1 -- 3. These are striking considerations
indeed: but to fix the o^gation upon an act that is never expressed in the
whole bible, has rather a tendency to guard against conviction, than to cause a
true sense of duty; especially if we observe, 2. That when people have a few
outside things, they are apt to think that they are, either safe, or in a fair
way for it: which is exactly the foundation error of the Pharisees, who were
blind, because they did not FIRST cleanse that which is within, that the
outside might be clean also. Matt: 23.26 Many have seen the danger of this, who
at the same time did not see how their principles would lead to it. Mr. Willard
of Boston, after a long discourse upon renewing covenant, in the year 1680.
wherein were included parents and their children, yet says, To conside in these
outward enjoyments, as if they were real assurances of God's complacency, is
not says but presumption: -- And yet, says he, what more common then for the
children of men thus to delude themselves with such opinions? To trust in
church privileges, as it is the most dangerous, so it is the most common
mischief and misery of a people in visible covenant: God calls it, to trust in
lying words, Jer. 74. And it was a ground of the Jews ruin. p. 63, 64. What
then are men doing, who would labor to get persons into the church, before
they have any proper evidence that they have first trusted in Christ!

Mr. F. appears a little more cautious of asserting things against the baptist,
than against separates. He says, Let me be corrected, if I charge them
wrongfully. Is not a learned, able ministry, too lightly set by, and very
rarely to be found, among those churches? p. 101. Answer, several who have
formerly sent their sons to college, have been disappointed, as the clergy have
found means to draw them over to their party; which has discouraged others from
sending their sons. And the baptists in general have been so much abused, by
those who boast of their learning, that it is not strange if many were
prejudiced against such men; yet they have had some that the world calls
learned men, from the beginning; and lately have begun a college of their own,
which bids fair to increase; The charter for it was granted in February 1764,
by the general court of Rhode Island colony: and Mr. James Manning of Warren,
is now president thereof.
but I hope they may never imagine to confine Christ or his church, to that, or
any other human school, for ministers.

In order to show how poorly furnished our churches are with teachers, Mr. F.
tells a story of his conversing with one of them, who held that those words,
Drink ye all of it, proved that they must eat and drink up all the elements,
that are set apart for the Lord's Supper: and represents it as the common
practice among our churches. p. 101. In answer to this. I can tell him truly,
that I have been acquainted with a great part of the baptist in New England,
these 18 years, from Connecticut river to Piscataqua, and I never heard of such
a practice among any of them, 'till I heard it from his book: therefore I leave
him to instruct or correct his acquaintance, but I would have him get more
learning, before he attempts again to reproach those he don't know.

Having given such an account of the baptist, he concludes, that many good
things are lost, and no good thing gained by going over to them, unless theirs
is the only scriptural mode. Upon this he says, Let us impartially examine the
scripture. p. 102. And he goes on to examine the text, that speaks of our
Lord's going out of the water, so impartially, that he says, This text affords
not the least shadow of proof for plunging. p. 105. This conclusion he draws
from Mat. 4.25. and Luke 2.4. where the word apo, is translated, from (...)
from whence he concludes that the other text means no more than from the water.
Now let us not jest with scripture, but we'll suppose a critic, like our
author, had been at New London when he came there to get his book printed, and
had asked, whence it came? and he had replied, From Stonington. Then, says the
critic, you have not been into the town. Yes, says he I came from my own house
in the further part of the town. What lodgings, then, (says the other) have you
by your house? for I perceive you did not come out of it, but only from it?

If this be the learning which Mr. F. speaks so much of, he is welcome to it
all: yet after he has spent eight pages in this impartial examination, (wherein
he says, We choose the mode of sprinkling or washing as most decent, p. 110) he
concludes that he has made it appear, beyond contradiction, that plunging in
baptism, is no ways essential: and says they are, fairly licenced, -- even by
those very texts (as they stand in the original) upon which they rely. p. 111.

I confess it might seem ill manners, to proceed in a dispute, after a person
is fairly silenced; yet I remember they used to allow the Indians to ask
questions, after they had been preaching to them: I shall therefore take that
liberty.

And first, I would ask this teacher how he came to act as he says we learned
enemies, who make havoc of the church, do? whose language according to his own
account, p. 176, is, You don't rightly understand your bible: it is thus and so
in the original; the meaning of this and that text, is not as you take it; but
just the reverse, or very different. He asks whether we must not run back to
the standing churches for help in such a case? I believe not; but I will tell
him what I have once done. When the ministers of Norwich and one from Preston,
joined and made some additions to Mr. Dickinson's dialogue, and got it
reprinted, I sent one of them to Dr. Gill, who had answered the dialogue
before; but when he observed that they have added in page 5, that "St. Irenaus,
who lived about 14 years after Christ; -- says in his epistle ad Romans lib. 5.
The church received a tradition from the apostles, to administer baptism to
little children or infants. The doctor ordered an advertisement to be inserted
at the end of one of his books, wherein, after mentioning this passage, he
charges it as a forgery, there being no such passage in all the works of
Irenaeus; and Dr. Gill defies the above gentleman, and the whole literary world
to produce or point out, any such passage in Irenaeus, or any book or chapter
of his, of such a title, in which this pretended passage is said to be. And
with this, he sent me another book, wherein he declares to the world, that all
the Greek Lexicons which he ever saw make the primary sense of the word
baptize, to be to dip; and to wash by consequence: but that it never means to
pour or sprinkle; and if there are any lexicons which give a different sense of
the word, he desires they may be pointed out.

A second question I would ask is, how our author and his brethren came to
depart in this case, from the general rule, of interpreting obscure places by
those which are plain? It is well known that the meaning of words is most
plain, where they are used in their literal sense, and commonly, but part of
their meaning is referred to, when used in a figurative way. As for instance,
the metaphor of a thief, and of an unjust judge is referred to by our Lord, to
show the suddenness of his coming, and the prevalence of importunity: but what
blasphemer will dare to apply the whole meaning of those words either to the
Father or to the Son? yet in the case before us, all arts are used to darken
texts which speak of baptism in the literal sense, and then we are turned to
places where the word is used in a figurative way, in order to decide its true
meaning. The overwhelming sorrow of Christ; and his disciples being filled with
the holy Ghost, are called baptisms; and Mr. F. would point us only to the way
or manner of its coming, and not to their being filled or overwhelmed therein,
and then says, There was nothing in either of those baptisms, that so much as
looked like dipping. p. 107. What! nothing like it! when in a plain prophecy of
Christ, it is said, The waters are come in unto my soul; -- I am come into deep
waters, where the floods OVERFLOW me, Psalm 69.1, 2. Thus he denies what is in
the bible; but at other times would have us read what never was there: for in
the same page he refers us to Mr. Dickinson's dialogue, who in speaking of
Israel's being baptized to Moses, leaves out all the circumstances of their
going into, and coming out of, the sea, and having the waters on each hand, and
the cloud over them: I say, he leaves all these out, and then tells us of rain
from the cloud, which the bible speaks nothing of. Th^s these men who are so
much confined to what they have written, in their teaching, can read to the
people what God never wrote in his word!

My third question is this; Can they find one instance that God ever instituted
an ordinance without showing the manner how it should be performed? will they
say that Christ appointed the matter of the ordinance of the supper to be bread
and wine, but left the church to decree rites and ceremonies concerning the
manner of its performance? The initiation ordinance of the jewish church was a
bloody sign, and the learned tell us that it took its name from the manner of
its performance, as the word circumcision signifies "to cut all round."
Cruden's Concordance at the word circumci^.
Now if any had taken a fancy then, that the substance of the ordinance was its
being a bloody sign, and that the mode was no great matter; and thereupon had
attempted to administer it by pricking instead of cutting, or by cutting across
instead of cutting all round, would that have been circumcision? I presume none
will say it would. Neither (I believe) will they pretend, that cutting any
other part of the body would have done beside the foreskin. And who will
venture to contradict the bible, and say, Jesus was less faithful than Moses,
in appointing the orders of his house? Heb. 3. ^ 6.

And let me ask those who hold that if water is used in the sacred name it is
baptism, though it be done by sprinkling or pouring, whether they think Paul
understood what he said when he calls baptism a burial? Romans 6.4, 5. Indeed Mr.
Dickinson says, It is most evident that this text has no reference at all to,
-- any particular mode of administering that ordinance, but the plain manifest
scope of the words, is to show us our obligation by baptism, unto a conformity
to the death and resurrection of Christ, by dying unto sin, and rising again
unto newness of life. Answer, it is readily granted that this is his scope; but
do they suppose that learned Paul had such a scope with him as to use words
without any reference to their true meaning? Common people know, that when they
bury a man they never expect to see him return to his old way of living again;
and that when they plant corn they expect its next appearance will be by a new
growth: and how stricking from hence is the argument to engage baptized
believers to walk in newness of life? But now, forsooth, Paul must be thought
to apply the words buried and planted to baptism, when sprinkled and washed,
would have done as well or better! such advances have men made in learning
since Paul's day!

Before we leave this point, I would ask these learned gentlemen how they came
to know which part of the body they should apply water to? Circumcision was in
a secret part, and they often tell us that baptism comes in its room. If
washing be baptism, Jesus washed his disciples feet, but I don't read that he
washed their face: how then did they come to know that sprinkling the face was
baptism?

However I must stand no longer here, for Mr. F. says, to be consistent, we
must unchurch all the christian world except ourselves; yet, says he, as our
religion does not oblige us, so we are not disposed to treat them with like
severity. p. 96. Here then, if we will take his word for it, he and his
brethren have much more charity than the poor rigid baptists: but as this has
long been an engine to keep people in darkness, I shall, as help may be
offered, freely and distinctly give my thoughts upon it.

1. What do men mean by unchurching others? Paul would have every man fully
persuaded in his own mind; and act accordingly, so as not to condemn himself in
that thing which he allows. And he shows, that he which doubts whether a
thing be right or not, and yet does it, is damned or condemned therefore. Romans
14.5, 22, 23. Yet modern charity will condemn all who dare to think and act
contrary to the established religion. Every soul that ventures to see with its
own eyes; so far as they discover and act upon truth, they like Noah do therein
condemn all the world who act contrary thereto; which renews the old complaint,
Thou reproachest us also. And what then? Mr. F. condemns us as much as we do
him. No, says he, we are not obliged nor disposed to treat them with like
severity: but if we read on, we shall find he has told the world that he has
proved beyond contradiction that we are wrong, and has fairly silenced us, and
therefore has warned all not to hear us any more: and what separate or baptist
in New England, has done more or so much as this toward unchurching any other
sect whatsoever?

Will he admit any into his community without he thinks they are baptized; or
without they will conform to the orders of his church? I believe not. And if we
have not the same liberty, where is liberty of conscience gone? If he thinks
our consciences are erroneous; we are as fully persuaded his is so; and we are
laboring to convince each other: and does not he unchurch us, as much as we do
hi^? Indeed he gives it in his preface, as a great reason of his writing, that
two thirds of his people have left him: but that only proves we have been more
successful than he has: and does that excite his envy? All unscriptural methods
to gain a party ought to be exposed and condemned; that is what each side have
taken their turns to labor upon: and has not one as good a right to do so as
another? Those who creep into houses, and resist the truth, God says, Their
fol^ ^all be manifest unto all men. So that they who are upon the truth, have
vastly the advantage of those who resist it, and need not fear a being
unchurched by them. And is not our author somewhat inconsistent with himself,
while he is telling what we must do to be consistent? for he tells abundance of
what weak and ignorant teachers we have; and yet anon they are so crafty that
he durst not venture his people to go near them, lest they should be deceived
by them. Therefore, 2. Does not the core of all this difficulty lie in this,
that common people claim as good a right to judge and act for themselves in
matters of religion, as civil rulers or the learned clergy? It has a show both
of wisdom and humility to appoint those who know more than we do, to judge and
act for us; and it has more than a show of them, often to do so in temporal
things: but in religion it is a most dangerous snare. Fathers have a right to
see and act for their children in many cases; but in this matter Jesus says,
call NO man your father upon the earth. Mat. 23.9. And Paul spends a whole
chapter in labors to expose and guard against this very snare. Col. 2. He
speaks highly of the order of that church, and of the stedfastness of their
faith in Christ, and exhorts them to walk in him AS they received him. And all
saints know that when they received Christ, they had no creature to see for
them, but each soul acted as singly toward God, as if there had not been
another person in the world: well says the apostle, So walk in him: rooted and
built up in him, and stablished in the faith, AS YE have been taught, abounding
therein with thanksgiving. Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and
vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and
not after Christ: for in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily:
and ye are COMPLETE in him, which is the HEAD of all principality and power.
Now if each saint is complete in him which is the Head of all wisdom and power,
then they have no need of philosophers to see for them, nor of princes to give
them power to act for God: but they freely confess with their mouths, what they
believe in their hearts, and so their hearts ^re comforted, being knit together
in love, and are built up together, as they have been taught. And as those
saints had received the substance of what was shadowed forth in circumcision,
and had declared in their baptism, that they were dead to the body of sin, and
to the worship of the worldly sanctuary; the apostle says, Wherefore if ye be
dead with Christ, from the rudiments of the world; why as though living in the
world are ye subject to ordinances, -- a^ (...) the commandments and doctrines
of men: which things indeed have a show of wisdom and humility.

Now as this warning was openly given, it would not do for men to act against
it in plain terms; yet those who were vainly pust up by their fleshly minds,
conceited that the ordinances which Jesus had instituted after he had blotted
out the old hand writing, were too few and plain, and the worship too spiritual
to consist with that great maxim, That christian privileges are greater than
jewish privileges were; therefore their philosophy was set to work upon the
deceitful line of making jewish ordinances, shadows of christian ordinances,
instead of owning them to be shadows of spiritual and inward realities: and so
making Abraham's household which first constituted that church, a shadow of
christians natural offspring, instead of viewing it to be a shadow of the
household of God, which constitutes the gospel church. Ephesians. 2.19, 20. And having
by this art got the relics of that old covenant which Jesus had blotted out
and ^ailed to his cross, it has made room for the exertion of all their
learning to write upon it, and contend about it ever since. Mr. Dickinson says,
The patent sealed by baptism is (so to speak) the very same parchment that was
given to Abraham; -- there is nothing altered, but the seal only. Dialogue, p.
17. And Mr. F. plainly holds things in the sa^ line; and therein, he and his
brethren appear to be in a fair way to bring that upon themselves which they
would charge upon us. For on the same parchment it was written, than none but
the sons of Aaron should minister in the sanctuary; and it has already been
proved that when they came out of Babylon, those children of the priests, who
could not find the register of their genealogy down from Aaron, were as
polluted put from the priesthood. And the christian church has been through a
more dreadful captivity since the apostle's days, than that of the Jews in
Babylon; therefore, according to this rule, all ministers who cannot show their
registers of an uninterupted succession from the a^stles, must as polluted be
put out of their places, and that I believe in my heart, there would not be one
minister left upon the face of the earth. It will not do here, to fly to don't
knows and suppositions, because we have renounced the doctrine, of ignorance
being the mother of devotion.

What poor work then are our ministers like to make of it; for when they come
to trace their line back; the Lord-Bishops claim a higher title, and an older
right to this parchme^ ^an they, and are now making attempts to overrun them.
And though episcopacy has got as many or more orders of office than were among
the priests and levites, yet instead of a high priest, they have a secular
prince as their head. And they formerly separated from the pope, who was set up
to answer to the high priest in the old patent: and when we come to him, he has
such a voluntary humility, that he must worship angels, in order to get them to
go to Jesus for him. And what an awful succession is here left between private
members, and Jesus their glorious head?

Therefore says Paul, Let no man judge you, -- let no man beguile you of your
reward, in a voluntary humility, -- And not holding the head from which all the
body has nourishment. Col. 2.16, -- 19. Peter and other apostles to whom the
keys were given to open the mysteries that were contained under those ancient
types, assure us that Aaron was a type of Jesus Christ, and his children a type
of Christ's children, who are born of the spirit; and Peter says to such, ye
also as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood to
offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 2.5.
And now we will turn our opponents own arguments back to where they belong. No
strangers or bastards were allowed to come into God's sanctuary; where then is
any room allowed for unregenerate persons, be they great or small, in this
spiritual house? God says of the new covenant, when the old one vanished away,
They shall all know me from the least to the greatest. Heb. 8.11.

Again, these ministers often tell of David's error in putting the ark into a
new cart which was drawn by oxen, instead of laying it on the priests
shoulders; but in this light, what will become of their invented schemes,
supported and drawn by earthly powers, instead of resting the cause of truth
where Paul did, in the church, which is the pillar and ground of it; or where
Peter did on the shoulders of this holy priest hood? Saints are often called
priests, but ministers as distinguished from other christians, ^e never once as
I can find, called priests, in all the new testament. Men's carts, both new
ones and old ones are shaking at this da^ which is a token that they will all
be removed, as things that are made, that those things which cannot be shaken
may remain. Even Christ's supreme power to govern all, and to call whom he
pleases out of the world unto himself, and the subordinate power which he has
given to them to confess him in the wor^ ^d openly to join in his worship, and
to call and constitute in office such men as he has qualified therefore, and to
remove from office such as act contrary to his divine rules, without dependence
on any other power. This I believe is the kingdom which cannot be moved; and is
certainly the foundation which the fathers of this country built upon; Were it
worth while we might compare notes with these ministers as to an external
succession; for Mr. Hanserd Knollys, and Mr. John Miles, were educated at the
same Universities and ordained by the same Bishops, that other ministers were;
who came to this country: and Dr. Muther calls them "Godly anabaptists," and
says "Both these have a respectful "character in the churches of this
wilderness." Magnalia. book III p. 7. Mr. Miles was pastor of the first baptist
church in the Massachusetts province, and lived near that which is called
Miles's Bridge in Swanzey. Now the man who gave the charge in the first
separate ordination at Mansfield, had been an ordained elder (...) the
baptists; and I suppose there has never been one ordination among us since,
without an ordained elder to assist in it. So that our apponent will have hard
work to prove that our line ever was broken according to his own notion of it;
while we have (...) plain instances of it on his side. Mr. Fitch the first
minister of Norw^ (who was as much accounted of in his day as any minister^ ^at
county which Mr. Fish belongs to) was ordained by the church, 40 years after
our fathers first came to Plymouth.
and those who have now got upon another footing may paint the fathers
sepulchers as much as they please, yet their foundation will be overflown with
a flood: and the wood hay, and stubble of such as are on the sure foundation
will all be burnt up: but themselves shall be saved; yet so, as by fire. This
leads me, 3. To observe that though it is as incredible thing with many, that good
men should err so far as to change that, which an ordinance took its name from;
or that those who practice so, can have the divine presence: yet we have plain
proof of both in the divine oracles.

It was God's express command, that three times in the year all the males in
his ancient church, should appear before him; the last of which times was at
the feast of tabernacles, which took its name from the mode which he ordered it
to be kept in, viz. That they should dwell in booths or tabernacles all the
time of the feast. But soon after Israel had got settled in Canaan, they
altered that mode, and it was not recovered again for about a thousand years;
namely from Joshua's time, 'till after their habitations had lain desolate 70
years. Neh. 8.17. Solomon dedicated the temple at this feast, though as they had
dropped the manner of keeping of it, which it took its name from, so it is not
there called by that name, but is called the feast in the seventh month. 1 Kin.
8.2. Yet how remarkable were the tokens which they enjoyed, of God's presence
at that feast! These things if rightly viewed, would sweep off abundance of
stuff that is brought up in our day, to frighten people from seeing the truth,
or from acting upon it when it is seen.

Dare any pretend that they have equa^ evidence of the divine presence in
sprinkling for baptism, with what Israel had at that feast? or that any have
practiced it, who equalled David for devotion, or Solomon for wisdom? yet the
poor captives who returned from Babylon were not detered by such great
characters, from returning to an a^ct conformity to divine rule. 4. As the
baptists are often represented as the most rigid of all sects, I will briefly
touch upon some plain evidences to the contrary. The reader may remember how
shockingly Mr. Robbins of Branford was treated by the consociation for his
preaching among the baptists. And though the separates set out, and for some
years practiced free communion with the baptists, and the bars were broken
down, so that they were admitted to free and successful labors in many baptist
societies, and they went on comfortably together, 'till by this freedom many
were brought into such an acquaintance with the baptist principles, as to
embrace and practice them; yet that made a great difficulty, and several were
censured by churches and councils, for leaving infant baptism: upon which many
attempts were made for accommodation, 'till at length a baptist elder refused
to act in an ordination with an elder of the other denomination, because he
thought that elder had in several instances injured the baptists and their
principles. This caused hard contention between the two elders, and they joined
and called all these churches together, to hear the affair: which was the
largest meeting we ever had since the beginning of the separation.

The meeting was at Stonington on May 29, 1754, where the messengers of about
35 churches came together; and labored in conference upon these affairs three
days; and in the close of the meeting, several of the most noted leaders on the
side of the paedo-baptists openly declared that though they could yet commune
with saints who did not see light for infant baptism; yet they did withdraw the
hand of fellowship from all such as professed to see that there was no warrant
for bringing infants to that ordinance. And thus the breach appeared before the
world to be on that side.

And there has lately been a plain instance of like nature, among those called
standing churches. Mr. Heze^iah Smith, who was educated at New Jersey college,
came into New England 4 years ago, with a proposal of only traveling and
laboring a while, and then of returning back again: and under this view he was
readily received into many pulpits: but a destitute society in Haverhill, by
their pressing importunity, prevailed with him to alter his purpose, and stay
with them; and when those ministers who had received him understood that, they
turned against him with all their might, and one of them has held forth to the
world in print, that when he received him, it was under an expectation that Mr.
S. would keep his principles concerning baptism "private to himself," and
neither openly hold them up, nor practice them among us. And he reflects very
hard upon Mr. S. for disappointing that expectation. See Mr. Parson's sermons
on Act. 16.33. p. 12.
But we may boldly appeal to his conscience that he would not call it charity
nor a catholic temper, for another sect to allow him only to think for himself,
but not to speak his thoughts; or if he spoke them, yet not to practice upon
them lest it should offend others. And let who will deny others the liberty
which they take themselves; or judge and set at naught their brethren for
taking such liberty: yet the day is hastening, when we must all stand before the
judgment seat of HIM who has eyes like a flame of fire.

The Conclusion.
A few lessons of instruction must close the whole.

1. MAY we all learn the importance of Solomon's advice, to Buy the truth and
sell it not. The end of buying and selling is mutual gain; and he who forsakes
all for the truth as it is in Jesus, makes great gain to his own soul, and will
prove a blessing to others: but they who make shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience, the whole world cannot make up their loss.

2. Let us never imagine to promote the cause of truth by any false methods.
Indeed God will overruled every the for his own glory; and in that sense we can
do not^ against the truth: but for it: yet let us talk what we (...) of
defending truth, or promoting its cause, if at the same time we advance false
arguments, or discover a wrong temper and behavior, we thereby contract guilt
to ourselves, and injure our fellow men. To give a plain illustration of my
meaning. I will mention an instance which equally cuts both ways. In our former
disputes concerning baptism, I heard one advance it as a motive to embrace the
baptist principles, that thereby providence had opened a door for a release
from a burden of taxes: and the same day I heard another of equal note say, The
baptist principles might be right, and he did not know but he should conform to
them if he lived among them, but it would not do to make an overturn about it
among us. I was then at a loss in the affair; But this made my soul cry, Alas
where are we! that interest should be advanced as an argument, for a principle
as truth, and honor as an argument against it! Each party can readily see
corruption on the other side; yet alas! how little faithful charity is
exercised, to distinguish between truth, and the corruptions and infirmities of
those who profess it?


3. Let none indulge the imagination of being neuters in this case: for all
heaven is engaged for truth, and all hell against it; and this world is divided
between them; so that HE who is the truth and the life, says, He that is not
with me, is against me; and he that gathers not with me, scatters abroad.
Mat. 12.30. Therefore though many have been at ease from their youth, and glory
in their steadiness in the way they were trained up in; and others, because
they have no changes, therefore fear not God. (Psalm. 55.19.) but laugh at the
infirmities or calamities of professors; yet they will soon find the reality of
what truth declares, even that their judgment and damnation lingereth not. To
be steadfast in the truth, is a weighty matter, but to change from error to
truth, is of equal importance.

4. Learn what is the real cause of all the disorders in the world. As they
were first introduced by harkening to a creature instead of the creator; so the
cause and nature of all our present disorders are the worshipping and serving
the creature more than the Creator, who is over all, God blessed forever. And
what higher worship can be offered to any being, than to fix our dependence
upon him for light to direct, and for power to act? yet how much have we of
such worship, in a nation where many fancy that both pagan and antichristian
idolatry have long been destroyed? This work is carried on now, as it was
formerly in the dark, every man in the chambers of his imagery. Ezekiel. 8.12. God
is good: and every soul that knows not the true good, has some false image of
good set up in his mind, which governs his conduct and behavior; Mr. Ed^ds has
clearly demonstrated this point, in his Treatise of the will. Part 2. Sect. 9.
yet these images are of en covered so artfully, that they say, The Lord sees
us not. Peace, order, zeal for the good old way, and abundance of such fine
names are often wrote upon the outside of this covering; and the great deceiver
plays a double game thereby: for by this means he keeps them which are under
this cover, easy in a conceit that they have religion; and by their evil
conduct, he persuades others that they are as well without it as with it. Still
laboring to keep all their attention fixed, some way or other upon the
creature, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of
God, should shine unto them. 2. Cor. 4.4.

And whenever the power of God is remarkably displayed, to turn men from
darkness to light, and from the power of satan unto God; a loud noise is soon
raised about disorders, delusions and imprudencies; and all arts are used to
blind peoples minds, and to settle them back into carnal security again. And no
stratagem of the enemy has been more successful, than to mix and confound error
with truth, in christians experiences, conversation, and conduct: and when
their corruptions are discovered, sinners and hypocrites catch at them: for God
says, They eat up the sin of my people, and they set their heart on their
iniquity* Hos. 4.8. And the destroyer of souls would persuade them, that there
is nothing in religion: or if there is some reality therein, yet that common
people cannot discern the difference, and therefore must be directed by such as
know better than they. In order to accomplish this end, many who would be
thought to know much, have often pretended to discern distinctions, where
others can see no difference; while things which are really distinct in their
nature, are confounded together. This wickedness has been as wretchedly
practiced by some, under the pretense of spiritual teaching, as it has by
others under the name of great learning.

It is a fact not to be disputed, that some men know more, and see further than
others do, both in natural, and in spiritual things; but when real or pretended
knowledge, is used to keep others in ignorance, and to excite a high opinion of
themselves, instead of laboring to enlighten and benefit others; that is a
certain token of such persons being ensnared by, if they are not under the full
power of, the wisdom which is from beneath. For when there was much murmuring
among the common people, concerning HIM who spoke as no mere man ever did: some
saying He is a good man, others saying, Nay, but he deceives the people: He
was so far from checking their attempt to form a judgment of such matters, that
he gave them an infallible rule to judge upon: viz. He that speaks of
himself, seeks his own glory: but he that seeks his glory that sent him,
the same is true, and no unrighteousness in him. John 7.18, But as those who
have a right to judge, yet many times don't judge right; therefore he lays down
two important lessons in the affair. One is, not to act as unconcerned
spectators, but as persons really engaged to practice what they know. If any
man will DO his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or
whether I speak of myself. The other lesson is, not to judge in a superficial
manner, by the appearance and show which is made, but to judge righteous
judgment; to search carefully into the truth and reality of things.

Thus the son of God plainly held forth the right which common people ever have
to judge, both of the doctrine and conduct of teachers; and the meek he will
guide in judgment, while those who receive not the love of the truth, but have
pleasure in unrighteousness, are constantly exposed to be given over to strong
delusions. This being the order of Christ's kingdom; hence see what a disorder
it makes, when common christians are denied the free liberty of examining their
teachers, and of acting according to their judgments in the affair; and also
that it is a great disorder to condemn and reproach any teachers, only because
they are not owned by rulers or learned ministers: for by this very rule, our
glorious Lord was condemned as a deceiver, and his followers stigmatized as
ignorant cursed people, by men who were as famous in the world's esteem, for
learning, devotion, and order, as any in our day, ver. 47 -- 49. Nor is the
disorder less on the other hand, when any under a pretense of special
teachings, and divine influence, crowd their improvements upon those who are
not edifyed thereby, and plead their right so to do, because they see further
than others, who they say cannot discern where they are: though (it may be)
serious christians do see them at the same time, conduct in a flesh-pleasing
way, and even not providing things honest in the sight of men.

Some such spots and blemishes have caused the greatest disorders that I have
ever known among any of our churches; and a principal reason of some such
persons being left to go on, so far as they have in such a way, was a fear in
humble souls of speaking evil (as many have done) of things they know not: and
we ought always to be cautions in that respect, for it is like shooting in the
dark, where we may be as likely to wound a friend as an enemy. What we know to
be right, we ought to own, and to disown what we know to be wrong, and leave
other things 'till they are opened to us. But here the case is plain, for C^ri^
never gave authority to any to crowd upon others; and we are commanded to cease
to hear instruction, that causes to err from the words of knowledge. Prove.
19.27. And also to withdraw from every brother that walks disorderly.

It is an important part of gospel order, to have every member encouraged in
the improvement of the gifts which are given them; but for any to pretend, they
have got so far out of sight of the least saint, either by human or divine
teachings, that the saint cannot understand them, when they properly improve
their gifts, is as absurd as to tell of a candle shining so bright as not to
give light unto all that are in the house. Mat. 5.15. The divine direction is,
Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge among you? let him show out of a
good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom. But if ye have bitter
envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth.
This wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish: for
where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work. But the
wisdom that is from above, is FIRST PURE, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without
hypocrisy. And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make
peace.

Appendix.
SOON after Mr. Fish's book was put into my hand, I received a sermon which a
gentleman sent me from the westward, entitled, The holiness of infants
explained and improved; or a vindication of the divine right of christian
infants, to the privileges of the church; and particularly to baptism, the
initiating seal of the second covenant, is a sermon preached at Woodstock,
second society, in the colony of Connecticut, to a numerous auditory, Dec. 10.
1765. By Isaac Foster, V.D.M. pastor of a church in Stafford. Wherein my name
is mentioned, and a few strokes are given upon my letter to Mr. Lord. I shall
therefore add a brief reply thereto in this place. His text is, 1 Cor. 7.14.
Though there is nothing said of baptism in the text or context; and all the
argument turns only upon the term sanctified and holy: which words are used in
three senses in scripture. As 1. For internal and spiritual purity. 2. For the
external consecration and setting apart of persons or things to divine worship.
In this sense the whole nation of Israel were holy, as they were set apart from
all other nations to ^e God's church; and so the place and furniture for
worship among them were holy, being devoted to that use, in distinction from
all their common enjoyments. 3. These words are sometimes used for the lawful
and free use of creature comforts, which God grants to his saints, while they
are going on in a life of devotedness to him. Thus in a plain prophecy of
gospel privileges and blessings it is said, In that day, shall there be upon
the bells of the horses, holiness unto the Lord; -- Yea, every pot in Jerusalem
and in Judah shall be holiness unto the Lord of hosts, Zech. 14.20, 21. Which
words I suppose intend the same thing that Paul expressed, in this very
epistle, (after he had declared that those things were lawful to christians
which were unclean to the Jews,) Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. 1. Cor. 10.31. So he says in 1 Timothy 4*4, 5. Every creature of God is good, -- for it is sanctified by the word
of God, and prayer, i. e. His word gives christians a warrant to take them, and
by prayer they receive a blessing in the use of them.

Now in my letter to Mr. Lord, I gave it as my mind, that this third sense of
the words sanctified and holy, was the true intent of them in the text before
us: and that the Corinthians writing to the apostle upon this affair (ver. 1.)
was doubtless occasioned by their reading in Ezra 10.3. That the Jews were
obliged to put away all the wives, and such as was born of them, which they had
taken of other nations, that were not of their religion: which might naturally
cause an enquiry, whether they must do so now or not? And the answer is in the
negative, for the unbelieving mate is sanctified, and their children holy. And
Mr. Foster entirely concurs with my sense of the occasion of the words, and
also as to the meaning of the word sanctified; but he would have the word holy
taken in the second sense which was given above; and the only reason that he
gives for differing from me in that respect p. 8. is, That the unbelieving
party is not said to be sanctified in relation to God but only in relation to
the believing yoke fellow. But he says, children are holy, not in relation to
any other but God only.

Upon which I would observe, that it is very evident in the text, that the
childrens being holy, is the effect of the parents being sanctified, so that
here we are presented with a number of absurdities. As 1. an effect which
rises above its cause. 2. With a case of conscience, which was occasioned by a
text in Ezra, that obliged the Jews to put away their wives, and such as were
born of them, as equally unclean; and yet the answer to it is declared, to mean
something higher in the child than in the parent it sprang from. For Mr. Foster
says, the unbelieving parents being destitute of the sanctifying graces of the
holy spirit of God, are unfit for communion with him. p. 5. Yet in the same
page after saying, The children of believers are as others, born in sin, and by
nature children of wrath; he goes on to say, They are visibly sanctified, being
set apart for God: and declares, It is such a sanctification or holiness as is
intended, when the church and people of Israel are called holy; Psalm. 50.5.
Gather my saints together unto me, those that have made a covenant with me by
sacrifice. Here old sinners are declared to be unfit for communion with God,
while it is asserted that young ones who are born in sin, are set apart for him!
3. We have a self-contradiction; for in p. 4. Mr. Foster refering to Ezra 10.3.
says, It Is just that those actions that are done against law, should be
accounted not only unlawful, but null. -- But it was otherwise with those to
whom the apostle wrote; for they were lawful man and wife; their marriage not
being prohibited, they might not be parted, and their children not unclean, but
holy. Yet in page 7 when he is opposing Dr. Gill, he says, The question
propounded by the Corinthians, was not whether a believing husband and
unbelieving wife, were lawful man and wife together? No body doubted that.

However I will not waste paper, nor abuse the reader with remarks upon all the
stuff which his sermon abounds with; but would just observe, that the
new testament certainly gives the same sense of these terms, sanctified and
holy, else where, as we do here; and those who give the other sense of them are
forced, all of them, to borrow it from the national church in the old
testament; and Mr. Forster says, I freely own that I know no other difference,
betwixt a national church and a congregational church, but one is great, and
the other little. p. 20. If all would come out so plain, we should hope to see
the controversy soon brought to an issue: for the first constitution of the
national church, in Abraham's household, is very express; the covenant included
every man-child that was b^rn in his house, and bought with his money of the
stranger. These were all in that covenant, and therefore were to have the token
of it administered upon them. Circumcision did not bring them into covenant;
natural birth or purchase brought them in, and being in, if there was one soul
of them that continued without the token of the covenant, God said, That soul
shall be cut off from his people: he has broken my covenant. Genesis 17.13, 14,
27. And when the passover was instituted in that church, the Lord said, every
man's servant that is bought for money, when thou have circumcised him, THEN
shall he eat thereof. Exodus 12.44.

No words could be more plain than these are, to describe the exact limits of
the national church; yet Mr. Dickinson asserts, that the patent sealed by
baptism, is The very same parchment that was given to Abraham: and Mr. Fish and
Foster concur in the same sense. But if so, then out of their own mouths they
are condemned; for instead of excluding half the subjects, as they tell us of,
they exclude more than a hundred to one. Abraham, before this, had 118
servants, born in his own house, who were fit for soldiers. Genesis 14.14. And in
the self-same day that this covenant was made with him, he circumcised his son
and ALL the MEN of his house. Here was but one of his own seed to such a great
household, (but now their plea is, only for little children.) And if we view the
antitype, we may see as plain a description of the gospel church. Paul shows to
the Ephesians, that Christ had broken down the middle wall of partition between
them and the Jews, and came and preached peace to both, whereby their enmity
was slain; and through him they both had access by one spirit unto the Father,
and were fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the HOUSEHOLD OF GOD; and were
built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.14 -- 20

Now if Mr. Foster knows of no other difference between these two churches but
only what respects their number, I would desire him to go to school with
Nicodemus, and learn the difference betwixt being born of the flesh, and a
being born of the spirit. In my letter, I had observed that the oracles of God
were committed to the Jews, and many means were used for the conversion of
members within the church: whereas now, the gospel is freely preached to all
nations, and the lively stones, which are the materials of this spiritual
house, which is the antitype of Solomon's temple, are prepared without, before
they are builded together for an habitation of God through the spirit. Upon which
Mr. Foster gives several cants, and says, he knows not what I mean, unless it
is, "That there is now no means used for the conversion of members within the
church. p. 21.

But if the observing this difference, that the means for conversion were
confined within the jewish church, which are now freely used with others who
are without the christian church, can convey no other meaning in it, than that
there are no means used for conversion within this church; then I despair of
ever conveying any just ideas to mankind I However, when we see how this man
leaves his own meaning, we shall not wonder at this treatment of others; for
upon my saying that Paul takes much pains to keep Abraham's natural and
spiritual seed distinct, he says, Abraham never had a spiritual seed, nor no
other man, the man Jesus Christ excepted. p. 24. And leaves it so. Now whether
he thinks, Onesimus whom Paul had begotten in his bonds, was his natural or
spiritual son I know not; neither shall I detain my reader, any further than to
correct two stories which this writer has published.

In warning the people of Woodstock of their danger, Mr. Foster says, By going
after those who are now causing divisions and separations among you, and
conniving at their wicked doctrines and practices, you will be in danger of
falling into such errors, and embracing such opinions, as will render your
salvation altogether hopeless. p. 28. Then after allowing that there were some
sober baptists in the land 20 years ago, he says, As to our present separate
baptists, it is well known that in opinion and practice, they are notoriously
bad, and seem daily growing worse. Witness Dr. Davis's book, which so far as I
can understand, is generally liked among them. This man was as famous a baptist
preacher as any in the country a few years ago, and what he is now come to, his
book will show, in which he blasphemously attributes all conviction of sin to
the Devil. p. 29.

This I perceive was delivered from the pulpit, which makes me think of Dr.
Franck's saying, that he who hears such a railer does not hear Christ, but the
devil himself; for what could that accuser say more false than this is! The
pastor of the baptist church in Stafford, informed me some years ago of one
Davis a physician, who was cast out of that church, for broaching antinomian
errors; and that he published a small pamphlet upon them afterward: but I never
saw the man nor his book, and it is so far from being "generally liked among"
our churches, that very few have ever seen his book, and Mr. Foster may be
boldly challenged to produce an instance if he can of one member in the baptist
church in Woodstock, or any church which they hold-fellowship with, who like or
will countenance the horrid principle he speaks of.

The other story concerns Wookstock in particular. Mr. Foster says, I am
informed that not long since, there was a hopeful prospect of the revival of
serious godliness among you; that a number of persons in this place, appeared
seriously and suitably concerned about the great things of God and religion,
and were enquiring the way to Zion, with their faces thither ward; but no
sooner did these men, like a destroying flood, come in among you, but they
flung all into confusion, as you see this day, and in a moment dashed all your
hopes of a revival of godliness amongst you. p. 33.34.

Now the plain state of their case, as I have it from good authorities, is
briefly thus. Vanity and extravagance, especially among young people in that
place, had greatly prevailed: 'till a young man, who had been a ringleader in
frolicking, happened to hear a baptist elder preach, in Dec. 1763. which was
blessed as a means of his awakening, and he continued under conviction 'till the
next March, and then was brought out of darkness into mavelous light;
whereupon four of his old companions came one evening, to try to get him back
to his former way; but instead of that, two of them were seized under
conviction; and they were moved to set up religious meetings, instead of their
former frolicks; which meetings in a few weeks increased to several hundreds;
and these meetings which were carried on by prayer, singing, reading, and
mutual exhortation, were made a happy means of the awakening and hopeful
conversion of a considerable number. And though they gladly improved occasional
opportunities of hearing baptist elders, yet they still attended the parish
meeting, 'till the minister there, upon a fast which was appointed for the
purpose, ^ot some neighboring ministers to labor to regulate them: who
plainly warned them against the first instruments of their awakening, as being
the deceivers which should come in the last times. And they evidently set up
the same standard that we have seen so much of before, of measuring themselves
by themselves, so as to read all off for delusion, which interfered with the
order and honor of the old ministers and churches as they stood.

But for young converts to hear, the instruments and nature of that work, which
turned them from vanity to love Christ, treated at such a rate, it only served
to convince them that the ministers who treated things at that rate, were
wrong, and so finally caused a separation from them, and a baptist church was
gathered in that place. The former part of this account I had from the mouth of
the young man who as first awakened there, and in the presence of one of the
two young men who were convinced by him; and the rest I have had attested by
many substantial evidences.

I leave the reader to make his own remarks; and shall only observe that this
author has intermixed with these slanders, some quotations of the most bitter
sentences against the baptists, that he could find in the ancient fathers; it
makes me think of a saying of one of the old Martyrs, Alas! says he, such is
the wickedness of these our last days, that nothing moves us! -- Neither the
pure doctrine, the godliness of life, nor good example of the ancient fathers.
-- If in anything they erred, that will their charitable children embrace,
publish and maintain with sword, faggot and fire: but in vain they strive
against the stream; for though in despite of the truth, by force of the ears of
crafty persuasion, they may bring themselves into the haven of hell; yet can
they not make all men believe that the banks move, while the ship saileth, nor
ever shall be able to turn the direct course of the stream of God's truth.

Sufferers mirror Vol. I. p. 103.

Published by the same Author, and Sold at Philip Freeman's in Union-Street,
Boston; and by Thomas Green in Newport.
I. THE Nature and Necessity of an internal call to preach the Gospel. II. A
Sermon, Entitled spiritual ignorance, causes Men to counter-act their doctrinal
knowledge. III. A Letter to Mr. Binjamin Lord of Norwich, occasioned by some
harsh things which he has published against those, who have dissented from his
sentiments concerning the Ministry, the Church and Baptism. IV. Family prayer
not to be neglected. A Sermon from, 1 Pet. 3.7. V. A Discourse Entitled, true
Faith will produce good Works; with some remarks on Mr. Sandeman's scheme.
ERRATA.
TITLE page r. Dr. Owens Eschol. p. 4. l. 6. fr. bot. r. yet to do. p. 13. l.
12. fr. bot. r. were. p. 14. l. 14. fr. bot. r. questions p. 15. l. 2. r. any
church. p. 16. marg. r. 3 John 9.10. p. 19. l. 2. r. apostasy. p. 23. These
words at the end of the second paragraph, while we are represented as proud
rebels for not owning them as such, should have been in the marg. note after
the word Aaron. l. first of the note r. was. l. 4. fr. bot. omit to r. not. p.
24. marg. note. r. witnesses. last l. r. Acts 1.8. and 6.3. p. 25. l. 3. fr.
bot. add, is. l. 22. r. way. p. 26. l. 22. r. might be. p. 33. l. 9. fr. bot.
r. confessed. p. 42. l. 12. after the word Tutors, put a period. l. 4. of marg.
note. r. the power. p. 46. in the note Mr. Pains name should be placed
opposite to the word judgment. p. 50. l. 23 r. lie. l. 2. fr. bot. r. are. p.
51. l. 8. r. or of. p. 53 l. 4. r. who. p. 58. l. 16. r. to have been. p. 64.
l. 20. dele for. p. 71. l. 7. r. could not. p. 82. l. 6. fr. bot. r. these
words. p. 86. l. 35. r. that in all. p. 89. l. 21. r. known. p. 90. l. 1. for
those. r. such. l. 2. fr. bot. r. have been. p. 92. l. 13. r. confessed. p.
100. l. 1. r. hear. p. 110. l. 11. for licenced. r. silenced. l. 14. fr. bot.
for 14. r. 114. p. 112. l. 14. fr. bot r. striking. p. 115. l. 18. fr. bot. r.
that. p. 127. l. 22. for no. r. any.


