A Copy of a LETTER from a GENTLEMAN (...) Virginia, To a Merchant in
Philadelphia.
SIR,
"I Have read, with much Attention, your Apology for the Merchants of
Philadelphia; and think you have great Merit, in attempting to vindicate a
Conduct, which is deemed inexplicably spiritless by the Inhabitants of every
other Colony.

"One would imagine there has been something very mysterious in the Behavior
of the Merchants of Boston, to have induced you to treat them with so much
Contempt; if their Conduct, since the first Dispute with our Mother Country,
had not been manly, candid and ingenuous.

"You confess, that many of you opposed the Suspension in Consequence of Advice
received from your particular Friends in London, that prudent and pacific
Measures would be most a^^^^able to the Ministry and Parliament; and that it
was dangerous to provoke them. This, no doubt, influenced some among you --
But, in my Opinion, we must look somewhere else for the real Cause of your
Opposition: perhaps an Examination into the Nature and Design of the Stamp Act,
and the grevious one, to which you still bend the Knee, may discover the
lurking Principle, ^^on which you acted.

"The Stamp Act was intended to raise a Revenue in America: (...) the Produce
of the several Duties were ordered to be paid into the Receipt of his Majesty's
Exchequer, and there reserved, to be, from Time to Time, disposed of by
Parliament, toward defending, protecting, and securing the American Colonies
and Plantations. -- This Act, in your Resolutions for Suspending the
Importation of Goods from Great Britain, you, without Ceremony, declared to be
UNCONSTITUTIONAL; you likewise entered into spirited Measures for obtaining a
Repeal of it, which had an immediate and a desired Effect. -- You observed,
justly, that the Stamp Act was unconstitutional -- although your Reasons, for
believing it to be so, were not then explained. Your Opinion must have been
founded upon this obvious Truth, That no Power on Earth had a Right to take
Money out of your Pockets without your Consent, expressly declared by
yourselves or your chosen Representatives. -- Not content with barely
remonstrating against the Stamp Act. -- You also insisted "That the many
Difficulties you then labored under, as a trading People, were owing to the
Restrictions, Prohibitions, and ill-advised Regulations made in the several
other Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain, lately passed to regulate the
Colonies; which had increased the Cost and Expense of many Articles of your
Importation, and cut off from you all Means of supplying yourselves with Specie
enough to pay the Duties imposed on you, much less, to serve as a Medium of
your Trade."

"The Acts, against which, you spoke thus freely -- still remain in full Force
and Virtue; and when you obtained a Repeal of the Stamp Act, glorious as it was
-- you obtained but a Part of your Demand. -- The Repeal of it was well worth
the Pains and Trouble it cost you. -- It was indeed so replete with ministerial
Venom, and proved such a general and oppressive Burden, that Judges, Lawyers,
Physicians, Parsons, Merchants, Farmers, nay Shool-Boys and Orphans, were alike
subject to its baneful Influence.

"The Sufferings of all Ranks of People induced them to oppose it -- Business
was consequently at a Stand. -- The civil Courts were shut, and you could sue
no Man for the Recovery of a Debt -- You were therefore obliged to sacrifice a
very considerable Interest; and you determined to import no Goods from
Great Britain, until it was repealed. -- This was your Virtue! -- This your
Resolution! -- Your Patriotism and private Interests were so intimately
connected, that you could not prostitute the one, without endangering the
other: And you would have been particularly fortunate, if Great Britain, when
she repealed the Stamp Act, and redressed all your Grievances; and had never
thought of imposing new ones -- You would, then, have been distinguished, in
the Annals of America, among her best and most virtuous Sons, for a timely and
resolute Defense of her Liberties; and the Virtues, which under the present Tax
you have despised and slighted, would have been, though unmerited, your greatest
Glory -- But Charles Townshend, with an artful and penetrating Eye, saw clearly
to the Bottom of your Hearts -- He knew, that, the private Interests of the
Merchants were the Rocks against which Greenville's favorite Argo had
unfortunately split; and that no Act of Parliament, for raising a Revenue in
America, could be executed without their Consent and Approbation.

"To this Gentleman, you must attribute the Loss of your Reputation: and it
was, certainly, your Misfortune, and the Misfortune of all America, that you
did not know him, as well as he knew you, -- He imposed Duties upon Paper,
Glass, and Painters Colors; Articles of Commerce, which will prove most
grevious Taxes upon the Country in general; but cannot affect you, as
Merchants: For it is notorious, that a Merchant must have his Profit on every
Article of his Trade, let the Original Cost be what it may: The Purchaser of
any Article, very seldom reflects that the Seller raises his Price, so as to
indemnify himself for the Tax he has paid. He knows that the Prices of things
are continually fluctuating, and if he thinks about the Tax, he thinks at the
same Time, in all probability, that he might have paid as much, if the Articles
he buys had not been taxed. He gets something visible and agreeable for his
Money; and Tax and Price are so confounded together, that he cannot separate,
or does not choose to take the Trouble of separating them. -- Thus have the
People of your Province been deceived into a Pacisic Compliance with this
particular Act, the Preamble of which declares it is intended to raise a
Revenue in America. You did not esteem it your Duty, as Merchants nor as
American Freemen, to oppose it; BECAUSE IT DID NOT DIRECTLY AFFECT YOUR PRIVATE
INTERESTS. The Parliamentary Right, of Taxing America, you thought of little
Consequence, when compared with your own Ease and Safety -- You concluded, that
although it was unconstitutional, it could not do much Harm in your Time, and,
that, if your Posterity did not like it, or found it insupportable, -- they
might endeavor to remove it. -- By such deceitful Reasoning, you persuaded
yourselves you were discharging your Duty; when you were industriously riveting
Chains upon your Descendants, who will have no great Cause of Obligation to you
for such distinguished Favors -- The Merchants in the Northern Colonies,
despised these inglorious Motives: They were willing to lose their whole Trade,
rather than suffer their Country to be enslaved -- and for this Reason
determined to suspend the Importation of Goods from Great Britain, until the
several Acts of P -- t imposing Duties on America, were repealed. -- This was
their Virtue! This their Resolution! -- Your Opposition to this Measure
prevented it from taking Effect, and you may thank yourselves for the blessed
Consequences which are like to follow. --

"These Reflections may appear harsh and uncharitable; but they are the
Reflections of every man, who is not tinctured with the local Prejudices of
your Province -- Believe me, your Opposition to the Proposal of the Merchants
of New York and Boston, although it might have been founded upon specious
Arguments, has done infinite Prejudice to the American Cause; and created great
Jealousies in your Neighbors Breasts; which, nothing, but your determined
Resolution to assist in removing those heavy Burdens, with which they and you
are equally oppressed, will effectually heal -- An Union, between the several
Colonies in Sentiment and Action, is essentially necessary to their
Preservation; and had not my Lord H -- h been informed, that we were dis-united
in both -- he would never have treated the Inhabitants of the Massachusetts Bay
with so much severity; nor the other Colonies with such indignity. His Lordship
imagined, from the Disunion of these Provinces, of which no Doubt he has had
faithful Intelligence, that Dragooning of One would intimidate and silence the
Rest; and his Judgment was founded upon a plausible Principle -- However,
"there are things which at sometimes even Slaves will not bear;" and I
apprehend his Lordship^ Letter will prove too hard even for you to bear. This
Letter is an express Declaration, that the Ministry intend to direct and
influence our Assemblies, by threatening them with a Dissolution, whenever they
may have the Confidence, c^^^^ary to ministerial Mandates, to consult or
promote the Safety, Honor and Interest of their Constituents. I hope your
Assembly will take the first Opportunity to resent the grossest Indignity ever
offered to the Representatives of a free and loyal People, and show no Symptoms
of that Modesty of which Mr. Pit so justly complained to the House of Commons.
-- if a P -- M -- r in (...) he can intimidate an American Assembly, Threats,
nay Punishments, will be made use of to execute the most slavish Maxims; and
the very Men, whom we may invest with Power to promote and secure our
Interests, will under such Influence, effectually ruin us. For what Faith can
we repose in our Assemblies, when they do not (...) answerable to us for this
Conduct; but to arbitrary Ministers, who will always make it their Interests to
oppress (...)? We had better have no Representatives, if we cannot, when we
think proper, instruct and direct (...); and, at the same time, have a
reasonable Ass^^^^ce of their obeying our Orders. The People are to all Intents
and Purpo^^^, Masters. -- Their Representatives are their (...) Servants -- And
we shall be justly chargeable with political Suicide, if we are stupidly fond
of an Establishment, which, on the principle of ministerial (...), will destroy
our Civil Existence.

"It is, certainly, a most cruel Dilemma, to be obliged to sacrifice every
Thing that is most dear and valuable among Men, or to contend with our Mother
Country. -- But let us not, in this Case, distinguish Great Britain from any
other Power -- To Freemen it must be different, who their Oppressors are -- If
Britons oppress us, and strive might and main to enslave us -- all pretended
Ties of ancient Favors, Friendship, Duty, are destroyed: G -- B --, France, or
any Power on Earth, pursuing the same Measures, ought indiscriminately to be
opposed. -- I shall conclude this Letter with an historical Fact very
applicable to the present Subject.

"The Privernates had been several Times subdued by the Romans, and had as
often revolted; but their City was at last retaken by the Consul Plautius -- In
these distressed Circumstances they sent Ambassadors to Rome, to sue for Peace
-- Upon a Senator's asking them what Punishment they thought they deserved; one
of them answered, 'That which is due to Men who think themselves worthy of
Liberty.' Then the Consul asked them, whether there was any Room to hope, that
they would observe the Peace, if their Fault was pardoned? 'The peace shall be
perpetual between us,' replied the Ambassador, "and we shall faithfully observe
it, if the Conditions you lay upon us are just and reasonable; but if they are
hard and dishonorable, the peace will not be of long Continuance, and we shall
very soon break it.'

"Though some of the Senators were offended at this Answer, yet most of them
approved of it, and said that 'it was worthy of a Man and of a Man that was
born free:' acknowledging therefore the Force of the Rights of human Nature,
they cried out, that 'those alone deserved to be Citizens of Rome, who esteemed
nothing in comparison of Liberty.' Thus the very Persons, who were at first
threatened with Punishment, were admitted to the Rights of Citizens, and
obtained the Conditions they wanted; the generous Refusal of the Privernates to
comply with the Terms of a dishonorable Treaty, gained them the Privilege of
being incorporated into a State, which at that Time could boast of the bravest,
and most virtuous Subjects in the Universe."


