SERMONS, OR, DECLARATIONS, Made by some of the ANCIENT PREACERS AMONGST THE
People called QUAKERS, VIZ. STEPHEN CRISP. WILLIAM DEWSBURY. WILLIAM PENN. etc.

Taken in SHORT HAND, as they were delivered by them.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOHN DUNLAP, ON THE SOUTH SIDE OF
MARKET-STREET, THE THIRD DOOR BELOW SECOND-STREET. MDCCLXVIII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IF these DECLARATIONS are well received, (as it is thought they will, by the
truly pious and religious of every Denomination) the Printer proposes to
publish more of the same Kind.

Pure and Spiritual Worship: A SERMON.
Preached at Devonshire-House, Novem. 12, 1690.
By STEPHEN CRISP.
THE Worship of God, of the Great God, is Pure; he is a Holy God, Of Purer Eyes
than to behold Iniquity; and all they who will Worship God, whose Souls are
breathing to have a Return of a Testimony in his Sight, must offer up pure
Worship, and it must come from that which is pure: For that Purpose the
Greatness of the Love of God is made manifest in Christ Jesus; and there is a
diffusing of his Grace and Virtue in the Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of
Men, whereby he has laid a Foundation for his own Worship; because his Worship
must be pure. Therefore he has freely given unto us, through his Son, the
Knowledge of that pure Principle of Life and Grace, from whence and out of
which, all true Worship does spring, and all true Honor to God arises, and
real Obedience to his holy Will springs forth out of that which is from himself.

And therefore all that will be Worshipers of God aright, must first know and
be sensible wherein the Ability and Capacity stands, that may enable them to so
great and so good a Work. Some have conceived it to stand in their own Will,
and according to the Working of their own Will, they have framed Worships,
Religions, and Observations, thinking thereby to please God: But you know the
Apostle in a few short Words lays down a positive Christian Doctrine, Without
Faith it is impossible to please God.

Now this does declare and signify, that there must be something upon which
this Faith must work, that must be the Object and Foundation of it: Faith as it
works in the Creature, works upon something; it lays hold upon something in
which there is a Capacity of pleasing God. Now if we are all by Nature Children
of Wrath, and that no one of himself can please God, then there must be
something that is supernatural that must be the Object of that Faith, by which
Men alone can please God; and this must be made manifest to the Creature for
its Help, for to be its Director and Supporter in that Work, that is too mighty
for himself, too great a Work for a Man or Woman, too deep, too profound for
any Man's Abilities, Power, Wisdom, and Acquirements, that he can attain to in
this World, to worship God aright: To worship God, that is, to perform a pure
Worship to a pure God; Who can bring a clean Thing out of an unclean? Now if we
are all obliged to bring a clean Worship, a pure Worship to a pure and Holy
God, who has created us and all Things; where shall we have it? Not out of an
unclean Heart, not out of a defiled Mind; there is no bringing it forth from
thence, for that is the State and Condition that Men are fallen into by Sin, in
which their Minds and Consciences are defiled, their Hearts are polluted, and
their Affections depraved and set upon wrong Objects; and in this State none
can serve God aright: That which is pure and holy must be first made known,
revealed, discovered and believed before People can perform a right Worship to
God.

And therefore in vain it is, to go and drive People to this and that Worship,
and force People to this and that Service and Conformity, upon the Account of
the Worship of God. This is vain Worship; when they have done all, it is not
acceptable to God; the poor Creature has no Return from the Lord, for God
accepts no Service or Worship, but only through his Son. And if so be, Men cannot
pray and preach in the Spirit of his Son, and cannot present their Complaints
and Supplications to God, but by the Assistance and Help of his blessed Spirit,
there is no Reason in Religion why People should expect a Return and Answer
from God of the Prayers they make: For it is the general Doctrine of
Christendom, That Christ Jesus is appointed of God for a Mediator between God
and Man, and all the Acceptance we have, or desire to have, must be through
him: and therefore if we pray without him, and perform this and the other Dutys
without him; it is contrary to the Doctrine of Christianity to think that ever
we should have Acceptance in God's Sight.

Therefore there is a Necessity for every Man and Woman that desires to be
religious, that has a religious Mind, and is willing to worship God, and serve
God aright, there is a Necessity that they come to the Knowledge of Christ, who
tells us that he is The Way to the Father: They that go any other Way, go a
wrong Way; but they that go unto God by Christ, they do receive from him Power
to draw near to God; and through him they receive from God all those Blessings
that their Souls stand in need of.

So here would be an End of all Religions the World is full of, of all the
several Worships that Men have made: They have invented and found out several
Ways for People to worship and serve God: This and the other Ceremony, this and
the other Observation and Method of Preaching and Praying: If all this be
without the Assistance and Divine Help of the Mediator, through whom alone we can
justly expect Acceptance at God's Hands, it is all good for nothing. Therefore
the first Lesson of a Christian in Point of Worship, is that he come to the
Knowledge of Christ, by whom, and through whom he may expect Favor with God.

Now say some People, We are already come to the Knowledge of Christ, we have
read the Relation in the Gospel of his Conception, Birth, Life and Death,
Resurrection and Ascension: Now where this Belief does give a Man this Kind of
Christian Knowledge, that does open a Door and Way for him into the Presence of
God: This is a Question that ought seriously to be considered, for if we err in
this Question, we err in all; this is like stumbling at the Threshold, and
never come into the House. If we mistake in laying hold of Christ, we mistake
in our Worship, and in all Matters that relate to Life and Salvation.

For if we must have another Sort of Knowledge of Christ, than we can have from
the Reports of others; if I must have Christ revealed in me before I can have
the Hope of Glory; if I must have the Spirit of Christ in me, to help me to put
up my Requests and Supplications before he can present them to the Father, then
all literal Knowledge and Faith cannot stand Men in any Stead, but this is
evident by the Testimony of all the Writers of the New Testament. Christ and
his Apostles did concurrently signify, that the Hope of a Christian, that the
Power and Strength of a Christian, it all lies in this, In that they had known
the Revelation of Christ, and the powerful Operation of the Spirit working in
them; this was that which was well pleasing to God; many Scriptures might be
spoken of, but you know the Scriptures, and can read them, and see in them the
concurrent Testimony of all Holy Men to this Day, that the Knowledge they had
of Christ was a divine Knowledge, a spiritual Knowledge, it was knowing him
after the Spirit, it was a Revelation of Christ in them, that separated and
distinguished them from Reprobates, even the Knowledge of God through Jesus
Christ their Lord: Why should not we come to this Knowledge as well as they?
The Lord is the same, and his Power is the same and his Arm is not shortened:
We may see as much Need of divine Assistance, and divine Love as ever Men did;
we can perform no Duty, either of Prayer or Preaching, without divine
Assistance; not so much as a Sigh or Groan, that may have Acceptance with God,
without the Help of his Spirit, Romans viii. 26 The Spirit helps our
Infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the
Spirit itself makes Intercession for us with Groanings which cannot be
uttered. If we go about the Duty of Prayer without divine Assistance, we see
what sad Work we make of it; if we pray not in the Spirit and with the
Understanding, how can we receive the Thing we pray for? But if we Pray in the
Spirit, and with the understanding also, then the Spirit helps our Infirmities;
the Spirit that came from God brings us the Things we stand in Need of.

So that a Christian has a Foundation for his Worship and Christian
Performance; what is that Foundation? Nothing that is corrupt, if it be, it is
good for nothing; for nothing that is corrupted and that defiles, can be
acceptable and pleasing to God; we are all polluted and defiled by Nature; how
can carnal Men worship a Spiritual God? Carnal Men that are in Death and
Darkness, cannot worship that God that is Light, and dwells in Light, that is
inaccessible, that is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity. Carnal Men want a
Foundation for their Worship, and will do till they come to that Foundation
that God has laid.

Now, that I may speak intelligibly what the Lord has laid upon my Heart, I
would say thus; There is an universal Benefit and Privilege distributed and
given freely of God, unto the Sons and Daughters of Men, in their natural
State, through his Son, Jesus Christ, in that he has caused his Light to
shine, and his Grace to be extended to every Man; for the Grace of God which
brings Salvation (for it is not by Works) has appeared unto all Men, and
brings Light, by which every Man may see how to worship God; God has
enlightened every Man, and this Light comes by Christ the Mediator; this
Mediator is the Way that Men must walk in, if they will come back again to God;
for Men are run out and departed from God; if Men will draw near to God, and
take some Footsteps toward the Kingdom of God, from the Kingdom of Sin and
Satan, they must mind the Way, the Way must be their Director, they must not go
which Way they list.

This is that which was prophesied of Christ, says God by the Prophet Isaiah,
I will give him for a Leader. I would fain return to God, and go out of the
Kingdom of Sin and Satan, to the Kingdom of God: God has given Christ to lead
me, if I knew that Way he will lead me in, I would go that Way. As soon as a
Man takes hold of Christ, his Grace, and Spirit, and Life, he will be ready to
say, I am corrupt, my Senses are corrupt, my Mind is depraved, my Conscience
defiled and polluted; but I have found out something that God has bestowed
upon me, that is Essential, Holy and Pure, that did never consent to my
Corruption, but is a Witness for God against it: Here now a Christian lays hold
on Christ, the Leader; which Way will he lead me? If thou layest hold of this
Guide, he will lead thee out of Evil, he will teach thee to cease to do Evil,
and speak Evil: This Light will lead thee to nothing that will dishonor God,
or defile thy own Soul: But this is not all, we must not only cease to do Evil,
but we must be doing something; there must be a breaking off from Pride,
Foolish Jesting, Evil Communication; but this is not all that he will lead me
to; let us learn that Lesson, Cease to do Evil. This Doctrine was preached
before Christianity was preached, as it is now preached; the Prophets of old
preached this Doctrine to the Jews that were under an outward Administration,
Cease to do Evil, and learn to do well, then I will plead with you, and
discourse with you, says the Lord: Come now let us reason together, says the
Lord, though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though
they be red like Crimsom, they shall be as Wool.

This is the first Lesson that a true Christian learns in his turning to God,
in his Change and Translation, to cease from that which is Evil: Here is a
Cessation of Rebellion, and here is some hopes of being reconciled to God; a
Man has been a Rebel against his Maker, but he has now received help to
resist those Temptations that prevail over him; But there is no worshipping yet,
there is a forward mind in Men to do something that is pleasing to God; but
there are some that are not troubled at all for their Evil Ways, and dread not
God's Anger, but make a mock at Sin, that draws others to it, and make
themselves merry in it: But there is a Sort so far touched with a divine Sense
of God's Love to them, that they have also a Sense of his Anger and
Indignation, because of their Sin; and they would fain be out of his Anger; and
who can blame them? When a Man feels the Anger of God burning like a Fire in
his Bosom, who can blame that Man if he desire Peace with God? If he be under a
Sense of the Displeasure and Indignation of the Almighty, he must not haste too
soon out of that Condition he is brought into; for this is God's Purpose, and
this is the Fruit of all his Troubles and Afflictions, to take away Sin: God
had no other End or Design in the Affliction that came upon him, than to take
away Sin; when God has brought a People into a distressed and dejected State
for their Sin, the Fruit that God expects, is the taking away of their Sin, and
he will hide Pride from them, and humble them before him; if this be the
Purpose of God that he intends to purge and purify his People; then says the
poor Creature, if God design to purify me from Sin, then I will pray to God to
support me, and bear me up under his Indignation: That is the Cry of the Soul
that he may not be brought too soon from under the Judgment of God, but he may
be supported and hid in the Hollow of God's Hand, until the Time of Remission
and Refreshing comes, that he may behold the Light of God's Countenance.

Here is Encouragement for every one that is acquainted with this divine
Principle of Grace, that will be led by it, and follow it so far as to be led
out of Evil; then they will be sitted to do something in the Work of God; every
Sigh and Groan that thou have, the Assistance of the Spirit of God to help thee
in, is Part of Worship: All thy Brokenness of Heart is part of Worship; hereby
thou acknowledgest the great God, that he is able to help thee on in thy Way,
and to pardon thy Iniquity, and blot out thy Transgression, and give thee all
those heavenly Blessings that thy Soul does stand in Need of: Then thy Soul
will bow down to God in Acts of holy Worship, and say, with an humble
Confidence and Expectation, God will do all those things in me, and for me,
that will promote my Salvation. It is nothing in Religion for People to go from
Praying and Preaching to Sinning; but God must have a holy Sacrifice, and that
must come out of a pure Heart: Now when a Man is brought by the Help of God,
and by the divine Assistance of the Mediator, Jesus Christ, to break off from
his Sin, then he stands fair to become a Child of God, and to be a Servant of
God, and to do something for God in his Generation, and to offer to God Praise
and Thanksgiving, and to perform all other Duties that God shall lead him into.

But some will say, What, must we do any thing? I have deeply weighed that
Question, what a poor Man or Woman must do, that is come out of Bondage? There
is a Propensity in People to be doing, they would fain do something, they would
be doing; they say, What shall I do? If I do something that pleases not God, I
had better let it alone; and I can do nothing acceptable to God without divine
Assistance: Such an one that sees his own Impotency and Inability, will cast
his Care upon God, and will say, The Lord is able to lead me and guide me: I am
ready to do thy Will, O God: Make it clear to me that this is thy Will, and
that this is that which thou requirest, I am ready to do it, though it be cross
to mine own Will: He is ready to go on in God's Way, in the Way of
Christianity; such an one that has the true Knowledge of Christ, if he speaks,
the Spirit of Christ speaks in him; if he prays, it is through the Assistance
of the Spirit of Christ, through whom God alone is appeased and reconciled, and
through whom they may receive a Blessing from God's Hands: But for Men to run
on in their own Wills, and to do a thing because they Will do it, they had
better sit still; this doing in their own Wills, has filled the World with a
Sort of Christians that want Acceptance with God, which is to be had alone
through the Lord Jesus Christ; and the Want of the Guidance of God's Holy
Spirit, is the Misery and Downfall of Christianity in our Days.

Therefore it is our Work and Business to build upon that Foundation which God
has laid; no Worship is pleasing to God, but that which arises from that
Spring that is pure and Holy: If I cannot find that which will keep me from all
pollution and defilement, if I cannot find that, I must stay till I can; for to
begin a Worship and a Religion without that which I know is acceptable to God,
it is but lost Labor, and Time spent in vain.

Therefore, Friends, let every one that desires to be religious, turn their
Mind inward, wait for the Gift of God, which is essentially pure, that never
did consent to Evil, that never mixed with the Corruption of Nature, but bears
witness to the Light, that will guide you and lead you, and conduct you, first
out of Sin, and then it will lead you into that Worship and Religion, and the
Performance of those Things that are pleasing to God, They that are come to
this Worship, they do not only know what the Lord requires of them, and when he
requires it of them, but they are given up into the Hands of God; they pray,
preach, exhort and live according to the Will of God.

It is hard for People in a carnal State to believe this; but you that are
Believers, that are come to know the Gift of God in yourselves, and the
Necessity of being ruled by him; you will believe us, for none else will
believe us; let us preach to as many People and Nations as we will, none will
receive us as true Ministers, but those that have the Truth in their own
Hearts; if there be any that despises the Grace of God in his own Heart, he
hates that which chides and reproves him; if there be such a Man, he will hate
me because I am a Minister and a Witness of the Grace of God, and of that Truth
in the inward Parts, which is the Ground and Foundation that Man has of
Acceptance with God. A wicked carnal Wretch will say, I hate such an one, I
hate the Light, that which checks me, and witnesses against me; thou art such
an one as bear witness against me, therefore I hate thee: It is very true,
it cannot be otherwise: Now our desire and Labor is, that Men may come to the
Love of the Truth in themselves.

You know there are a great many other Ministers, whose Labors are to persuade
People to believe what they say; to lay down a Doctrine, and prove it by
Scripture and Reason, and set it home upon their Minds by such Testimony as the
Scripture affords, and hereupon they prevail upon the Minds and Judgments of
People, to believe what they lay down.

It is easy to lay down a Position, and prove it, and convince People that it
must be according to Scripture; but when a Person is convinced of a Principle
of Truth, he is not Regenerate thereby, and come to God; therefore, though he
cannot deny the Doctrine of Truth in Words, yet he can deny it in Works, and
does not rightly come to love it. If People would believe what we say, and
observe what Argument we bring for proving a Position, they may be convinced of
the Doctrine of Truth, and come to a Profession of it, and yet be Strangers to
it, till they come to love it in themselves; if it were not for this, we would
leave Preaching, if God had not given a Measure and Manifestation of the Spirit
to every Man to profit withal: You have it in yourselves, we are but as
Monitors to you, to put you in Mind of it; you have so much Business in the
World, that you have not had leisure to take Notice of it.

A Man may have a rich Jewel, and be poor notwithstanding, till he comes to
know the Value of it. A Man has a rich and precious Jewel, a Pearl bestowed
upon him that would make him rich in Faith and Love to God, and qualify him for
the Kingdom of God, and make him an Heir of it, but he knows not, nor
understands the Value of it, and esteems it not; therefore God has raised up
Ministers to put you in mind of it, that you may be happy forever, and live in
Blessedness to all Eternity; Whoever has an Ear to hear, let him hear; and
when they hear what we say, let them take the Benefit of it to their own Souls.
We bring not Truth to you, but God has bestowed it upon you; you will be rich
indeed, if you do as a Man that bought a Field where the precious Pearl was,
and dug till he found it. Come to the Foundation upon which you should build
all your Hopes of Happiness, and depend not upon your own Works, or religious
Performances, for Acceptance with God; for there is no Acceptance with God, but
only through Christ, we are only accepted of God through him: Those that will
become Christians indeed, and worship God as he has ordained and appointed
himself to be worshipped; they must come to the Principle of Light and Grace in
their own Hearts, which they have in, and through Christ, and they will find
Acceptance with God.

The Kingdom of God within: A SERMON.
Preached at Grace Church Street, July 26. 1691.
By STEPHEN CRISP.
YOU have read and heard much concerning the Day of the Lord, as a great and
notable Day; many of you are now living Witnesses that the great and notable
Day of the Lord is coming, in which the Accomplishment of great and notable
Things, the mighty Works of God, which have been prophesied of, may be lawfully
expected. It is the Work of every Christian to wait upon the Lord in the Light
of this Day, and to be acquainted with the Works of the Lord, both inwardly and
outwardly; for the Day of the Lord is a Day of Power, and that Power of God
works wonderful Things; and if we were not kept in the Light of that Day, the
Lord may work great things, and we not know it; we shall be looked upon as
careless and negligent Witnesses of the Works of the Lord, as those that do not
regard them. If you would be faithful Witnesses, you must have regard to the
Works of the Lord, and the Operation of his Hands. One that is minded to be a
faithful Witness, he will take Notice of what is said and done; you are called
to be Witnesses of the Works of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of his doings; you
must stand where you may hear, and see, and understand what the Lord is about
to do at this Time.

In your Testimony and Witness bearing, the greatest Thing we have to expect in
this Day of the Lord is, that God will set up the Kingdom of his Son Christ
Jesus; and unto this all the Prophets did bear witness in their Time, and now
it is our Turn to bear witness of it by sensible and living Experiences of the
Accomplishment of those Things that they prophesied of, that the Lord will set
up the Kingdom of Christ, and bring down and lay waste the Kingdom of
Antichrist. This our Savior taught his Disciples to pray for, sixteen hundred
Years ago, that the Kingdom of God might come; and all the true Disciples of
Christ ever since have prayed for the coming of this Kingdom, and many of them
have seen the coming of it, and rejoiced; and others have died in the Faith of
it, and have been gathered into the Kingdom of Heaven.

But, my Friends, that which chiefly concerns us at this Day, is to behold the
Kingdom of Christ, the eternal Son of God, within us, to go forward and
prosper; and the Kingdom of Antichrist suppressed and destroyed, and utterly
laid waste; and this is wrought two Ways, 1. Inwardly. 2. Outwardly.

First, Inwardly, There is a greater Inclination in the Minds of People, to
look more at the Operation of God's Power in this great Work outwardly, than to
look at it inwardly, but unto that there must be a daily Cross taken up, and it
is my Business at this Time to tell you in the Name of the Lord, that your Duty
and mine is to turn our Minds to the Working of the Power of God in ourselves,
and to see that other Kingdom of the Man of Sin weakened and brought down within
us; then there is no Fear but he will carry on his Work outwardly, and we shall
see as much of that Work as belongs to our Generation; but the great Matter and
chief Concernment of you and me, is to see the Kingdom of God set up within us,
which stands in Holiness and Righteousness: Our Business is to walk till we see
the Righteousness of this Kingdom set up within us in our Hearts and Souls, and
to have a real change made.

We all know, and we must confess, that we have been subject to the Man of Sin,
whatsoever we are now. We have seen the Reign and Government, the Rage and
Tyranny of the Wicked One that has led us into Rebellion and Disobedience to
the Lord our Maker; how do we like that Government to be ruled by the Devil,
and to be led Captive, and to be made to do his Will, and to rebel against God
that gave us our Life, and our Breath, and our Being? How do we like that
Government of Satan? I hope we do none of us like it. It was so with me, and
they that are under the tyrannical Government of Satan, have many Cries and
Wishes in their Souls that they were freed and delivered from it, and brought
under the Government and Obedience of Christ Jesus; and they were able to serve
God as they ought to do, that they might be translated from the Kingdom of Sin
and Satan, into the Kingdom of the blessed and dearly beloved Son of God.

This has been the Cry of some ever since they have known the World; and I am
persuaded it is the Cry of many at this Day: I have good News to bring you; not
that the Day of your Redemption draws nigh, but that it is come; the Day of
Redemption is now come, and there are a great many blessing and glorifying the
Name of God that they are redeemed, and delivered from the Bondage of
Corruption, and have more Joy and Delight in the Service of God, that made
them, than ever they had in the Service of the God of this World.

But may not some say, How shall this great Work be wrought; for it is a great
Work, and we verily think that nothing but an Almighty Power can effect it? For
there are many in this Assembly have been trying to no Purpose, and done what
they could in their own Strength, to deliver their own Souls from Death, and
yet they find themselves in Bondage still; nay, they have called in the Help
and Assistance of those that they thought to be stronger than themselves, and
all have sailed, and they are yet weak and entangled, and they cannot find
themselves at Liberty to serve the Lord as they ought to do.

I am of this Mind, that nothing but the Almighty Power of God can do it; and
when you come to my Experience, to know this as I have done, then I hope you
will seek after that, and you will see good Reason for it; and you will then
come to this Profession, If the Lord puts not forth his Almighty Power, I must
then perish, for there is no other Power can deliver me: When you come to know
this, what must you do? Why, you must wait for the Revelation of that Power
that will take you off from all Trust and Confidence that you have ever had in
any Thing else; a Man that has nothing to trust to but the Almighty Power, and
Mercy, and Goodness of God, he puts his whole Trust and Confidence therein, or
else he knows he must perish.

When a Man or Woman comes to this pass, that they have nothing to rely upon
but the Lord, then they will meet together to wait upon the Lord: And this was
the first Ground or Motive of our setting up Meetings; and I would to God that
this was the use that every one would make of them that come to them, then they
would be justly and properly used according to the End of the Institution of
them at first; we should use them as poor desolate helpless People that are
broken off from all their own Confidence and Trust, and have nothing to rely
upon but the Mercy and Goodness of God; and if he pleases to reveal his Power
among us, we know that he is able to save us; and we have met with the
Revelation of God's Power; and when we have met together in Simplicity of Mind,
the Lord was pleased to communicate his Spirit to us, and open a Door for us,
and discover and reveal to us that it was the Day of his Power: And when we
came to examine ourselves whether we were willing in this Day of God's Power
(for the Prophet gives us a Note of Distinction between the People of God, and
other People; Thy People shall be willing in the Day of thy Power, which is as
much as to say, God discovers and reveals his Power to them, such a People are
willing to give themselves over to the Government of it, when we found we were
subject to it) we had Joy in believing, before we attained the End of our Hope;
it was Gladness to us we found ourselves willing; and I am persuaded that every
one of you would be glad to find yourselves willing to part with that which you
cry out of.

What a Cry is there of our Bondage and Corruption, and of our being led
Captive by our Lusts? We may hear such a Cry from one End of the Kingdom to the
other: People cry out of the Bondage of Corruption, and of their Subjection to
Sin and Satan: I would they were in earnest; there is not that Earnestness and
Reality in Men and Women that God looks for, and so there comes nothing of it.
There is no Redemption, and no Deliverance, the Lord does not hear them, though
they come now adays into his Presence, to offer up their Prayers: I would have
you to be in good earnest, I wish well to you all; and it would be hard to say
that you do not wish well to yourselves: Here lies your Welfare, that you find
yourselves willing to be subject to the Power that made you; you have been
subject doubtless to the Power that destroyed you; that Power that never gave
you Life and Breath, has been instrumental of your Destruction: The Power of
the God of this World never did Men good, but destroyed them, deceived them,
and deprived them of their Lives.

Now if their was but a Willingness in every one of us, freely to give up our
selves to that Power that created us to obey his Will: I am sure there is never
a Man or Woman among us shall long be without the knowledge of it* If I am but
willing to be subject to the Law of him that made me, it will not be long
before he discover it to me, and reveal his Power in me in the Glory and
Excellency of it; that Power which is more able to preserve me than all the
Power of Men on Earth, or all the Power of the Devils in Hell is able to
destroy me. When the Lord shall discover and reveal his Power in you, you will
be willing to be subject to it.

But methinks the Sound and Noise of Flesh and Blood grows loud here: I would
be subject to God, but I would not have him cross mine Interest, and deprive me
of that I love and thirst after; I would not have him imbitter my carnal
Delights and Pleasures, and undo me as to my Reputation in the World.

You may see whence this comes, that you would make a Bargain, and draw a
Contract with the God of your Lives about these Things, this is a nonsensical
Thing; because of all People in the World, you are a People that have had a
Veneration for the Holy Scriptures, the Scriptures of Truth, and have been
acquainted with them so familiarly as with any Book in the World, wherein you
find Articles drawn, long ago fixed and sealed; and no new ones are to be
drawn. If any one will be my Disciple, John, or Thomas, James or Peter, or
whosoever he be, he must take up his Daily-Cross, and deny himself, and follow
me. Now here is a Contract made, therefore turn aside from all Kind of
Reasoning and Consulting with Flesh and Blood.

If you will become spiritual, and partake of spiritual Blessings and Benefits,
I would advise you to turn from all Kind of Reasonings that come from the Pit
of Darkness, that has thus far deceived you, and will ruin you for ever, if
you hearken to them: For assure yourselves new Gospel-Terms no Man can make;
and if any come to preach new Gospel-Terms, count him a Deceiver; for there is
no possibility of being a Disciple of Christ, but by taking up a Cross daily,
and denying ourselves, and following him as our Leader and Guide. To him I must
go, and go in no other Way, speaking nothing, or doing nothing but what is holy
and pure; he must conduct me in my Walking, guide me in my Way, and justify me
in it: This is to be a true Disciple of Christ.

As soon as he comes to adhere, and join to the Power of God revealed in his
Soul, he sees the coming of the Kingdom of God, he sees it at a Distance, he
says within himself, and makes this Conclusion, I will follow my Captain, I
will become subject to the Kingdom of Christ. If I obey this divine Principle
of the Grace of God, and the Gospel of Christ, I shall be his Disciple. I read
in his blessed Book, That as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the
Children of God. I am not to propose new Terms, but accept of the old Terms of
the Gospel of Christ: I see that the Kingdom of God is to be set up, and the
Kingdom of the Devil to be brought down in me; if I follow this divine
Principle, I should never follow the Devil more; if he would have me lie, I
shall refuse, and say I cannot; if he would have me run into vain and corrupt
Communication, and foolish Jesting, that will be a Bridle to me, that I cannot
do it.

I speak now to Persons that live under the Light of the Gospel of Christ, and
that are subdued by his Grace; I would speak that which all the Logic in the
World cannot overthrow, that which the most cunning Logician, with all his Wit
and Quirks, cannot refute and prove erroneous. If a Man be led by the Spirit of
God, he cannot Lie; this is a common Cure for all Men; if I be led by the
Spirit of Truth, and hearken to the Principle of Truth in my own Soul; this
will cure and heal me of the Wounds and Maladies of my corrupt Nature, and set
me at Liberty from my old Master; I do not like his Service.

I (...) any of you like the Servitude and Bondage of Sin and Satan, you will
desire Liberty before you die: Why do not you desire it now? It may be thou
think to enjoy a little Liberty and Reputation, and Pleasure in Sin for many
Years, for Six or Seven, Nine or Ten Years, and then break off from it, and
repent and turn to God: How do thou know that thou have Ten Days to live? It
is of high Concernment to every one of us to wait for a Discovery of
Gospel-Liberty, and an Ability and Power in his Soul, to enable him to break
off from the Servitude and Bondage of Sin and Satan, that he has so long lived
under; and to wait upon God with Patience, for the setting his Soul at Liberty,
and setting up the Kingdom of Christ within him, and pulling down the Kingdom
of Satan, that he may be brought into the Kingdom of Christ, that consists in
Peace and Righteousness and Joy in the Holy Ghost. These are the Things that
follow one another; when Righteousness is set up in me, I shall not be
disturbed, I shall have Peace; and if I have Peace I shall have Joy, and this
Joy is in the Holy Ghost the Apostle says the Kingdom of God consists in these
Things.

Now that every one might be persuaded that God has given a Measure of his
Grace to them, as well as to other Folks: Let them consider and say within
themselves, God has not shut me out of the Number of his People: He has
knocked at the Door of my Heart, to bring me to Repentance, he has waited upon
me so long, surely he has a Mind to save me: Would he call upon me, but that
he intends I should repent and turn to him?

But where is the Power? You will say knocking at the Door of the Heart, and
Checks of Conscience, we understand them; but we undestand not where the Power
is, to be conformable to the Will of God.

People will never understand it while they are in the Kingdom of Satan, and
under the Power of the Prince of Darkness; the Apostle tells us, That the God
of this World has blinded the Minds of them that believe not lest the Light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine upon them.
If Men saw the Beauty of the Gospel, they would run after it, and embrace it;
therefore the Devil blinds their Minds, that they should not see the Beauty and
Amiableness of the Gospel, and like the Terms of it: He has the Rule and
Government of the Children of Disobedience. So long as I live in Subjection to
that devilish hellish Power, which leads me forth into Sin: I shall be a
Stranger to God's Power, that would enable me to break off from it.

You never read in Scripture of any that ever came to be saved by the Power of
God, but there was Faith mixed with it, that came to join with that Power of
God. Our Savior said to the impotent Man, Thy Faith has made thee whole; thy
Faith joining with that Power of God. We shall be made strong in the Lord, and
in the Power of his Might, and be able to withstand Temptations.

As soon as the Soul of Man joins with the Grace of God, he does forsake the
Service of his old Master and Governor, Sin shall no longer have Dominion over
him; though he may meet with the same Temptation, it shall not have the same
Power over him, but he will be enabled, by the Grace of God to withstand it,
and overcome it. If you ask such a Man how it is that he overcomes that
Temptation that formerly prevailed over him; he will tell you, I have now an
Helper, I am now joined to the Grace of God in my Soul, therefore do I
withstand Temptations, and have Power over them. Thus comes the Kingdom of
Christ to be set up in the Soul, and this is that which will fit and prepare us
for the everlasting Kingdom of God: They that do wait upon God, shall see this
Work wrought inwardly in them, they know more by Faith than they can see by
Sense.

I know and am certain, that the Power the Devil has in the World, shall be
broken down, and Righteousness shall be exalted, and Justice and Equity shall
prevail in the Nations. I shall not perhaps live to see it, but I may see it by
Faith; I have seen enough for my Generation, and they that live in the next
Generation shall see it also, for the Church of God is the same from one
Generation to another. Now unto us it is given to see the Things that in former
Generations were prophesied of, God having (says the Apostle) provided some
better Thing for us, that they without us shall not be made perfect.

The Church of God from one Generation to another, have their Measure and
Degree of Service, and bear their proper Testimony, and leave the Rest to
succeeding Generations: It concerns us in our Generation to see a Change made
inwardly in our Souls, and the Kingdom of Christ set up within us, and the
Kingdom of Satan brought down in ourselves. This does not concern my Son or
Grandson only, but it concerns me, and when they grow up to mature Age, in
their Time it will concern them: Therefore that which is most profitable to us,
is, that we have such a Station, and stand in such a Place in our Time, where
we may see the Work of God carried on.

I have considered many a Time, that there are many brave Men and Women in this
Age, that might have been eminent Witnesses of God in this World, and born
their Testimony to his Truth, but their Faith has been weak and ineffectual:
They have discovered their unbelieving Hearts, and have joined with the common
Herd of the World, because they thought such great Things could never be done,
that the Kingdom of Satan could never be pulled down and destroyed, and the
Kingdom of Christ set up within us. But I would hope better Things of you,
Things that accompany Salvation and that he that has begun a good Work in you
will carry it on to Perfection; that living Praises and joyful Thanksgivings
may be rendered to him who alone is worthy, who is God over all, blessed for
ever; to whom be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

The Necessity of an Holy Life and Conversation.
Preached at St. Martin's-Le-Grand, March the 26th, 1687.
By STEPHEN CRISP.
O How happy are they that have Bread in their own Houses! and that can draw
Water out of their own Wells! These have a blessed glorious Dewlling Place,
these are the Children that their Father provides for: All the divine Treasures
and the Riches of heavenly Things are laid up for these; O that all that have a
Sight of this blessed State, were got into it! that their Minds might not more
wander, that People might not be scattered in their Thoughts, that when they
meet together, they might have their Expectations entirely from that God whom
they profess to worship: Lord thou have said that thou will teach thy People
thyself; here a Cry goes up to the Lord, and their Expectations through Faith
pitched upon God; they never meet in vain, but a Well springs up, and the Water
of Life comes to them, by which they meet with divine Refreshments; for, you
know, the Promise that our Lord made to his Disciples, He that drinks of the
Water that I shall give him, shall never thirst more. Why, will once drinking
serve? Because I have tasted of the living Water that the Lord Christ gives me;
will that serve? No, but he gives me a substantial River, that is the Reason
why I shall thirst no more, it shall be in me a Well of living Water, springing
up to everlasting Life; blessed are the Witnesses of it; these are they that
are satisfied concerning Religion and Doctrine, they are satisfied concerning
Worship, they are looking after no new Things; when they meet together, they
meet in the Name of the Lord, and they have their Eyes to him, who is a
Fountain, and they discern a Brightness and a Glory that is unspeakable: and
the Glory that is speakable, that appears many Times through Instruments, will
not satisfy them; there is something beyond that, which must satisfy; this will
never do it: People will never be satisfied with hearing, nor never satisfied
with seeing, till they come to hear and see that which is unutterable, and then
they are satisfied; Christ had preached many Sermons in the hearing of his
Disciples, and there were a great many said, That there was never any Man spoke
like him, preached like him; yet one of them that was nearest to him, and most
acquainted and intimate with him, after some Years meeting and hearing of his
Sermons, he cries out, Show us the Father and it suffices us.

My Friends, this comes near to many of your States; many of you have heard
long, and have heard the speakable Word of God, that which could be uttered,
that which could be spoken forth, by the Demonstration of the Holy Ghost, by
them that have received it of the Father; this you have heard long, and yet
there are many of you, that if you come to a serious Search, you will find a
Want, you will find still that you have not that Satisfaction that puts you
beyond Doubt, beyond Fear; there is something that stands in the Way, that
hinders your Enjoyment of the unspeakable Glory of the unspeakable Word, and
this will never be removed, but by your innocent submittting to the Work of the
Power of God in your own Hearts, that so you may not only be Believers, but
come to be really baptized, and then all is out of Doubt; for our Lord said, he
that believes and is baptized shall be saved; he does not say, He may be
saved, but, He shall be saved.

Woeful Experience has told us in our Days, That a great many have believed the
Truth, and yet they are never like to be saved, they have made shipwreck of
their Faith; but if they had been baptized, if they would have endured the
Baptism, if they would have been buried with Christ in Baptism, they should
have been saved every one of them; and now there are a great many that remain
in the Belief of the Truth, and yet they are not baptized, they are not dead,
not buried, notwithstanding they have received like precious Faith with us,
that Faith which is of the Operation of God, and that is like precious in its
Nature to all that do receive it, and would work the same Effect in all too, if
it were not obstructed; but notwithstanding they have received Faith toward
the saving of their Souls, yet their Souls are Captives, their Souls are
subject to Lusts, and Pleasures, and Vanities, and unto empty and foolish
Things, and to Passions and Corruptions, after they have received Faith.

For if you take one that is a Believer of Truth, that is overtaken with his
Lust, and Passions, and Corruptions, he will commonly own that he believes the
contrary, he believes that these Things should not be, that it ought to be
otherwise: This is the Signification of Truth against Untruth: If it should be
otherwise, why is it thus then? Why, he finds a Life to spring up in that which
is corruptible, that is always contrary to the Life of God, and at Enmity with
it: What shall I do? I believe the Truth, I know it is an holy Thing, it leads
all that submits to it to an holy Life, and there is this and that unholy
Thing, this and that corrupt Thing remains, what shall I do?

It is an evident Demonstration that thou want the Baptism of him in whom
thou believe; thou have believed in Christ Jesus that comes after John, and
was before him; and now having believed in him, thou want to be baptized by
him, and for want of that, the Pollution and Corruption that was grown up in
thy Nature, in the Time of thy Alienation prevails still upon thee, contrary to
thy Faith; and there is no coming to obtain this Baptism, but by sinking down
into that which will slay thee, that which will kill thee: But there is such a
shifting to save ones Life, there are so many Twistings and Twinings of People
to save their Lives, that at last they lose them; but there are none that could
ever find that Life that is eternal, but those that are willing to be given up
to the Dead, and submit to this Baptism, that is, by the Holy Ghost and by
Fire: These only do come to Life, they come to the Resurrection, for you never
knew any that died this Death but they rose again; it is as impossible for
Death to hold any one down that is buried in this Baptism, as it was impossible
to hold Christ down, when he was in the Grave; The same Power that brought
again our Lord Christ from the Dead, the same Power it is that quickens us,
while we remain in these mortal Bodies, after we have sustained this Death and
Crucifiction.

But who can believe this Saying? for this is a hard Saying, who can bear it?
Is it not enough that I am a Believer, which makes me a Friend, and entitles me
to a Community among you, and as long as I hold the Truth, and profess the
Truth, I am looked upon as one of your Society? This is very true, this does
entitle People unto the outward Privileges of the Church of Christ; but there
is another inner Court, that lies under the Angel's Reed, the Measuring-Reed,
that is to be measured, the Temple is measured, and every Worshipper in the
Temple is measured; there was an outward Court, that was for representing the
Church of God in general, from the particular; the outward Court was not
measured, that the Gentiles might come in; the unbaptized People, which were
never regenerated, they might come so far as the outward Court, but this did
not entitle them to the Privileges of the House of God, nor to any Worship or
Sacrifice that was accepted upon God's Altar.

It concerns you and me (my Friends) to be serious about Matters of this Moment
and Importance, and not spend your Days, and, as it were speak by rote, under
an airy Profession, though of Truth itself, without considering what Progress
you have made, what Benefit you have obtained, and whether you are come not
only to the Shadow of good Things to come, but to the very Substance of the
heavenly Things; for the Comers to the outward Worship, could never with those
Sacrifices they offered be made perfect; the Comers thereunto were not made
perfect as to the Things pertaining to the Conscience, speaking there of the
outward Worship, Heb. 10.1. but coming to the heavenly Things, whereof the
other were but a Shadow, they made People perfect, as to the Conscience, and
did bring them to Salvation. The Apostle alludes to this Baptism, for he speaks
in a Figure of the Eight Persons that were saved in Noah's Ark; then he brings
down the Allegory to Christian Baptism, not only the Baptism of John, the
Forerunner of Christ, that preached of Christ, but to the Christian Baptism
itself; By the like Figure whereof Baptism now saves us, says the Apostle,
not the putting away of the Filth if the Flesh, but the Answer of a good
Conscience. What does he mean by Baptism saving us? He means, the Answer of a
good Conscience toward God, through the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead;
so that Christian Baptism did bring along with it the cleansing and putting
away of all Sin out of the Conscience, that might bring them under Doubts and
Scruples; and then there is an arising of Jesus, the Savior in the Conscience,
the Mediator that brought them to answer for them in the Sight of God; for if
People be conscious of Sin; and do leave off their Sin, this does not yet
cleanse the Conscience; for their still remains a Conscience of Sin; it is not
the leaving off our Sin that makes our Atonement with God, or that expiates
our Guilt, or does away the Guilt of the Sins that we have committed; but there
must be a Forsaking and a Leaving off Sin by the Virtue and Power of the
Spirit, by which we are enabled, not only to leave off Sin, but are guided and
directed to the Mediator, whose Blood alone reconcileth us to God, and
cleanses us from all Sin. If I should never commit a Sin while I live, it is
not this simply in itself that will make me have the Answer of a good
Conscience in the Sight of God; for there remains the Guilt of Sin contracted
in the Days of Unbelief, which is a Bar and Hindrance that none can approach
the Holy God but in the Atonement and Salvation that comes by Jesus Christ;
for all that believe and obey the Gospel are accepted in Christ, and upon the
Account of Christ's precious Blood, that cleanses us from all Sin and
Unrighteousness. Whom does it cleanse? Those only that forsake their Sins, and
by his Power are brought to a holy Life; they by the Virtue of his Power, and
the Cleansing of his Blood, come to have their former Sins removed from them,
as far as the East is from the West.

But what is this to them that remain in their Sins? what is this to them that
are not baptized? for the Dead that have not put off the old Man, nor put on
the new Man, but have only put on the Name and Profession of Christ, and put on
the Outside of him, his Garment, but have not put him on, the are not created
again in Christ Jesus unto good Works, that they might walk in them? No wonder
there remains a Conscience of Sin in them, there is a Bar that hinders them
from the Sight of the Glory of God, and from real and true Satisfaction,
concerning their Atonement and Reconciliation with God, and this hinders them
from the Enjoyment of that Peace that passes understanding; and it is no
Wonder, because they are not come to this Baptism that brings the Answer of a
good Conscience in the Sight of God.; they are not risen with Christ; how
should they? for they are not buried with him, Romans vi. 3. Know ye not that so
many of us (says the Apostle) as were baptized into Christ, were baptized into
his Death; therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into Death; that like as
Christ was raised from the Dead by the Glory of the Father, even so we also
should walk in newness of Life; here is a Change figured out between them that
had partaken of the spiritual Baptism, and were come again to the Participation
of Life in the Resurrection of Jesus Christ and those that were not baptized.

So it is now with every one that comes to believe the Truth, and make a
Profession of it; there is a Way cast up, and there is a Door opened for
Salvation; but the grand Question that every one ought to enquire about, and
put to themselves, is, What Progress they have made in this Way? Whether they
are baptized yet or no? Whether they have put off the old Man with his Deeds,
and put on the new Man and the new Man's Deeds, which are Righteousness and
Holiness? They that find that, though they are Believers, they are short of
this, they do also find that their Shortness is their Hindrance, their
Shortness in not coming up to the Pattern that has been showed them, is their
Hindrance, so that they enjoy not the things here spoken of the being under
this Sense, and really sitting under this Sense in a Meeting, though there
should be no Man speaking to them outwardly, yet being come to this Faith and
made Partakers of this Bapism, People would find in their own Bosoms the hidden
Word of Life ministering to their Condition; they would have enough, there would
not be a Famine of the Word unto them, nor they should not need to be in
Expectation of going out to this or the other Instrument, but they would be
satisfied when they are met together with the Presence of the Lord, that the
Lord is in the midst of them, ministering them the Word of Life, in his
Operating and Working, speaking in a Tongue that every one can understand it,
speaking with a kind of Voice and Language, that every one may understand his
own State and Condition; and this is the way that God brought up People from
the Beginning, to the Knowledge of Heavenly Things, and opening of the
Mysteries of Salvation; we had it not of Men but of Jesus our Lord; he was our
great Minister, we waited upon him, and trusted in him, and he taught us
himself; he has ministered to us at our silent and quiet Waiting upon him those
Things that were convenient for us; we might well say, He gave us our Food in
due Season; he has not only given strong Meat unto Men, but has ministered of
the sincere Milk of his Word unto Babes, that lived in Sincerity and
Self-denial, loving God above all things; and he taught and conducted us in our
Way, this Way of Simplicity, until our Understandings came to be opened, until
our Souls came to be prepared to receive the Mysteries of his Kingdom.

In those Days there were some that started up in Knowledge, and that built
their Nests on high, and took Flax and Wool, and Silver and Gold, and decked
themselves with them; but the Lord found them out, and brought them down, and
took the Crown from their Head, and clothed them with Dishonor: So God does
from Age to Age, his Judgment will begin at his own House if you would Grow in
the Grace and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, then grow
in Humility and Self-denial, and keep a constant watch upon your Hearts,
examine your Hearts, and Commune with your selves upon your Beds, and be still;
take Heed lest you sin against the Lord, and provoke him: There were some that
provoked the Lord of old, and they committed two great Evils, What be they?
They have gone away and forsaken the Fountain of living Water; as much as to
say, they have not their Dependence upon an invisible Power, as they ought to
have; for I am a living Fountain, and it is by an invisible Power that I am able
to counsel and teach, direct, and purify and open their Understanding; but they
have forsaken me, that is one great Evil; and the other is, they would not be
without somewhat, they have forsaken the Lord, and they would have somewhat
instead of God; They have dug to themselves broken Cisterns, that will hold
no Water. And how many in this Age have committed these two great Evils?

My Friends, examine your selves; are there not many that have been guilty of
these two great Evils? They do not keep their close Dependence, Trust and
Reliance upon the invisible Power of God, as they profess they ought to do, but
are hurried away from it; some by the Love of the World, some by Lusts and
Pleasures, some by Passions, and others by worldly Interests, are drawn away
from the Power, to do and say that which the Power is against: Is not this a
Forsaking of the Lord, the living Fountain? What do they do then? Are they not
for this and that, and the other Man? for hearing this and the other Man's
Word, and digging to themselves broken Cisterns? And have they not their Trust
and Confidence in going to Meetings, in commending this and the other Way? Have
they not their trust in their Profession outwardly, when it ministers nothing
to their Souls, so that they secretly wither for all this? If you had all the
Men and Angels that were ever sent of God, appointed to preach to you, that
could not minister Life to you, unless there be that Faith that stands in the
Power of God. The Faith that stands in any Man's Words, that will not overcome
your Lusts: but the Faith that stands in the Power purifies the Hearty, it will
not suffer any unclean thing there. As for Preaching, let a Man preach against
this and the other Lust and Corruption, there it will remain for all his
Preaching, unless Men know Gods Power and Life in which there is Righteousness;
for Words and Knowledge, and Sight and Speculation, will never give People
Victory over their Sins.

Therefore you know, every one who is settled must be settled where the
Foundation of Religion is; it is not coming to Meetings, and owning this and
the other Doctrine which is the Foundation of our Religion; God has revealed
his Power to every one of us; God has not given his Spirit to Preachers and
Prophets only, for then there would be a Famine of the Word, as was in Israel,
The Priest's Lips preserved Knowledge. If you did take away the Priest, you did
take away their Knowledge. The Prophets had the Word of God, and they only
spoke the Word of God. If the Prophet was taken away, then the Word of God was
taken away. The Lord threatened to send a Famine among them, they grieved and
vexed, and killed and destroyed the Priests and Prophets; therefore, says the
Lord, I will send a Famine among you, not of Bread, but of the Word, and they
shall go from City to City, and enquire for the Word of the Lord.

Thus it was in the Jewish Church; if there was a Prophet they would go 30, 40,
or 100 Miles to him that had the Word of the Lord; They shall go from City to
City to enquire for the Word of the Lord: But blessed be God we are come to
another Day, for now the Word of the Lord is manifested in the Hearts of all
that believe; they know the Word: I do not say all that believe do preach the
Word, or ought to preach; but the Word preaches to them; they are not as
broken Cisterns that can hold no Water; when they find the Word and hear it,
they speak it presently what is ministered to their own Condition, that they
tell to other Folks; when People come to the Blessing of this Dispensation that
God's Word reveals in their Hearts, they then know what the Signification of
it is, they understand the Doctrine of it, the Doctrine preaches Holiness to
them, not that they should preach Holiness and yet remain Unholy; not that they
should preach Humility, and yet remain Proud: It preaches Holiness, Humility
and Singleness of Heart to a Remnant, that like good Scholars and Disciples
learn the Lessons and Doctrine of the Word of God.

Now when thou have learned them well, and art come to see the Effect of the
Word, and do bring forth the Deeds and Works which are the Fruits of
Holiness, Perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God, and with Humility known and
witnessed in Christ Jesus, and art not only meek in Show, but meek and low in
Heart; when People come to be meek and lowly, and of a clear Conscience, purged
front all dead Works to serve the living God; then if the Lord gives them a
Word of Exhortation, of Doctrine or Counsel, it is very welcome, and it has a
Savor through the Blessing of God, and they come by it to be built up in their
most holy Faith, and this Word is brought forth in Holiness and Righteousness
in their Lives, and shows it self in a Life of Holiness; then thou will shine
in thy Conversation to all that thou conversest with, so that they may see thee
to be such a Man or Woman as have been with Jesus, and learned of Jesus, and
receivedst a Word engrafted; when thou do receive the Word into thy Heart,
there is the Engrafting of it: If it has not Root there, then, says Christ,
My Word does not abide in you. If you feel something of this invisible Word in
your Hearts, it brings you to a Resolution to serve God, and to keep your
selves from Sin, and to answer the Profession which you make of God; this is
the Effect of the Word of God, if it does abide in you. Does it abide? You
shall know anon or Tomorrow, so soon as a Temptation comes to stir you up to
Pride or Passion, to Fraud or Deceit, then you will see whether the Word abide:
If it abide, you sin not.

This is Scripture, a certain Foundation Doctrine, that may be as safely
preached as any Doctrine: If the Word abide in you, you sin not; What of that?
Let the Word go, and you will sin, when ever you are tempted to it. I write to
you young Men, because you have overcome the wicked One, you are strong and the
Word of God abides in you, and you have overcome the wicked One. We shall see
as soon as Temptation meets with thee, whether the Word abides in thee; if it
abide, thou will not Sin, but resist the Tempter. Set thy Foot upon the
Temptation, and go over it, and thou will have the Dominion; and this will make
thee a free Man or Woman, and thou will stand fast in the Liberty wherewith
Christ has made thee free. The Apostle supposes them free, and that they have
got Dominion; then Stand fast, says he, in the Liberty wherewith Christ has
made thee free. It is a Liberty not of Lust and Sin, but a Liberty of the Soul;
the Soul now is not at the Devil's Will and Call.

For it is a Shame to the Doctrine of Christianity, that we profess Things, and
yet deny them in Practice: We profess that there is a Power in Chirst to keep
and preserve us out of Sin, and we profess to believe that this Power is
communicated to them that do believe in the Lord Jesus Christ for their
Preservation; that is, he will not withold it from them: We profess these
Things in the Face of the whole World; and yet when the Devil calls one Man to
Covetousness, and another to defraud his Neighbor, and another to defile
himself, he is drawn away thereby; what Hypocrisy is here, to profess this, and
act the contrary? I do not wonder that they who profess they cannot live a Day
without Sin, that they should fall; but they that profess to believe there is
Power enough in Christ, and that it is offered to them; for them to live in Sin
and yield to Temptation, this is horrid Wickedness. They that are of an upright
single Mind, would die before they would sin, knowing that God is Almighty and
gracious, and willing to bestow his Power and Wisdom, and Grace upon them that
ask it; they would die rather than sin against God presumptuously: Let it cost
me my Goods, my Estate, my Liberty, or my Life, How can I do this great
Wickedness, and Sin against God? They love God above all; you never heard them
complain that they wanted Power, For the Lord is at their right Hand, and they
shall not be moved. They cannot fall; though they are tempted, they will not fall
into Temptation. They have Power when they see the Devil before them, to put
him behind them; the Nobility of their Extract, of their new Birth and
Regeneration puts such a Temper and Disposition into their Souls, that they
scorn to be at the Devil's Command, as if they were his Children.

Oh! It is a noble and honorable thing to be a Child of God, a very high
Dignity to be in such an honorable Relation to God, and to have a Right to the
heavenly Mansions, To sit down in heavenly Places in Christ Jesus. I would to
God you were all ready for it, that you had the Wedding Garment on, that you
might not be bound Hand and Foot, and cast into utter Darkness. What is the
Reason that you do not sit down in this heavenly Frame and Temper, and draw the
Waters of Salvation out of your own Souls: Could the Lord do any Thing more
than he has done, and could his Servants do any more than they have done for
your Help? Are not their Labors Demonstrations of it? We have been as Epistles
of Christ written in your Consciences: We have been testifying that there is
something wanting in too many, the Want of resigning up themselves to the
Baptism of the Cross. People are willing to be counted Friends; but they are
Friends of God, that do whatsoever he commands them; that is the Christian
Lesson, not to say I will be a Friend to you, and a Friend to the Church, and
to such a Sort of People; but I will be a Friend of God, and do whatsoever he
commands me; whatsoever Command God lays upon you, either to take up a Cross,
or to deny yourselves and follow him.

Learn this Lesson, and you will be Disciples indeed, and Members of the Church
too; not Members of a Church privileged outwardly only, but Members of a Church
of the Firstborn, and you will have your Names written in Heaven; when one
comes to have his Name written in Heaven, he comes to know his Name, it is a
white Stone, not a speckled one; they that have it, they know it, they are not
ignorant of one another's Names that are written in this Book; they have a
Fellowship that no body can declare; their Communion is in that Bread and that
Cup: This is a Cup of Blessing indeed, and this has blessed us, and will bless
us: God will preserve a People in this Fellowship. You that are at a Distance
now, you must come nearer to him; God will choose a People by whom his Name
shall be magnified; because the Love of God is shed abroad in our Hearts, we
cannot but desire this for all, especially for the Household of Faith; we cannot
but desire their Perfection, their growing up in the Grace of God, that they
might come to be Partakers of Heaven. And in the next Place, our Love is to all
People, every where; we would be glad that all were saved; they that despise us
when we are speaking of heavenly Things, speaking like a Child, like a
stammering Child, speaking of the glorious Excellencies of God, of the
Loving Kindness of God, speaking of those Things which God has spoken to our
Souls, they that despise these Things, we would be glad that they might be
saved: If they were Partakers of these Things, they would be glad as well as
we, and they would be more really happy in respect to this World, for the Time
that they are to live here; they would live a happier Life, even in this World,
and they would have everlasting Life in the World to come.

The Love of Christ constrains Men thus to judge, that every one that has
received like precious Faith, ought to answer that Grace and Faith which God
has ministered to them in an holy Life and Conversation, and every one who is a
stranger to this Thing, ought to be of an enquiring Mind and an open Heart to
wait for the Day when God will visit them with the same Grace; when you give up
yourselves to a daily Cross, as Christ's Disciples, you will not be running
after any one to teach you to know the Lord, for you will all know the Lord,
from the least to the greatest; I that have been but a little convinced, shall
I know the Lord? Thou shall know the Lord, thou that art dead in thy Sins and
Trespasses, thou that have not known the Blood of cleansing, thou shall know
thy Lord to be thy Judge, and thy Lawgiver, to teach thee how thou must live,
walk and act; and is not that a good Knowledge? This is the Way they reckoned
upon in old Time, it is a notable Expression, The Lord is our Judge; there is
the Beginning, he began there, Judgment began at the House of God; those he
brings into his House, he brings them under the Discipline of his House, The
Lord is our Judge, he is our King and Lawgiver, and he will save us; this same
Exercise of Discipline under Judgment brought to them the Faith and Experience
of his being their Lawgiver, and this brought them to a Faith of the last
Sentence, we shall be saved; and the Lord answers such a People, That he will
bring Salvation to them Salvation shall be for Walls and Bulwarks; Did the
People of this Nation but know Salvation was brought near to them, and that it
was their Bulwark, there would not be a Crying up of this and the other rotten
Thing for a Bulwark.

We talk of a Bulwark as well as others; we have a Bulwark, blessed be the God
of Heaven, made of better Stuff than theirs; for it is the Salvation of God
which has kept us from the Pollution of Sin, and from a running into all
Excess and Riot that others have run into; it has kept us from the Evil, it
has kept Evils out of us, and we have found that certainly true, That all
Things work together for Good, to them that love God, and fear God; that all
the Providence of God together, they have all wrought for our Good; and this
is the Bulwark that we have trusted in, and it has served hitherto, and it
will serve us and our Posterity to the End of the World. This is a Bulwark that
will never be stormed, that will never be thrown down nor laid waste: Though
all the Powers on Earth, and all the Potentates in this World should agree
together, they shall not prevail against it; we have Salvation for Walls and
Bulwarks; if I be within these Walls, Salvation is round about me; if I am got
into this eternal Bulwark, I am safe from the Devil and his Instruments; here
is a Bulwark to be relied upon.

Many wonder we differ with them in some Opinions; we have that Confidence in
this Bulwark, that we desire not another; God will last and abide for ever, so
will this Bulwark; all the Care that I take, and all the Care that you should
take, is to keep within these Walls: Do not sally out, if you go out, the Devil
is watching, and seeking continually whom he may devour; he will catch
Straglers; if that People will go out for Profit, or for Pleasure, or Interest,
the Devil will catch them: What, such People talk of Salvation for Walls and
Bulwarks? the Devil has got them in his Snare, and they are caught in
Drunkenness, Uncleanness and other Sins; the Reason is, they have gone out of
their Bulwark, they have sallied out of their Walls, for the Devil could never
have fetched them out.

O take Heed, says the Apostle, left there spring up in any of you an evil
Heart of Unbelief, in departing from the living God; as if he had said, You are
Christians now, you are a People come to a good Estate in Christ; but consider
you have no Strength to stand but in him, no Power to keep yourselves but in
him; Take Heed at all Times that there spring not up in you an evil Heart of
Unbelief, in departing from the living God; take heed lest there spring up in
you such a Thought as this; I may take this Pleasure, and the other Profit:
Consider that thou die and witherest if thou depart from the living God; take
heed of taking Liberty above the Fear of God: It is not our Talk of Salvation
for Walls and Bulwarks that will do us good but our keeping within these Walls.

I remember a notable Saying of the Apostle, which has a great Emphasis in it,
and a great Deal of Doctrine, he writes to the Church after they were become a
People of Prosessing Christians, Take heed lest you come to be beguiled by the
Serpent, as he beguiled Eve; he did not speak of Jezabel, a wicked Woman; but
he spoke of Eve, a good Woman created after the Image of God, in Righteousness
and Holiness: They were come to a Life of Sanctification, to a Life that was
hidden from Ages and Generations; You must look to yourselves, and look upon
yourselves as in the State of your Mother Eve, a Woman brought forth in
Righteousness and Holiness, that might have stood in that Primitive State,
notwithstanding all the Subtility of all the Serpents in the World; but letting
her Ear hearken to this Old Serpent, she was beguiled; there grew up a
Consultation in her reasoning Part; it may be so as he says, I will try.

So I say to you that are come to a State of Sanctification, and in some
measure to know the cleansing Power of God, and that you have not believed in
it in vain, but it has effectually wrought some Change and Alteration in you,
and is still carrying on the Work of your Salvation: Many Temptations will
attend you, and many Snares will be laid in your Way, but God has preserved
you to this Day: I know the Devil's Wiles and Temptations are manifold; they
are fitted to every one's Inclinations, fitted to every Opportunity, and to
every Occasion in this World; Men are tried every Way by the Tempter, to see
which Way he may ensnare them; he tries every Way to ensnare and entangle the
simple, that he may turn them to the right Hand or to the left, that their
Souls may be destroyed and perish.

I cannot speak to you by a more emphatical Word, by a more familiar
Exhortation than this, Take heed you be not beguiled as Eve was: many will be
tempted as she was; but I would not have you do as she did, and yield to the
Temptation: Take heed that you do not defile yourselves, but keep your Garments
white; you that have been washed and cleansed, labor to keep yourselves
unspotted from the World; this is pure Religion and undefiled, that which has
enlightened many a Nation, and shall enlighten many of those whose Religion is
to be undefiled, and to keep themselves unspotted from the World: I pray God
increase the Number of them, that so the blessed Work of Sanctification, that
has begun in this Way, may be carried on to his Praise, and the Salvation of
our Souls, to the spreading forth of his Glory, and the exalting of his Name;
that the Strangers which are scattered and desolate, may be brought into his
holy Way, and walk in it; that we all, in a Fellowship together, walking in
that holy Way, may through the Eternal Spirit, offer Praise and Thanksgiving to
God, who is worthy to recieve Glory and Honor, Power and Dominion, for ever
and even. Amen.

A SERMON ON THE IMPORTANT DOCTRINE OF REGENERATION.
Preached at Grace Church-Sreet, the Sixth of the Third Month, 1688.
By WILLIAM DEWSBURY.
My Friends,
Except ye be regenerated and born again, ye cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.

THIS is the Word of the Lord God to all People this Day; this lies not in airy
Profession, and in vain Imaginations, and whatsoever else it is that you deck
yourselves withal; you must every particular Man and Woman be born again, else
you cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. This was the Doctrine of Christ in
that prepared Body wherein he appeared in the World, and preached to Nicodemus,
that standing Doctrine to this Moment of Time, and will be so while any Man
breathes upon the Earth; there is no other Way, no other Gate to enter into
Life, but by this great Work of Regeneration. Now to enforce People to come to
this great Work, and to set forward from Earth to Heaven, all being driven out
of Paradise, by the Cherubim set with a flaming Sword, there is no returning to
that blessed Life, but by the Loss of that Life that did grieve the Spirit of
God, and which did cause Man to be driven out; there is no other Way of
returning again but by this new Birth. As you are all driven and forced out of
Paradise, and the flaming Sword and the Cherubims are set to keep the Way of
the Tree of Life, so you must return into the Favor of God again, by the Light
of Christ; and you have Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept, here a little,
and there a little, to direct your Minds to the Light of Christ Jesus. As the
first Adam was made a living Soul, so the second Adam is a quickening Spirit.
This know for certain, no Man or Woman can be quickened, and raised up into the
Life of the second Adam, till the Life of the first Adam be taken away from
them.

So now, let every one of you deal plainly with your own Hearts, how you came
to be a slain People to the Life of the first Adam, in which Life there was a
Working of the Mystery of Iniquity in every Part of Man. One cries, Lo here is
Christ! another, Lo there is Christ! and every one is following his own
Imagination about the Letter of the Scripture; this is still but the vain
Spirit of Man, running and striving to recover himself; and this is the Cause
there is so much Profession of God, and so little of his Nature appearing among
the Sons and Daughters of Men. Now all of you that come to be Regenerated, you
must come to the Light of Christ, there is no other Way to it. He will search
your Hearts, and try your Reins, and set your Sins in Order before you, and
trace out the Iniquities that compass you about; therefore you must see
yourselves a lost People, a sinful People, and so come to feel the Weight of
your Sins upon your Consciences, there is no other Way to come to Life; you
will never complain of Sin till you be burdened with it, till you have a
Trumpet sounding in your Ears, to awaken you, that you may arise from the Dead,
that Christ may give you Light; there is no other Way, dear People; you must
bring your Deeds to the Light of Christ, and abide in the Sentence of
Condemnation; if you save your Lives, you lose them; if you will lose your
Lives for Christ's Sake, there is no Danger of your eternal Life. John the
Baptist, Christ's Forerunner, declared, I indeed baptize you with Water unto
Repentance, but he that comes after me is mightier than I, the Latchet of
whose Shoes I am not worthy to unloose, he shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost and with Fire, whose Fan is in his Hand, and he will thoroughly purge his
Floor, and will gather his Wheat into his Garner, but the Chaff he will burn
with unquenchable Fire. What is it the better for you to read the Scripture, if
you know not this Fiery Baptism, which all must know that are regenerated;
deceive not yourselves, Christ will appear in flaming Fire, and take Vengeance
on all them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

I stand here as a Witness of the Lord of Life this Day; there is no Way for
People to come to Salvation, but they must know Christ revealed in all their
Hearts. What is he doing but rendering Vengeance upon the carnal Mind,
self-pleasing and all inordinate Affections; he comes with Vengeance to take
away thy Life, he will baptize thee with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire. If thou
know not this, thou art not a true Christian, thou will never look Death in
the Face with Joy, nor go down to the Grave with Triumph. If thou live at
Home in the Body, and flyest for thy Life, and will not be willing to lose thy
Life for Christ, if thou art called to it; and if thou will not have Christ to
wash thee (some for Shyness, and some for Self-Love will refuse this,) if
Christ does not wash thee, thou have no Part in him; you must come to Christ to
purify you in the fiery Furnace; the Day of the Lord shall burn as an Oven, (as
the Prophet speaks) this is a dreadful Day, a Day of Vengeance, the Day of the
Lord Jesus Christ, who redeemeth his People from their Sins; Sion is redeemed
with Judgment, and established with Righteousness. Do not make the Way to
Heaven easier in your Minds and Imaginations than indeed it is, and think it
not sufficient to live in an outward Observance of the Ways of God. If your own
Wills be alive, and your Corruptions remain unmortified, the Judgment of God
will be your Portion; therefore in the Lord's Name come along with me; I am
come to declare what I have heard and seen of the Father. Come and examine thy
Conscience; have thou brought thy Deeds to the Light? Then thou have received
Condemnation upon thyself, and thy Haughtiness is bowed down, and laid low, and
thou see thyself a poor miserable Wretch before the eternal God. Whatsoever
thou know of the Mind of God, have thou reformed thy Ways? come along with
me, and tell me what is the Ground of thy Faith, and thy Confidence; is it thy
Obedience and Qualifications? Because thy Obedience is right, and thy
Qualifications are right, What use do thou make of them? Read the Book of
Conscience; Have thou no Ground for thy Faith? Thou have put on the reformed
Faith, and live an unreformed Life; search and try thy self, Man, or Woman.
Do thou watch over thyself and keep in a Sense of thy Dissolution,
notwithstanding all thy Qualifications and partial Reformations? Do thou
strive to enter in at the strait Gate, and the narrow Way? Here is the lost
Sheep, thou seek, the Life of thy Will, the Life of the first Adam; the
Justice of God will not suffer thee to make a Savior of thy Duties and
Qualifications, and to take God's Jewels and to deck thyself with them; Thou
can not be saved without the Rigteousness of God in Chrst Jesus. What says
thy Conscience, art thou brought to this Change of Mind, and of thy
Conversation? Are you all willing to part with your Sins, with your Pride and
Haughtiness? Are you willing to part with your vile Affections? This is the
Work of God's Grace upon you. Do thou place thy Confidence in thy Duties and
Qualifications, and take God's Jewels and Ornaments, and deckest thyself With
them? Thou tookest my Jewels, says the Lord, and did play the Harlot. If
thou return to the Lord, and humble thy self, and get through this Difficulty,
thou will be happy forever. This Judgment of God, this flaming Sword that turns
every Way, will keep thee from returning to Sin, and bring thee to Christ, and
cut thee off from all Hope of Salvation but by him, and make thee to see the
absolute Need of a Savior, and that thy Life is hid with Christ in God.

It is God's infinite Goodness to Men, that he will hide Pride from them, and
humble them under his mighty Hand. This is the Condition of poor Creatures that
are slain by the Hands of the most High. How may I know when I am slain and
baptized, and come to have Sincerity? They that have this Baptism enter into
the Heavenly Life. If you love the Light of Christ Jesus, it will be thus with
you; God will make short Work in the Earth. He will set thy Sins in Order
before thee, and make thee watchful unto Prayer, and lead thee to Holiness of
Life and Conversation, and make thee abhor thyself, and despise all the Pomps
and Pleasures and Vanities of this World. When he has adorned thee with his
Graces, then watch for the Light, and in the Light of Christ thou shall see
Light, and that all thou have done, and can do, is but thy Duty. All this
thou ought to do: Thou art God's Creature, and all this will not justify
thee in Order to thy Eternal Salvation, for these Services thou owe unto God.
If thou diligently wait, thou shall see more Light; then the Sword that
proceeds out of the Mouth of Christ, who is called the Word of God, will cut
thee off from all thy Hopes of Salvation from any Thing thou have done, from
any of thy Qualifications, from any Thing that thou can do, so that thou will
be a hopeless Soul, nothing in thy own Sense and Apprehension. The Power of the
first Adam must die before him, and thou will cry out, I am a dead, lost, and
undone Creature; but there is a Life hid with Christ in God for me; but I can
never have it till I be slain into the Will of God, and become as a little
Child, and be stripped of all my own Excellency that I have attained. I must come
to a Sense of my own Misery, and fall down at the Foot of God. When I am become
as a little Child, humbled and slain as to my own Will and Confidence in my own
Righteousness; I will not then question but I shall live a holy Life, but I
will give all that Life I had, for that Life which is hid with Christ in God:
O! there is none come so far, that ever miss of Eternal Life. All shuffling
People that would have Salvation by Christ, and will not let him exercise his
heavenly Power, his princely glorious Power to baptize them into his Death, it
is they that come short of Salvation; but all those that yield themselves up to
Christ, to be redeemed through Judgment, and are become as little Children,
these are in a happy State. You know that our Lord Jesus Christ took a little
Child in his Arms, and said, Whosoever becomes not as a little Child, cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. You must all of you become as little
Children, and depend upon the Mercy and free Grace of God; you must all come to
a holy Resignation of yourselves to God's Disposal: If you come to Christ as
little Children, and depend upon him, you cannot miss of Salvation; it is
entailed upon such Souls as hear the Voice of Christ; they that hear the Voice
of the Son of God, shall live.

I stand here as a Witness for the God of Heaven. I never heard the Voice of
Christ (as his Follower) till I was slain and baptized, and lay as a little
Child under his Heavenly Chastisements. As soon as (...) my Soul was brought to
this in my Humiliation, (...) then the dreadful Judgment was taken away, and
the Book of Life was opened unto me, and the Lord spoke comfortably to me, I
have loved thee with an everlasting Love; and I was made a Christian through a
Day of Vengeance, and of burning as an Oven; and the Haughtiness, and Pride of
Man in me was brought low. Now in this Conformity to Christ's Death, People may
die into Life; and blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord, for they rest
from their Labors, and their Works do follow them. Away with all your own
Wills, and your Pride, and Haughtiness, and your Hypocrisy, and Deceit, and
Dependency upon any Qualification of your own. You must come to have your Life
separated from you, else you will all perish. Those that will die with Christ,
and be willing to die for him, he is revealed as a Savior to them. He was
before us in the Days of his Flesh, and complied with his Father's Will, he was
nailed to the Cross. The Son of God when he was come to the Depth of his
Sufferings, What was his Cry? My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? This
was for thy Sake, and my Sake, and every Man and Woman's Sake that do believe
in him; he drank the Cup which his Father gave him to drink; If it was done
thus to the green Tree, what shall be done unto the dry? He went before us, and
when he comes again he will take us to himself, and take us from the Filth of
Sin, that we may be made new Creatures.

Now except we be born again, we cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; and
there is no becoming new Creatures, till we be slain to the old Man. Thou must
be slain to thy Pride and Haughtiness, and the Corruption of thine own Will,
and all Selfishness, thou must have God to burn it up in thee the Holy Ghost
will destroy and burn up nothing in thee, but that which will bring an eternal
Fire upon thy Soul. Show me, thou whom my Soul loves, where is the Path of
Life, the Footsteps of the Flock of thy Companions? Why should I be as one
that goes aside? Now every one that lives at home in the Bosom of Self, take
this with you, though you profess the Truth, and live in an outward Conformity
thereto, yet if you secretly indulge your corrupt Wills, and live a
Flesh-pleasing Life, and consult with Flesh and Blood, and are not rent off
from your Lusts, you cannot enjoy the Lord of Life; While I am at home in the
Body, I am absent from the Lord.

The Body of Sin is a Loadstone to draw you from the Life of God, and from
glorying in the Cross of Christ: This is Flesh and Blood, and Flesh and Blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. For the Lord's Sake, for your Soul's Sake,
and for the Sake of your Eternal Happiness, put not off this Work, but pursue
it, and it will be perfected. See how Christ is revealed in you by the Holy
Ghost, and with Fire. God will redeem you by the Spirit of Judgment and
Burning: It is not ranging abroad with your Minds, but you must know Christ is
in you except you be Reprobates. If he has set your Eyes and Hearts upon
himself, and made you to water your Couch with your Tears; if he has broken
your Sleep, so as you have cried out, I shall be damned and never come to
Salvation; (this will be your Cry; it was once my Cry,) O let not your Eyes
slumber, nor your Eyelids take any Rest, till you be sure the Lord is your God.
If you find these Qualifications you are on your Way; otherwise you will be
like a deceitful Bow, and never abide in Judgment. If you reject the Counsel of
God against yourselves, and refuse to be crucified with Christ, and to be
baptized with his Baptism, you will never have Life; but by his Baptism, and
through the heavenly Operation of his Spirit, if thou have Faith in Christ's
Name, thou shall be married to him in everlasting Righteousness. Salvation
shall be brought to us, and eternal Life be bestowed upon us, even that Life
which is hid with Christ in God, he will give to every poor mournful Soul, that
submits to his blessed Will, and believes in the Lord Jesus Christ; This is
not a Faith of our own making, nor a Garment of our own Embroidery, but that
which the Lord has given to us. O happy Man or Woman, that obtainest this Gift
of God! O! Who will not lose their Lives for this everlasting Life? Who will
not die for this eternal Life? Now the Matter lies in the Death of your own
Wills: When you have done the Will of God, then watch that your own Wills be
slain, and that your CURSED SELF take not the Jewels of God, and his Bracelets
and Ornaments, and bestow them upon Self, and paint and deck cursed Self; and
take not the Members of Christ, and make them the Members of an Harlot: If you
be dead to your own Wills you are risen with Christ, and receive a Resurrection
to eternal Life: Crucify Self, and set the World at naught, and trample upon
it, and all Things of it, and count them as Dross and Dung in Comparison of
Christ, that the Father has revealed to be our Life, in the Days of our Sorrow
and Mourning, in the Day of our Calamity, in the Day when we cried, our Hope is
lost.

Thus it has been with the holiest People on Earth. It is not by Works of
Righteousness of thy own that thou can be saved; Christ comes to cut all
these down, that thou may be ingrafted into him, and justified by his Grace.
Do not make this Matter of Talk, and say, I have heard this and that; but look
into your own Hearts, and see what heavenly Workings are there; what there is
of the Power of the Lord Jesus, that has made you to loath this World, and the
inordinate Love of the Creature, that you may enjoy all these Things as if you
enjoyed them not. We cannot when we are slain and crucified to this World but
say, My Life is in Christ. When we come to ascribe Nothing to our selves, and
all to Christ; here is a blessed Harmony, broken Hearts, melted Spirits, and
yet joyful Souls; poor Creatures that were mourning and sighing and crying
before the Lord in retired Places, and yet rejoicing in Christ Jesus. I am
risen with Christ; I said, my Hope is cut off, I will lie down in thy Will, O
God; do what thou will with me, it is in thy sovereign Pleasure and free Gift,
whether thou give me Life, or deny it to me. There must be a Resignation of
ourselves to the Will of God; it was so with the Lord Jesus, and it is so with
every true Saint of God; you must be humbled as little Children, before
Judgment be taken away, and the Loving Kindness of God sealed up to your Souls.
If you seek this Work of God, you will find it; if you seek it upon your Beds,
in all your Labors and Concernments, in all your Stations; and Relations; if
you press after the New Birth, you must use this World as if you used it not,
and live a married Life, as if you were unmarried; for the Fashion of this
World passes away. This is not Rantism.

But let me tell you, a new World comes by Regeneration; a Man is not lifted up
in his own Mind, but laid low in his own Eyes; he waits for the Wisdom of God
to govern him, and he is a Steward of the Grace of God, to give to them that
stand in need. When a Man is regenerated and born again, he is as contented
with Bread and Water, as with all the Enjoyments of this World: What is the
Matter? His own Will is gone, and put down under his Feet, and whatsoever it is
that gives Life to all his vain Desires and Affections; there is an Harmony of
all within, a Man praising of God, and blessing his Holy Name; there are no
Intanglements shall draw away the Heart from serving of God, and seeking his
Glory; and if God shall call the Husband from the Wife, or the Wife from the
Husband for the Glory of his Name, there is no whining or complaining, and
crying out, but giving them up, and a praising and blessing God when they are
called to such an Exercise; and if they are not called to that, then they set
their Hearts to glorify God in their several Places and Stations; then they
have a full Content in a blessed Resignation. Here their Wills are slain, but
they praise God, they have no Desire, but Lord thy Will be done; always
praising God, always having the Fear and Glory of God before their Eyes. All
the Mischief is hatched in pleasing Men's own Wills: That is the Counsel of
every Heart that Christ does not govern: Will you live as the Quakers? Then you
must live contemptibly, the Mistress and Maid are Hail-fellow, well met. No;
every one must walk in Humility, and live in Acquaintance with the God of
Heaven; she that is wrought upon by the same Spirit, must with all Diligence
behave herself as becomes a Servant of the Lord. Here is now a new World, and
the Fashions of the old World are gone; all Pride, Haughtiness, Crossness, and
trampling one upon another are all gone, all slain, through the Operation of
Christ.

What remains now? Christ is in me, and we are all one in him. Christ laid down
his Life for thee and me; now he reigns in me, and he has prepared my Body to
die for the Truth, as his prepared Body was laid down for my Sin. It is a Kind
of foolish Profession, to make Profession of Christ, and live in Covetousness,
Profaneness, Sensuality, and the like; they that are come to this heavenly
Birth seek the Things that are above, thou can do no other. Make the Tree
good, and the Fruit will be good. You must be ingrafted into the Vine of God's
Righteousness: O! slight not the Day of your Visitation. What was it to me to
read of any being born again, till I was slain, and knew the heavenly Baptism
of Christ Jesus? Till I saw the flaming Sword ready to slay me in every Way, in
every Turning. The Light of Christ convinced me of Sin, and his Righteousness
Justified me, and those Works were abominable to me, that hindered my Soul's
Passage to Christ. Christ Jesus in marrying my Soul to himself, seized upon me,
and did work effectually in me: There is the Testimony of Christ in me, he has
sealed up my Soul to the Day of my Redemption: Here is a certain Passage, and a
certain Way which never any miss of, that lose their Lives for Christ: If you
be not ready and willing to lose your Lives for Christ, you shall never come
here: The Gate is straight, and the Way is narrow; none come hither but those
that die into an heavenly Oneness with Christ. O Friends, let us empty
ourselves, that Christ may fill us: Let us be nothing in our own Eyes, that we
may be all in him, and receive of his Fullness.

Now I commend you to God's Witness, that you may remember what has been
spoken, among you; but consider, if you do not hearken to it, it will follow
you, and be a Plague to you to all Eternity. If you will not yield up
yourselves to Christ, this Day that burns like an Oven, this Fire you must
dwell with when out of the Body, there will be no quenching of this Fire
forever; but if you be so wise for your Souls, as to resign yourselves up to
Christ, and come to him as little Children, this will not hinder your earthly
Concerns. Though the World may account thee a Fool, yet thou have that Part of
heavenly Wisdom, to do what thou do as unto God; thou carriest to thy Wife,
as in the Sight of God, that she may be sanctified to thee, and thou to her;
and thou carriest becomingly to thy Children and Servants, and thou will abound
in Grace, and in every good Work, which will be for thine Eternal Welfare.

O! I beseech you People, for the Lord's Sake, wait for the Light of Christ to
guide you; learn of him to be meek and lowly; then happy are you; for he
dwells with the Humble, but he beholds the Proud afar off. This New Birth,
which is a true Work, a sincere and heavenly Work, it will make you for ever. O
make Room for Christ in your Hearts, or else he is never like to dwell with
you. He loves to dwell with the poor and humble and contrite Spirit; he abhors
the Proud, he will empty your Souls, that he may fill them.

And so I commend you to God. I have been long held in Durance under great
Weakness; and I was restless, till I could come up to this great City of
London, to preach the everlasting Gospel among you; and you see I am among you
here: Pray every one of you turn inward; let not these Words passing through a
mean Vessel be as a bare empty Discourse of Truth to you, which you only hear,
and take no further Care of your Salvation. Take heed of despising the Light
that shines in the midst of you, and be pressing forward to the heavenly Work
that is laid in the Power of Christ Jesus, even through Judgment into Death,
and then he will give eternal Life. The Lord confirm this, that it may rest
upon your Hearts, that you may be dead to the Things of the World. We are not
come to Mount Sinai, that genders to Bondage, but we are come to Mount Sion,
the City of the Living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable
Company of Angels, to the general Assembly, and the Church of the Firstborn
which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of
just Men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to
the Blood of Sprinkling, that speaks better Things than that of Abel. This is
the Inheritance of the Redeemed of the most High, blessed be the Name of the
Lord: let us rest in Hope, till he bring us to Humility and Lowliness of Mind,
that he may cloth us with heavenly Glory according to his Promise, I will
beautify my House with Glory, says the Lord. This is the Portion of a poor
People, that cast down themselves before the Lord, that he may lift them up,
and be All in All to them, in whose blessed Presence they shall have Joy, and
Rivers of Pleasure at his Right Hand for evermore.

Salvation from Sin by Christ alone: OR, The Arm of the Lord revealed. A SERMON
Preached at the Quaker's Meeting House, in Grace Church Street, London, August
12, 1694.
By WILLIAM PENN.
THE Great and Blessed God that made Heaven and Earth, the Seas and the great
Fountains of the Deep, and Rivers of Water, the Almighty JEHOVAH, who is from
Everlasting to Everlasting. He also made Man and Woman; and his Design was to
make them Eternally Happy and Blessed. And therefore He made Man in his own
Image; In the Image of God created he him, Male and Female created be them: He
made them after his own Likeness, Holy, Wise, Merciful, Just, Patient, and
Humble, endued them with Knowledge, Righteousness, and true Holiness. But Man
and Woman through their Transgression lost this Image of God, and with it lost
their Happiness and true Blessedness, that God made them in a Capacity to enjoy.

Now in this State of MISERY, into which we are Fallen, we are come short of
the Glory of God; and it is out of this wretched woeful State we must be
brought, else we shall never see the Face of God with Comfort. This is an
eternal Truth of God, and recorded in the holy Scriptures, John iii. 16. That
God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life. God so loved the
World, he gave his Son to be a Light unto the World, that all might see their
Way back to God again: For Sin has darkened the Understanding, and clouded the
Mind of Man and Woman, and alienated them from the Life of God, and their
Hearts are hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin. But now is the Acceptable
Time, now is the Day of Salvation, the Day of God's Grace and favorable
Visitation, wherein he visits Men and Women, Illuminates their Minds and
Spirits with a Light from Heaven, that they might see the deplorable State and
Condition wherein they are, and what they are doing: It is in this Light, that
they have a Day of Grace vouchsafed to them, that it will be well with them,
both here and for ever. They that receive this Light, and come out of that
which they are called from, which is Sin, they may come to enjoy Peace with
God. It was Sin that first separated between God and Man; and it is Sin now
that hinders Man from Acquaintance with the Lord, who brings Peace unto him: It
is by this Light, that we are to acquaint our selves with God, that we may be
at Peace. Thus says the Lord by the Prophet, It is Sin has separated between
me and you: Sin has made a Partition Wall between God and us, and God has
sent his Son into the World to break down this Partition Wall that Sin has
made; that so fallen Man might return to God, and come into Paradise again, out
of which Sin has cast him.

Now, none can bring us back to God, and into Favor and Communion with him,
but our Lord Jesus Christ: He is the Light and Leader of his People. There is
no Name under Heaven by which we can be saved, but the Name of JESUS: It is he
that saves his People from their Sins; and it is in him alone that we are
blessed: Blessed is he whose Transgression is forgiven, and whose Sin is
covered: And for the Sake of Christ alone it is, that the Lord imputes not
Iniquity to us. Now pray, Examine yourselves, whether you be in the Faith, 2
Cor. xiii. 5. Prove your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except
you be Reprobates. Examine yourselves, whether you have chosen the Lord for
your God, and Christ for your Redeemer? And whether you have forsaken your
Sins, and turned from your evil Ways, and answered the Visitation of the Love
of God in your Souls? Do you believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, who came to seek
and to save them that were lost? He is the Physician of Value, that was wounded
to heal our Wounds: He was wounded for our Transgressions, bruised for our
Iniquities, and had the Chastisement of our Peace upon him; that by his Stripes
we might be healed: It is he alone that could do this. Who is sufficient for
these Things? The Lord has found out One that is sufficient; he has laid Help
upon One that is Mighty, that is able to save to the uttermost all that come
unto God by him. God has given him the Spirit without Measure, and filled him
with Grace and Truth, that of his Fullness we might all receive, and Grace for
Grace: He is mighty to save the Sons and Daughters of Men, and to give them
Power to become the Children of God.

This was testified of old, John i. 12. But as many as received him, to them
gave he Power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name.
Men want Power over their Sins: When Sin appears to be exceeding sinful, they
would overcome it, and be rid of it, when it is troublesome: And when they are
under a deep Conviction of the Evil of it, and see the woeful and miserable
State that Sin has brought Mankind into; how they have lost the Image of God,
and the Favor of God; they then desire to be restored and brought back again
into their primitive State. You that know the Truth of God, see how the Work
goes on in your Hearts; see how the Image of God is carrying on upon you.
Consider, that the Lord is a holy God, of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity
with Approbation: There is no Peace to the Wicked, that walk in the broad Way,
and grieve the holy Spirit, and do not answer his Divine Call. There is a
twofold Call concerning Man, a Call to Repentance, and a Call to Judgment. The
Call to Repentance, is in this Day of God's Visitation; they that receive it
now, that are so wise, as to answer God's Call, and believe in the Son of God,
and in his inward Appearance, that obey his Voice, when they hear his Call,
saying, Come away, come out of thy Sins, come out of the Wickedness,
Filthiness, and Pollution of the World; come into the Divine Nature of the Son
of God; come into his Life: Into what Life? Into the Spiritual Life, the Divine
Life. Thou have been dead to God, and alive to the World: Now that thou may
be dead to Sin, and alive to God, come unto him that has all Power in Heaven
and Earth committed to him. O come unto Christ, the Dear and Blessed Son of
God, in this Day of Grace and Salvation, and receive Power to overcome thy
Sins! Then thou will be a Conqueror, and overcome the Devil.

We are of ourselves altogether insufficient for these Things, we are weak and
impotent; and our Savior has told us, Without me ye can do nothing: We are
justified freely by God's Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ; not justified by our own Works. How great a Contradiction is it to
Charge them with the Contrary, that say, They cannot Preach nor Pray, but as
the Spirit of God moves them. Blessed be God, that has made us sensible of
our own Weakness, Emptiness, and Poverty. Our Help has been in the Name of the
Lord, who made Heaven and Earth, who has given us his Son to be an Helper, and
an all-sufficient Savior to us; with him he has given sufficient Power and
Strength, whereby we are enabled to overcome the Devil, the Enemy of our Souls:
So that we may be enabled to stand against Principalities and Powers, against
spiritual Wickedness, and conquer all the Powers of Darkness, and fight the
good Fight of Faith, and finish our Course with Joy, and keep the Faith; seeing
there is laid up for us a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous
Judge, shall give us at that Day; and not only to us, (says the Apostle) but
unto all them that love His Appearing. We have not an High Priest which cannot
be touched with the feeling of our Infirmities; but was in all Points tempted
like as we are, yet without Sin: Christ, our Redeemer, was tempted, that he
might succor those that are tempted. When the Devil tempted our Savior in the
Wilderness, and could not prevail, he went away and left him: The Prince of
this World found nothing in him, upon which he could fasten his Temptation.
Christ will enable those that believe in him to overcome the Devil, and to be
more than Conquerors, through him that has loved them: He came into the World
to purge and purify his People, and to be the Author of Eternal Salvation to
all them that believe in him, and obey him. But it is said, He did not many
mighty Works among some to whom he preached the Everlasting Gospel, because of
their Unbelief: Many will not believe in the Inward and Spiritual Appearance of
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who is the Light of the World; they will neither
believe in the Light, nor walk in the Light, which will enable them to conquer
the Evil one, who is the Prince of Darkness: It is only through Christ Jesus,
the Great Captain of our Salvation, that we are victorious.

Therefore, my Friends, open your Hearts to the Lord Jesus Christ, receive this
blessed Gift of God, which he offers to you: And can God give you a greater
Gift than the Son of his Love? And will not you gladly receive him, and that
great Salvation which he has purchased for you with his own Blood? But, say
some People, we have received Christ, and believe in him, and believe the
Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures. But let me ask you, Who keeps House
all this while? What have you done for Christ? Christ has died for you; but
have thou lived to him? And have thou died to the World, and died to thy Sins
and Lusts? Consider with your selves, It is both your Great Duty and Interest
to die to Sin, and live to Christ that died for you. And we must stand at
Christ's Tribunal, and give an Account to him of whatsoever we have done,
whether good or bad; and he will judge us at the great Day of his Appearing.
Blessed are you, that receive the Blessed Son of God, that now stands in Spirit
at the Door, and Knocks: Open your Hearts, and make Room for him, and let not
the World keep him out, and he will come in, and sup with you, and you with
him: And he will do that for you, which you cannot do for your selves. The
Spirit is willing, but the Flesh is weak: He will give thee Power over Sin, and
over the World, and over the Devil: When ever he shall assault thee with his
Temptations, Say, Get thee behind me, Satan, thou favourest not the Things that
be of God. When People come to be spiritually minded, they will taste and
savor the Things that are spiritual and heavenly: If they be not Things of
God, do not touch with them, have nothing to do with them; but walk in the
Spirit, and savor the Things of the Spirit. And hearken to the Counsel of
Christ, who speaks unto you in the Name of Wisdom; O ye Simple Ones understand
Wisdom, and ye Fools, be of an understanding Heart; hear, for I will speak of
excellent Things, and the Opening of my Lips shall be right Things; blessed is
the Man that hears me, watching daily at my Gates, waiting at the Posts of my
Doors: for whosoever finds me, finds Life. Hearken to the blessed Counsel of
Christ, hear this Voice and obey it: They that do his Will, shall know his
Doctrine: The Secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show
them his Covenant.

They that have the saving Knowledge of God, and Christ Jesus, which is Life
eternal, they will walk in a correspondent and suitable Manner to that
Knowledge, and be holy in all Manner of Conversation; they will not be only
nominal Christians, but true Christians, Israelites indeed, in whom there is no
guile: the will receive Christ Jesus, who is God's Gift, and know the Operation
of his Power in their Souls. These Persons are fit to live, and prepared to
die; when Christ who is their Life, shall appear, they shall appear with him in
Glory. When the Sound of the Last Trumpet shall be heard at the End of the
World, Time shall be no more; Come away! that Day shall not be terrible to them
that have put off the Old Man, and put on the New Man; and have begun to live a
new Life, and to have new Affections, new Thoughts and Resolutions, and have
laid up their Treasure in Heaven, where their Hearts are also: They have that
Peace which the World cannot give, and which Death cannot take away. Blessed
are they that take Sanctuary in the Name of Jesus, as in a strong Tower; they
shall get Power over their Sins, and over the Vanity of their Minds, that die
to Sin, and live to God, and feel the constraining Power and Efficacy of the
Love of Christ, who has loved them and washed them from their Sins in his own
Blood, and made them Kings and Priests to God.

My Friends, Hear the Voice of Wisdom, who has said, Whosoever finds me, finds
Life, and shall obtain Favor of the Lord: But he that sins against me,
wrongeth his own Soul. Be you early Seekers: Seek the Kingdom of God in the
first Place. The Lord calls from Heaven; My Son, give me thine Heart: Let thy
Answer be, Lord, take my Heart, purify and cleanse it; break it, and make it
new, make it fit for thy Acceptance, that I may find Favor in thy Sight.
Without me (says our Savior) ye can do Nothing: Therefore desire him to do it
for thee, and to work in thee both to will and to do of his own good Pleasure.
How dreadful is it to appear at the Bar of God's Justice, as miserable Sinners!
Those that have not Christ, the Great Mediator, to plead for them, are
miserable indeed; therefore lay hold on Christ now; believe in him, lay hold on
his Power and Spirit, in this Day of your Visitation. If thou art under the
Power of Sin and Satan, thou may receive Power from Christ to overcome all
the Power of Darkness: If the strong Man armed has got Possession of thy
Heart, Christ will lay Seige to it; and if thou be willing to open the Door,
Christ will come in and cast out the strong Man, and spoil him of all his
Goods. Me will cast out the grand Enemy of thy Soul, and take Possession for
Himself; that thou may be delivered from the Power of Satan, and from the
Bondage of Corruption, and brought into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of
God: And if the Son of God make thee free, thou shall be free indeed. For this
End Christ came into the World, for this Purpose was the Son of God manifested,
that he might destroy the Works of the Devil: And he will not lose the Design
of his Coming, but will finish Transgressions, and make an End of Sin, and
bring in everlasting Righteousness.

Let us all come to Christ, and let none deceive themselves, and live in their
Sins, and yet think to come to Heaven: Be not deceived (says the Apostle) God
is not mocked; for whatsoever a Man sows, that he shall also reap: He that sows
to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption; but he that sows to the
Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life everlasting. Labor for a sure grounded
Hope, a just Hope in the Mercy of God for Pardon and Salvation; then you must
know a Work of Christ upon you, and the Power of the Spirit of Christ within
you, subduing your Will to a holy Subjection to the Divine Will; that you may
say with the Apostle; I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live, yet not
I, but Christ lives in me, and the Life which I now live in the Flesh, I live
by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. Then the
Call to Judgment will be joyful to you; for you shall then be justified and
acquitted before the whole World, at that great and general Judgment, and have
an abundant Entrance into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and it shall be well with you for ever, Now, Say to the Righteous, it
shall be well with him; not that it does so appear at present; for through many
Tribulations we must expect to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and many are
the Troubles of the Righteous; but the Lord will deliver them out of them all.
So that if in this Life only (says the Apostle) we have Hope, we are of all
Men most miserable; yet Say to the Righteous, It shall be well with him;
whatsoever their Trials, Troubles. and Tribulations are, the Lord will deliver
them in the best Time; they have Heaven in their Eye, and they look to
Recompense of Reward. Now what have thou in thine Eye? Is it the high Calling
in Christ? Is this the Mark thou aimest at, and which thou have in View? Is
this the Port and Haven that thou art sailing to, looking unto Jesus, the
Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross, despising the Shame? Heb. xii. 2. The Apostle, after he had
been speaking of the Suffering and Martyrdom of those great Saints, of whom the
World was not worthy; Heb. xi, how that through Faith they subdued Kingdoms,
wrought Righteousness, obtained Promises, stopped the Mouths of Lions, quenched
the Violence of the Fire, escaped the Edge of the Sword, out of Weakness were
made strong, waxed valiant in Fight, and turned to flight the Armies of the
Aliens; of Women, that received their dead to Life again, and others were
tortured, not accepting of Deliverance that they might obtain a better
Resurrection; then he comes to speak of the Sufferings of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and bids us, Look unto him. Heb. xii. 1, 2, 3. Wherefore seeing we are
compassed about with so great a Cloud of Witnesses, let us lay aside every
Weight, and the Sin that does so easily beset us; and let us run with Patience
the Race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of
our Faith: Who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and
despised the Shame, and is set down at the right Hand of the Throne of God. For
Consider him that endured such Contradiction of Sinners against himself, lest
ye be wearied and faint in your Minds. Blessed are they that can endure all
these Things, Shame, Reproach, Contumely and Disdain, Persecutions and
Afflictions that attend the Testimony of Jesus! Blessed are they that can
endure the Cross, and despise the Shame! It is an internal Cross, which thou
must endure for Christ, or thy own Heart will reprove thee, check thee and
condemn thee, for it: But if thou come to know a being crucified with Christ,
thou shall reign with him, and be raised up to eternal Glory with him. Unless
thou know a Dying to the World, and a being crucified with Christ, thou
can not have a well grounded Hope of everlasting Happiness.

Therefore now, Friends, Examine your selves about your Title to Heaven. It is
the Wisdom and Practice of the World, to examine their Titles and Settlements,
and to see they be sure, and firm, and stable before hand: So we should make
sure for Heaven and eternal Glory, and of an House not made with Hands, eternal
in the Heavens, before this earthly Tabernacle be dissolved; then for us to
live, will be Christ, and to die will be eternal Gain. Blessed are they that
bear Record of the Word of God, and of the Testimony of Jesus, that bear his
Name and testify and join with him against the Spirit of the World, and the
Prince of the Power of the Air. It is within, that thou must join with Christ's
Appearance, that so thou may be christianized, and thy Mind made truly
Christian: Thou must be purified in thy Spirit, and baptized with the Holy
Ghost, and with Fire, and know the powerful Operation of the Lord: They that
have not Experience of the New Birth, they cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

O my Friends, set before you the Example of Christ, who was holy, harmless and
undefiled; his Life was glorious in Holiness: And as it becomes you, so it
highly concerns you to be holy in all Manner of Conversation. For if you
imitate not the Life of Christ, you cannot be saved by his Death: He came into
the World, to redeem you from all Iniquity, and to save you from Sin and Hell;
Labor to answer the Dignity of your High and Holy Calling, with a Conversation
becoming the Gospel of Christ: for you are called to Glory and Virtue.
Whatsoever Troubles, Temptations and Tribulations may attend you in your
Pilgrimage here below. If you be faithful and sincere, you will have Peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ. In all your Labors and Travels on this
Earth, you may look up with Joy, for you have a serene Heaven over your Heads:
Let Christ be precious to you; open the Door of your Hearts to him, who is the
King of Glory: He is oppressed in the Hearts of the Unclean, but he is exalted
and lifted up in the Hearts of the Faithful: Blessed are they that set him upon
his Throne in their Hearts! O learn of Christ to be meek and lowly: Your
Humility will exalt him, and will also exalt you at the last: Be faithful to
the Death, and you shall receive a Crown of Life: Those that have eternal Life
in their Eye, and depend upon Christ alone for Salvation, they have laid a sure
Foundation. All other Foundations will come to Nothing; they are founded in
Time, and in Time the will come to moulder away: But that City that GOD is the
Builder and Maker of, that Abraham had in his Eye, will never decay nor moulder
away: Let us have this always in our Eye, that nothing may intercept our View.
We have here (says the Apostle) no continuing City; we seek one that is to
come. In this World we are as Sheep among Wolves: Fear not, little Flock,
(says our Savior) It is your Father's good Pleasure to give you a Kingdom. If
we be the Sheep of Christ, we shall follow him: For his Sheep follow him, and
know his Voice, and a Stranger they will not follow, but they will flee from
him, for they know not the Voice of a Stranger. My Sheep (says Christ) hear my
Voice, and I know them, and they follow Me, and I give unto them eternal Life,
and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my Hands. Here
is Encouragement for us to Labor abundantly in the Work of the Lord; for our
Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. Let us, with Moses, choose rather to
suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin
for a Season; and esteem the Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the
Treasures of Egypt, and have Respect to the Recompense of Reward.

Friends, I beseech you, in the Fear of God, look up unto JESUS, the GREAT
MEDIATOR of the New Covenant, the Author and Finisher of our Faith; that by
patient Continuance in Well-doing, you may seek for Glory, Honor, Immortality,
and eternal Life: Which you shall obtain, if you persevere to the End: For he
that endures unto the End, shall be saved.

Be not weary of Well-doing; for in due Time you shall reap, if ye faint not.
He that has appeared as a God of Salvation, and a mighty Preserver of his
People in all Ages of the World, and has been so both to the primitive
Christians, and to all our Christian Friends that are gone before us to an
eternal Rest, if you faint not but follow them, who through Faith and Patience
do inherit the Promises, you shall lay down your Heads in Peace in him, when
you come to die: And when Time shall be no more, you shall be for ever with the
Lord.

To GOD be Praise, Honor, and Glory, who has stretched forth his mighty Arm
to Save: Who is the Arm of the Lord but Christ Jesus, the Redeemer of Souls?
When we had undone our selves, and lost our selves, in wandering and departing
from the Lord, the true and living God, into Darkness and the Shadow of Death,
he stretched forth his Almighty Arm to gather us, and to bring us into the
Paradise of God again, when we were driven out by our own Sin from the Face and
Presence of the Lord. Christ Jesus, the Great and Good Shepherd of his Sheep,
came to seek and to save them that were lost: The lost Sheep that have wandered
from him, he will take them on his Shoulder, and bring them to his Fold: And he
will make them lie down in green Pastures, and lead them by the still Waters,
and satisfy them with the Rivers of Pleasure that are at God's right Hand for
evermore. He has promised, That he will feed his Flock like a Shepherd, and
gather his Lambs with his Arm, and carry them in his Bosom: I hope CHRIST JESUS
the GREAT SHEPHERD, will find some here this Day, that have gone astray, and
gather them with his Divine Arm, and keep them by his mighty Power, through
Faith unto Salvation. To Him be all Praise, Honor, Glory, Dominion, and
Thanksgiving: For He alone is worthy, who is GOD over all, Blessed for ever and
Ever! Amen.


