THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF PARLIAMENTARY POWER CONSIDERED, In some Remarks upon
Mr. PITT's SPEECH in the House of Commons, previous to the Repeal of the
STAMP ACT. With an INTRODUCTION. Applicable to the present situation of the
COLONIES, September, 1767.

If there be any one so credulous as not to apprehend the fatal consequences of
this FORMIDABLE POWER, I cannot but wonder at that man's security.
Demosthenes's 2 d Philipic. New York, Reprinted from the Pennsylvania Journal,
by JOHN HOLT, at the Exchange, 1768.

ADVERTISEMENT. To the PRINTER.
ANY considerations upon the nature of our present political situation, will
appear impertinent and ill-timed, while we have a writer so capable and so
anxious to support the liberties of his country; but since information cannot
be so effectually communicated, as by placing the same object in a variety of
lights, the essay which you are now requested to convey to the world, through
the channel of your press, may have its use. The patriot Farmer has, with great
judgment and precision, applied his observations to those important particulars
which have lately occured. The author of the present performance has
endeavored to support the interests of the colonies, by reasons drawn from
general principles; and, if he can but be so happy as to cooperate with his
worthy predecessor in correcting the prejudiced, and informing the ignorant, he
will have the satisfaction of thinking that he has discharged the duty of

A CITIZEN.

INTRODUCTION.
THE following piece was written but a short time before the repeal of the
stamp act; and as the subject of it was of the most general and important
nature, the trifling alteration of circumstances which a few months have
produced, cannot prevent it is being as applicable to the present state of our
affairs, as to those disagreeable controversies, in which we have been
heretofore unhappily involved. The conciliating spirit which prevailed upon the
first intelligence of the stamp-act's being repealed, prevented its publication
then; though the author was ever perfectly convinced, the colonies would not
long have any reason to flatter themselves, that the repeal of this act was a
sacrifice to liberty; or that it proceeded from any thing more than an
apprehension of the ill consequences which our brethren of Britain must have
felt from the oeconomical resolutions which we had formed. Upon examining the
debates, previous to the repeal, if any one could have doubted the sense of the
legislature, the act for securing the dependence of the colonies, would have
reduced it to a sufficient degree of certainty. Indeed, if this act had been
more equivocal, the billeting act was explicit enough to have pointed out
clearly to every common understanding, their generous meaning -- A meaning
evidenced by such measures as could not but excite the most alarming
apprehensions.

In mixed forms of government, where the delicacy of the constitution requires
the strictest attention, to the movements of each distinct part, jealous fears
frequently intervene, upon the slightest appearance of irregularity. The
history of England, alone, will furnish us with facts sufficient to support
this assertion; since every man who possesses the smallest share of historical
knowledge, must certainly have observed, that before any measure of importance
could obtain the necessary approbation of the three estates of the kingdom, it
first passed a severe and critical examination; lest a superior address in
either of the parties interested, should give themsome particular advantage --
lest a designing minister should extend the prerogative of the crown, or an
artful commoner increase the liberty of the subject. A few thousands added to
the military list, have alarmed the whole nation; and a body of troops, not
equal to those upon the American establishment, have with the most terrible
apprehensions, been considered as a formidable army, -- so averse have the
people of England ever been, to trust their liberties, even with the best of
men, that they have chosen to depend upon the precarious aid of subsidiary
troops, rather than put arms into the hands of their own countrymen: while
there was the least probability that those arms might be employed to the
subversion of liberty. This conduct, I only mean to remark as consistent with
the genius of liberty: and, though its policy, when critically examined, may
not appear altogether unexceptionable, yet will the jealous caution which
produced it, be ever considered as the grand bulwark of freedom. When I apply
myself to consider the situation of the colonists, I cannot but observe that
they labor under difficulties peculiar to themselves. They have not only to
guard their libertles against the encroachments of the royal prerogative, but
even to protect their property against the invasions of their more powerful
brethren. The people of England have only one single defense to make for the
preservation of their freedom; and, if the system of venality and corruption,
which now so generally prevails, does not gradually lead them into a state of
slavery, no open violence can ever affect it. Far different is the situation of
the divided Americans. Of them every distinct colony has hitherto been
considered as a particular plantation of the crown, and been governed by such
loose, discretionary powers as were better calculated to support the
despositism of a minister than the liberties of the settlers. They are now
considered as dangerous rivals, and their unprotected interests must fall a
sacrifice to those of their jealous brethren. An artful, designing minister
would naturally endeavor to conciliate the affections of those who more
immediately surround the throne, by removing any burdens from their shoulders,
and sixing them upon those, by whose murmurs and complaints, he could not be so
immediately affected. To gratify the desires of his selfish countrymen, and
flatter them with the appearance of an unnatural superiority; he would
willingly subscribe to any acts for the limiting our trade, and restraining our
manufactures: But perfectly convinced that the Americans will neither be so
stupid as not to perceive the iniquity of these measures, nor so passive as
patiently to submit to their being carried into execution, he prudently
prepares to support them by means as infamous and oppressive as those which are
to be supported. Though our European neighbors are driven from the continent;
and, though our savage enemies have long since laid down the hatchet, yet have
our careful guardians left us with a very considerable body of troops, and are
daily sending over fresh supplies -- to protect us from any future dangers;
when it cannot but be evident to every man of common knowledge, that in our
present situation, we are both able and willing to defend our own frontiers,
without putting the government to the trouble of transporting troops for that
purpose, at such an immense expense. We have now sixteen regiments distributed
through the different colonies -- most of them instead of being a defense to
our frontiers, are a burden to our maritime cities; where they are, by virtue
of an act of the British parliament, to be plentifully supplied with
necessaries at the expense of the place where they may be quartered; and as the
quartering them depends altogether upon the arbitrary will of the commanding
officer, he is absolutely vested with a power of oppressing any single colony,
which may have been so unfortunate as to have incurred the resentment of those
who appointed him.

When the ministry, resolved to burden us with so many troops, it was not
thought proper to make the usual requisitions to the different assemblies for
the necessary supplies. The power of parliament had met with an unexpected
opposition, in their first attempts to enforce the stamp act. Urged by a
prudent attention to their own interests, they had indeed determined to repeal
this oppressive act; but lest this extraordinary concession should be
considered as an acknowledgment of right, they determined to exert their
authority once more in a manner so explicit, as should leave us no room to
doubt their meaning.

One act is passed to declare the dependence of the colonies upon the imperial
crown and parliament of Great Britain; and that dependence is immediately
proved by a law for billeting soldiers in America, and for obliging those
places, in which the commanding officer may think proper to quarter them, to
grant certain very ample supplies of necessaries. Upon application to the
government of New York, the general assembly of that province showed their
readiness to comply with every thing that might be required for the
accommodation of those troops which had contributed to the valuable
acquisitions in America. They framed a law for the purpose, and granted a
sufficiency of such articles as they conceived most useful and necessary for
the soldiers: They did not indeed comply with every particular contained in the
act of parliament -- perhaps it might not be in their power. If any thing was
to be given by the colonists for the accommodation of the soldiery, surely they
were the best judges, of their own abilities, as well as of those articles
which they could most conveniently procure. If the parliament had thought
proper to have ordered porter instead of small beer, and gin instead of rum,
they would scarcely have procured a sufficient quantity, had they even sought
it with fixed bayonets. Although the inhabitants could not but be alarmed at a
requisition supported by the whole legislative authority, yet did they
prudently decline taken notice of such an extraordinary procedure, and very
modestly resolved to comply with the design of the act without any immediate
reference to the act itself. Some triffling alterations were indeed made in the
stipulated allowances; but so inconsiderable were they that I believe the
soldiery complained but little of the alteration; and I cannot think that the
greatest enemy to America ever imagined that the freemen of New York, when they
used a discretionary power in granting a share of their own private property,
for the use of the army, and were hardy enough to deviate, in some minute
particulars, from the directions of the British parliament, would ever have
excited so violent -- so unjustifiable a resentment. A resentment expressed by
a proceeding the most unreasonable and unconstitutional -- such a proceeding as
must prove, beyond all possibility of contradiction, that whatever concessions
we may receive from a prudent attachment to their own interest, we can expect
nothing from a generous attention to the spirit of their own happy
constitution, or from an honest reluctance to invade the natural rights of
their fellow subjects.

-- Sed comprime motus
Nec tibi quid liceat, sed quid fecissae decebit
Occurrat, mentemque domet respectus honest.
CLAUD. MR. PIT, has frequently declared that the freemen of Great Britain
have no right to take money out of our pockets, without first obtaining our
consent; and yet their representatives in parliament have resolved, without
deigning to consult us, that we shall pay a certain sum for furnishing the
soldiery with particular necessaries. Unwilling to revive a contest, which had
just before been settled so much to our satisfaction, we declined renewing the
dispute with regard to the legality of the act. We were contented to receive it
as a reasonable requisition, though not as a binding law; and, consulting our
own abilities and convenience, we granted such articles as we thought would
answer the design of the act. In this conduct. so remarkably temperate, we have
incurred the highest displeasure of the British parliament, and are exposed, as
a punishment due to our offenses, to one of the most general, and severest
penalties which the hand of power could inflict. An act has passed to strip us
of our legislative power, and render us unable to provide for ourselves in a
situation of the most imminent danger; because we have outrageously refused to
subscribe to our own ruin. We have modestly avoided controverting a point of
the highest importance, lest we should draw upon ourselves a charge of
obstinacy and malevolence. We have complied with the meaning, though not with
the letter of the act. We have evidenced the most grateful and complying
disposition, and are nevertheless doomed to receive the punishment of the most
rebellious opposition. If our every act is thus liable to be misconstrued, and
we are patiently to receive such severe chastisement, we must at once renounce
the name of freemen, and accommodate ourselves to a state of abject vassallage.

We may not perhaps, just now feel any immediate ill consequences from this
restraint upon our legislation; but when we are to determine upon the purity or
justice of any particular act, we are to consider all the effects which it may
probably, or even possibly produce. Suppose (for instance) that our savage
neighbors should once more wantonly invade our frontiers -- to what a horrid
situation should we be reduced! Our lives and fortunes exposed to the attacks
of a barbarous enemy, without our being able to raise either men or money for
our protection. Can the greatest enemy to America think of our being reduced to
a situation so truly distressful, without accusing of the most unnatural
severity, those who arrogate to themselves an absolute power of directing and
restraining our every action, in such a manner as may best answer their own
partial purposes? In this amazing exertion of parliamentary power, the single
colony of New York is not alone concerned. It may hereafter be the fate of
every other province, unless they now cordially unite in such an application as
may confirm their liberty, or establish their subordination upon some regular
principles.

I am no favourer of violent measures. I would endeavor to support our
pretensions by force of reasoning, not by force of arms; but yet I would
anxiously wish that nothing may intimidate us into an acquiescence with the
measures of oppression. We may be compelled to submit, but never to relinquish
our claim to the privileges of the freemen.

When we complain of the violent proceedings in the late administrations, let
us consider the alterations which a century has produced in our constitution.
We have now a standing army of one hundred and twenty regiments. Scarce a
family of rank but what has some military connections; and even in the house of
commons there are too many gentlemen of the sword. No wonder then, that we are
alarmed with such spirited resolves -- that execution is to preceed judgment;
and that the inhabitants of a colony are regarded as dependent vassals, by
those who have been accustomed to consider a legion of free subject, as a band
of absolute slaves -- points of honor now take place of points in law, and
Magna Charta itself must give way to that furor militaris which so universally
prevails. The hand which bestows a truncheon can never be guilty of oppression,
and the will of an artful minister, will become the law of a whole nation.

I am no enemy to the present military establishment, but as I conceive it may
influence and endanger our liberties; nor have I any resentment against the
inhabitants of that country, which gave birth to my ancestors, but when I
consider them as exerting their superior power to reduce their fellow subjects
to a state of subordination inconsistent with their natural rights, and not to
be reconciled to the spirit of their own constitution. I admire and revere the
well regulated government of Great Britain, and only wish to have our own
system established by so excellent a standard.

As a colonist, my most ambitious views extend no further than the rights of a
British subject. I cannot comprehend how my being born in America should divest
me of these; nor can I conceive why the liberty and property of a free born
American should not be protected from every invasion with the same caution,
which has ever been exerted to guard the privileges of an Englishman. If we are
entitled to the liberties of British subjects we ought to enjoy them unlimitted
and unrestrained. If our pretensions to these are without any foundation, why
are we left unacquainted with the cause and nature of our subordination? In
acts of the greatest solemnity and notoriety, we have been flattered with the
title of British subjects -- we have received with the blood of our ancestors,
the spirit of liberty, and our hearts naturally retain an utter abhorrence of
slavery. We have carefully examined those glorious charters, granted to the
virtuous resolution of our brave forefathers; and the result of our
examination cannot but inform us -- that liberty is only to be supported by a
steady opposition to the first advances of arbitrary power. The conduct of the
colonists has been most maliciously misrepresented, and they have been
stigmatized as riotous and rebellious, when those who are un-influenced by
prejudice, cannot but discover that their warmest wishes rise no higher than to
a connection, founded upon natural right; and that their present resentment
could only be excited by the horrid apprehensions of being reduced to a state
of slavish dependence.

I am not so great a stickler for the independence of the colonies, but I am
ready to acknowledge the necessity of lodging in some part of the community a
restraining power, for the regulating and limiting the trade and manufactures
of each particular county or colony, in such a manner as might most effectually
promote the good of the whole; and I should not obstinately object to the
vesting this power in the parliament of Great Britain, if the violent measures
which have lately been carried into execution, did not afford me too much
reason to believe, that every concession which might at this time be made from
a principle of necessity, and a regard to the public utility, would be
immediately considered as an acknowledgment of such a subordination, as is
totally inconsistent with the nature of our constitution. If a laudable motive
of moderation, and a generous attention to the welfare and tranquillity of the
whole community, should induce a ready submission to every regulation which the
British parliament may think necessary to frame, the ill consequences which may
possibly attend such a temperate conduct, may draw upon us, a charge of
unpardonable negligence. In a system so complicated as ours, where one power is
continually encroaching upon the other, and where the general balance is so
fluctuating and precarious; a spirit of compliance and moderation in the
present age, may lay a foundation for the slavery and dependence of future
generations; who will have the greatest reason to charge us with having basely
betrayed their liberties, by carelessly relaxing from the rigid scrutiny which
ever ought to be made into matters of national concern.

Vos dormitis, nec udhuc mihi videmini intelligere quam nos pateamus Call. ad
Cic. In the pursuit of all political measures, if we are not cautious in
preserving the appearance of liberty, we may insensibly lose the reality
itself. As men attentive to our own particular interests, we cannot but
discover the many advantages which the colonists would necessarily have over
their brethren of Britain, in the course of a free uninterrupted commerce; but,
as men of reason and integrity, we do not indulge a wish to enjoy these
advantages at the expense of our fellow subjects. We shall ever readily
subscribe to such commercial regulations as may enable the inhabitants of
Great Britain, and Ireland, to meet us at all foreign markets upon an equal
footing; but where the authority by which these restrictions are to be framed,
can with most safety and propriety be lodged, is now the subject of our
inquiries.

The boldest advocates for the power of parliament, cannot, at this day,
without blushing, assert, that it is sovereign and supreme in every respect
whatsoever. That great man, who is, beyond all contradiction, the best
acquainted with the constitution of his own country, and the most sincerely
attached to her true interest, never wished to extend the legislative power of
Britain, any further than might be essential to her own preservation; by
establishing such regulations as were indispensably necessary to prevent her
falling a prey to her rising colonies. As there was an immediate necessity of
placing this power somewhere, the parliament of Great Britain could urge a
claim founded in an appearance of reason, and supported by a superiority of
strength; and yet reasonable as this claim appeared to be, it could never be
maintained, upon the principles of their own government. The commons of Britain
might indeed with great propriety propose regulations for the trade, and
restrictions for the manufactures of those by whom they were appointed; but how
they can, with any face of equity, resolve to extend these regulations and
restrictions to those from whom they have received no delegated power, is what
I cannot easily comprehend. Would they but admit to their general council a
certain number of deputies, properly authorized from every colony, to support
the interests of their constituents, to explain the nature of their situation,
and remonstrate against any acts of oppression, then indeed whatever commercial
regulations they might think proper to form, would be fixed upon a
constitutional basis, and their authority remain for ever undisputed; as I can
never be supposed to mean that it should extend to any other than such matters
which immediately relate to commerce; while the internal policy of each colony
should still be regulated by its proper representatives, in conjunction with
the deputy of the crown; and their liberty should only be restrained and their
property fairly disposed of by those who are legally vested with that
authority. I am very sensible, that to fix a representation in parliament for
the purposes of commerce only, would be attended with many inconveniences; but
every man who has the cause of liberty, and the interest of his country at
heart, would rather accept such a partial, disadvantageous establishment as
might immediately be obtained, than submit to such an unnatural state of
subordination, as must continually keep alive the spirit of contention, and
finally involve us in inevitable ruin.

The friends of parliamentary power lose themselves in contemplating the idol
they have raised; and to confirm the veneration which they have entertained,
they annex to it the idea of omnipotence and infallibility. It is a received
maxim of the law -- "that the king can do no wrong;" and yet our brave
forefathers were not so deluded by this royal dogma as to suffer themselves to
be stripped of their invaluable rights and privileges by the arbitrary fiat of
a wicked prince; and if they were justifiable in their resolute opposition to
the unwarrantable encroachments of a power which had been considered as sacred.
by a long hereditary succession; how very reasonably may we conceive that our
conduct will be strictly defensible when we unanimously oppose the violent
proceedings of a body which we may be said, from day to day, to have fashioned
with our own hands. As the original design of delegating power, was, that it
might be exercised for the good of the whole community, there cannot be a
greater absurdity in polities, than to suppose, that those whom we have vested
with a reasonable and necessary authority, are not accountable to us if they
should by any consideration, be led weakly and wantonly to abuse it. The
doctrine of non-resistance and passive obedience to the tyrannic will of a
wicked prince has long since been exploded, and those who have endeavored to
inculcate these slavish principles, have deservedly been treated with the
utmost rigor of the law. Vide Sacheverel's trial.
If liberty be the object which we pursue, and slavery the misfortune which we
most cautiously avoid, we have as much to apprehend from a corrupt parliament,
as from an ambitious King; and he who would patiently submit to the usurpations
of the one, and resolutely oppose the despotism of the other, only declares, by
his conduct, that he would rather be ruled by five hundred tyrants than by one.

The natural right which every man possesses, to restrain, by every possible
method, the progress of arbitrary, lawless government, is not at this day to be
controverted; and though it may be insinuated, that the too warmly and too
frequently pressing this doctrine, may excite a spirit of licentiousness; yet
in answer to this, I must beg leave to remark, that the cause of liberty cannot
be too carefully cultivated, and that those principles by which it is best
supported, cannot be too often or too strongly inculcated. Should the
parliament of Britain, by an act of power, atempt to strip their constituents
of some important, unalienable right; would they not meet with as certain and
violent opposition, as if the crown, by an exertion of its prerogative, should
endeavor to divest them of some established privilege? The King of
Great Britain is vested with an extensive, but not an unlimitted authority; and
is himself bound by those laws with the execution of which he is entrusted. The
representatives of the nation, in parliament assembled, with justice arrogate
to themselves many great and useful powers. They are trustees lawfully
appointed for the freemen of Great Britain -- nequid detrimenti capiat
respublica is the tenure of their appointment; and if they should from any
principle of venality or corruption, betray their important trust, no man can
doubt but that they are very reasonably accountable to their constituents for
every part of their misconduct. Should an act of the British legislature invade
the rights of those who clothed the lawmakers with their legislative power, it
could only be considered as a breach of trust; but if the same authority should
be exerted to deprive us of our most inestimable liberties, we must very
properly regard it as an act of violence and oppression. Such violence has
lately been offered to the legislature of New York in particular, and such
oppression will with great reason be complained of by the colonies in general,
when they more clearly discover the ill tendency of those statutes, which have
lately been framed under a pretense of regulating our commerce. I cannot think
it necessary to enter into a minute examination of every particular statute.
The nature and importance of those duties which have been imposed upon such
articles as we are under a necessity of importing from Great Britain only, have
been very clearly and accurately explained by a late judicious writer. Author
of the Farmer's letters.
For my part I have only labored to impress the principles of liberty upon the
minds of my countrymen; and to draw from those principles such clear an
forcible conclusions as might carry with them conviction even to the most
prejudiced. I have left the arrangement and consideration of particular facts
to those who have more leisure and ability; but if this loose undigested essay,
should, in the most trifling, degree, promote the interest of my country, I
shall, at any time hereafter, must willingly devote my head, my heart, and my
hand to the same glorious purpose.

A CITIZEN.

Te propter colimus leges, animosque ferarum
Exuimus; nitidis quisquis te sensibus hausit
Irruit intrepidus flammis, hiberna secabit
Aequora, consortus hosts superabit inermis.
Claud.
THE NATURE and EXTENT OF PARLIAMENTARY POWER CONSIDERED, etc.
Those laws therefore that I call scriptae Leges or such as are usually called
statute laws, which are originally reduced into writing, before they are
enacted, or receive any binding power; every such law being formally made, is
at it were, an INDENTURE TRIPARTITE, between the King, the Lords, and the
Commons; for without the concurrent consent of all these three parts no such
law is or can be made. HALE's Hist. of the Common Law.
IT seems to me the distinguishing characteristic of the English constitution,
that no free man shall be restrained in the exercise of his natural liberty,
or, in the use of his acquired property but by those regulations to which he
has really or virtually subscribed. Laws which are the result of such a
rational and well-digested compact, may bear hard upon some, but they cannot,
with propriety, be complained of by any; since every precaution which the wit
of man could devise, was necessarily employed for the benefit of the whole
united body, after a due attention to the separate interest of each.

The Lords and Commons with the approbation of the Crown, agree to regulate
their trade by well placed restrictions, and settle the establishment of their
manufactures in such a manner as shall be most conducive to the public good. In
all these disposing and restraining laws, the interest of the whole community
is consulted, and the spirit of the constitution preserved inviolate.

But when the Lords and Commons of England, by formal compact with the Crown,
attempt to bind those, who can by no means be considered as parties to their
agreement, they discard those noble principles to which they owe the enjoyment
of all that is valuable in life, and introduce power in the place of reason to
support a system which has its foundation in partial, not in universal good.
For, can any thing be more evidently partial, or more inconsistent with the
principles of common justice, than that the Lords and Commons of England should
"What property have they in that which another may, by right, take when be
pleases, to himself." Lock on Government.
give and grant to his Majesty any sum which they may think proper, to be
levied, by any mode which they may be pleased to devise, upon his American
subjects -- perhaps for the payment of a subsidy to some Prince of the Empire
for the defense of his Majesty's electoral dominion? If the absurdity and
injustice of such a procedure is to be discovered by every eye, we shall not be
long before we clearly perceive, through all the mists of ingenious sophistry,
that, upon the indispensible principles of their own constitution, the Lords
and Commons of England can no more covenant with the Crown for the limitting
and restraining our natural liberty, than they can agree to give and grant the
most valuable of our property to be disposed of for their own private purposes.

The more I consider this maxim, which I have taken from my Lord Chief Justice
Hale, the more sensible am I of its weight and importance. To perceive its full
force, it will be necessary to look back to the first dawn of freedom, when the
good people of England, would no longer submit to have their liberty and
property arbitrarily disposed of by the royal fiat. Conscious of their own
importance, they, at first, only claimed a privilege of recommending by
petition, such measures as they might conceive necessary for the public good.
In this humble form did the spirit of liberty first appear, while the power of
the crown continued for ages almost unlimitted in its extent, and uncontrouled
in its opperation. But, when an attention to the true interests of the nation,
established their manufactures and extended their commerce, the common people
readily shook off their servile dependence upon their Lords, and gladly
embraced an opportunity of acquiring that affluence of riches which was the
firmest foundation of their future liberty. Those, whose situation had lately
been that of the most abject vassallage, now suddenly found themselves raised,
by their own industry, to the possession of wealth and independence. Proud of
such valuable and important acquisitions, they only waited for that
information, which was the child of time and experience, to direct their steps
in the pursuit of measures which were to establish the most solid security for
that liberty and property which they had so lately acquired.

Before science extended her happy influence over this rising nation, their
progress in the paths of liberty was but slow and irregular -- interrupted by
events which they were too short sighted to foresee, and obstructed by
revolutions which no human prudence could prevent. But, when their acquisition
of knowledge, from a careful examination of the past, enabled them not only to
regulate the present, but even to penetrate into the remote regions of future
contingency, every revolving year furnished them with some opportunity to
improve and enlarge their system of liberty. With every assistance which human
wisdom could bestow, supported by the experience of ages, they have at last
fixed the foundation of their freedom upon such principles as will forever
stand the test of the most critical examination. Careful to guard those
blessings for which they had so industriously labored, they established this
as a fundamental maxim -- that no new regulation could be framed, nor any old
law abrogated but by the general consent of the nation. Such a consent as must
be evidenced by a majority of votes in the different estates of the kingdom --
the Lords in their proper persons assenting, while the sense of the common
people is known from the voices of their representatives. Can any thing less
than infinite wisdom elaborate a system more perfect than that which so
effectually secures the happiness of every individual -- which admits no law as
obligatory but upon those who are expressly parties, or have actually
subscribed to the obligation?

If these be, as they certainly are, the well digested principles of the
English constitution, with what appearance of reason can the warmest zealot for
the superiority of Great Britain assert, that the legislative power of
parliament is sovereign and supreme?

Shall the freemen of New York be reduced to a state of subordination, and
deprived of those invaluable privileges enjoyed by the inhabitants of that city
which has given a name to their province, because they are unfortunately placed
a thousand leagues further from the presence of their sovereign; and instead of
prefering their petitions immediately to the royal ear, can only apply to his
deputy for a redress of their grievances, and for the framing such regulations
as the infant state of the colony may require? This would be heightening the
misfortune of their situation by the most flagrant injustice.

When the emigrants from Great Britain crossed the Atlantic to settle the
deserts of America, they bro't with them the spirit of the English government.
They brought with them the same duties to their sovereign, which the freemen of
England at that time acknowledged; and they very naturally supposed, that,
under his direction, they should be allowed to make such regulations as might
answer the purposes of their emigration. Ever mindful of their duty and
allegiance to their Prince, they cannot easily conceive that they left their
brethren the freemen of England, vested with a sovereign, supreme power to
restrain their De plus, le droit de propreten'etant que de convention, et d'
institution human, tout homme peut, a son gre disposer de ce qu'il poffede:
Mais il n'en est pas de meme des dons essentials de la nature, tells que la vie
et la liberto, don't il est permis a chacun de jouir, et don't il est au moins,
douteux qu'on ait droit de se depouiller. ROUSSEAU.

Mais quand on pouroit aliener sa liberte comme ses biens, la difference seroit
tres grande pour les enfans, qui ne jouissent des biens du pere que par
transmission de son droit, an lieu que la liberte etent un don qa'ilis tiennent
de la nature en qualite d' Hommes leurs parens n'ont eu aucum droit de les en
depouiller IRID.


natural liberty, or to dispose of their acquired property. Removed at an
immense distance from the seat of government, they could no longer join the
national council; but, as the very spirit of the English constitution required
it, they naturally applied to their Prince for such protection and assistance
as might raise them to an equality with their brethren of England; from whom
they only requested their friendly patronage, during the weakness of their
infant state.

The formula of their government once settled in some measure to their
satisfaction, with the concurrence of those officers appointed by the crown,
the inhabitants of these new settlements, ever faithfully preserving in their
memory the principles of that happy government which they had just quitted,
totally disclaim all A subordination not only imcompatible with the principles
of the English constitution, but even not to be reconciled to the law of nature
if we admit as just the following definition.

"On commence par rechercher les regles don't pour L'Utilite commune it seroit
a propos que les hommes convinssent enter lux; and puis on done le nom ce loi
naturelle a la collection de ces regles sans autre preuve que le bien qu'on
trouve qui resulteroit de leur pratique universalle." ROUSEAU.


subordination to, and dependence upon, the two inferior estates of their
mother country. Without the power, without the inclination to disturb the
tranquillity of those to whom they stand so nearly related, they wish to promote
an amicable intercourse, founded upon reciprocal interest; without allowing or
submitting to any laws but those which they themselves have made, by regular
agreement with the deputy of the Crown, properly authorized for that purpose.
To suppose the British parliament to be vested with a sovereign and supreme
legislative power over the colonies, is advancing a supposition inconsistent
with the principles of their own constitution; and to assert the necessity of
subordination from the nature of our situation, without attempting to prove
that necessity, is really treating an affair of the utmost importance with too
little Quistatuit aliquid, part inaudita altera aequum licet statuerit, haud
aequus fuerit. SENEC. MED.
attention. Those who may probably be most seriously affected by this doctrine,
very naturally require something stronger than general assertions to support
it, although those assertions may be advanced by the best and wisest men of the
nation.

Perhaps it may not be such an irreconcilable paradox in policy, to assert,
that the freemen settled in America may preserve themselves absolutely
independent of their fellow subjects who more immediately surround the throne,
and yet discharge, with the strictest fidelity, all their duties to their
sovereign. They may not only be loyal and valuable subjects to their Prince,
but useful and necessary neighbors to their brethren of Britain.

The colonies may, with no great impropriety, be considered as so many
different counties of the same kingdom, the nature of whose situation prevents
their joining in the general council, and reduces them to a necessity of
applying to their Prince for the establishment of such a partial policy as may
be the best adapted to their particular circumstances, and, at the same time,
the most conducive to the general good. That this partial policy, settled for
every distinct part, may not interfere with the general welfare of the whole,
the restraining power lodged in the Crown will always be able to insure; since
we cannot suppose that a wise and just Prince would ever consent to sacrifice
the interest and happiness of any one part to the selfish views of another.

As a commerical people, while blessed with the same advantages which the
inhabitants of Great Britain enjoy, our interest may sometimes clash with
theirs. This is an inconvenience which may, at some future period happen, in
the extent of our trade: But shall this possible inconvenience be a sufficient
authority for stripping us of all the most valuable privileges in society?
shall we be reduced to the most abject state of dependence, because we may
possibly become formidable rivals to our jealous brethren if we are allowed to
maintain that equality which we have received from nature, and which we find so
firmly supported by the laws of our mother country?

Nostri autem magistratus, imperatores que ex hac una re maximam laudem capere
stutebant, SI PROVINCIAS, SI SOCIOS EQUITATE ET FIDE DEFENDERENT. CIC. de Off.
THERE is no reasoning against those prejudices which are the support of
particular interest, or I would ask why my being born in the island of
Great Britain should vest me with a power to tie the hands of my American
neighbor, and then justify me in picking his pocket; although this same American
should be a loyal subject of the same Prince, and formerly declared to be
possessed of all the liberties and privileges of a British subject? How absurd
and unmeaning must this specious declaration appear to one who sees and feels
the force of the present violent struggles for reducing us to a state of
infamous vassallage.

That right honorable and worthy gentleman who exerted his extensive influence
to ward off from the devoted colonies that blow which would have effected their
immediate ruin, has been pleased to make these declarations in our favor. --
They are the subjects of this kingdom, equally entitled with ourselves to all
the natural rights of mankind, and the peculiar privileges of Englishmen,
equally bound by the laws, and equally participating of its constitution. The
Americans are the sons, not the bastards of England. -- And yet, in the same
speech he asserts the authority of Great Britain over the colonies to be
sovereign and supreme in every circumstance of government and legislation
whatsoever. If the latter part of this declaration be by any means
reconcilable with the former, I must forfeit all pretensions to reason; since,
after the most careful disquisition which I am capable of making, I cannot
discover how any inhabitant of the colonies can be said to enjoy the peculiar
privileges of Englishmen, when all that he holds valuable in life must lie at
the mercy of that unlimited power, which is so repeatedly said to be sovereign
and supreme. An authority established upon partial principles, and such as must
be supported by the force Le contrast de gouvernement est tellement dissous par
le despotisme que le despote n'est le maitre qu'aussi long tems qu'il est le
plus fort; et que sitot qu'on peut l'expulser il n'a point a reclamer ontre la
violence. ROUSEAU.
of arms more than the force of reason, if it is to survive to any distant
period.

I have the highest veneration for the character and abilities of Mr. Pit, and
scarcely dare indulge myself in a train of reasoning, which evidently points
out to me the most striking inconsistency in the sense of his speech in
January, upon American affairs. From the best evidence which I am capable of
receiving, I cannot but be clearly convinced that our liberty must be only
ideal, and our privileges chimerical, while the omnipotence of parliament can
bind our trade, confine our manufactures, and exercise every power whatever
except that of taking money out of our pockets without our consent. If this
sovereign power, which they so warmly assert, should be once tamely conceded,
to what trifling purpose have we exerted ourselves in our glorious opposition
to the Stamp Act. At best we have but put the evil day a far off. -- We have
not combated the reality, but the mode of oppression, we have only gained a
temporary reprieve, 'till some future minister, with as little virtue and more
abilities than Mr. G --, shall think proper to employ this unbounded
legislative power for the horrid purpose of reducing three millions of people
to a state of abject slavery.

If our sovereign lords, the commons of England, have been led, by their absurd
jealously and envious partiality, under the direction of a rash and impolitic
minister, to strike so bold a stroke at both our liberty and property, what
danger may we not apprehend from the same selfish principles, when they may be
influenced by the deep laid schemes of some able statesman? Under such
pernicious influence the chains of America may be forged and rivited on, while
her incautious sons are lulled in a state of security. The power of taxation
given up to their spirited opposition, the excess of their joy will not suffer
them to indulge any gloomy reflections upon that dangerous reserve of
legislation. The present evil averted, the warmth of their sanguine
dispositions will not allow them to think that oppression may return at any
other time, or in any other form. Their very gratitude and humility prevent
their enquiring into a cause of the last importance. In the highest exultation
of heart at a concession scarcely expected, they receive as a matter of favor
what they demanded as a matter of right, and, to avoid an appearance of
arrogance in urging any new demands, they neglect the discharge of the most
essential duties to themselves and their posterity. Perhaps they will scarcely
thank the man who shall endeavor to convince them, that the simple power of
legislation may as effectually ruin the colonies as that of taxation.

Let us borrow and improve upon a thought of our greatest enemy. Mr. G -- tells
us that internal and external taxes are the same in effect, and differ but in
name. Mr. Pit has indeed treated this opinion with so little attention, that
he has only answered it by a general assertion, that there is a plain
distinction between taxes levied for the purpose of raising a revenue, and
duties imposed for the regulation of trade.

Plain as this distinction is, my most industrious enquiries have not yet led
me to it; and I cannot but think with Mr. G --, that they are the same in
effect. -- The one is precisely determined, while the other is more uncertain
and eventual; but, in proportion to the sum raised, the effect will be exactly
the same. It is taken for granted that the collection of a stamp duty would
drain us of all the specie which we receive as a balance in our West India
trade. If any exorbitant duty laid upon sugar and molasses produces the same
effect, in what does the difference consist? By either means the treasury of
England will be enriched with the whole profit of our labor, and we ourselves
shall be reduced to that deplorable state of poverty, of which we have, at this
very moment, a most affecting instance. General as the calamity is now become,
there are few so uninformed as not to know that the power of legislation has
done all this mischief, without any assistance from that of taxation. The
severe restrictions imposed upon our trade, have made it impracticable for us
to answer every foreign demand, and, at the same time reserve a sufficient
stock to keep up that circulation of property so necessary to the well being of
society.

Involved in heavy debts, without any prospect of discharging them -- in want
of the necessaries of life, without the means of acquiring them, the very
politic Mr. G -- has furnished us with the most interesting facts to prove the
truth of his doctrine. As great an enemy as he may be to the colonies, he has
at least kindly bestowed upon them the most irrefragable proof that internal
and external taxes are the same in effect; and that they may be as effectually
ruined by the powers of legislation as by those of taxation.

When the parliament of Great Britain arrogate to themselves this sovereign
jurisdiction over the colonies, I should be glad to know on what principles
they found their claim. Do they ground their pretensions on the excellent
principles of their own constitution, or is this supremacy a power virtually
inherent in the name of parliament? A name which should remind them of their
original state of humility, when the distinguishing power which they boasted
was privilege of speaking their mind and remonstrating their grievances. The
Lords indeed may, with some appearance of reason, assert a supreme jurisdiction
over the whole body of the nation, as the highest court of judicature: But when
an aspiring member of the Commons House confidently declares that he has a
power to bind our trade, and restrain our manufactures, I should be glad to
know whether he derived this power from the honest freemen his constituents, or
whether he acquired it by virtue of his office? From his constituents he could
receive no more power than they naturally possessed; and, from his office he
cannot reasonably be supposed vested with any other authority, than that of
deciding upon the formalities, and punctilios annexed to it.

To grasp at a jurisdiction so infinitely extensive, and so little capable of
limitation, is expressly declaring, that, from the antiquity of their
establishment, they are become sovereigns of the new-discovered world. Upon
such arbitrary principles must they ground their unreasonable pretensions;
since no man in his senses will assert that an inhabitant of Birmingham or
Manchester has a natural right, after having obtained the consent of the Crown,
to restrain, and prevent an industrious settler of the colonies from engaging
in those particular manufactures which may interfere with the business of his
own profession. Absurd as this assertion is, either this must be maintained, or
one full as pregnant with absurdity; since one may with as much reason suppose
this natural superiority in the freemen of Great Britain, as this acquired
sovereignty in the collective body of their representatives. Whatever reasons
they may devise to support this extraordinary claim, the motives to their
usurpation are clearly evinced in that part of Mr. Pitt's speech, where he says
-- if the legislative power of Great Britain over America ceases to be
sovereign and supreme, I would advise every gentleman to sell his lands and
embark for that country. A jealous fear, that, from the many natural advantages
which we possess, we may, in some future age, rival our envious brethren in
strength and riches, has urged them to exercise a piece of Ottoman policy, by
strangling us in our infancy. When we examine into the nature of those fears
which have already proved so fatal to our interest, the slightest examination
shows them as contemptible and ill-grounded as were ever entertained by the
most selfish of mankind.

Had not this refined policy of our British Machiavel interfered, and roused us
to attention, we should, in all human probability, have continued for many
centuries the faithful drudges of our indulgent mother; and Great Britain would
have increased in strength and riches in proportion to the population of her
colonies. While our commerce continued unrestrained we should industriously
have cultivated every branch of it, that we might be enabled to pay punctually
to Great Britain, that balance which would every year increase; since our
attention to the settling an immeasurable extent of country, would effectually
prevent our establishing such manufactories as would furnish us with the
necessaries of life.

Had I sufficient information to enter into a minute detail of facts, I believe
it would be no difficult matter to prove, that, in the course of our most
successful commerce, Great Britain receives nine-tenths of the profit, whilst
we are humbly contented with being well fed and clothed as the wages of our
labor.

If this inferiority be the consequence of a reasonable connection, why would
they wish to reduce us to a state of abject dependence? Or, if with the
advantages which they already possess, a fair unlimited trade would bring into
their hands all the specie which we could draw from the West Indies, why would
they wantonly use such detestable measures as they have lately pursued, to
effect the same purpose?

If the present severe system of politics be the result of unreasonable
jealousy; I will venture to assert that this very policy will counteract its
own intention. Their distresses first led the colonists into enquiries
concerning the nature of their political situation, and the justice of the
treatment which they had received. That ignorance which has kept them in a
state of peaceable submission, fled before their eager researches after that
information which was so essentially necessary to the preservation of their
liberty. Enraged to find, that, while they had been amused with the specious
title of fellow subjects, and flattered with the rights of British freemen,
they were in reality treated as infants in policy, whose every motion was to be
directed by the arbitrary will of their jealous parent; when every such
direction evidently tended to reduce the one to an abject state of dependence,
and to raise the other to the most exalted superiority. That both these
purposes could easily have been obtained, by measures artfully managed, is not
to be doubted, since nothing but the most violent oppression could have roused
us from our state of stupefaction to a proper degree of attention. But when our
sensibility was excited by the most pointed injustice, rage instantly succeeded
that tranquillity which had been nourished by our imaginary security. Warmed
with a sense of the injuries which we suffered, neither our gratitude nor our
fear, could prevent our asserting those rights the possession of which can
alone determine us freemen; and, though we could not but see that superiority
of power which could "crush us to atoms" yet could we have found even in the
modern history of Europe so many examples for our encouragement, that we should
not have despaired of assistance sufficient to preserve us from the worst of
evils.

Quam vos facillime agitis, quam estis maxim potentes, dites, fortunati,
nobiles, tam maxim vos aequo animo aeque noscere oportet, si vos vultis
perbiberi probos. Terent. Adelph THE advocates for the sovereignty of
Great Britain enumerate amongst the other obligations by which we are bound,
the favors which she has constantly conferred. If we could reasonably suppose
a whole political body actuated by the same passions which may influence an
individual, then, indeed there would be some foundation for our grateful
acknowledgements; but when we plainly perceive that the bounties which
Great Britain is said so lavishly to have bestowed upon us, are meted out in
the common political measure, with an evident intention finally to promote her
own particular benefit, we can only say that her actions are the result of good
policy, not of great generosity. As for the support which they have given us in
times of danger, if it did not immediately arise from the same motive which has
produced their other favors, I am still amazed that it should even be
mentioned by those who have lavished so much blood and treasure, for the
maintenance of an imaginary balance, or in defending those who never thanked
them for their defense.

The most superficial examination must serve to convince us that the battles of
Great Britain could no where have been fought with so much advantage as in the
woods of America; where her troops could be supplied with all the necessaries
of life upon the easiest terms, and, from whence all the money which they
expended immediately returned in immense payments for the extraordinary
importations of her manufacture which the exigencies of the war required. Thus
were the whole expenses of the American war very far from lessening the
strength or riches of the nation; while her forces, which were not sufficient
to make a considerable impression upon the body of her natural enemy, were
enabled to lop off one of its limbs. In affecting this glorious purpose, I will
venture to mention the assistance which they received from the provincial
troops, as an aid of more importance than is generally allowed. I will even
take the liberty to assert, that the colonists, in proportion to their real
ability, did more for the general cause than could reasonably have been
expected, if not more than Great Britain herself. This assertion I fancy will
gain more eredit now than it would have gained some time ago; since the eyes of
the world are at last open, and they must if they are not wilfully blind,
plainly discover, that the estimates of our wealth which have been received
from ignorant or prejudiced persons, are, in every calculation, grossly
erroneous. These misrepresentations, which have been so industriously
propagated, are very possibly the offspring of political invention, as they
form the best apology for imposing upon us burdens to which we are altogether
unequal. The easy faith which every absurd information obtained, and the
precipitate measures, which were the consequence of this unreasonable
credulity, must sufficiently convince us, that while we are within the reach of
parliamentary power, we shall not be suffered to riot in a superfluity of
wealth, or to acquire any dangerous degree of strength. Whatever advantages may
hereafter present themselves, from an increased population or more extended
trade, we shall never be able to cultivate them to any valuable purpose; for,
how much soever we may possess the ability of acquiring wealth and
independence, the partial views of our selfish brethren, supported by the
sovereignty of parliament, will most effectually prevent our enjoying such
invaluable acquisitions.

If any alternation in our system of agriculture should furnish us with a
sufficiency of the necessary articles for the establishment of the most
valuable manufactories, and an increase of population should enable us to carry
them to the greatest advantage; the manufacturers of Great Britain, jealous of
such a formidable encroachment, would easily obtain the interposition of our
sovereign directors; who would very naturally ordain, that we should export our
unwrought materials to be labored by our more skilful brethren, and dispatch
our superfluous inhabitants in search of another vacant world: And, if the
extent of our commerce should draw into our hands the wealth of the Indies, the
same unlimitted authority would always carefully provide ways and means for
conveying the whole into the treasury of England. Perhaps some future G -- lle,
refining upon the system of his predecessor, may make the powers of legislation
answer the purposes of oppression as effectually as the severest taxation.

The measures which have already been pursued, almost give to conjecture the
force of conviction; since no man can have been so inattentive to the most
interesting facts as not to know, that the power of parliament exerted in the
single instance or restraining our trade, has already reduced us to
inconceiveable distress. Denied the means of acquiring specie sufficient for
the purposes of a general circulation, and limited in the emission of our
paper currency, men of considerable real estates become unable to answer the
most trifling demands; and, when urged by creditors, perhaps as much perplexed
as themselves, their lands are sold by execution for less than half their
former value. This, as one of the most striking inconveniences, attending the
late unseasonable exertion of parliamentary power. I have selected for
observation, from a very extensive catalogue of grievances which it has already
produced, and of which we are at this moment most severely sensible. I am led
to a choice of this particular fact, from a consideration of the fatal
consequence by which it may possibly be attended, should the merchants of
England immediately demand a rigid payment of the general balance due to them.
It is not an easy matter to conceive how much our property may be affected by
so unseasonable a demand; since the calamity would by a regular connection,
extend from the lowest to the highest member of society. But as it was never my
intention to enter into a minute detail of facts, I shall content myself with
offering such loose, desultory observations as may serve to direct others in
their researches after more particular information upon this most interesting
subject. In the further pursuit of this design, I shall just take the liberty
to observe upon the resolves of the Commons, of February 1766, that the severe
censures which they so liberally bestow upon us, are evidently inconsistent
with the principles upon which they are supposed to have voted the repeal of
the stamp act.

From these resolves we may very reasonably suppose, that the repeal is more
immediately founded upon the inexpediency of the act, than upon a conviction
that they had exerted an unconstitutional power. Had they been willing to allow
this act as invasive of an indisputable right, they would not so severely have
censured us for our daring opposition, and lavished such praises upon those
whose selfish views or slavish principles made them so readily subscribe to the
infallibility and omnipotence of parliament. -- A peaceable submission to the
first attacks of encroaching power, is altogether incompatible with the genius
of liberty! nor could it reasonably be expected, that in such a sudden and
dangerous invasion of our most inestimable rights, the form of opposition could
be perfectly modeled by the hand of prudence. Violent and precipitate as our
measures were, they wanted nothing but success to sanctify them; since the most
superficial observer cannot but have discovered, that in the political world,
right and wrong are merely arbitrary modes, totally dependent upon the rise and
fall of contending parties.

The people of England very justly dissatisfied with the tyrannic conduct of a
weak prince, made the boldest struggles for the support of their languishing
liberty, in their first ill directed efforts under the unfortunate Monmouth.
The justice of their cause could not save them from the pains and penalties of
open rebellion: But when a prince of military abilities gave them his powerful
assistance, they suddenly effected the preservation of their freedom, and
distinguished so important an event by the title of a glorious revolution; so
much influence has success, in rating the merit of our political conduct.

When the committee of the house resolve in the most general and expressive
terms, that the authority of parliament over the colonies is sovereign and
supreme in every respect whatever, there is no reasoning against so formidable
a resolution, supported by the power of the whole kingdom. We can only remark
that the same house heretofore resolved to take under their own particular
direction, the rights of the people, the privileges of the lords, and the
sovereignty of the crown; and, for a long time maintained this unnatural
usurpation.

If they did not suffer the passions of the man to influence the judgment of
the Senator, they would never treat that as a point of honor which should only
be considered as a matter of right.

If, upon a cool, dispassionate enquiry, it may appear, that the Commons of
Great Britain have no natural or acquired superiority over the freemen of
America, they will certainly do us the justice to acknowledge this very
reasonable independence, and not wickedly endeavor to enslave millions to
promote the honor and dignity of a few ambitious individuals.

In supporting this doctrine of independence, I have established as an
incontrovertible truth, this very accurate definition of my Lord C. J. Hale --
That every act of parliament is a tripartite indenture of agreement between the
three estates of the kingdom. If this maxim be not disputable I very humbly
conceive, that every consequence which I have drawn from it, is fairly and
logically deduced; for it cannot, but with the most glaring absurdity, be
supposed, that the parties to these political agreements may legally bind those
who are not in any wise privy to them.

The very spirit of the English constitution requires, that general regulations
framed for the government of society, must have the sanction of general
approbation; and, that no man shall be deprived of life, liberty or property,
but by the force of those laws to which he has voluntarily subscribed. These
principles once acknowledged as the foundation of English liberty, how can the
colonists be said to possess the natural rights of mankind, or the peculiar
privileges of Englishmen, while they are every day liable to receive laws
framed by persons ignorant of their abilities -- unacquainted with their
necessities, and evidently influenced by partial motives? If my zeal for the
good of my country has not greatly clouded my judgment, I still dare so far
depend upon the principles which I have established, as to assert, that, while
the power of the British parliament is acknowledged sovereign and supreme in
every respect whatsoever, the liberty of America is no more than a flattering
dream, and her privileges delusive shadows.

While I relate matters of fact, from the best evidence which I am capable of
receiving, if I have misrepresented them, I lie open to contradiction; and,
when I recapitulate the principles from which I have drawn my train of
reasoning, I am not so obstinately attached to my own opinion as to be proof
against conviction. If I am guilty of any errors in the course of this
unconnected performance, they must be attributed to my not having received
sufficient information, or to my want of ability in using the materials which I
had acquired. I have never wilfully misrepresented a fact, nor designedly drawn
from it a falacious consequence. I have not labored to establish any favorite
system, and, with the vanity of a projector, supported it at the expense of my
veracity.

But however trifling this performance my appear, both my head and my heart
have co-operated in its production, and I really sat down to write what I
thought, not to think what I should write

Ardeo; mihi credit -- incredibili quodam amore patriae -- quod volent denique
homines ozistiment; nemini ego possum esse been de republica merenti non
amicus. CICERO.
A CITIZEN.

FINIS.

