SOME BRIEF REMARKS UPON SUNDRY IMPORTANT SUBJECTS, Necessary to be understood
and attended to by all professing the CHRISTIAN RELIGION. Principally addressed
to The PEOPLE called QUAKERS.

By JOHN GRIFFITH.

LONDON, Printed; And Wilmington, Reprinted, by James Adams, M.DCC.LXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
CANDID READER,
WERE it not apprehended by me a duty, thus to offer to thy serious perusal the
following plain and experimental observations upon various subjects, thou had
not heard from me in this way.

I have often, with many brethren and sisters in the truth, been deeply
affected in viewing the great danger Christian professors are exposed to
through a prevailing indifference of mind. For when a lethargic stupefaction
has gained the ascendancy, religion in notion, and fruitless speculation,
satisfy a mind so depraved. A renovation of heart, without which none can be
truly religious, has not been sought after. Pleased with the shell or form
only, such have not been sensible they wanted the substance.

When the subtle adversary finds men in this kind of sleep or stupefaction, it
is then his opportunity for sowing the tares amongst the wheat: by such means
the field of the Christian church became in process of time covered therewith.
That which came nearest to my heart, and most earnestly engaged my attention
toward the present undertaking (not without ardent desires for the lasting
advantage of Christians of all denominations) was, that the descendants of a
people, who a little above a century ago were very marvellously brought out of,
and redeemed from, all lifeless shadows, and empty forms of religion, to enjoy
and be grounded in the blessed power and life thereof, might be preserved truly
sensible of the way and means whereby our worthy predecessors obtained a firm
establishment in the truth, as it is Christ Jesus: for it is evident, where the
means are neglected, the end cannot be attained.

That many of these descendants in this day of outward peace and plenty,
inclining to false liberty and ease, do shun the cross of Christ, which would
crucify them to the world, is a mournful truth, too obvious to be denied. In
consideration hereof, I found a concern to throw a few observations before
them, as near as I could, suited to the present state of things; endeavoring,
in some degree, to offer to the view of the present and succeeding generations,
by what means our worthy predecessors became such a living honorable body of
people; that the necessity may fully appear of the same blessed power operating
upon their minds, in order to qualify all, that they may rightly succeed those
valiants in maintaining the cause of God.

The objection which cast some discouragement in my way, may also occur to some
readers, viz. that the subjects treated of in this small tract have been diverse
times heretofore judiciously wrote upon by different authors. This is no more
than may be said of most other religious subjects as well as these. Divine
Wisdom and Goodness has seen meet to receive the same truths, by different
instruments from generation to generation; the Lord's servants speaking the
same thing, as with one mouth. Herein God's gracious condescension to human
frailty is very conspicuous and wonderful, by causing those excellent truths,
so essential to be received that man's soul may be saved, to be frequently
revived and inculcated, seeing he is so liable to forget God, and his
reasonable duty to him.

Having no desire to enlarge, I shall only add my earnest prayer to the God and
Father of all sure mercies, that this mite of simple experimental truths, which
I have cast into the treasury, may meet the serious reader, of whatever
denomination, with the divine blessing in it! If that graciously attend, though
what is here offered may be justly accounted as the barley-loaves, the hungry
soul may receive some strength and refreshment thereby.

30th 8th Mo. 1764.
CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I. Containing tender ADVICE, CAUTION and COUNSEL to PARENTS and
CHILDREN. Page 1 CHAPTER II. Containing some Brief Observations concerning the
NATURE and NECESSITY of the NEW BIRTH. Page 19 CHAPTER III. Relating to the
NATURE of TRUE WORSHIP; with some Remarks upon the State of our Society as in
early Times and now. Page 35 CHAPTER IV. Containing Short Remarks upon the TRUE
and the FALSE MINISTRY. Page 52 CHAPTER V. Containing Brief Observations upon
the NATURE and USEFULNESS of CHRISTIAN DISCIPLINE. Page 66
SOME BRIEF REMARKS UPON Sundry Important Subjects.
CHAPTER I. Containing tender ADVICE, CAUTION and COUNSEL tO PARENTS and
CHILDREN.
FIRST to parents. Very much depends upon a right education of children. I
therefore find it in my mind to make a few observations thereon, as it shall
please the Lord to open my understanding; without whose assistance, and
blessing upon our labors, they prove altogether fruitless.

The children of Israel were strictly enjoined to make the training up their
children in the law of God their constant care; viz. Hear, O Israel, the Lord
our God is one Lord; and thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words which I command
thee this day, shall be in thine heart, and thou shall teach them diligently
unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine house, and
when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest
up. Deuteronomy. vi. 4, 5, 6, 7.


Exceeding great is the trust reposed in parents and heads of families. It
certainly lies upon them an indispensable duty, as much as they can, both by
precept and example, to form the tender minds of their offspring to virtue, as
says the apostle, And ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but
bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Ephesians. vi. 4.
And, Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not
depart from it. Prove. xxii. 6.


Parents must first be well acquainted with the way of truth, and the nurture
and admonition of the Lord themselves, before they can train up their children
therein. That which is likely to have the greatest influence upon their tender
minds, is a steady circumspect example, in a self-denying conduct before them;
which will beget reverence, and honorable thoughts in children, and servants
too, concerning those whom Providence has placed over them.

Great care should dwell upon the minds of parents, to make it fully evident to
their children that they are much more desirous they should possess an heavenly
than an earthly inheritance; that they are more concerned their souls may be
adorned with the graces of the Holy Spirit, than that their bodies should
appear finely decked with outward ornaments.

Children will be very likely to value that which they see is preferred by
their parents, whether it be the things of the world, or religion. If this be
really the case, which I think will be allowed by considerate persons, O then!
how much depends upon them for the promotion of truth and righteousness on the
earth, both in regard to the present time, and generations to come. This yet
more fully appears by the Lord's testimony concerning Abraham. And the Lord
said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do? seeing that Abraham
shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth
shall be blessed in him. For I know him, that he will command his children, and
his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice
and judgment; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of
him. Genesis xviii. 17, 18, 19.
In chap. xvii. ver. 18. his godly concern appears earnest, even for the child
of the bondwoman; viz. And Abraham said unto God, Oh! that Ishmael might live
before thee. Which petition was answered.

Constant and warm endeavors, with secret cries to God that his blessing may
attend them, may prove effectual to the preservation of children. This should
begin very early, even as soon as they are capable to distinguish what pleases,
or what displeases their parents. A self-willed perverse disposition may soon
be discovered in children (more especially in some) which is very earnest to
have its own way, before they can judge what is best for themselves. This
should constantly be subjected to those that are to judge for them. They should
never be suffered to prevail by an untoward fretful temper, not even when what
they crave is suitable for them to receive, were they in a submissive
disposition; that they may clearly see (which they soon will) it is more to
their benefit and comfort to yield an entire subjection to their providers, and
that nothing is to be got by a fretful self-willed temper. This should be done
by a constant steady hand, and it will make the work of parents abundantly
easier in the government of their children, and may prove a great ease to those
concerned with them, perhaps through the whole course of their lives; since by
crushing their perverseness in the first buddings, it may so die away, as never
more to gain the pre-eminence. This would be a wonderful blessing, and they
would owe their watchful parents more for suppressing that, and other
pernicious buds in them, than for a large patrimony or outward inheritance.
Indeed every thing of an evil nature should be kept down in them by such
careful ready means. Oh! what a fine hopeful generation of youths should we
have, were parents in general to exercise this prudent care in all things! I
verily believe, instead of sober virtuous youth being as speckled birds amongst
others, the rebellious, disobedient, and froward would be so; and this would
bring judgment over them.

A conscientious discharge of this great duty would bring an ample reward to
such parents, as have no greater joy than to see their children walking in the
truth: and if they should prove unsuccessful, as it sometimes has happened,
they will be clear of their childrens blood in God's sight, which is a very
great thing; so that though the rebellion and evil conduct of their offspring
may be their sorrow, it will not be their sin.

I have sometimes been much grieved, when I have seen youth in the way of being
ruined by the very imprudent indulgence of their parents, especially mothers;
making themselves and others mere slaves to the perverse humors of their
children; taking abundance of pains to extinguish the flame of their untoward
tempers, by such means as add fuel to the fire; inverting the order of nature,
by becoming subject to those who should submit to them, by answering their
unreasonable cravings; making themselves more work (and that too of a very
disagreeable nature) to educate one, than, were they to follow the method
before hinted, it would require to educate a number, and in the end not so well
done neither. Parents, who are so very imprudent, have less reason to reflect
upon their children for being self-willed, and not subject to them when they
grow up: seeing they themselves have cherished, fed, and supported that temper
in them from their cradles; whereby, unless religion lays deep hold of them,
and changes the state of their minds, they are unfitted to be a comfort either
to themselves or others; not being formed for good servants, husbands, wives,
or members of society.

Alas! when I take a view of the world, and reflect how it wallows in abundance
of wickedness and corruption, which mankind possess in a kind of succession
from parents to children, like outward inheritances; I have no words sufficient
to set forth to the full so deplorable a case. How sorrowful it is to observe
even children, by the power of example, become as grown men in wickedness and
hardness of heart! Custom and general practice has, as it were, changed the
nature of some gross evils, so that there appears very little remorse in the
almost constant practice of them. Many children are brought up, like their
parents, much strangers to their duty both to God and man. This almost
universal infection of evil, forgetfulness of God, and of many or most relative
duties, by a constantly wallowing in the pollutions of this world, are very
alarming, and call loudly for a reformation, lest the Lord break forth in
judgment upon the nations, as the breach of waters. It is indeed a painful task
for godly parents, amidst so general a depravity, to educate their children
without receiving some tincture from this pollution, which runs down like a
strong torrent. The safest way is, with great strictness to keep them out of
such company; though an inconveniency may attend that in some outward respects,
But oh! the souls are the most precious part of them, which parents, above all
other considerations, ought to be concerned to preserve untainted with the
defilements of this world.

There is no better rule to proceed and act by in this important task, than the
Spirit of truth, promised to lead us into all truth. If we mind this, we shall
not indulge our children in any individual thing which that testifies against
in ourselves. We shall be far from pleading, that because they are young, some
greater liberties may be allowed them in dress or otherwise; but as they are a
part of ourselves, the same divine law should be a standing rule for the whole.

I have taken notice, that diverse parents, who, as to their outward appearance,
seem to have learned, in degree, the lesson of humility and self-denial,
however as far as could be discovered by their dress and address, yet seem to
have no aversion to their children's making a different appearance; nay, some
will even introduce them into it themselves whilst very young; by which it is
plain they have a pride in seeing them so, and cannot help (notwithstanding
their outward show) discovering great unsoundness, and that they themselves are
not what they would pass for. I sincerely wish that parents, who are apt to
indulge wrong liberties in their children, by suffering them to deviate from
that pure simplicity and self-denial Truth led our ancestors, and still leads
those who follow it into, would consider, in the first place, the injury their
children sustain thereby, by being placed in a difficult and dangerous
situation with respect to temptations, which may be presented to them by the
children of the land, or of the world: for doubtless the more like them they
appear, the more free and intimate will such make themselves with them, that
they may be drawn out into undue liberties; whereas, did they make an
appearance quite consistent with their plain self-denying profession, that sort
would be more backward to attempt an access to them.

There is no doubt with me, but this has opened a way for many under our
profession to ruin themselves, by going out in marriage; and their parents have
been, by their imprudent indulgence, the original cause thereof. For suffering
them to be so much like the world, and so little like what Truth leads into,
they are put out of the way of the best connexions in marriage amongst us, viz.
the most religious; as such dare not seek to, nor join with, those who give way
to undue liberties: I mean such as Truth does not allow us, as people who ought
in all things to hold up a true standard to the nations, to continue in. Here
inconsiderate tender youth, through their aptness to crave the glittering
gaiety of the world, and their much more imprudent parents indulging them
therein, are, as it were, prepared for ruin, unless divine mercy interpose; and
are also removed out of the way of the greatest blessing that can be enjoyed in
the things of this life; viz. a truly religious husband or wife.

Some parents have been pierced through with much sorrow by such means, and
have had great cause to repent when it was too late, and there has been reason
to fear that the blood of their children would be required at their hands. Oh!
how dishonourably have some leaned to unsuitable connexions for their children,
when there has been a large outward prospect! It is to be feared diverse
parents have looked at little else. This has sometimes appeared to have been
the case, by the slight put upon the offers of those, who have wanted nothing
to recommend them but wealth; the want of which, in the eye of such, has proved
so offensive, that they seem to have been rejected on that account. This is
very wrong, and ought never to have entrance amongst any professing the
Christian name; For the earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof. These
hints are not intended to encourage any to aspire after great things; but that
all should, with a single eye, earnestly seek for divine counsel, both in
making and accepting offers for marriage.


Some perhaps may think I am very close and severe upon parents; that it is not
always their fault when children take undue liberties; (which I have already
granted) that they are frequently very self-willed and ungovernable. This is
indeed saying something, when children become their own rulers by age, or
otherwise, and have to cloth and provide for themselves; but I think it has
little weight whilst their parents provide for them, who have not only power to
advise and persuade, but also to command and restrain. They certainly may and
ought to be absolute, in cases where the testimony of truth is in danger of
suffering.

It is very observable, that Eli was greatly blamed, because he, having power,
did not restrain his wicked sons; though it plainly appears he much disapproved
of their practices, and expostulated with them on that account, and laid before
them the pernicious consequences of their evil conduct. Oh! how very affecting
it is, to consider the fearful calamities which came upon that house; and also
upon Israel, probably in some measure on the same account.

The neglect and imprudent indulgence of parents in the training up their
children, is also a painful loss to the society, as the consequence thereof
tends greatly to obstruct the progress of truth, by standing in the way of
serious enquirers as stumbling blocks; when it is seen by such, that the same
undue liberties they are called out of, are indulged amongst us, they are
offended. Oh! that parents, children, and all who are unfaithful, and who
easily suffer the important branches of our Christian testimony to fall (as
indeed they would all appear, if they were seen in a true light) would deeply
consider the mournful consequence thereof, by retarding the progress of truth,
and grievously eclipsing the beauty of Sion! Then I greatly hope a more lively
zeal and holy ardour would prevail, and that the careless sons and daughters
thereof would arise, and shake themselves from the dust of the earth, putting
on the beautiful garment of holiness and truth, that she might become more and
more a praise in the earth.

Having offered a few remarks concerning the important duty of parents, it now
remains to do the same respecting the indispensible duty of children to honor
and obey their parents in the Lord, which is strongly enjoined in the holy
scriptures, and, in the nature of things, of lasting and indispensible
obligation.

The command is, Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long
upon the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee. Exodus xx. 12.
Read Matt. xv. 4. Mark vii. 10. Luke xviii. 20. Ephesians. vi. 2.3. In that which is
consistent with the law of God, no children can stand acquitted before the
supreme Judge, for disobeying or dishonouring their parents. This Obedience and
honor not only extend to the yielding to what they enjoin or direct, but also
to the preservation of a reverent awe, and honorable esteem in the heart,
arising from a bottom of love, which would on all just occasions cherish and
protect them. It is a sin of a deep dye to disregard and slight parents, as
appears by Deuteronomy. xxvii. 16. Cursed be he that sets light by his father or
his mother; and Prove. xxx. 17. The eye that mocketh at his father, and
despises to obey his mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and
the young eagles shall eat it. Chap. xxiii. 22. Hearken unto thy father, and
despise not thy mother when she is old. Chap. xxviii. 24. Whosoever robs his
father or his mother, and says, It is no transgression, the same is the
companion of a destroyer.

On the other hand, very memorable was the kind and watchful Providence which
attended such as feared the Lord, and those who loved, honored, and obeyed
their parents; as Jacob, Joseph, Ruth, Samuel, and David; also the Rechabites.
Read the account concerning them, Jer. xxxv. Respecting such as lived in the
fear of the Lord, let me recommend the case of Daniel, Dan. iii.
and the three children, who, because of their faithfulness to God, were
preserved unhurt, when by their adversaries exposed to the greatest torment and
danger.

It would far exceed the bounds of my intention to particularize all those
excellent patterns and examples we are favored with the account of, which are
wonderfully adapted to instruct, encourage, and improve the youth, as well as
others. There are also, for caution and warning, examples and very affecting
instances of fearful judgments and dreadful calamities, which fell upon the
rebellious and gainsayers. May the tender minds of youth, by reading these
things, (as recorded in the holy scriptures and other good books) be deeply
impressed with proper sentiments concerning good and evil, and the very
different rewards of virtue and vice, both in this world, and in the world to
come.

It is a very commendable, as well as a very profitable thing, to be conversant
in those sacred writings. Remember what Paul said of his beloved son Timothy,
viz. From a child thou have known the holy scriptures, which are able to make
thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus. All scripture
given by inspiration of God, is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. 2 Timothy iii. 15, 16, 17.
But let the youth and all duly consider, that the profiting by these sacred
writings entirely depends upon the holy living powerful faith of Christ, which
works by love, purifying the heart; and whereby we come to see him who is
invisible, and consequently to understand the precious mysteries of his
kingdom, as far as is proper and necessary for us to know them, which is all
that is lawful for us to desire. There are many other good and profitable
books, but none in which is contained such a store of rich treasure, and
sublime heavenly mysteries, wonderfully wrapped up, and entirely concealed from
earthly wisdom and carnal policy. For none can know the things of God without
the assistance of his Spirit, as appears by 1 Cor. ii. 10. to 15. and in many
other places too tedious to enumerate.

Great has been the concern of the church in its largest collective body; as
appears by frequent and very pressing affectionate advice, caution, and counsel
to the youth, to read the holy scriptures, and other profitable books,
carefully to refrain from all such which may have the least tendency to
alienate their minds from the holy fear of God, and a sober virtuous course of
life, or which are barely for amusement, being unprofitable; whereas time is
very precious, short, and uncertain; therefore it should be carefully improved
to the soul's everlasting advantage. Moreover, that the youth do yield strict
and careful obedience to the Divine Monitor within, to parents, and all those
who have the rule over them without, carefully to shun the vain unprofitable
amusements, as well as the corrupt conversation of the world: earnestly
admonishing all, to avoid every thing in their dress and address, which might
have the least tendency to render them suitable for an intercourse, league, or
amity with the children of the land; or of a depraved degenerate world, that
wallows in pollution and great defilements, lest they should be drawn aside, as
Dinah was, Genesis xxxiv. 1.
by going out to see the daughters of the land; and as the children of Israel
were, by their woeful intimacy with the daughters of Moab and Midian. Numb. xxv.
Read the whole chapter; not forgetting the dreadful fall of Solomon, the
wisest king, who, by contracting intimacy with those that were strangers to
God, and his holy covenant, came to have his heart drawn away from the living
and true God, who had appeared to him in Gibeon; and so greatly debased
himself, as to bow down to their paltry dumb idols. Time would fail to
recapitulate one half of the mournful instances recorded in the holy
scriptures, and other authentic accounts, concerning the hurtful consequences
of God's people mixing and joining with the nations. It is their safety to be
separate, and to dwell alone. Numb. xxiii. 9


Our youth have been also highly favored with a living powerful ministry,
which has often reached the Witness of God in their hearts. What a wonderful
favor is this! when we consider that the greatest part of Christendom, almost
ever since the apostles days, have deprived themselves thereof, by substituting
human wisdom and learning in its place; so that the panting thirsty soul could
meet with little from their ministers, but the muddy nauseous waters of Babylon
to drink; neither could they direct to the pastures of Christ's flock; but
counsel was darkened by a multitude of words without knowledge, and the
commandments of God made void by the precepts, inventions, and injunctions of
men. What a blessed time is your lot cast in, even when evangelical Light and
Truth has discovered itself in perfect purity! Oh! that our youth would
consider and deeply ponder in their hearts, that notwithstanding the great and
earnest labors many ways bestowed in godly love and zeal for the whole
society's preservation in the way of truth and righteousness, yet very
sorrowful and obvious has been the declension in practice of many amongst us.
A mournful inundation of undue liberties has flowed in; many have made grievous
advances in those corrupt perishing pleasures, and trifling amusements, which
our truly pious predecessors wholly denied, and turned their backs upon, and
have left us large and lively testimonies, by way of warning and caution,
carefully to avoid being entangled with such yokes of bondage. All these things
have prevailed for want of abiding in the fear of God, and duly considering
that he is ever present, beholding all our words and actions, be they ever so
much concealed from the view of mortals; yet he knows them altogether. When the
mind is suffered to turn to his pure Witness in the heart, we find reproof,
correction, and judgment, for giving way to wrong things: and as the youth
abide in subjection thereunto, they will be afraid to transgress its pure law
in the mind; which they will find agree exactly with the precepts and
injunctions recorded in holy writ, respecting their duty to God, to their
parents, and all mankind.

The reason why many, who see their duty, fail in the performance, is their
departing from the perfect law of liberty, and of the Spirit of life in their
minds. They may be informed concerning their duty by outward means and law: but
the ability is only to be sound arising from the inward law, agreeable to Romans
viii. 3. For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free
from the law of sin and death. In obedience and humble subjection to this holy
law, youth would enjoy that pure peace, heavenly serenity, and sweet
consolation of soul, which infinitely surpasses all the treasures and
pleasures of the earth; and would have a well-grounded hope of a happy
eternity. It is the adversary that leads to that obduracy and self-willed
rebellious state of mind, to be observed in some of the youth, who, by their
uncontrollable dispositions, administer great sorrow and anxiety to their
parents and friends, being puffed up with vain conceits in their unexperienced
minds, that they are more capable of judging for themselves, than those of
greater experience are for them; by reason whereof too many, it is to be
feared, have rushed on to the ruin of body and soul.

Very great is the danger when the young and unexperienced are proud and
opinionated. This naturally raises above instruction, putting them out of the
way of being truly profitable, either to themselves or others. Such, unless
their hearts are mercifully turned by a supernatural power, are never likely to
be fit for governing families, or to act as members in the church of God.
Seeing, unless their unmortified wills and tempers are submitted to (however
unreasonable) they will break the peace of society, and violate the wholesome
order thereof, being like the unsubjected bulls of Bashan.

When any assume the outward form of religion, and take upon them to be active
members, without a change of heart, they prove a painful burden to living
members; neither can such make suitable help-mates as husbands or wives; nor
can they in that state rightly fill up the honorable stations of parents,
masters and mistresses, friends, neighbors, or tradesmen. I do therefore, in
much affection, and desire for the welfare of tender youth, caution and warn
them carefully to avoid the company and conversation of such, though under the
same profession; who disregard their parents, and those who have the rule over
them; who slight or speak contemptuously of their betters, such as ministers
and elders, etc. or of the Christian advice frequently given forth by the
yearly and other meetings, or of the wholesome discipline established amongst
us as a people in the wisdom of truth: do not join such in marriage, however
great the outward prospect may appear; for tender religious minds cannot be
happy with such in that connection. And as the fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom, and that which makes and keeps the heart clean, learn it
in tender age; by it you will be taught to remember your Creator in the days of
your youth, and, agreeable to the injunction of our blessed Lord, to seek first
the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all things necessary here will
be added. Divine wisdom, as it is regarded, will direct your steps in the
course of this short pilgrimage, in the choice of proper help-mates, and all
other affairs of consequence. The same watchful Providence will be over you in
care, guidance, and protection, if you look to it, which attended those who
lived in his fear, as you may read in the holy scriptures.

It greatly behooves you to look diligently to the footsteps of Christ's
companions, who walked with him through many tribulations, having washed their
robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Be truly contented with
that low, humble, self-denying way which you see they walked in; you can never
mend it. If you seek more liberty than that allows of, it will only bring upon
you darkness, pain, and vexation of spirit. Take notice of friends writings in
early times, and for a considerable number of years, how wonderfully the power
and love of God was with them and how marvellously they were protected amidst
the raging foaming waves of earthly powers, combined, to lay waste the
heritage. What encouraging and excellent accounts had they to leave upon record
for us, concerning the mighty powerful overshadowing of the canopy of heavenly
love and life in their religious assemblies, and of the glory of God shining
forth amongst them! This, through the mercy of God, is not departed; though
there have been some removes thereof.

Dearly beloved youth: Lay to heart, the great slackness of zeal which appears
in too many; the dimness, flatness, and the painful gloominess, which spreads
itself over our assemblies in this our day, hard to break through, many times
depriving us of the heavenly places in Christ Jesus our Lord! It is not of Him
we are in this condition, but it certainly is our own fault, because wrong
things are suffered to prevail. Oh! that our youth may be stirred up in a godly
zeal to cry out fervently with the prophet Elisha, Where is the Lord God of
Elijah? 2 Kings ii. 14.
And to be as vigilant as he in ardent endeavors to be endued with the same
Spirit, to succeed those honorable worthies who are removed from works to
receive a blessed reward. Consider the business of your day is to come up in a
faithful succession, maintaining the cause and testimony of God, left with you
by your ancestors, or those who are removed as above. Stand fast therefore in
the liberty purchased for you by great sufferings, and shedding of innocent
blood; be afraid to trample thereon; which all certainly do, who turn away from
the truth, as it was received, held forth, and maintained by them. May it be
very precious in your eyes from generation to generation, until time shall be
no more! Those who otherwise esteem it, turning their backs thereupon,
violating the blessed testimony thereof in its several branches, will (unless
they repent) be wholly rejected and cast off, as being unworthy of so great an
honor, as that of holding forth a standard of truth and righteousness to the
nations; and others will be called and chosen for that great and glorious work:
yea, the Lord is able to raise up of those who may be compared to the stones,
and to make them Abraham's children, by doing his works; while those, who might
have been the children of the kingdom, may by disobedience provoke him to
exclude them.

I shall conclude this affectionate address to our youth with the words of
Christ, by his faithful servant John, to the church in Philadelphia, Behold I
come quickly; hold that fast which thou have, that no man take thy crown. Him
that overcomes, will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go
no more out; and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the
city of my God, which is New Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my
God: and I will write upon him my new name. Rev. iii. 11, 12.


CHAPTER II. Containing some brief Observations concerning the NATURE and
NECESSITY of the NEW BIRTH.
THE standing doctrine preached by our Lord Jesus Christ to Nicodemus, of the
necessity of being born again, John iii. 3 -- 8. and what is delivered by John
the Baptist concerning the baptism of Christ with the Holy Ghost and fire,
Matthew. iii. 10, 11, 12.
being the same in substance, which is also set forth by the prophet Malachi,
under the lively metaphors of a refiner's fire, a purifier of silver, and
fuller's soap, Mal. iii. 1, 2, 3, 4.
with many other passages of like import in holy writ, although of the utmost
consequence to be rightly understood, weightily considered, and deeply pondered
by all, is by the generality much overlooked, and amazingly neglected. That
which alone can lay a sure foundation for happiness, both in time and eternity,
is hardly thought of by many with desire, or even with any degree of
seriousness; unless it be to shun and evade the force of that power, which
thereby would separate them from their beloved lusts and fleshly
gratifications. In order to effect this, many and exceedingly absurd have been
the conjectures and dreams of a great part of mankind; but all to shun the
cross; that corrupt self, with all its seeming rich treasure and adorning,
might be saved. This self, in many, has been more fond of a religious kind of
ornament and treasure, than those of any other sort; toward whom the subtle
transformer has not been wanting plentifully to furnish all those minds who
have a religious turn. Antichrist, as an eminent I. Penington.
author observes, can bring forth in his church a likeness or imitation of
every thing that is to be found in Sion. O then! how greatly it behooves mankind
to press after a certainty; since nothing can possibly center the soul in a
more deplorable state, than a mistake of this kind.

But some are apt to doubt whether such a thing as an infallible evidence of
our adoption is attainable here; though so fully asserted in the holy
scriptures. This is not to be wondered at, with respect to those who are in the
natural, unrenewed state; seeing the natural man, according to Paul's doctrine,
understands not the things of the Spirit of God, neither indeed can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned. 1 Cor. ii. 14.
But I am persuaded none, who have really experienced the new birth, remain
doubtful or scrupulous concerning this important truth. It seems to me
altogether unreasonable to suppose Infinite Goodness, who knows the fallibility
and great weakness of his creature man, should leave any, whose hearts are
fully devoted to yield obedience to his will, in a state liable to mistake the
same, or in any wise ignorant of his divine approbation, upon a careful
discharge of their duty to him. This holy evidence in faithful souls is indeed
the white stone, and in it a new name written, which none know save those who
receive it; being an assurance that their names are written in heaven: from
whence arises a joy, which is unspeakable and full of glory.

A sense of the wrath of God against evil, does often make deep impressions
upon the minds of many; so that they in painful remorse are ready to cry out
for mercy and forgiveness of their sins. And seeing this sensibility upon the
mind of man, that he has displeased his Creator, neither does nor can proceed
from any thing in man, but the pure witness of God placed there; so it is quite
reasonable to conclude, that this divine Witness, upon our faithfully
discharging the duty we owe to God, according to its discoveries, will impress
our minds with a sweet sense of divine approbation, agreeable to Romans viii. 16.
The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of
God. With many other passages in holy writ of like import.

When any are really disposed to be religious, great care should be taken in
their first setting out. Many have been marred upon the wheel, for want of
patience to endure proper tempering; endeavoring to be formed into vessels,
before they have passed through the necessary operation. This has been for want
of thoroughly knowing themselves. For every thing that appertains to the
creaturely will, and forwardness of desire to choose and act for itself, must
die upon the cross, therefore there must be a remaining as a chaos without form
and void, to endure all sorts of storms and tempests, until the effective Word
says, Let there be light! making by his own power a perfect separation between
the light and darkness in the little world, ( viz. man) as he did in the great
world. Until this is really experienced, man is not in a condition to be placed
upon the wheel, to be formed into a vessel of honor. But there must be a time
for drying, and enduring the furnace.

These wonderful operations, which I have, in an allegorical way, only just
touched upon, must necessarily make very deep and lasting impressions upon all,
who have been so happy as so far to experience the nature of that regeneration,
without which none can see the kingdom of God. When any are come thus far,
there will be no occasion to make use of dreams and uncertain conjectures in
forming a judgment concerning their adoption. That divine birth which is raised
in them, naturally cries, Abba, Father! leaving them no room to doubt, when he
is pleased to appear (which they are taught to wait in the patience for) of
their having passed from death unto life; or being translated from under the
power of darkness into the kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ; which consists
in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

The great danger of man's being deceived lies in the mysterious workings of
Satan, who has a strong hold in those, who, upon their first awakening by the
call of Christ, have not suffered his power so far to prevail, as to make them
willing to part with all for his sake. There is something exceedingly reluctant
in the strong spirit and will of man, to the falling into nothingness of self,
and be wholly given up to be guided and upheld by another. This in part arises
from the excellency of his frame, and nobility of his understanding, who finds
himself in naturals capable of effecting great things, and knows not, till his
eyes are opened and enlightened from above, but that he is equally capable of
comprehending what relates to him concerning the world to come. Instead
therefore of wholly ceasing from his own will, and relying altogether upon the
guidance of the Holy Spirit, he is very apt to be active, and imagines God will
be pleased with his diligence, in the performance of what he apprehends to be
religious duties; such as praying, singing, preaching, or eagerly seeking to
join others in those performances; often telling his experiences, and hearing
those of others. Whereas it would be abundantly more pleasing to the Almighty,
and profitable to himself, to lay his mouth in the dust, silently to commune
with his own heart, and be still, until it shall please the Lord to send forth
his light and his truth, that the poor helpless creature may move and act in a
religious sense, with an understanding informed thereby: seeing every thing
that is done in religion and worship, without the sensible guidance of the Holy
Spirit, is will worship and idolatry: for if the Spirit of Christ does not move
and actuate us in religious performances, we are liable to the influences of
the spirit of antichrist.

Yet some perhaps, by way of excuse for their not being influenced by the
Spirit of Truth in their religion, are ready to call it enthusiasm and
presumption in those who assert the necessity thereof, seeming to imagine there
is no such thing in our time to be relied upon; yet they will readily own it
was so in the apostles days. But they can give no good reason why the same
divine power and efficacy should forsake the true church; since mankind have
equal need thereof, and the nature of God's dispensation is now the same as it
was then.

Common prudence teaches us to examine strictly into the clearness and
validity of our titles to earthly estates, that we may be fully satisfied we
are not deceived or imposed upon by false glosses and specious pretenses. Shall
we be less solicitous about that which is of infinitely greater moment; viz.
our title to an everlasting inheritance? Man should be very jealous over his
own heart, which is apt to be partial toward itself, and, through the
transformation of Satan, to sooth and flatter him into an apprehension that he
is in the way to everlasting happiness, when in reality it is quite otherwise.
But, alas! his criterion to form a judgment of himself by may be the same as
that of the Pharisee, who went up to the temple to pray, or rather to
recapitulate his own supposed excellencies. He perhaps measures himself by
himself, or by comparing his principles and conduct in life with those of
others; whereas nothing should be received as a standard in this very important
case, but the stamp of divine approbation upon the heart; agreeable to Romans
viii. 14, 15, 16, For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
sons of God. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but
ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The
Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God.

Having offered a few Hints by Way of Caution, in order that all into whose
Hands this shall come may examine themselves without Partiality, lest they fall
inadvertently into an irretrievable Mistake respecting the eternal Salvation of
their own Souls, I shall now endeavor to set forth, from mine own Experience,
a little of the Nature of that New Birth, without which none can see the
Kingdom of God; consequently are no true Members of his Church, which is his
Kingdom, and frequently called Heaven, and the Kingdom of Heaven, in the holy
Scriptures. It cannot therefore be supposed, that a Person wholly unregenerate
can be properly qualified for the Performance of any religious Duty, or even
the least Service in that kingdom, which he does not so much (...).

I have, by experience from my childhood, found two spirits or seeds striving
in me for mastery or rule: I have discovered them to be irreconcilable enemies
one to the other; and that I could not serve them both at the same time. I had
an understanding given me, whereby I knew one of those seeds was a measure of
the All-powerful Inexhaustible Source of Goodness; and the other, which had
indeed in a manner leavened the whole lump, was of a wicked and diabolical
nature. By means of this corrupt leaven, I had a strong bias to evil of many
kinds; nevertheless, I often found the good striking at the evil, as an ax laid
to the root thereof, agreeable to Matthew. iii. 10. in order to destroy that
which deprived the Heir of all things of his inheritance. I was long in a kind
of suspense, unresolved which to join with; yet saw all depended upon my
determination, and that I had full power of choice. On the one hand, when the
awakening visitations of God's Spirit were upon me, it appeared very dreadful
to provoke an Omnipotent Being, of unmerited kindness and mercy, to cast my
soul into everlasting perdition. On the other hand, especially when those
blessed impressions were somewhat worn off, it was next to death itself to
yield up all my sensual gratifications, and to expose myself to the scorn and
contempt of the world. However, in process of time, the Lord in gracious
condescension broke in upon my soul, by his judgments mixed with mercy, in such
a powerful manner, as that I was made willing to yield up thereunto, come life
or death. For indeed I looked for nothing else at that time, but really
expected my frail body would sink down under the weight of that unspeakable
distress which was upon me, and that my sinful soul must be centered in a state
of everlasting misery. Now the cry was with Saul, afterward Paul, with
trembling and astonishment, "Lord! what will thou have me to do? Acts ix. 6.
" There was no holding back, or secret reserve then, but whatever was called
for was given up with all readiness: this being all I could then do. As to
performing religious duties, I had them all to learn, though I had been trained
up from my infancy in a strict religious way by godly parents. But the very
best outward helps, and the most consistent set of religious principles, only
professed, cannot at all enrich the soul with heavenly grace.

By carefully enquiring as above, I soon clearly perceived my business was to
watch and pray continually; to commune with mine own heart, or the Witness of
God therein, that I might receive fresh instruction and help as I had need.
Self-denial, and taking up the cross daily, was to be my constant employ; in
the doing whereof I had much inward peace and comfort, and a well-grounded hope
that I should thereby find, in the Lord's time, the body of sin so weakened, as
that the yoke of Christ would become easy, and his burden light.

In order to a happy progress in the life of religion, the great thing is, by
abiding in the Divine Light, to preserve a clear and distinguishing sensibility
between the flesh and the Spirit. There is no doing this without great care and
steady attention of mind upon the Divine Gift. If the eye goes from this, it is
blinded by the darkness; then the man is liable to be misled by a counterfeit
light, and various resemblances, which Satan will cast in his way for guidance
and instruction, persuading him all is well and right. To be so misled, and
therein established, is a truly deplorable state; it being very unlikely such
should ever be persuaded to believe they are mistaken, as they often deride
whatever appears doubtful concerning their religion and worship. This was
evidently the case with a set of professors of uncommon outward sanctity and
punctual exactness in the exteriors of their religion, in the time of our
Savior's personal appearance upon earth; notwithstanding which, these very
people appeared to be the most inveterate enemies he had amongst mankind.
Seeing therefore frail mortals are liable to such dangerous mistakes, how
exceedingly circumspect and watchful ought all to be! and what frequent and
strict scrutinies ought they to make into the state of their own hearts! which
can be known no otherwise by any, but as the Lord is pleased to send forth his
heart-searching light. This is a high favor, which none receive but those who
are turned from the darkness, and are fervently concerned to put away all the
works thereof. Very gross is the deception of those, who imagine the work of
their conversion to be an instantaneous work. This can be nothing else but a
delusion of Satan, to settle people at rest in a state of self-security as soon
as he can. Oh! what a length of time it takes, to work out that rebellious,
stiff-necked, backsliding nature, which was born in Egypt, before the new
generation is raised up, that is fit to enter the promised land!

From what is before hinted, it may be understood, that the Good Seed, or
Heavenly Principle, arising into ascendancy in us over the evil seed or
principle, and leavening the three measures of meal into its own nature, is
essentially a being born again, or with water and the Spirit, or being baptized
with the Holy Ghost and fire; or man's enduring the operation of the refiner's
fire, fuller's soap, and being purified as silver; all which metaphors signify
to us, in a very instructive manner, the different operations of the Holy
Spirit; which is to the willing soul sometimes as water, to wash and bathe in,
and also to drink of freely; at other times as a refiner's fire, to purge away
the filth and dross, that man may be as pure gold, prepared to receive the
image and superscription of the King of Heaven; that so, wherever he goes, or
whatever he does, all who have their eyes opened may see whose subject he is.

It is very observable, that the prophet Malachi, when he had elegantly set
forth the nature of the new birth, breaks out in the forth verse of the third
chapter on this wise: Then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be
pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years; which
clearly implies man's unacceptable state with his Maker in any religious
performances, until he has previously known the cleansing and refining
operations beforementioned. What then will become of those who have intruded
themselves into religious services, and amongst his faithful followers, not
having on the wedding garment! who would pass for his people, yet cannot find,
by examining the state of their minds respecting religion, that they have trod
the path of regeneration, nor passed through the many and various pangs of the
new birth.

When man has, through the powerful prevalence of the Divine Principle,
obtained victory in a good degree over evil, his soul abounds with evidence and
tokens of his happy seize, through the Lord Jesus Christ; to whom with
the Father, through the influence of the Holy Spirit, praise, adoration, and
thanksgiving, are offered up as incense with acceptance; he enjoys an abundant
flow of heavenly love, to those especially of the same lineage, begotten of the
same Everlasting Father, agreeable to 1 John iii. 14. We know that we have
passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren. It is then become as
his meat and drink to do the will of God; he looks with indifference upon
worldly enjoyment, when compared with religion and the weighty concerns
thereof; his body, soul, and outward substance are offered up to the Great
Giver; being given up to spend and to be spent for the promotion of truth,
according to the degree of its requirings; careful that all he does may tend to
God's glory. These particulars, and much more than I can set forth, are done
from a mature result of a well-informed understanding and sound judgment, which
cannot fail of producing great peace and heavenly solace, whereby he is
mightily encouraged to persevere.

Oh! that mankind would but come clearly to see the necessity of beginning in
the Spirit, and walking therein, agreeable to the advice and practice of the
primitive Christians! then they would not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. The
spirit that lusts to envy, and seeks vengeance, would be slain. Here outward
wars and fightings would cease of course; the cause being taken away, the
effect would be no more. A selfish covetous spirit, which seeks undue advantage
to the injury of others, would be purged out. Here we should have power to love
our neighbors as ourselves, and to do unto all as we should be done unto, were
we in their situation. All these, and many more good fruits, would spring up
naturally from the new creation in Christ Jesus our Lord. But those who have
not the groundwork in themselves, and lack the virtues of the Holy Spirit,
which are set forth in the scriptures of truth, are blind, and cannot see that
it is possible to attain those exalted Christian virtues now as it was in the
apostles days; and therefore imaginations, dreams, and conjectures abound
amongst outside Christians (who are numerous) concerning the way and means of
obtaining that salvation which comes only by being born from above. Some say,
Lo! here is Christ! Others say, Lo! he is there! but still evade the cross. If
that did not stick in the way, they would surely embrace the right thing, as it
is so fully set forth and described in the holy scriptures.

The testimonies thereof have enforced, however, an assent to the truth of the
doctrine of the new birth, both in Papists and Protestants. But alas! their
apprehensions concerning its nature are exceedingly obscure and carnal, making
the sprinkling of infants with a little water (which they call baptism)
essential thereunto; nay, the manner of their expressing themselves on this
subject, in the confession of their faith to the world, seems in my
apprehension to make that ceremony all, or the chief that is intended by being
born from above; or that the operations of the Spirit for that end are
infallibly connected to the operation of water. Papists say, We must believe
that Jesus Christ has instituted in his church seven sacraments, or mysterious
signs and instrumental causes of divine grace in the soul: baptism, by way of a
new birth, by which we are made children of God, and washed from sin:
confirmation, by which we receive the Holy Ghost by the imposition of the hands
of the successors of the apostles, etc. Popish Manual of Spiritual Exercises,
page 4.
The Protestant Church of England says, in confessing their faith to the
world, In my baptism (they mean sprinkling infants) wherein I was made a member
of Christ, the child of God, and an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven. After
an infant is sprinkled, the priest says, Seeing now, dearly beloved brethren,
that this child is by baptism regenerate and grafted into the body of Christ's
church, let us give thanks, etc. And again, "We yield thee most hearty thanks,
most merciful Father, that it has pleased thee to regenerate this infant with
thy Holy Spirit, to receive him for thy own child by adoption, and to
incorporate him into thy holy church, etc. Catechism and Public Baptism.


From these evasions it appears man hates death to self, and had rather look
any way than that which is likely to strip him of all his beloved treasure;
though if he was not very blind and ignorant concerning his true interest, he
would easily see that his supposed loss would make way for his greatest gain.
However, this unhappy reluctance in man to the true way, has put him upon
straining his invention, to find an easier way to the kingdom of felicity, of
becoming heir of two kingdoms; of serving God and mammon, though we are assured
that is impossible. Many would fain imagine, that man may be saved merely by
the imputation of Christ's righteousness; which, if it were true, would be a
mighty palatable doctrine to a multitude of self-lovers. Some, who do not fall
in with this opinion, but believe they must repent, and that they ought to
experience the evil purged out by the spirit of judgment and burning, do yet
put off this great work, resting with a kind of hope, that they shall be fitted
for everlasting happiness thereby some time before they go hence; and build
much upon the great mercy and long-suffering of the Almighty, catching eagerly
at the sudden conversion of Paul, and of the thief upon the cross. Oh! how
exceeding inconsiderate are such delays! A saying of Chrysostom is worthy to be
noted, viz. God promises mercy to penitent sinners, but he does not promise
them, that they shall have so much time as tomorrow for their repentance!
Others there be, who imagine conversion is effected in an instant; and in order
that their deception may be effectual, the false prophet causes fire to come
down as from heaven in their sight; he that is prince in the airy region,
raises vehement heats and agitations upon their passions. This they call the
workings of the Spirit upon them for their conversion; immediately after which
a kind of heaven is formed, wherein they take their rest with a seeming
security, erroneously supposing their calling and election are made sure, and
that they can never fall from saving grace, which they doubt not of having in
their possession. Oh! how dangerous is such a security!

Much more might be written concerning the many false rests and visionary
heavens which poor mortals, through the subtlety of Satan, and their own
inattention, are deluded to repose themselves in; which might all be happily
prevented, were they to enter into the sheepfold by Christ, the door and way to
the everlasting kingdom, which is opened and prepared for the soul to travel
in, by his inward appearance, as before noted. He will certainly count all
thieves and robbers, who come into his church any other way.

What abundance of robbery is found in thee O Christendom! what stealing the
name of Christ, and the experience of God's people formerly, to live upon, and
also to feed one another with! Oh, what multitudes there are of unwholesome
barren pastors, and poor, lean, starved flocks, amongst most or all societies
of Christian professors! Their poor low condition, as to religion, induces them
to put forth their hands and steal. Can the God of justice and truth delight in
robbery for burnt-offerings? No; such sacrifices are an abomination to him. His
regenerate ones, though often tried with great poverty of spirit, dare not
steal; knowing nothing will find acceptance with the Source of Infinite
Goodness, but that which is of his own immediate begetting. He will smell a
sweet savor from that, although it be but a sigh or a groan; which may be
compared with the acceptable offering of the poor under the law, of a pair of
turtle doves, or two young pigeons; and with the widow's two mites cast into
the treasury, taken notice of by our Lord.* Those poor humble dependant ones,
who are made perfectly honest by the just and upright principle prevailing in
them, and waiting the Lord's time, may be, and often are furnished with larger
offerings, and do greatly increase with the increase of God.

To conclude this head, I shall thus sum up the matter, viz. that man's great
business, upon his first awakening out of the sleep or stupefaction of sin, is
passively to yield himself into the hands of his faithful Creator, that he may
be pleased to work in and upon him, to will and to do of his own good pleasure.
His soul must, with the utmost care, endeavor to abide in that which enables
incessantly to pray, Thy kingdom come, and thy will be done on earth, as it is
done in heaven. This bent of heart, through the grace of God, is a sufficient
guard or defense against all the subtle attempts of Satan to beguile and
deceive, and nothing else. The most crafty devices of the adversary can never
prevail to pluck such an one out of the Almighty's hands; and by abiding
therein, he is created anew in Christ Jesus unto good works, having spiritual
senses given, that he may continually exercise them in discerning between good
and evil. His heart being made pure in a good degree by the sprinkling of the
most precious blood of Christ, his constant care is, through Divine assistance,
to preserve it so, that he may be pleased to tabernacle with him, on whom help
is laid; who is made of God, to such passive upright souls, their wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. They receive from him those
qualifications, which enable them to co-work with the Spirit, and perfectly to
understand the proper business of their day, both in the world as strangers and
pilgrims, and in the church of Christ, as living members thereof.

CHAPTER III. Relating to the NATURE of TRUE WORSHIP; with some Remarks upon
the State of our Society, both as in early Times, and now.
THE nature of acceptable worship is set forth by our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, in a manner wonderfully adapted to the subject; viz. that it is to be
performed in Spirit and in Truth. The reason is given, "Because God is a
Spirit;" and therefore, they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and
in Truth.* Not in the ceremonial, shadowy, and typical worship of the Jews;
(though because of weakness it was dispensed to them, until a better hope, and
more excellent worship was brought in; whereby man has a nearer access to the
Divinity, and a better knowledge of himself: here such a brightness of heavenly
glory appears, as causes all signs, figures, and types, to vanish away) but in
the truth and real substance of all that was typified and pre-figured by the
ceremonial law of Moses, the righteousness of that law being fulfilled in those
who walk and worship in the Spirit.

The soul must bow in perfect sincerity, humble prostration, and a deep inward
sense of its own frailty, want, and unworthiness; being at the same time deeply
impressed with a lively sense of the Lord's adorable greatness and goodness;
from which sensibility renewed upon the mind, by Him alone who is the sole
object of worship, thanksgiving and praises ascend, for the multitude of his
mercies received, and reverent prayer, either mental or vocal (according as the
mind feels itself influenced or directed by the Holy Anointing) for the
continuance of his gracious preservation in the way of righteousness; agreeable
to Ephesians. vi. 18. Praying always with all supplication in the Spirit, and
watching thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication for all saints.

It is clearly to be understood, by what our Lord said to the woman of Samaria
beforementioned, that acceptable worship is not to be confined to any
particular place, mode, form, or ceremony whatsoever; which was a deception
mankind had too generally fallen into, and greatly wanted to be drawn from,
being then, as well as now, too apt to rest satisfied with exterior
performances; which although some of them once were to the Jews in condescension
dispensed, yet not even then substituted in the place of spiritual worship, nor
at all acceptable without the bowing of the soul as above. But now our Lord
shows the outward was to be laid aside, and not to continue in his glorious
spiritual dispensation any longer; a dangerous snare for man to please himself
with and rest in. But it could hardly be expected that so much, or so great a
mass of outward observations could be cast off all at once; yet in the apostles
days the church was wonderfully (for the time) brought out of them, as appears
by those few things laid upon the Gentiles.* But alas! the Christian church (so
called) instead of leaving all, and becoming purely spiritual, gradually
decayed as to life and power, and increased in ceremonies and outward
observations, until she became as full of them as ever the Jewish church was.
The she got fall possession of the outward court, having nothing to enjoy but
her own inventions, and to glory in Babylon, which she had built instead of
Sion, until her measure should be filled up, and her determined overthrow was
to take place.

Paul says to the Philippians, For we are the circumcision which worship God
in Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.*
What circumcision is here intended, appears from Romans ii. 28, 29 Col. ii. 11.
That the generality of Christian professors, of every denomination, have
lamentably deviated from this kind of worship, requires not much penetration to
discover. And though the great Author of the Christian religion has so fully
expressed his will and pleasure in this most important point, yet many will not
be satisfied without a kind of worship that the man's part can be active in;
that has something in it capable to amuse the outward senses: they would yet
worship the Most High with human abilities, or the work of men's hands; and by
an unjustifiable veneration, which some endeavor to keep up for old mass
houses, and other places of worship, calling them churches, houses of God, holy
places, etc. they seem to maintain a doctrine contrary to the testimony of that
holy martyr Stephen; Howbeit the Most High dwells not in temples made with
hands, as says the prophet; and that of the great apostle of the Gentiles: God
that made the world, and all things therein seeing that he is Lord of heaven
and (...) dwells not in temples made with hands; neither (...) worshipped
with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to all life,
and breath, and all things.

Most Protestants, though they have cast off much of the Romish superstition,
still retain some outward ceremonies and observations very unsuitable to the
spirituality of the gospel dispensation, for which they have no divine
authority, nor any color of warrant, but what is patched up from the example
of some in the primitive church; which being then just arising out of a load of
ceremonies, could not be wholly weaned from every thing of that kind at once;
and therefore several of these things were for a time condescended unto; it
being, though a very glorious beginning, but the morning of the gospel-day, and
infancy of the Christian church, she wonderfully abounded with heavenly power,
in order to make her way in the world. Yet, by the rising higher and higher of
the Sun of Righteousness, who rules the everlasting day of God's salvation, she
was to put on all her beautiful garments; to make herself quite ready for the
bridegroom, and, by a gradual increase of clear discoveries, was to grow into
maturity of wisdom, and ripeness of judgment. Our Lord clearly intimates the
great danger of tacking any thing of the old ceremonial dispensation to the new
gospel dispensation Matthew. ix. 16.17
; showing they would by no means agree, or safely subsist together. This the
experience of many generations can fully declare. Oh! what rents, schisms, and
tearing of the pure undefiled religion of Christ to pieces, have there been by
means of retaining some patches of the old garment!

Yet there has been a godly travail, and an ardent labor preserved, even
through the darkest ages of superstition and idolatry, by the true church; though
hidden from carnal eyes, as in a wilderness, that she might cast off this heavy
eclipsing mass of outward observations: there were many risings up, through the
divine power, against it, especially the grossest part thereof; but the most
extraordinary, as to its consistency with the unmixed purity of the gospel, was
about the middle of the last century. Then evangelical light and truth
appeared, without the blending of ceremonies and outward observations. When the
Lord, by his overruling power, had erected this blessed standard of simple
truth, and pure righteousness, many thousands flocked to it, and spoke the
language, in a considerable degree, set forth by way of enquiry, Cant. vi. 10.
Who is she! that looks forth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the
sun, and terrible as an army with banners? Terrible indeed they were to the man
of sin, the son of perdition, and were mighty instruments in the Lord's hand to
reveal him. A great annoyance they were to the merchants of Babylon, and those
who enriched themselves by the superstitious wares thereof; which, through the
witchcraft and enchantments of the great whore and her daughters, mankind were
deluded to buy of them; though now the wicked craft is much more seen in all its
transformations, than it was at their first rising.

They endured a great fight of affliction; but through all, they with patient
but undaunted firmness maintained their ground, and were made victorious
through sufferings, as the Captain of their salvation was. The everlasting
gospel was preached by them in great demonstration of the Spirit, and with
power; in sum and substance as it was to be preached after the apostasy: Fear
God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship
him that made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of water. Rev
xix ^^


This was indeed coming to the substance, after men had wearied themselves with
abundance of toil in vain, catching nothing, but vanity and vexation of spirit.
If any would receive this gospel, thus preached according to the true intent
and meaning thereof, there was no room to evade the cross of Christ, which is
the power of God to salvation. There is no liberty here to retain a few
ceremonies for decency's sake, and to invite the Papists over, as pretended by
Protestants; but all are to embrace the substance, not daring any more to touch
the beggarly elements, so much pro^^^tuted and defiled during the whole night
of apostasy. The virgin daughter of Sion is well assured the bridegroom of her
soul will never more appear to her in these uncertain polluted things, which
have been, and yet will be, more and more terribly shaken, and pass away as a
scroll; that those things which can never be shaken may remain, agreeable to
Rev. xxi. 1. And I saw a new heaven, and a new earth; for the first heaven and
the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea. There was no more
sea; nothing unstable, fluctuating, and uncertain; nothing of that element from
which the beast arises, and therefore no danger of a beast rising thence any
more. The 2d, 3d and 4th verses of the same chapter wonderfully set forth the
glory of the New Jerusalem coming down from above, the tabernacle of God being
with men, and God's dwelling with them; of his wiping away all tears from their
eyes; and that there shall be no more crying, sorrow, and pain, because the
former things were passed away; viz. there was no more sea; all is purged away
which was the cause of those dreadful calamities and miseries set forth in this
Divine Revelation, by opening the seven seals, sounding the seven trumpets, and
pouring out the seven vials full of the wrath of God, who lives for ever and
ever. The fifth verse says And he that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I
will make all things new! Now there is nothing of the old garment, nor old wine
left, to tear and break to pieces the new garment, and the new bottles. Oh!
glorious gospel times! May the Lord of hosts hasten them more generally in the
kingdoms of the earth!

Having offered a few general observations upon the state of things, it now
remains to make some further remarks upon those people so remarkably raised, as
before hinted, in the last century, in this our native land: for their
beginning and first progress was here, though many other lands were also sharers
in the brightness of truth's arising in them; and it may without vanity be
said, that through them a light has extended, or at least glanced, over a
great part of Christendom (so called) which has discovered the hidden mystery
of the false church more clearly than heretofore, and given a great shake to
the long-continued kingdom of antichrist. They have been, through Divine
Wisdom, established into a firm body, amongst whom subsists the comely order of
the gospel, as an hedge, by divine appointment, for their safety and
preservation from the destroyer, and out of the polluting defilements of a
greatly corrupted world. Notwithstanding which, their preservation does, and
always will, much depend upon their diligently seeking unto, and waiting singly
and carefully for a daily renewing of strength and wisdom from above, whereby
alone all things must be directed and ordered for their safety and perseverance.

It has been often accounted by me a great favor and blessing, that my lot
was cast in a time when primitive Christianity, in its power and purity, was
restored in the world; and that I was so happy as to have my birth and
education amongst the beforementioned people: for though that did not make me a
real and living member of their body, yet it happily put me more in the way of
being so, than if my lot had fallen in some of the foregoing dark ages, and
afforded me greater means of restoration, than if I had been educated amongst
superstitious bigots; for which favor, enjoyed by me and many others, there
must be proportionable returns of thankfulness and obedience, or it will surely
add to our condemnation: for where much is given, much will be required.

Before I had quite arrived to man's estate, I was, through merciful goodness
operating upon my soul, brought into a better knowledge of, and a nearer
intimacy and fellowship with, these people in a spiritual sense, than before,
to my unutterable consolation: for I found the glorious Lord was their king and
lawgiver, and that he was indeed become to them a place of broad rivers and
streams; and that man's splendid inventions, such as a galley with oars, and
gallant ship, could not pass amongst them: For the Lord is our judge, the Lord
is our lawgiver, the Lord is our king, he will save us. Isa. xxxiii. 21. Ver.
22.
This was the blessed language sounded within their borders. My spirit has
many times been reverently bowed, and awfully prostrated before the Lord, in
beholding the comeliness, beautiful situation, and safety of these his people;
in an humble sense whereof I have been ready to say, Happy art thou, O Israel!
who is like unto thee, O people saved of the Lord! the shield of thy help, and
who is the sword of thy excellency! and thine enemies shall be found liars unto
thee, and thou shall tread upon their high places!

It may be objected that the foregoing contains high encomiums on a people,
amongst whom we cannot discover these excellencies, but have looked upon them
as a mean contemptible body, who affect a kind of awkward singularity; and we
observe many amongst them as eager after the world, and who love it as well as
any people whatever; and others, who take undue liberties, are as deeply
involved in the pleasures and gaieties of life, and as much strangers to
self-denial, as people of other persuasions. And it is further to be noted,
that when we go to their places of worship, and observe the manner of their
sitting in silence, a Laodicean lukewarmness is very apparent in many of them,
by the easy, careless condition they seem to sit in, at the same time they
profess to be waiting in silence of body, and stillness of soul, for the
descending of the Holy Ghost, that their spiritual strength may be renewed.
Surely, If this is not really so, it must be a mockery and deception of the
most contemptible and provoking nature in the sight of an All-seeing Eye.

In order a little to open the state of the case, and to answer the foregoing
objections, I shall now make some observations upon the defection in practice
that is to be found amongst us as a people, especially of late years, which
has caused abundance of pain and heart-aching distress to the living body, who
fervently travail that Christ may be formed in those who have a natural
birth-righ in the society, which at present seems to be all the title some have
to be accounted of us. As to the foregoing part of the objection, this people
have been indiscriminately viewed in that light by carnal professors from their
first rise, which discovers the fame undistinguishing blindness, as always has
deprived the children of this world of seeing any beauty or comeliness in the
children of light. I have before noted, that I though educated in the same
profession) did not see the Lord was amongst them, in such a manner, until he
was pleased to open mine eyes, agreeable to Matthew. xvi. 16.17. where our Lord
pronounces Peter blessed, in that the Father had revealed the Son to him. Chap.
xiii. 16. he said to his disciples, Blessed are your eyes, for they see; and
your ears, for they hear. It is through the same blessing mine eyes are yet
preserved open to see, that notwithstanding the great declension in practice,
which has prevailed over many of us as a people, the glory is not departed
from amongst us: the King is known by the upright-hearted in his beauty, still
reigning. Princes do yet rule in the spirit of judgment given them of God. My
faith is, at times, greatly strengthened to believe it will never cease to be
so amongst this people, but that they will be preserved by the Almighty power,
through all generations, a living body; and that the principles of truth, as
held by them, will yet spread far and wide in the kingdoms of the earth. This,
I believe, was the blessed end for which they were first raised, and
marvelously supported: this glorious work has been in degree going on, though
very much impeded by the unfaithfulness of many amongst us, who, like the
foolish woman, are in some measure pulling down what the wise woman has built
up. Oh! that all who take upon them our holy profession of the unchangeable
truth, would deeply consider the weight of that obligation which they take upon
themselves thereby! It is far, O very far! from being a light easy thing; as it
may, in a proper sense, be esteemed an entering into the solemn covenant those
people are bound to by their God, of holding up a standard of truth and
righteousness, altogether meet and suitable for the nations, with safety and
well-grounded confidence to draw unto; so that none amongst us need be ashamed
to call unto mankind thus; viz. Look upon Sion, the city of our solemnity! Oh!
it is a lovely sight to behold her walls and bulwarks all salvation, and her
gates praise; when none of her stakes are broken down, nor any of her cords
loosened; being indeed the Lord's habitation, as set forth Psa. cxxxii. 13, 14,
15, 16. For the Lord has chosen Sion: he has desired it for his habitation.
He says, This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell, for I have desired it. I
will abundantly bless her provision: I will satisfy her poor with bread. I will
also clothe her priests with salvation: and her saints shall shout aloud for
joy.

Many under our religious profession disregarding or lightly esteeming this
solemn covenant, and resting in the profession only, is the principal reason
that we find diverse under our name more insensible, harder to be reached unto
and awakened by a living powerful ministry, than people of other religious
persuasions. This may seem strange to some, but I know it is lamentably true;
having frequently felt it so in my gospel labors. To me this does not appear
hard to account for, when it is considered, that amongst us there has been
dispensed greater abundance of spiritual favors, of various kinds, than
amongst any society of people that I know of: which has not proceeded from any
partial regard in the Almighty toward us more than others, but the better to
enable us to keep our covenant with him, in the discharge of that great work he
has called us to. Where any are so inconsiderate as to disregard and neglect
such wonderful opportunities of lasting benefit and improvement, they become
more hardened and impenitent than those who have been more out of the way of
receiving heavenly impressions. The portion of such, unless they in time
embrace the grace of repentance, is very dismal to think of, as in Prove. xxix.
1. He that being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy. And Heb. vi. 7, 8. For the earth that
drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for
them by whom it is dressed, receives blessing from God: but that which bears
thorns and briars is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing: whose end is to be
burned.

Great indeed has been the bounty of heaven to us as a people, both
immediately, by the solacing influences and guidance of the Holy Spirit to all
that would receive it, and also by the abundant flowing of a truly evangelical
ministry, raised up and continued for the greatest part of this last hundred
years. But now the society is much stripped of a living skilful ministry; yet
not, nor I hope ever will be, wholly destitute. This, through the divine
blessing, has been a great means of our being gathered into and preserved a
people! but many amongst us have leaned and depended thereupon; and therefore
it may be, and I believe it is, consistent with Divine Wisdom, to try how the
society will stand without so much outward help in that way; though perhaps more
may be afforded, in raising up a spirit for promoting found discipline and good
order, which will prove a blessed means of its preservation. And this must be
proceeded in by the help and holy influences of the same Spirit, which
furnishes the best ministry. It looks as if the Lord was about to make his
people still more inward and spiritual, showing them plainly, that
gospel worship does not depend upon outward means.

It is quite obvious that abundant preaching, praying, and singing, does not
bring a great part of mankind a whit nearer to heaven, nor more acquainted with
God and themselves, than they would be without it. So that it may be truly
said, and indeed lamented, that they spend their money for that which is not
bread, and bestow much labor without real profit to themselves. With respect
to us, the ministry approved has abounded with heavenly bread, and refreshing
streams of living water have flowed through the conduits and water-spouts to
the plantation of God; and although many have not improved thereby, yet some have
grown and flourished. But the Lord of the vineyard cannot be confined to any
particular means for the help and preservation of his church, though perhaps such
as he has made use of in time past; seeing he can make other means, unthought
of by short-sighted mortals, as effectual. We may see he made use of the people
of Israel to fight his battles, wherein they seemed, in some sort, to have been
the cause and instruments of their own deliverance and preservation: yet it was
not always so; for there are diverse instances of his destroying his enemies,
and working the deliverance of his people immediately by his own power. This
appeared more mavelous and astonishing, both to his people and their enemies,
than the ordinary means usually employed. Upon the whole, although it appears to
me something like a chastisement, that so many worthy valiants have been
removed, and few raised up in the ministry to succeed them with equal
brightness, this may prove a trial, which, to discerning eyes, may fully
distinguish between the professor and the possessor in religion; yet I believe
the true church will grow under this dispensation of God's dealing with his
people. She will be more grounded and settled in that which is within the veil,
viz. the holy sanctuary and house of prayer. There is her place of safety,
quite out of the reach of Satan's transformations.

An holy, awful, silent waiting before God, is spiritual Israel's abiding in
their tent, where no divination nor enchantment can prevail against them. This
is exceeding beautiful, reaching, and convincing to all, whose spiritual eyes
are in degree opened, when they see the things, as set forth Numb. xxiv. 5, 6,
7. How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob! and thy tabernacles, O Israel! as the
valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the riverside, and as trees of
lign-aloes which the Lord has planted, and as cedar-trees beside the water. He
shall pour the water out of his buckets, and his seed shall be in many waters.
Oh! what wonderful encouragement have the Lord's chosen people, to abide
faithful in that station wherein he has placed them, whether in silence or
speaking, doing or suffering, prosperity or adversity. There is not the least
occasion to be ashamed of silent worship, unless we are so naked, as to be void
of a right sense of what true worship is. Then indeed it is exceedingly
contemptible, and cannot fail of rendering us more despicable in the eyes of
mankind, than such are who have a form, ornamented with man's curious invention
and adorning. This must of necessity center all that are so unhappy in that
state, set forth by our Lord under the metaphor of, Salt that has lost its
savor, which is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and trodden
under the feet of men. Therefore all professors of spiritual worship should
greatly fear being found in this dreadful state, of the form truth leads into
without the life and power: if that is with them, it will raise them above
contempt.

In my travels for the promotion of truth, according to ability received, which
I have been engaged in through most parts of our society, I have seen and
painfully felt much of this sorrowful idleness and insensibility, which has
caused me many days and nights of morning with sackcloth as it were underneath.
I have seen that it proceeds from various causes, but principally from an
over-anxiousness in seeking after earthly things, lawful in themselves, but
direct idolatry when they have the chief place in the mind, and are made the
principal treasure thereof; which they certainly are, when most delighted in
and thought upon. Then how can it be supposed that idolaters can worship the
true and living God, any otherwise than in a mere form? With such the several
branches of our Christian testimony are no otherwise regarded than for outward
decency's sake, to keep up the form in the sight of men. So there is a dead
form, and an insipid fruitless bearing of our testimonies, which can never
beget to God, though perhaps it may sometimes beget into the form. But this
brings no increase to the Lord's people, except of pain and distress. Visible
disorders and immoral practices in particulars have often wounded us, and hurt
the cause of truth; but not in such a dangerous manner; because, where sound
judgment and the Spirit of wholesome discipline have been preserved, these
Things have been judged and cast out of the Camp. But the greatest wounds we
have received have been in the house of our seeming friends, by their
endeavors to maintain our principles (or at least what they liked of them)
worship, ministry, and discipline, all in that form only, which the faithful
have been, and now are, livingly led into. Antichrist has always made more
havoc by transforming himself, than by direct Violence and opposition. Let it
be ever remembered what Paul says, For he is not a Jew which is one outwardly;
neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the flesh: but he is a Jew
which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit,
and not in the letter; whose praise is not of men, but of God. Romans ii. 28, 29.
None, I think, dare deny but it would be equally true, if the word Christian
was substituted in the room of the word Jew: if so, the form, appearance, and
character may be attained without the heart-work. We read of some who had the
form even of godliness, yet denied the power, though perhaps not in words; for to
me it appears the most emphatical denial of it, to live and act in the form
without it; as this may seem by practice, which speaks louder than Words, to
declare to mankind there is no need of the power, seeing they can do without
it. Certain it is, those who inordinately love this world, and the things of
it, cannot have the Power of Godliness whilst in that state; as says the
apostle, Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any
man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. 1 John ii. 15.


I do therefore earnestly entreat all, into whose hands these remarks shall
come, seriously to pause, and examine their own hearts without partiality, that
they may see, before it be too late, what state they are in. If by a narrow and
strict scrutiny they should find that the religious structure (which some of
them have been many years in building) was not erected by the ordering and
direction of Divine Wisdom, it would be much more safe and prudent to have it
all pulled down, so as that there may not be one stone left upon another, by
laying the foundation of repentance from dead Works, and of living and powerful
faith toward God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, in a conscience purified by his
Blood.

These lines are principally intended by way of an alarm and warning to the
careless, lukewarm and formal professors. As for the sincere, upright, humble
seekers of and worshippers of God, they will be established upon the Rock of
ages, which the gates of hell shall not prevail against, and reap the blessed
Fruits of the painful travail of their souls before God; and in due time, if
they faint not, their parched ground will become a pool, and their thirsty
Lands springs of water: yea, through generations to come, they will enlarge,
and become as a fountain of Gardens, wells of living water, and streams from
Lebanon. The beloved of their souls will call, saying, Awake, O north wind! and
come thou south, blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out.
Cant. iv. 15, 16.
Then will they say, "Let my beloved come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant
Fruits."

CHAPTER IV. Containing Short Remarks upon the TRUE and the FALSE MINISTRY.
THE prophet Joel, in a remarkable and excellent manner, sets forth the nature
of gospel ministry. And it shall come to pass afterward, I will pour out my
spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy. Joel
ii. 28.
What prophesying is here intended is clearly described, 1 Cor. xiv. 3. He that
prophesies, speaks unto men, to edification, and exhortation, and comfort.
Indeed great part of this chapter is excellently employed in setting forth
gospel ministry, and the Christian liberty all have to exercise a right call
thereunto. But let it be observed, the daughters were to be engaged therein, as
well as the sons, by gospel law and rule; which was accordingly allowed and
practiced in the apostolic church. But where the learning and wisdom of man
has been introduced in the place of gospel ministry, it has, directly contrary
to Christian liberty, wholly excluded women therefrom. What pride and arrogance
must such men have, who exclude all from the ministry but themselves, for
filthy lucre's sake! assuming to themselves the name clergy, calling others
laity; a distinction the true church and the holy scriptures are strangers to,
which say, 1 Pet. iv. 10, 11. As every man has received the gift, even so
minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of
God. If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God: if any man
minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives: that God in all
things may be glorified through Jesus Christ.

Here is the precious comfortable language of truth indeed, and perfect gospel
liberty, which excludes none who have received a gift; that is, who are
immediately called of God thereunto, as was Aaron. Exodus xxviii. 1 Chronicles.
xxiii. 13. shows at large how Aaron was called, and, with his posterity,
separated by the immediate appointment of God himself. The manner of their
qualification, and how they should conduct themselves in the priest's office
during that dispensation, are all recorded with that exact clearness and
punctuality, always used by the Almighty toward his poor dependent creature
man, when he is pleased to enjoin him the observance of any law or ordinance.
Therefore no man ought to receive any thing as an ordinance of God, unless it
appears indisputably clear that he has commanded it; nor yet receive those men
who have engrossed the ministry to themselves, unless they appear to have
better authority for their undertaking, than their being taught by human means
at schools and colleges.

But, alas! the powers of the earth enable many such to take the fleece,
whether they feed the flock or no: Having learned this trade, they appear as
anxious how to make the most of it as any others. If any refuse to receive them
as the Lord's ambassadors, and conscientiously forbear putting into their
mouths, the usual method has been to call to the magistrate, Help! help! and to
prepare war against such. But through the breaking forth and arising of the
Light of Truth, they have it not in their power to make such drudges of
magistrates in general as heretofore. Neither do I think the generality are so
much inclined to persecution themselves, especially among Protestants, as in
time past; but do really believe many or most of them abhor the severest part
of it, and are men of moderate principles. Their greatest unhappiness seems to
be that of suffering interest to blind their eyes, and that it is so much for
their outward advantage to keep mankind from receiving the true Light, which
enlighteneth every man that comes into the world, John i. 9.
lest their craft should be endangered by the arising thereof. So here the
blind lead the blind, Matthew. xiv. 15.
which exposes both to the utmost hazard; yet such leaders frequently despise
and deride those, who, from the constraining power and love of God, testify
against their blindness; to whom the answer of our Lord to the learned Rabbis
amongst the Jews may not be unapplicable: And some of the Pharisees which were
with him heard these words, and said unto him, Are we blind also? Jesus said
unto them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say we see;
therefore your sin remains. John ix. 40.


Where men have suffered themselves to be swayed by interest to embrace a
profitable craft whereby they get wealth, they have frequently been found very
hot and fierce in supporting the same, endeavoring to suppress whatever has
risen up against it. Hence the experience of many generations can testify, that
after preaching became a gainful trade to get money and worldly honor by, the
clergy (so called) have been always the greatest stirrers up of (...) upon
conscience, and persecution, for differing from them in religion; for which
they have not the least shadow of example or precept, either from Christ or his
apostles. But all that his ministers were allowed to do, with respect to such
as would not receive them and their doctrine, was to shake off the dust from
their feet, as a testimony against them. These had received the gift of the
ministry from Christ; they had it without money and without Price, Freely ye
have received, freely give. Matthew. x. 8.
But mercenary preachers do not receive their Ministry freely; for they
allege, it is attended with great charge to be properly qualified for it; and
therefore they must make an Interest of it again, or they should be great
losers. The plain truth is, they do not receive their ministry from Jesus
Christ; neither can they produce any evidence to prove that they have received
a commission from him for what they take upon them. Their using the Words of
Christ and his apostles affords them no Authority from him; for the very worst
of men, yea the devils themselves, may do the same. Oh! what pity it is they
should pretend to be sent of God, ambassadors of Christ, and the apostles
successors! when they really are so manifestly unlike him and them; and have
evidently the marks of the false prophets and hirelings we read of in the holy
scriptures, as has been fully proved against them by authors of good Account.

Now let us take notice what Paul the great apostle of the Gentiles says upon
this subject, Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think any thing as of
ourselves, but our sufficiency is of God: who also has made us able ministers
of the New Testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the letter
kills, but the spirit gives life. 2 Cor. iii. 5, 6.
This plainly shows, that ministers in the gospel times were to convey the
quickening Spirit of living and heavenly virtue to mankind; agreeable to Matthew.
xxviii. 19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in (or into)
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Verse 20. Lo, I
am with you always to the end of the World. That this baptizing-teaching with
the Holy Ghost was that practiced in the primitive Church, appears by many
passages in holy writ; particularly Acts x. 44. While Peter spoke these words,
the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word. Chap. xi. ver. 15, 16.
And (said Peter) as I began to speak, the Holy Ghost fell on them, as on us at
the beginning. Then remembered I the word of the Lord, how that he said, John
indeed baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost. And
seeing the dispensation or God to man is the very same now as it was then,
mankind as much involved in sin, and estranged from God as they were then, and
the Lord has graciously promised to be with his ministers always to the end of
the world, no good reasons can possibly be given, why the same powerful
efficacious means are not now as essentially necessary for man's recovery, as
at that time. There can be no ground for a denial of this truth, unless a
consciousness in some that they have not the assistance of the Spirit in their
ministry; therefore it seems for their interest, and for the maintaining of
their credit, to persuade mankind there is no such thing to be attained now
This, with many other instances which might be produced, plainly shows them to
be no other than ministers of the letter; and that, we read, only kills, when
the quickening Spirit does not accompany the preaching of it.

Very judicious are the distinctions made by William Dell (in his Trial of
Spirits both in teachers and hearers) between ministers of the letter, and
ministers of the Spirit; he being himself a man of literature, and well
acquainted with the nature of university Education, as he was master of
Gonville and Caius college in Cambridge. I shall just make a few quotations
from him, and recommend that tract, and his excellent treatise on baptism, etc.
to the reader's serious perusal.

And first, let me note an Objection, viz. but some will object here, If a man
preach the word in the letter, even good, sound, and orthodox doctrine, no
doubt but such a man is to be heard, and he may do much good in the church,
though he want Christ's Spirit: This (says he) I have heard from very many who
have thought they have said something. But to this I answer, That they who want
Christ's Spirit, which is the Spirit of prophecy, though they preach the exact
letter of the word, yet are false prophets, and not to be heard by the sheep."
Again, "They that preach only the outward letter of the Word without the
Spirit, make all things outward in the Church: whereas in the true kingdom of
Christ all things are inward and spiritual, and all the true religion of Christ
is written in the soul and spirit of man by the Spirit of God; and the Believer
is the only book in which God himself writes his New Testament. He further
says, They that preach the outward letter without the Spirit, can,
notwithstanding that, both live themselves in all the inward evils of corrupted
nature, and allow others to do so too. Wherefore, to conclude (says he) let us
know that that church that has the word, if it wants the Spirit, is
antichrist's church; and that ministry that uses the word, and wants the
Spirit, is antichrist's ministry; and that all works, duties, prayings,
preachings, fastings, thanksgivings, etc. without Christ's Spirit, are nothing
but the very kingdom of antichrist, and the abomination of desolation. Thus far
Dell. -- Oh! of what importance it is for mankind, of every denomination as to
religion (as as well as others) deeply to ponder these weighty observations in
their Hearts, especially the last. Upon that of Paul, Romans x. 15. How shall
they preach, except they be sent? Dell farther observes thus, viz. So that true
preaching, comes from true sending and this comes from the Grace of God. Not,
say I, from the sending of universities, bishops, presbyters, or any other man
or set of men whatever, or from man's intruding himself thereinto in his own
will without a proper call; but from the constraining power of the everlasting
word of God laying a necessity, as expressed by Paul, 1 Cor. ix. 16. For though I
preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of: for necessity is laid upon me,
yea, woe is unto me if I preach not the gospel.

It is of the utmost consequence, toward promoting truth and righteousness
upon the earth, that the ministry be preserved according to its original
institution, viz. under the immediate direction of the Eternal Word of God,
speaking as the oracles of God. It is properly God's speaking by his
Instruments to the Children of men, such things as he the searcher of hearts
knows they stand in need of; at the same time opening the hearts of them to
whom it belongs to receive the doctrine. Nothing but the unparallelled love and
power of Christ can bring forth and support such a ministry. It is in the
nature of things impossible that those, so exercised therein, can have sinister
views of making temporal advantage to themselves thereby. Wherever that
appears, we may be assured the Lord has not sent them; and therefore they
cannot profit the people at all.

Man should be so far from proceeding upon corrupt motives, for outward gain or
advantage, in this important work, that even though good will to mankind, flowing
from the love of God shed abroad in the heart, in which strong desires may
arise to do good, free from lucrative views of all kinds, and much beautiful
gospel-doctrine also may open very suitable, as the party may think, for the
help and edification of his or her fellow-mortals, yet all this is not
sufficient to proceed upon, without the call and real gift in this so awful an
undertaking; it being no more at the best than the natural consequence of the
operation of that pure love in the saints minds, even in such as never had a
call to the ministry: yet to some these blessed operations, influences, and
openings, may be given, in order to prepare them for that Work which they
should wait patiently under, until the full time comes: this will be clearly
seen, as the eye is single. But there is great cause to believe some have
launched out upon this Foundation only, in the Beginning of their public
appearances, whereby they have in a sorrowful manner brought darkness upon
themselves, and sometimes on others; having proved only ministers of the
letter, though perhaps pretending much to have the impulses of the Spirit. These
have been instruments of much anxiety and distress to the true church, who can
favor nothing with delight, but that which comes from the power of the word of
life.

It may be difficult to bring true judgment over such, in the present low state
of things; especially when there has been a fair outside, and nothing to blame
in their morals. But it sometimes has fallen out, that there has been
something permitted to manifest the unsoundness of such, and thereby to relieve
the painful sufferers under the blasting wind of such ministry.

Inconsiderate weak persons have intruded themselves into this great work; who
not duly waiting for judgment to try the spirits, and what presents to their
minds, have been beguiled by transformations to go out in a false heat; and for
want of the holy dread and fear upon their hearts, they have catched hold of
the gospel liberty again restored, (which must be preserved open, lest the Holy
Spirit be quenched) viz. that all who are called to the work of the ministry,
whether male or female, may prophesy or preach one by one, that all may be
edified. 1 Cor. 14.31.


It has been a painful suffering case to living members in some places, when
they have seen that both the matter and manner of some could have no other
tendency than to expose themselves, and burden the religious society, who
suffered such to assume an office for which they were no ways qualified.
Certainly the church has power to order and regulate her own members; and
doubtless she may wholly refuse and reject a ministry, which, upon trial, she
has in truth no unity with; and even substantial members in their private
capacity, who have stood their ground well, and have large experience of the
Lord's dealings, whether ministers or others, ought, in reason and the nature
of things, to have great weight with such who have not yet made full proof of
their ministry, nor given satisfaction to their friends in general, as well as
to themselves, and perhaps a few others of little judgment. Neither ought any
to go abroad to exercise their ministry, until they know there is a general
satisfaction at home therewith; not even to adjacent meetings. Some such have
been very positive and resolute, hard to be convinced of their mistakes, and
censorious upon those of deeper experience, but too much like that sign of
great depravity set forth by Isa. iii. 5. The child shall behave himself
proudly against the ancient, and the base against the honorable.

Great order and decency is to be preserved in the church of God, especially
among the leading members, as way-marks to all. The reason and nature of the
thing demands a proper regard and preference to age, gifts, growth, and
experience; which will be always strictly observed and paid by those of right
spirits. When it is otherwise, it is a sure token of a false birth, and that
pernicious self is not slain. Where that predominates, it cannot fail of mixing
with their religious services.

That the hearers have a right to judge, appears from 1 Cor. xiv. 29. Let the
prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge. Therefore it is very
presuming for any to take upon them the sole right of speaking and judging too;
or to impose that upon an auditory or church, which they are not edified with,
nor believe to proceed from the right spring; for the word preached does not
profit, unless it be mixed with faith in those that hear it.

I know no way to evade the force and weight of what is above observed, unless
it be supposed the auditory in general are so void of spiritual understanding,
as not to be capable of judging; which would discover great uncharitableness,
and savor too much of arrogance. I am fully persuaded, if ministry does not
reach the Divine Witness in the hearts of the hearers, and cause them to assent
thereunto in some measure, it will never profit them. The right ministers have
a witness to the truth of their ministry in the minds of even the rebellious;
how much more so then in those of the honest-hearted?

The danger which there is reason to apprehend from the low, languid, unskilful
state of many in our society, has induced me (and feeling my mind in degree
warmed thereunto) to write the more closely concerning the nature and
pernicious consequence of a false ministry, being fully persuaded, that the
more formal and superficial we as a people become, the more abundant danger
there is of such a ministry rising, and finding encouragement to grow and
prevail; for the lifeless, formal professors had rather have almost any kind of
ministry than all silence. And on the other hand, a right ministry cannot have
a free course, nor be exalted, where there is nothing but worldly spirits,
clothed with a form of religion. But true ministers must be like the holy
prophet Ezekiel: And I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth,
that thou shall be dumb, and shall not be to them a reprover; for they are a
rebellious house. Chap. iii. 26.
And, The prudent shall keep silence in that time. Amos v. 13.


Having made some Remarks upon the false, as well as the forward and unskilful
ministry, which, though plain and close, I hope will administer no hurt or
discouragement to any truly concerned in this important work, they may (if duly
observed) be lessons of caution and instruction to those for whom they are
intended; and I hope also a strength to the painfully exercised under the
causes of uneasiness given by unskilful intruders into the work, whether
through weakness or wilfulness, that they may not be slack in their endeavors
to regulate the same by plain-dealing, yet with true judgment, love, and
tenderness; all justly applied where they severally belong. Their task may
sometimes be heavy and discouraging, as it is hard to turn those who have taken
a wrong course, and imagine themselves right, when it is really otherwise; for
those have been observed to be the most positive of any of their pretended
sight and sense, yet let the weight of the sense of truth, which is strongest
of all, be laid upon them from time to time, that the church may not suffer
hurt and loss by the omission of its sensible members; which cannot fail of
weakening and hindering the growth of such members also in an individual
capacity. I know it must be those alive in the truth, of good understanding and
judgment therein (and no other) that are qualified to help and direct those who
have missed their way in a religious sense; agreeable to Gal. vi. 1. Brethren,
if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such an one in
the spirit of meekness, considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted; and not
the captious, critical, worldly-wise; for they have nothing to do to act in the
church of Christ, until they are first subjected to and taught of the Lord
themselves.

The main point, in my apprehension, is to be able to form a true judgment of
the source or spring from whence ministry proceeds; and if found to be right in
the ground, a great deal of tenderness is to be used, and much childish
weakness is to be patiently borne with. For although some through fear, and a
deep sense of the weight of so important an undertaking, may (at first) speak
very stammeringly, and with considerable perturbation, yet the sweet efficacy
of the quickening powerful Spirit, which is felt with them in their service (by
those who are circumcised in heart and ear) far exceeds the finest eloquence
without it. Such should be prudently encouraged, yet suffered to feel their own
feet. There are but few children, however hopeful, that can bear much nursing
and applause. Oh! the great hurt which has been done by the forward
affectionate part in some, laboring to bring forth diverse before the right
time, and by pushing on others too fast, who in their beginning were lively and
very hopeful, to their great hurt and loss. Oh! then, what caution and care
should be exercised, clearly to see in the true light what to lay hold of, and
what to discourage in this important respect.

I now intend to conclude this head with some plain honest hints, which have
arisen from mine own experience and observation concerning the true ministry,
as it has been restored again through divine mercy for about this last hundred
years, in greater simplicity and purity than has been known (as I apprehend)
since the apostles days. This has not been conducted with the enticing words
of man's wisdom, but in such a demonstration of the Spirit and Power of God, as
has (though much despised by the learned Rabbis) been a great blessing to this
and other nations; many thousands having been thereby turned to Christ their
true and saving teacher, whom they embraced joyfully, as the alone beloved of
their souls. A great number of Churches were gathered to sit down as under the
shadow of the wings of the prince of Peace. Great was the Lord their God in the
midst of them; their ministers were clothed with salvation, and their feet shod
with the preparation of the gospel of peace. Many then ran to and fro, and the
true knowledge of God was increased. The Lord gave the word, and many, both
male and female, were the publishers of it. And through divine mercy it may yet
be said though the declension in practice is great in many) that there is a
considerable body preserved, to bear the ark of the testimony of the Lord their
God as upon their shoulders, in the sight of the people, with their feet as in
the bottom of Jordan; and a living powerful ministry is yet continued, though far
short of the number formerly engaged in that work. For many have grown up
amongst us, who became more superficial and easy about possessing the substance
of religion than their ancestors were. Such have relied too much on the
ministry, and have not profited in religion thereby. But they have greatly
declined in practice, under abundant favors of this kind, the ministry
becoming to many as a pleasant song. They hear the words with pleasure, but do
them not; their heart going still after their covetousness of one kind or
another. Therefore the Lord has seen meet to strip the society very much in
that respect; and also to engage many of those who are true ministers,
frequently to lead the people, by example, into silence. O! blessed will all
those servants be, who are preserved, discerningly and with true judgment, to
administer proper food, and that in due season, whether in silence or words,
doing or suffering with and for Christ! Which doubtless all will, who look with
a single eye to God's honor above all things attending upon the gift received,
which in its operations and requirings is self-evident. None that wait aright
upon God will ever be confounded; that belongs to Babylon; but peace and
infallible certainty is known through all the borders of Sion. Every one who
knows Jerusalem a quiet habitation, is at no loss to understand his proper
allotment of service therein, unless he falls into the conferring with flesh
and blood; then he comes to the confusion and uncertainty, wherein he may fret
and toil in vain. But in the holy awful still waiting upon God in a sanctified
heart, which is the temple wherein Christ dwells, and our house of prayer,
there Satan can never come to deceive us, or to endanger our safety.

CHAPTER V. Containing Brief Observations upon the NATURE and USEFULNESS of
CHRISTIAN DISCIPLINE.
ON every glory there shall be a defense -- That God intended to establish an
excellent government, order, and discipline in the church, under the gospel
dispensation, appears from diverse passages of the prophets in the Old
Testament, who saw into and wonderfully described the Christian state; a few of
which I shall instance. Isaiah xxxii. 1. Behold a king shall reign in
righteousness, and princes shall rule in judgment. Chap. xxxiii. 5, 6. The Lord
is exalted: for he dwells on high, he has filled Zion with judgment and
righteousness; and wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times,
and strength of salvation. Chap. xxviii. 5, 6. In that day shall the Lord of
hosts be for a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty unto the residue of
his people: and for a spirit of judgment to him that sits in judgment, and
for strength to them that turn the battle to the gate. Our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, Matthew. xviii. 15, 16, 17, 18. clearly directs his followers how
to proceed in the exercise of discipline and good order, both with respect to
individuals, and to the church; he assured them, that whatsoever of this kind
is done under divine direction upon earth, shall be ratified and confirmed in
heaven, Chap. xix. 28. he promises such who have followed him in the
regeneration, that they shall be exalted in his Kingdom, sitting upon thrones
to judge and govern his people. We find among the eminent gifts of the Spirit,
Paul reckons helps in government, 1 Cor. xii. 28. In chap. the 5th, he blames
that church very highly for their neglect of practicing sound judgment in the
way of discipline, showing them the necessity of putting those guilty of
corrupt practices out of the community, lest as a leaven they should affect the
whole lump. Verse. 11. he points out how unsafe it was for the Lord's people to
have any society with the workers of iniquity. Verse. 12, and 13. that it is the
church's duty to judge those that are within, viz. her own members, leaving the
judging of those that are without to God. In chap. the 6th, he blames them as
sharply for going to law one with another before the unjust, showing that it
would have been better they had suffered themselves to have been defrauded, and
that every matter of difference or controversy should be judged and determined
by the church, in regard to its own members.

A religious society, gathered by God's power, who have received diversities of
gifts and qualifications, are considered as a body properly tempered by their
holy head (who is perfect in wisdom) that it may well exist by pure laws,
rules, and comely orders, both within and without; for the maintaining whereof
every member has its proper office and station wherein it is to act, yet only
by the guidance of the Holy Head, who is known ever to preside over his humble
dependent people, a present help in the needful time, supplying all their
wants, as they wait his time.

Pertinent to this is Ephesians. iv. 15, 16. But speaking the truth in love, may grow
up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ, from whom the whole
body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joint supplieth,
according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes
increase of the body, unto the edifying of itself in love.

The apostle, in 1 Cor. xii. with great strength of reason and perspicuity,
shows the diversities of gifts, differences of administrations and
operations, all by the same Spirit, who works in all as he will; that
notwithstanding this variety, all, and of all sorts, are baptized into one
body, and made to drink into one Spirit; he says, verse. 14. "For the body is
not one member, but many;" and shows they are all useful to and dependent
upon one another, therefore none have a right to apprehend such a
self-sufficiency, as to be independent of other members; nay, that those
members of the body, which seem to be more feeble, are useful. The near union,
harmony, and sympathy of this glorious body, is set forth in verse 26. And
whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be
honored, all the members rejoice with it.

For brevity's sake, I forbear at present making more quotations on this
subject. These are sufficient to demonstrate fully the strong obligation all
baptized members are under, rightly to understand their places in the body, and
to come up in a faithful discharge of their duty therein, as in the sight of
God, to whom they must be accountable. And it likewise appears that every
member, entered as such by his or her voluntary consent, is strictly bound to
keep and maintain the established rules of that body; the breach of which not
only renders him or her guilty in God's sight, but also accountable to the
body. It also behooves this body, immediately upon the transgression of its
rules and orders, to exert itself in dealing with transgressors, and to
administer sound judgment, in order to restore them; or, on failure of success
in that, to disown or refuse to have unity with such, and to let the world know
they are not of their body; that the reputation thereof may be preserved
amongst those which are without, as well as for its own peace and safety
within; seeing by a neglect hereof, others may be infected by the corrupt
member, and his evil may spread in the body like a leprosy; but that which is
the most affecting, the Lord may be provoked to withdraw from that body which
neglects the exercise of true judgment against evil; as in the case of Achan,
Joshua vii. and also that of the tribe of Benjamin, Judges xix. and xx.

It is too obvious to be denied, that the professors of Christianity, by losing
the power and life of religion, lost the true spirit of discipline and good
order in their churches. Instead of which, they have substituted rules, orders,
and canons, etc. of their own invention, principally calculated to support that
power by which the clergy (so called) got their wealth, and by which they have
procured them to be enforced where they judged necessary by human law. The
present state of church government appears to be truly deplorable, amongst most
of the divided parts of Christian professors that I know of; consequently they
are in a very corrupted state, greatly lacking that judgment and righteousness
which was to fill Sion, and the wisdom and knowledge which was predicted would
be the stability of her times.

Cave and King, in their Primitive Christianity, clearly show, from the
writings of many of the ancients, particularly for the first three hundred
years after Christ, that much care and zeal were maintained to preserve the
church clean and pure by a wholesome discipline.

King shows, that not only the teachers, but the whole church were concerned
and active in dealing with, receiving satisfaction from, or finally censuring
people in common; and also that no teachers were set over them, but only such
as the whole church unanimously agreed to receive; and that the common people,
generally called laity, were equally concerned with others in deposing and
censuring ministers, when they ceased to have unity with them, page 22 to 25,
and page 112, 116. He and Cave, from Tertullian, both show, that the manner of
the primitives in giving judgment on such accounts was very weighty and solemn*
As amongst those that are sure that God beholds what they do (says Tertullian)
this is one of the highest preludiums and forerunners of the judgment to come,
when the delinquent is banished from the communion, etc, p. 120.

Athenagoras told the emperors, that no Christian could be a bad man, unless he
was an hypocrite; and Tertullian openly declares, that when men depart from the
discipline of the gospel, they so far cease amongst us to be accounted
Christians. Cave, page 95.

When at any time invited to public solemnities, as marriages and the like,
the prudence of the church thought fit to lay restraints upon them, and to
forbid them light and ludicrous actions, as leaping and dancing; but that they
should dine and sup gravely and modestly, as becomes Christians; for which he
quotes a council of Laodicea, 2d part, p. 73.

They took notice of all offenses against the Christian law, any vice or
immorality that was either public in itself, or made known and made good to
the church. For (says Cave) the holy and good Christians of those times were
infinitely careful to keep the honor of their religion unspotted, to stifle
every sin in its birth, and by bringing offenders to public shame and penalty,
to keep them from propagating the malignant influence of a bad example. For
this reason they watched over one another, told them privately of their faults
and failures, and when that would not do, brought them before the cognizance of
the church. It is needless (says he) to reckon up particular crimes, when none
were spared. Cave 3d part, p. 406. Agreeable to the nature and constitution of
the church, which as it transacts only in spiritual matters, so it could
inflict no other than spiritual censures and chastisements, p. 408. The common
and standing penalty they made use of was excommunication, or suspension from
communion with the church; the cutting off and casting out an offending person,
an infected member, till by repentance and wholesome discipline he was cured
and restored; and then he was readmitted into church society, p. 410.

Cave relates, upon the authority of Julius Caesar, that this manner of
discipline was commonly practiced amongst the ancient Druids, who, when any of
the people became irregular and disorderly, they presently suspended them from
their sacrifices; and those thus suspended were accounted in the number of the
most impious and execrable persons: all men stood off from them, shunned their
company and converse as an infection and plague, p. 411.

Penitents, before they were received into unity, made open confession of their
faults; this being accounted the very spring of repentance, and without which
they concluded it could not be real. Out of confession (says Tertullian) is
born repentance, and by repentance God is pacified; and therefore without this
neither riches nor honor would procure any admission into the church: a
remarkable instance whereof was in the emperor Theodosius the Great, who, for
his bloody and barbarous slaughter of the Thessalonians, was by Ambrose bishop
of Milan suspended, brought to public confession, and forced to undergo a
severe course of penance for eight months together; at length, after he had
passed through abundance of sorrow, with tears and great lamentation for his
sin, he was admitted into fellowship again, p. 418, 419. So wisely (says Cave)
did the prudence and piety of those times deal with offenders, neither lettting
the reins so loose, as to patronize presumption, or encourage any to sin; nor
yet holding them so strait, as to drive men into despair, p. 429.

Very forward and active have professors been, and still are, in heaping up
offerings, by performing what they call religious duties, whilst practical
virtue has been shamefully neglected. Multitudes professing faith in Christ,
and accounted members of his church, are suffered to remain without control or
rebuke in various sins and pollutions, to the great scandal of the Christian
name; so that it may be said iniquity runs down amongst them like a mighty
stream or torrent, carrying all in a manner before it. What painful
apprehensions must fill the minds of thoughtful parents respecting their
offspring, when, morally speaking, no other can be expected than that they will
be carried away thereby to everlasting destruction! Oh! that it were rightly
considered by all Christian professors, that obedience is better than
sacrifices or offerings, and to hearken unto the voice of God, in putting away
the evil of their doings from before his eyes, is better than the fat of rams.
To what purpose is the multitude of their sacrifices or offerings, whilst the
most weighty matters of the law of God are neglected? viz. judgment, mercy, and
faith; even that faith which is productive of good works. Let them carefully
ponder in their hearts what the Lord by his prophet has declared, Amos v. 21,
22, 23, 24. I hate, I despise your feast-days, and I will not smell in your
solemn assemblies. Though ye offer me burnt-offerings, and your meat offerings, I
will not accept them: neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat
beasts. Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs, for I will not hear the
melody of thy viols. But let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as
a mighty stream. Man is apt to begin at the wrong end, or where he should
finish; presuming to perform worship and service to his Maker before he is in a
fit condition to be accepted; as a Being of infinite purity will not so much as
look toward him in that sense, whilst he has any fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, either in himself or others. For the Lord will be
sanctified in all them that come nigh him. He is of purer eyes than to behold
iniquity with any assent or approbation. The contrary of which would be
implied, if man was suffered to present his offerings whilst in a defiled
state. The same that I have here said concerning the acceptance or
non-acceptance of individuals, is true, and will hold good, in regard to
churches, and countries or nations. Oh, then! how greatly it behooves all who
would stand approved in God's sight, to exert their utmost care and diligence
in judging, condemning, and suppressing evil of all kinds, first in themselves,
and then in every branch of the community, as far as lies in their power.

I shall now proceed to show, that when the Lord was pleased to restore
Christianity in its primitive purity and power, which was in the last century,
church government, good order, and wholesome discipline was also restored
amongst an humble, self-denying people, who were, as God's people in all ages
have been, much despised, reviled, and persecuted. Yet, through all the
heathenish rage of their adversaries, the rising up of the rulers of the earth
against them, and the people imagining vain things concerning them, their bands
were not broken, nor their cords cast away. They saw holiness was the Lord's
delight, and promoted it with all diligence amongst mankind in general, but
more especially amongst themselves. The Lord, who at first raised chosen
instruments, and sent them forth into the world, which was as a briary thorny
wilderness, wonderfully blessed their ardent labors with increase, so that in
a few years a large number of churches were planted (even amidst all the rage
and fury beforementioned) and quietly settled and established under the
teachings of his Spirit in their hearts. Hereby they grew up in wisdom and
stature, and in process of time clearly saw, in the Divine Light, that they
must form themselves into an orderly body, to be governed under such
regulations as would put them in the best capacity, as a religious society, of
glorifying God, and being the most useful to one another, as members of the
same body; and that also, by being embodied and disciplined as an army with
banners, they might make a firm stand against every appearance of evil, with
their united strength, under the Captain of their salvation.

Divine wisdom was wonderfully with those worthies first sent and engaged in
this blessed work, directing their steps with true judgment, as well as opening
the minds of a numerous people, of various growths, to receive the manner and
form of government and order, which those of the clearest sight discovered, in
the Light of Truth, to be best adapted to promote the glory of God, and the
preservation of his church and people. Yet there were some opposers (as in the
primitive times) even of their own body or society; men of perverse spirits,
who troubled the church for a time with litigious jangling, and corrupt
disputations. But the Lord, who knows how to put a stop to the rage and cunning
devices of the enemies of his church, brought a blast upon them, which has
exposed the names of the leaders, and will continue to expose them through ages
and generations to come. Thus the faithful were enabled to carry on this great
work, designed for the defense and preservation of God's people, in defiance of
all those Sanballats, Tobiahs, and Geshems, which were permitted to rise up
against them and their godly undertaking.

Great wisdom may be discerned by those eyes only which the Lord has opened,
in his thus ranking and placing his people, that they might stand in such a
situation as to be really true help-mates in Christ Jesus our Lord and holy
head; the strong bearing and helping the infirmities of the weak, supporting
one another in that which is good, judging down all of a contrary nature to it,
in every rank and station; none daring to be above admonition, but rather
esteeming it a mark of love and sincere regard, that others extend care over
them; agreeable to 1 Thessalonians. v. 12, 13, 14. And we beseech you, brethren, to
know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish
you; and to esteem them very highly in love for their work's sake: and be at
peace among yourselves. Now we exhort you, brethren warn them that are unruly,
comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men.

What an inexpressible favor it is to be even one of the least members of this
body, or branch of the heavenly Father's family, where so great help and
edification may be received from those of greater growth and maturity than
themselves. On the other hand, what high satisfaction it affords the fathers
and mothers in Israel, to see the children and weaklings of the flock of
teachable dispositions, and carefully endeavoring to walk according to the
truth. Some are made of God as saviors upon mount Sion, and as watchmen upon
her walls, anointed and appointed by the Holy Ghost, to watch over the flock of
Christ, as those that must give an account, whose excellent services may justly
entitle them to the application of that copious elegant language, wherewith Job
sets forth what he had done in the time of his prosperity, Job xxix. 13, 14,
15, 16. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me; and I caused
the widow's heart to sing for joy. I put on righteousness, and it clothed me:
my judgment was as a robe and a diadem. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I
to the lame. I was a father to the poor: and the cause which I knew not I
searched out.

Elders ruling thus in the church are indeed worthy of double honor, whether
they labor in the word and doctrine or not; being such as, agreeable to
Peter's advice, 1 Pet. v. 2, 3, 4. Feed the flock of God which is among you,
taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind; neither as being lords over God's heritage, but
being ensamples to the flock. And when the chief shepherd shall appear, ye
shall receive a crown of glory that fades not away.

It is of the utmost consequence, that the members, who constitute the church
of Christ, be thoroughly acquainted with the true spring of motion and action
therein, lest any should presumptuously conceive or imagine, that seeing church
government carries much the appearance of outward economy and civil
proceedings, human abilities, natural and acquired, are sufficient to manage
the same. If any fall into such a dangerous error, it must be for want of duly
considering the nature of the work to be engaged in; it being no other than
what appertains to the spiritual kingdom of Christ, and the promotion thereof
on earth: which kingdom man by nature cannot see nor understand. Matthew. iii. 3.
And it is written, "the world by wisdom knew not God. 1 Cor. i. 21.
" Therefore they cannot know his kingdom, nor how to act properly therein,
under the Supreme Head, whom they know not.

To be capable of acting rightly in the discipline of the church, man must be
born of the Spirit, or from above, and receive a qualification from the Holy
Ghost for that work. Such are the only qualified persons for maintaining good
order in the churches, whether young, old, or middle-aged, male or female, and
should be regarded as those who are set over others in the Lord. These are seen
and esteemed highly in love for their work's sake, by the discerning in the
church, though they may be of a low degree; yet, being alive in the truth, they
can savor the things that be of God, conveyed to them through these favored
instruments; and also reject the things which be of men, when intruded into
God's work; because the innocent life raised up in them is burdened and
grieved therewith.

Nothing can more afflict the souls of such, than the darkening counsel by a
multitude of words without knowledge. We may see none were properly qualified
to judge and govern outward Israel, unless gifted of God for that purpose. We
find they were to have God for their king; and those whom he raised up by his
immediate power, to be their judges under him, (herein a perfect pattern of the
christian church) until they impiously rejected a government, than which none
could be attended with more ease, security, and comfort, that they might be
like other nations, that is, to be more left to their own power and policy, and
to be less dependent upon God. Whilst they looked to the Lord for judgment,
aid, and protection, see how wonderfully he provided for them, Moses, Aaron,
and Miriam in Egypt, through the Red Sea, and in the wilderness. To the help of
whom the Lord also raised a large number of inferior judges, upon whom he put
his Spirit, as an essential qualification. (...)


It would be needless to be very particular, in showing how the Lord was
pleased to raise many, and to put his Spirit upon them, under the blessed
influence and strength whereof they wrought wonders for the reformation,
deliverance, and protection of his people: as Joshua, Othniel, Deborah, and
Barak, Gideon, Jephthah, Samuel, David, Solomon, Nehemiah, etc. and when the
people perceived the Spirit of God was upon them, they joined such with
alacrity in God's work, out of faithful subjection to that of God in and upon
them, and not to them as men.

Very remarkable is the humility and honest upright petition of Solomon, which
does amply discover the state of mind such must be brought into, who are (...)
with suitable ability to judge and govern the Church of Christ. In Gibeon the
Lord (...) Solomon in a dream by night: and God (...) what I shall give thee.
He said, O Lord my God, thou have made thy servant king instead of David my
father: and I am but a little child; I know not how to go out or come in. Give
therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may
discern between good and bad: for who is able to judge this thy so great a
people? 1 Kings iii. 5, 7, 9.


Pertinent hereunto is the ardent concern raised in Nehemiah's mind for the
welfare of God's people and city; the deep anguish of his soul (though in the
midst of worldly affluence;) his earnest and humble prayer to God; the manner
of addressing king Artaxerxes upon that mournful occasion concerning the
desolate state of Jerusalem, and his whole proceeding in that godly undertaking
of raising the walls of that city, etc. Much might be wrote to show the great
analogy hereof with the maintaining of the hedge, or wall of discipline and
good order in the Christian church, as a defense from dangerous enemies; but I
hope, as the Light of Truth has mercifully arisen, and people's minds are
considerably illuminated thereby, there is not so much necessity (especially
amongst us) to convince them in general what is truth in these respects, as to
remind them of their duty, that practice may keep pace with knowledge; for
which end short hints may in a good degree answer.

I might also draw much more from the precious doctrine and experience of God's
people, recorded in holy writ, concurring to establish the truth of what I have
advanced concerning the outward order, government, and beautiful discipline of
the church, which is the kingdom of Christ, wherein the sanctified of God are
as subordinate kings and priests; which is thus expressed, Dan. vii. 21, 22. I
beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints," ( viz. the power of
antichrist in the form of a church, with orders and rules) and prevailed
against them, until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the
saints of the Most High, and the time came that the saints possessed the
kingdom. Paul calls this dominion the saints are to possess, Ephesians. iii. 10.
"Principalities and powers in heavenly places." Oh! long has this wicked horn
had the rule and government where the saints should! so that there has been
little or nothing of the nature of that excellent government which is found in
the kingdom of Christ. There has been no true vision from the prophets, the
law has perished from the priests, and counsel from the ancients, Ezekiel. vii.
26. and the glorious kingdom of the Messiah has for many ages been as it were
banished from the earth, or at least hid from mankind in general, as in a
wilderness, whereinto the true church fled, Rev. xii. 6. But the Lord has been
pleased in a good degree to restore again the excellent order of his house
amongst a despised people; concerning whom I shall now endeavor to give some
account, by way of short hints, of what mine eyes have seen, mine ears heard,
what I have tasted and handled of the good word of life in their assemblies;
more particularly as I am now upon that subject, those, according to their
degrees of subordination (as the wisdom from above has placed them) called
meetings for discipline, or church order and government: which meetings I have
attended with diligence, as I thought it my indispensable duty, for about
thirty years of my time: near the first ten whereof I was for the most part an
highly pleased and comforted spectator of the sweet harmony and comely order of
God's house, the love, sympathy, and care extended in each branch thereof one
toward another; in silent seeking the assistance of the Holy Head, that the
body might edify itself in love, and the King of saints be known to rule all
that was within us. For when we become members of Christ's body, we cease to
consider ourselves as individuals only, but also as members deeply interested
in the welfare of the body. Here is an united labor and travail, being all in
one common interest.

I have often beheld the awful Majesty of the Divine Power amongst these
people, and could say in humble admiration, at least in my heart, Cry out and
shout, thou inhabitant of Sion, for great is the Holy One of Israel, in the
midst of thee! Isaiah xii. 6.
There has been no lack of any good thing in the camp of God. The glorious Lord
has been indeed as places of broad rivers and streams, where can no galley
with oars, neither shall gallant ship pass thereby. For the Lord was our judge,
the Lord was our lawgiver, the Lord was our king, Isa. xxxiii. 21, 22. and
therefore all the splendid art and invention of man in religion, was to be
wholly laid aside, as Readiness armor was by David, being concerned to go as he
did, in the name ( viz. the power and dread) of the most High. When I did thus
stand still, looking upon Sion, viewing her beauty and excellency, I have seen
great things done by mean instruments going forth against their enemies in the
name of the Lord only; which has caused my soul to be knit unto them, and I
loved them as mine own soul. This sight and sense of things made me exceeding
awful in my mind, afraid to speak and act, unless I found a well-grounded
assurance that the Lord required it of me; by feeling the weight of his divine
power upon my spirit, opening my understanding, and guiding my judgment, that I
might clearly know what when, and how to speak in the awful presence of God,
and before the princes of his people, whose words I observed, were as goads,
and as nails fastened by the master of our assemblies, which are given from one
shepherd.

Very pertinent to what I am now upon is Eccles. v. 1, 2, 3. and what indeed
ought to take deep impression on all those concerned, viz. Keep thy foot when
thou go to the house of God, and be more ready to hear than to give the
sacrifice of fools: for they consider not that they do evil. Be not rash with
thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God: for
God is in heaven, and thou art upon earth, therefore let thy words be few. For
a dream comes through a multitude of business, and a fool's voice is known by
multitude of words. It is plain from what is before noted, and much more in
holy writ, that all the power and wisdom of man, till it be subjected,
sanctified, and properly influenced by a supernatural principle, is wholly
excluded from and shut out of the church of God. Although those abilities are
adequate to, and sufficient for, the things of a man. viz. the concerns of this
life; (for, as says our Lord, the children of this world are wiser in their
generation than the children of light) yet the things of God no man can know,
consequently cannot rightly act in them, but by his Spirit. This also in part
appears from what Elihu says, Job xxxii, 7, 8, 9. I said, Days should speak,
and multitude of years should teach wisdom. But there is a spirit in man: and
the inspiration of the Almighty gives them understanding. Great men are not
always wise: neither do the aged understand judgment.

Very great has been, and still is, the loss of man, for want of deeply
understanding this important point. Giving a latitude to human abilities in
religion, and the concerns thereof, has opened the door wide for antichrist to
become almost an universal monarch. It is that by which he has got great
footing amongst all the divisions of Christian professors; ours in a sorrowful
manner with respect to individuals, as well as others; yet a living body are
preserved. These, through the divine blessing, prevent his taking possession of
the church, as he has done of others. The eyes and cry of these are to the
Lord, whom they know to be their sufficiency; and that unless he ordain
salvation as walls and bulwarks to keep our city, in vain are all human
endeavors.

When I have considered the low, indifferent, languid state of those under our
name in many places, both in this and other nations, chiefly occasioned by an
inordinate love of the world, and the things thereof, my soul has been deeply
humbled in awful prostration before him; when I have beheld his wonderful
condescension, in still shining forth upon us, as from between the cherubims of
his glory, waiting to be gracious, by turning again the captivity of many of
his Israel, and seeking to rebuild her waste places, and thereby to revive her
ancient beauty. He is pleased to continue unto us some judges as at the first,
and counselors as at the beginning, though but few in number when compared to
the bulk. May the Great Lord of the harvest raise many more saithful laborers,
and send them into his harvest, even such as are described by the evangelical
prophet Isaiah! The sinners in Sion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the
hypocrites: who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who amongst us
shall dwell with everlasting burnings? He that walks righteously, and
speaks uprightly, he that despises the gain of oppressions, that shakes his
hands from holding of bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and
shuts his eyes from seeing evil: he shall dwell on high: his place of
defense shall be the munitions of rocks, bread shall be given him, his waters
shall be sure. Chap. xxxiii. 14, 15, 16, 17.


Oh! how sorrowful it is, in this and other nations, for the Lord's messengers
to view the great prevalence of unfaithfulness in large numbers, in most
branches of our Christian testimony! much whereof has been greatly owing to
the laxness of discipline. Those who should have been, above all other
considerations, waiting for fresh and renewed ability from God to build his
house, have been most of all endeavoring to build themselves and posterity
uncertain houses in earthly inheritances; living at ease in their cieled
houses, whilst the ark of the testimony of God has been exposed.

Dreadful will the account be such will have to render, who have hid their
Lord's money in the earth, having wrapped it in a napkin, viz. a decent form of
religion. The Lord has opened eyes that see them through their fig-leaf
covering in most or all the ranks of his people; though it is much to be feared
they have closed their own eyes, except toward the world. In that they may be
clear sighted, it being their kingdom. Some of these may presume from their
long profession, wherein perhaps they have taken care (as far as appears to
man's eye) to preserve a reputation free from spots or blemishes; and they also
having a pretty large stock of wealth, in the getting whereof they may have not
only dried up the tenderness of religion in themselves, but also have laid a
foundation for the ruin of their children, or those that succeed them in their
possessions; notwithstanding which, some such may take upon them to be active
members in the meetings where they belong. Very lamentable indeed are the
states of meetings, managed by such unsanctified spirits. The king of Sion is
banished from their councils; and the precious sons and daughters thereof are
but as suffering witnesses for God, clothed as in sackcloth; and the seed of
God, which should have dominion in all our meetings, is depressed. I sincerely
wish there were no cause for these close remarks; a caution of this kind may be
necessary. This spirit getting in amongst us, in any part of the body or
society, cannot fail of laying waste; therefore let all consider what spirit
rules in them. Where such a spirit prevails, it is not the wise woman building
the house, but the foolish woman pulling it down with her own hand.

It is a mournful truth, that among the many thousands of Israel, there are but
few, in comparison, who really stand quite upright, as pillars in God's house,
who cannot be at all warped by fear, interest, favor, or affection, but look
beyond all singly at truth and righteousness. Oh! what mean cringing, stooping,
and temporizing, is to be found in some! It is my son, daughter, near relation,
or friend, that I am loath to offend, lest I should suffer in my interest or
reputation, or shall gain his or her ill will. This spirit will never dwell on
high, but must have its portion amongst the fearful and the unbelieving; and
unless such repent, they will be ranked with those that deny Christ before men.
They may read their portion, Luke xii. 9. True zeal and sound judgment is often
rejected by this sort, whether it comes from individuals, or meetings; nay even
by some, when it is the mature result of the largest body under the direction
of the best wisdom, if they do not find it agree with their unsanctified
understandings; which would be strange if it should, as it comes from the
spirit of Truth.

It may be further observed, that those whose principal view is only
maintaining the form or outward character in religion, feel very little or no
pain on account of the disorderly practices of their fellow members, and
therefore they can easily daub with untempered mortar, and smooth all over,
crying peace, before judgment has laid hold of the transgressing part, and all
this done under the specious pretense of charity and Christian tenderness. Yet
when any in godly zeal are constrained to show the pernicious consequence of
healing the wounds of the daughter of Sion deceitfully, some such soon discover
they are too much strangers to true charity, by their opposition to sound
judgment, and those exercised therein, that the wounds might be searched to the
bottom. Here something of a persecuting spirit appears, and the bitter leaven
of the Pharisee is discovered, striking at the life of religion. But, agreeable
to the usual craft of antichrist, they must call a godly concern and labor by
a contrary name, or they could not smite at it with any color of reason. Such
honest laborers have sometimes been represented as enthusiasts, too hot in
their zeal, disturbers of the church's peace, etc. When there is a peace in the
church with wrong things, it is much better broke than kept. I take it that it
was in this sense our Lord said: I came not to send peace on earth, but a
sword. Matthew. x. 34.
It was a woeful peace to Israel, when they became so reconciled to the
inhabitants of the land, as to suffer them to dwell therein, contrary to the
express command of God!

When the upright in heart cannot for Sion's sake hold their peace, their
spirits being truly enlightened to search Jerusalem, it is very dangerous for
any to obstruct, oppose, or even to discourage them in such a godly
undertaking. The voice of their Almighty Helper is, Touch not mine anointed;
for he will certainly vindicate his own cause in their hands, and will
recompense any injury done to it, or them, as if done to himself; so that all
had need to know well what they do, and what spirit bears rule within them.

Some I have observed very blind, fruitless, and unskilful, who are not quite
upon the same bottom as those abovementioned, but who differ from them in the
cause of their unfruitful situation, which arises chiefly from a gross
deception in themselves, and for want of abiding in that wherein they could try
the spirit that presents things to their minds. These have been moved and
kindled by a false fire, and a zeal not duly tempered with that knowledge which
comes from God. This proves a sore wounding to the cause of truth, where it
has prevailed; very hard to judge down, because it is commonly very wise and
right in its own eyes. In concluding this head, I am free to express an ardent
prayer, which has filled mine heart at times for a considerable number of
years, that the Lord may be graciously pleased greatly to increase the number
of those amongst us, who are made willing to leave all, and to follow the
gentle leadings of his Spirit, whithersoever he is pleased to lead them; who
prefer the welfare, peace, and prosperity of the city of God to their chiefest
joy; that truth and righteousness may be so exalted in every part of the body,
as to make all the sinners in Sion afraid indeed: for they cannot stand in
judgment when the Lord arises in majesty among his saints, nor in the
congregations of the righteous; that so for very shame there might be a casting
their idols of silver, and their idols of gold, to the moles and to the bats.
Isa. ii. 20.

The substance of what is before signified, is doubtless, and has been, the
fervent travail of many brethren and sisters, who are deeply affected with the
present lethargy which prevails, yet are in the midst thereof comforted in
observing great reviving of a concern, in most places, for stirring up and
provoking one another to love and to good works; particularly in promoting
discipline: which if it prospers (as I believe it will) truth and righteousness
will prevail thereby, and Sion will enlarge her borders, her cords will be
lengthened, and her stakes strengthened, and she will yet break forth on the
right hand and on the left; her seed will inherit places which are now
desolate. Therefore let the true travailers for her prosperity be encouraged;
for I believe some of them will come to see the fruits of their painful
travail, and be satisfied. May all such keep their habitations in a feeling
sense of the Holy Head, whether in suffering or rejoicing, prosperity or
adversity! For, as says the apostle, If we suffer with Christ, we shall reign
with him, or be glorified together.

FINIS.
Errata. In Page 4, Line 6th, of the Preface, for receive, read revive. -- And
in Page 49, Line 15th, from the Bottom, for Morning, read Mourning.


