Excessive Wickedness, the Way to an untimely Death. A SERMON Preached at
Fairfield, in Connecticut, SEPTEMBER 7th, 1768. AT THE EXECUTION Of ISAAC
FRASIER.

By NOAH HOBART, A. M. Pastor of the First Church in Fairfield.

DEUTER. xix. 20. And those which remain, shall hear and fear, and shall hence
forth commit no more any such evil among you. EPHESIANS. iv. 28. Let him that
stole, steal no more. NEW HAVEN: Printed and Sold by Thomas and Samuel Green.

Advertisement.
AS this discourse may possibly fall into the hands of some who have not seen
the account of the Life and Crimes of Isaac Frasier, which was published on the
day of his Execution, it is thought proper that some of the principal Facts
relating to him should be here inserted.

He was born at North-Kingston, in the Colony of Rhode Island, Feb. 9, 1740.
His Father died while he was a Child, and his Mother's poverty obliged her to
bind him out as an apprentice at the age of eight Years. He was so unhappy as
to be brought up in an irreligious Family, in which he was not so much as
taught to read, nor had any religious Instructions given him: He was never sent
to any place of public Worship, though he lived near enough to have constantly
attended it. In consequence of these things he was entirely ignorant of the
first Principles of Religion. He early discovered a thievish Disposition. His
Mother corrected him for this when he lived with her; but after he left her, he
met with no restraints: On the contrary, his Mistress would receive the things
he had stolen, and even employ him to steal small things for her.

A foundation being thus laid, as he advanced in years he grew in wickedness:
From stealing Trifles he proceeded to steal things of Value. At length he went
into the practice of breaking open and robbing Houses; and was in near thirty
Instances guilty of Burglary. He was first convicted of this Crime at
New Haven, and was whipped, cropped, and branded. After committing the same Crime
in a number of Instances, he was prosecuted to a second Conviction at Fairfield
in August, 1766. He here received the same punishment as before, and was
solemnly warned that death would be his punishment on a third Conviction: Yet
he still persisted in the Practice, and committed ten or a dozen Burglaries
between his second and third Conviction; at length he was committed to prison
for breaking up a Shop in Fairfield in the night, and robbing it of Goods to
the value of an hundred pounds lawful money. Soon after his imprisonment, he
set fire to the Goal at midnight, and consumed it with the Goaler's appartment
and the Court House. He was tried at Fairfield, April 27, 1768, on two several
Indictments, the one for Burglary in the third Instance, the other for burning
the Goal, etc. found guilty on both, and received Sentence of Death.

The Government of Connecticut have always been remarkably tender of putting
persons to Death. Such was the lenity of the Judges in this Case, that the
Warrant for Execution was not signed till four Months after Sentence. By this
means opportunity was given the Prisoner to apply for mercy to the General
Assembly, with whom the Power of pardoning such offenses is lodged. He
petitioned accordingly; but his Offenses were so many and great, that it was
though it necessary to leave him to suffer. During this Period he found means to
break the Goal at New Haven, which had been the Place of his Confinement since
his burning that at Fairfield. The second Night after his Escape, he broke open
and robbed three Shops at Middletown. After committing several other Thefts, he
was bro't back to the Goal from whence he escaped, and ordered to be executed
at Fairfield on the 7 th of September. As he had before broken out of five or
six different Prisons, he seems to have flattered himself with the hope of
making one more Escape. And this hope, it is though it by many, did not leave him
till the day of Execution. But when he found he must die, he behaved with
decency and an appearance of Concern, both at the Sermon (which was preached at
his desire) and at the Place of Execution.

Excessive Wickedness, the Way to an untimely Death.
ECCLESIASTES, vii. 17. "Be not overmuch wicked; neither be thou foolish:
"Why should thou die before thy Time?"

AS the melancholy occasion on which we are now assembled, requires a plain
serious discourse, such an one as is adapted not to gratify curiosity, but to
lead us to a religious improvement of the awful sight now before our eyes; I
shall not spend any part of the little time allowed me, in critical remarks on
the words now read, or on their connection with those that go before, or that
follow them; nor shall I entertain you with the opinion of this or the other
learned expositor concerning them. The plain and obvious sense of the words,
and what must immediately strike the mind of every one that attentively hears
or reads them is, That excess in wickedness is the height of folly, because it
tends to, and is likely to end in an untimely death. This is a truth worthy of
our serious consideration at all times, but especially on such an occasion as
this, when we are come together to see it verified in a particular instance. I
hope therefore for your serious attention while I endeavor to illustrate this
truth, by showing,

I. When a man may be said to be "overmuch wicked." And,

II. That an untimely death is what this leads to, and is likely to end in --
and while I apply these things to the present occasion.

I. I am then, in the first place, to explain the expression of being
"overmuch wicked;" or, to show, when this may be said of any person in
particular. To which it may be said,

1. A man may be "overmuch wicked" in respect to the kind or sort of sin he
commits.

Sin is justly styled "the transgression of the law." And the word
transgression implies excess or going too far; it means going beyond the bounds
or limits prescribed. All sins of commission, all offenses against negative
precepts, do therefore consist in excess. When the divine law says, "Thou shall
not" do this or that, he that does it transgresses the law, he passes over or
goes beyond the bounds set him. So that every transgression may be said to be
overmuch.

But yet all transgressions are not equal: Some have greater evil in them than
others. He that commits one sin, does indeed as really transgress the Divine
Law as he that commits another; for the law allows of no sin at all: But in
some kinds of sin the transgression is greater, or there is a further departure
from the rule of righteousness; and consequently some sins do in their nature
or kind imply greater excess than others. And a man may he said to be
"overmuch wicked" on account of the sort or kind of sin he commits.

In sins against the second table of the moral law, the comparative evil, or
the degree in which one sin exceeds another, may be judged of by the damage or
injury done either to a particular person or to the public. The Divine Law
which requires me to "love my neighbor as myself," and forbids my hating any
person, is transgressed by hatred expressed in reproachful and provoking words;
but the transgression is not so great, as when hatred is discovered by robbing
him of his goods, burning his house, wounding his person, or taking away his
life. In these cases the transgression or excess is proportioned to the injury
done to a particular person. But then crimes are likewise to be considered as
they affect the community. And in this view some of them have a greater degree
of evil in them, or are more excessively wicked than others. Every thing that
disturbs the peace and safety of the public is evil. Now this is done by
tattling, tale-bearing, lying and defamation; whence it is that these kinds of
vices are punishable as breaches of the peace. But the happiness of mankind,
considered as formed into society, is much more affected by robbery, burglary,
burning houses, and such like crimes, which are therefore justly esteemed
greater transgressions. And indeed if men cannot be secure in their
possessions, if they cannot rest safely in their beds, but must be in continual
danger of having their houses broken open and plundered, or burnt over their
heads, while they are asleep, the happiness of society is at an end, and
government is in effect dissolved; for such a state is little, if at all,
better than a state of nature.

A person therefore who commits these greater offenses, these more enormous
transgressions, may well be considered as being "overmuch wicked."

2. The man is overmuch wicked who repeatedly and frequently commits the same
crime.

The frequent repetition of any fault renders a person highly criminal. A man
by the long and habitual practice of wickedness of the lower kinds, may
contract greater guilt and expose himself to a more severe condemnation, than
would have resulted from the commission of a much greater crime in a single
instance. A truth worthy of the very serious consideration of all such persons
as indulge themselves in smaller sins, and think they are secure so long as
they abstain from gross and scandalous violations of the Divine Law.

Now if a man become "wicked overmuch" by frequently repeating and living long
in the practice of sins of a lower kind, what amazing guilt must he contract,
and what an awful condemnation has he to expect, who lives long in the habitual
practice of great transgressions, or frequently repeats the same enormous
crimes? When such vices as imply great excess in the very nature of them, are
frequently repeated and long lived in, it cannot be doubted that men are
"overmuch wicked." They are so in the sight of GOD, the unerring Judge of the
World. Hence that threatening, "But GOD shall wound the head of his enemies, and
the hairy scalp of such an one as goes on still in his trespasses." Psalm
lxviii. 21.
All the enemies of GOD shall be destroyed, but this shall especially be the
case of him that goes on still in his trespasses. The man that frequently
commits the same sin, or lives in the habitual practice of it, shall by no
means escape. And hence appears the justice of those human laws which inflict
higher punishments on a second or third conviction of the same crimes.

3. Men are "overmuch wicked" when they persist in their sinful practices,
notwithstanding their having had plain and repeated warnings of their danger.

A man must be stupid to a degree that can scarce be supposed, who goes on for
any considerable time, in the practice of gross wickedness, without feeling
some uneasiness in his own mind, on the account of it. There are seasons in
which conscience must awake, and when it will be heard. Or, if the consciences
of sinners are ever so hardened and even "seared with an hot iron," yet when
they practice such crimes as expose them to the stroke of human laws, they must
surely have at some times very uneasy apprehensions, and even distressing fears
of being detected. "In the dark they dig through houses which they had marked
for themselves in the daytime: They know not the light. For the morning is to
them as the shadow of death: If one know them, they are in the terrors of the
shadow of death." Job xxiv. 16, 17.
One would imagine, did not experience prove the contrary, that the thief who
had been in great danger of being detected, and had felt these TERRORS OF THE
SHADOW OF DEATH, should "steal no more, but labor working with his hands," for
his support. And his returning to such practices after such warnings, argues
his being wicked overmuch; it proves that he is to an awful degree under the
power of satan and his own heart's lusts, and it is a dreadful token of his
being given over to ruin and destruction.

In those cases in which human laws inflict higher punishments on a second or
third conviction, and especially where death is the penalty on a third
conviction, a person has still plainer and more solemn warnings given him.
Those lower punishments are designed to reform the offender, and they are well
suited to answer this design. He ought to look on them as warnings of more
severe punishments to be expected if he refuses to be reformed, and "still goes
on in his trespasses." And he that being thus often reproved, hardens his
neck, has nothing to expect but that he shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without remedy.

These are the ways in which men render themselves excessively vicious. When a
man commits the grosser kinds of sin; when he frequently repeats the same vice;
or when he persists and hardens himself in his transgressions under solemn
warnings; in each of these cases a man may be said to be "overmuch wicked."
But when all these circumstances concur and unite in the same person; when his
crimes are of the higher kinds greatly injurious to particular persons, and
utterly inconsistant with the safety and happiness of the community; when such
crimes have been frequently committed and long lived in; and when lighter
punishments, instead of detering and reforming the offender, do but render him
more bold and presumptuous; then is the person in a very high degree wicked
overmuch. His character is complete and finished: The measure of his sins is
filled up, and the man is ripe for destruction.

But I proceed to the second thing proposed, viz.

II. That an untimely death is what excessive wickedness tends to, and what it
may reasonably be expected to issue in.

This observation may be illustrated and confirmed by the following
considerations.

1. Being "over much wicked" tends to shorten the life of a man, or to bring
death sooner than otherwise it would have come according to the ordinary course
of things.

There is "a season and a time for every purpose under the sun," and God "has
made every thing beautiful in his time:" Among other things "there is a time to
die." Eccles. iii. 1, 2, 11.
Old age is, according to the course of nature, the time to die. When nature is
worn out, and can no longer discharge its functions, it is time they should
cease: When the season for either doing or getting good in this world is over,
it is time to leave it: When the earthly house of this tabernacle is gone to
decay, and is no longer a proper habitation for the rational soul to reside in,
and exert its noble powers and capacities, it is the proper time for its being
dissolved, and for the soul's entering upon another and more perfect state of
existence, in which its capacities of Action and of Enjoyment shall no longer
be clogged and prevented from exerting themselves as they now are. And there
seems to be a propriety and beauty in leaving this world when a man can no
longer be either useful or comfortable in it; especially if he be prepared for
a more exalted and perfect state of existence. Hence we have that description
of the death of a good man in old age, "Thou shall come to thy grave in a full
age, like as a shock of corn comes in his season." Job v. 26.
Old age being thus the "time to die," according to the course of nature, the
death of a person in youth or middle age, is styled untimely, or a man is in
such a case said to die before his time, that is, before the time which nature
seems to point out for dying, or before the time, to which, according to the
ordinary course of things under the government of Divine Providence, his
constitution might have held out, and so he might have lived usefully and
comfortably.

Now excessive wickedness tends to an untimely death in this sense. It has both
a natural and a moral tendency to this: And the tendency is so strong that it
may reasonably be expected, that this will be the issue and event.

Excess of any kind does in its own nature tend to weaken, wear out and destroy
the human constitution: It introduces disorders, pains and weakness, which all
tend to the dissolution of the body, and frequently bring on death sooner than
it would have come in the course of nature. This is especially true of some
particular kinds of wickedness, and perhaps of none more than Intemperance and
excessive lust. "Whoredom and wine and new wine take away the heart." Hosea iv.
11.
"They die in youth" whose "life is among the unclean." Job xxxvi. 14.
And then all kinds of wickedness, especially when practiced in an excessive
degree, tend to procure an untimely death as they provoke GOD, the sovereign
ruler of the world, to cut men off in the midst of their days. Hence we have
such threatenings as these, "Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half
their days," Ps. lv. 23.
and "he that gets riches and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of
his days, and at his end shall be a fool." Jerem. xvii. 11.
These threatenings a righteous GOD carries into execution in various ways;
sometimes by diseases, and at other times by accidents, all of which are under
his direction and accomplish his pleasure. Again,

2. Being "overmuch wicked" tends to an untimely death as it exposes a man to
capital punishment, or to be cut off by the sword of civil justice.

It is commonly said of one that has suffered death as a malefactor, that he
came to an untimely end. And there is a propriety in the expression; for such
an one dies sooner than he would have done in the ordinary course of things; he
dies while his strength is firm in him, before his constitution is exhausted
and death become necessary according to the established laws of nature: He dies
before the season which the wise man calls the "time to die;" and therefore
when, humanly speaking, he might have lived longer.

Now if we take the expression of a man's dying before his time in this sense,
or understand by it his suffering a violent death from the hand of civil
justice, it is true that being wicked overmuch exposes a man to it.

Civil Magistracy is an "ordinance of GOD," and a very important and necessary
one. The great end and design of it, is the public good; or the security, the
peace and happiness of civil society. This end cannot be attained unless
magistrates are vested with sufficient power to punish malefactors, and that
with such a degree of severity that others may be restrained from imitating
them. Accordingly GOD has committed the sword to the magistrate, and
constituted him "the revenger to execute wrath on him that does evil." Romans
xiii. 4.
Some crimes are so great and of so pernicious a nature that nothing can
expiate them, or secure the public from the ruinous effects of them, but the
death of the criminal: Accordingly GOD has, in mercy to the community,
committed the sword to the magistrate, and constituted him "a revenger to
execute wrath" on such persons. It has in consequence hereof been allowed in
all ages and nations, that the civil magistrate has a just right in some cases
to inflict capital punishments, or to take away the life of a malefactor. One
of the laws GOD gave to mankind in general was, "whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by
man shall his blood be shed." Genesis ix. 6.
There can therefore be no doubt that murder is to be punished with death: Nor
is this the only crime that may justly be thus punished. When GOD himself
condescended to become the King of the Jewish nation, and in this character
gave them a body of judicial laws, he ordered that several other crimes besides
murder, should be punished with death. Now, though the laws given peculiarly to
the Jews, do not necessarily oblige other nations to whom they were not given;
yet, since they came from GOD, it must be allowed that there was nothing unjust
either in the laws themselves, or in the penalties with which they were
enforced.

Human laws, consider crimes in a political view; and the scale by which the
evil of them is measured and determined, is their tendency to destroy the
public good, or the safety and happiness of society. If, therefore, there are
crimes, the prevalence of which will certainly destroy the safety and security,
and even the being of society; and at the same time, men are not to be detered
or restrained from practicing them by any other method, it is lawful for the
magistrate to put them to death. The right of self-preservation belongs to
communities as well as to particular persons. This right will justify a private
man in taking away the life of one that assaults them, when he can no other way
defend his own life against him; and it will as fully vindicate the magistrate
in putting to death the criminal, against whose destructive practices the
public cannot otherwise be secured and defended.

It can hardly be doubted, that a long continued course of house-breaking, and
robbery is as destructive of the being and happiness of civil society, as a
single instance of murder; and more so than some crimes that were made capital
by the Jewish law; and if this be granted, the justice of punishing it with
death seems evident. By the law of Moses a man was justified who killed the
person he found breaking up his house in the night. Exodus xxii. 2, 3.
It seems therefore that this crime did, in the judgment of the Divine
Lawgiver, amount to a forfeiture of life. For as every man has a right to his
life, it is murder to kill a man who has not forfeited his life: But in this
case, the killing was allowed, and therefore the forfeiture must be supposed.

Now, if a course of house-breaking and robbery be justly punishable with
death, it is plain that being in this way overmuch wicked is the way for a
person to die before his time.

I will but just add,

3. Death is always untimely to the person who is unprepared for it: And in
this sense he that is wicked overmuch is in the utmost danger of dying before
his time.

Death is untimely whenever it comes before that great and important design for
which life was given, is answered: And it had been better not to have lived at
all, than in this respect to have lived in vain. We are sent into this world as
probationers for an eternal state. The great end for which life is given, and
on the account of which it is worth having, is that men may obtain a right to,
and the necessary qualifications for, a state of complete and everlasting
happiness, in that unseen world into which they enter at death: That they may
obtain the pardon of their sins and acceptance with GOD through the blood of
JESUS CHRIST his Son, and be made meet for the inheritance of the saints in
light.

Being "overmuch wicked" directly tends not to prepare men for heaven, but to
render them "vessels of wrath fitted for destruction." By frequently repeating
sinful actions, and persisting in them under warnings and reproofs, men
treasure up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the
righteous judgment of GOD. Nor can a man take a more direct way to die before
his time, that is, before he is prepared for death, than by being overmuch
wicked. For resolutely persisting, and going to great excess, in those things
for the sake of which the wrath of GOD comes on the children of disobedience,
is by no means the way to obtain the mercy of GOD, through CHRIST to eternal
life: But it is the way to harden men in sin and impenitence, and to render
them the proper objects of the everlasting indignation and wrath of the LORD
GOD ALMIGHTY.

But it is time to apply what has been said to the present solemn occasion. And
how can I more properly do this, than by saying, "This day is this scripture
fulfilled," before your eyes, and may your "eyes affect your hearts!" You have
now before you a man that has been "overmuch wicked;" one that has rendered
himself notorious by the practice of great and enormous transgressions, such
acts of injustice and violence as are destructive of civil society, and utterly
inconsistent with the happiness of the community. His crimes have been
frequently repeated and carried to an astonishing excess: He has persisted in
them under warnings and reproofs, and to an awful degree hardened his heart
under rebukes and punishments. The lighter punishments inflicted on him, and
even the sentence of death and prospect of execution, have been so far from
bringing him to true repentance, that they have not restrained him from
repeating his crime, and that in a number of instances. He has been a
remarkable instance of impenitence: Seldom does the corruption of human nature
show itself in so strong and affecting a light: Few men, it is to be hoped,
have so entirely sold themselves to do evil. And now you all see the end of
such a course. He now stands before you in the character of a condemned
malefactor, and one that is in an hour or two to receive the due reward of his
evil deeds, even death from the stroke of public justice. He has to an awful
degree been "overmuch wicked," and is now agreeable to the threatening
contained in my text, to "die before his time." He is to die while a young man,
but twenty-eight years of age, and when according to the ordinary course of
things he might have lived much longer. He comes to an untimely end, as he is
to suffer a violent death, in the execution of a legal sentence. And I pray GOD
his death may not prove untimely in a still worse sense, by coming upon him
while he is unprepared for it.

So melancholy a spectacle suggests several useful reflections, and must surely
engage our minds to fix and dwell upon them.

The whole world would be no consideration at all to induce any one of us to
stand in the place, or be in the condition of the criminal before us; shall we
not then carefully avoid, and be continually on our guard against every thing
that tends to bring us into so unhappy a state? We all have the same
corruptions of soul, the indulgence of which has rendered this man so
excessively wicked, and brought him into the unhappy condition in which we now
behold him. He therefore who gratifies any of the sinful inclinations of his
own heart, takes the direct road to ruin and destruction. Every indulgence of a
vicious appetite strengthens it, and renders it the more difficult for him
afterward to subdue or even restrain it. Every act of sin of any kind
strengthens the habit: And every step a man takes in a course of vice, brings
him nearer to that excess in wickedness of which we have so deplorable an
example now before our eyes. Men grow extremely wicked by degrees. When they
first engage in sinful practices they intend to keep within some bounds, and to
be but moderately vicious; and perhaps would tremble at the thought of
committing those greater crimes which they afterward run into without remorse
or concern. By practicing smaller sins they are emboldened to commit greater
iniquities. And this is what may reasonably be expected, as it is exactly
agreeable to the (...) on of human nature. Every act of sin strengthens (...)
inclination of the sinner, and at the same (...) weakens the natural restraints
from sin, such as the (...) of conscience, a regard to reputation, fear of
shame, and (...) punishment. Now it is not to be wondered at (...) from one
degree of wickedness to another until they arrive at the greatest excess, when
they are thus continually strengthening their own vicious inclinations, and at
the same times abating the force of all those principles which were implanted
in them on purpose to serve as natural preservatives and restraints from sin.
Especially considering that by the habitual practice of wickedness, though in a
lower degree, men provoke an holy GOD to withhold from them the restraints of
his Providence and Grace, and to leave them to be as vile as unbridled
corruption can make them, and so to bring themselves to an untimely death in
this world, and to an awfully aggravated condemnation in the world to come.

This is the case particularly with regard to sins of unrighteousness or
dishonesty. Men seldom, if ever, begin with the higher degrees of this kind,
such as house-breaking, robbery and murder; but they first practice the arts of
cheating and defrauding; from thence they proceed to the lower kinds of
pilfering and theft, and are by degrees brought ^^der the power of satan, and
hardened in sin till they are prepared to commit all iniquity with greediness.
"So are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain" until at length "he
takes away the life of the owners thereof." Prove. i. 1^.
And indeed it may generally be expected, that he who will be guilty of
house-breaking and robbery, will (if resisted, or like to be apprehended) take
away the life of a man.

Now, if this be the way in which men become "overmuch wicked, so as to die
before their time," of how great importance is it that their vicious
inclinations instead of being gratified and strengthened, should be resisted
and curbed in early life; and that those principles in human nature, which
serve to restrain men from gross sins, should be kept alive and strengthened?
Much of this kind may be done by a regular and virtuous education: And a
criminal neglect of family religion, instruction and government is frequently
the means of bringing persons to infamy and damnation. When family religion and
instruction are neglected; when no order or government is maintained in private
houses; when the reins are thrown loose on the necks of giddy and thoughtless
youths; when children who have not discretion to govern themselves, are not
governed by others; and when masters care not where their servants are, or how
they are employed, in the night, so that they do but perform their daily task;
what can be expected, but that they will go from lower to higher degrees of
wickedness, until they arrive at the most infamous and the most ruinous
excesses? The case is still worse when heads of families by their own vicious
examples encourage their children and servants in those evil practices, which
all their authority should be exerted in preventing and suppressing. To such
unnatural parents, to such cruel masters, (if any such are now present) I must
say, look on the criminal now before you, under sentence of death and going to
execution, and think seriously what agonies you would feel were you to see a
child or a servant of your own, any one whom Providence had committed to your
care, instruction and government, in his condition; and to reflect on
yourselves as having been instrumental in bringing him into it. And here I
cannot help wishing that the mistress of this unhappy person, who he says not
only encouraged, but employed him, when a boy, in stealing things of small
value, were now present to see what she was criminally instrumental in bring
him to.

A principal design of public execution is, that others may fear and do no more
so wickedly. Let the instance before us be improved with this view. Let it
engage all who have the education and government of others committed to them,
to bring them up in a virtuous, religious manner; to give them proper
instruction, and to maintain a due government over them; to encourage in them
every thing that is virtuous and praiseworthy; to curb the first appearances
of vice in them; and to restrain them from such practices, and such company as
lead to it. Let all beware of habituating themselves to the lower kinds and
degrees of wickedness, lest they be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin,
and lead by insensible steps to the greatest excess in wickedness, even such as
shall bring them into the melancholy condition of the unhappy person now before
us.

It is owing to the restraining grace of GOD, that any sinners are kept from
the greatest excess in wickedness. But this grace is ordinarily afforded in
these ways; and therefore we ought to be careful and diligent in the use of
such means. And he that does not by the use of them endeavor to preserve
himself, and all committed to his care, cannot reasonably expect that GOD will
keep him or them.

After all, it must be owned that such restraints as may be expected in these
ways, will not absolutely secure sinners from the danger of being so
excessively wicked as to die before their time. There is no safety in a state
of impenitence and unbelief. In order to a person's being in a state of
security, it is not sufficient that his corruptions be under some present
restraints, but they must be really subdued and even mortified by the
sanctifying operations of the Spirit of CHRIST. Nor indeed is habitual grace a
complete security in this case; for though "he that is born of GOD does not
commit sin" 1 John iii. 9.
so as to live in the practice of it, yet it is not impossible but he may in a
single instance commit a capital crime. The lively and continual exercise of
grace is the only way to be safe and secure. Let sinners then be awakened to
flee for refuge to the hope set before them in the gospel. Let the terrors of
human, as well as those of the Divine Law, excite and quicken them hereto. Let
none rest satisfied or think themselves secure till they experience the
regenerating and sanctifying influences of the Holy Spirit, changing them into
the love and the image of GOD. And let not believers content themselves with
grace already received, but let them be careful to live in the exercise of it,
and to grow and increase in it. Let it be their care to maintain a constant and
lively sense of the glorious perfections and the continual presence of GOD. And
(...) them, in the steady practice of the duties of piety and devotion,
maintain communion with GOD in CHRIST. In these ways they may expect to be kept
from the evil that is in the world, and bro't safe to the enjoyment of eternal
salvation.

I am now to finish my discourse by applying it particularly to the unhappy
person who has occasioned it, and at whose desire it is delivered.

Isaac Frasier, You now appear in this public manner, as one who has been "over
much wicked" and as one who is now to die before his time." It is of the last
importance that you be thoroughly convinced of all your sins of heart and life;
and particularly of the crime for which you are to suffer; that you be deeply
humbled for the extreme evil and the amazing folly you have been guilty of; and
that, under a sense of your being a guilty and justly condemned creature, you
make your flight to the hope set before perishing sinners in the gospel, even
to the infinitely rich, and infinitely free grace of GOD exercised through
JESUS CHRIST, the all-sufficient Mediator of the new Covenant. And it is of
infinite importance that you do this immediately, since you are now within an
hour or two of the eternal world.

Your sins go before you to judgment. They have been too open and notorious to
be denied, and too great and aggravated to admit of any sort of excuse. Besides
smaller crimes, of which your own conscience must doubtless accuse you, and
which were the steps by which you proceeded to greater, you have in some very
high instances transgressed the eternal law of justice and righteousness, in
violently taking away the property of other persons. You have in a surprising
number of instances, broken into their houses, and robbed them of their
substance, and in one instance set their dwelling on fire, wasted their goods,
and endangered their lives. Your crimes of house-breaking and robbery have been
frequently repeated: You have persisted in them after having been convicted and
punished a first and second time; and that when you well knew, and was solemnly
warned of it, that death was the penalty on a third conviction. Nay you have
shown yourself wicked and hardened to a degree we should scarcely have thought
human nature capable of, were we not convinced by the fact; for even after
sentence of death had passed upon you for this crime, no sooner did you obtain
liberty by breaking prison, than you immediately returned to the practice of
the same wickedness. Thus have you, though often reproved, hardened your neck,
and now you see the consequence, you are suddenly to be destroyed and that
without remedy. The peace and welfare of the public, and the safety and
security of particular persons render it necessary that your forfeited life
should be taken away. Justice requires that you should suffer; and it is
necessary that you be made a public example to deter others from committing
such wickedness.

And, if your crimes deserve so awful a punishment from man, what do they
deserve from GOD? The bodily death you are now to suffer, is nothing when
compared with the death of the soul, that eternal death which means an endless
existence in a state of exquisite misery; and which your sins justly deserve.
You have in an high-handed manner, transgressed the laws and trampled on the
authority of GOD, the sovereign ruler of the world: You have greatly offended
and provoked HIM who is able to destroy both soul and body forever. The just
penalty of the Divine Law, which you have broken, is that death which consists
in being cast into the "lake of fire." And if death from the hand of man be so
terrible, what must that be which comes immediately from the hand of the Lord
GOD Almighty? If you can scarce support yourself under the near prospect of
your approaching execution, how can your heart endure or your hands be strong
when GOD shall enter into judgment with you? "It is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living GOD." Heb x. ^1.
Well may your flesh tremble for fear of HIM; well may you be afraid of his
judgment. It Is necessary that you suffer the death to which human justice has
condemned you; nor may you on any terms expect to escape it: But, blessed be
GOD, there is a possibility of your escaping eternal death. Sufficient
provision is made in the new covenant for the pardon and salvation even of so
great a sinner as you have been. The Blood of JESUS CHRIST cleanses from all
iniquity. The salvation procured by the Sacrifice of CHRIST; which comprehends
pardon, sanctification and eternal life, is by the gospel offered to you. O!
how infinitely great is the mercy of GOD in making you such an offer after your
many and great offenses, your presumptuous and aggravated transgressions!
Admire, and be astonished at his grace, and bow your soul to an humble,
believing and thankful acceptance of it. Sensible of your astonishing guilt,
and liableness to eternal condemnation; apply to and trust in the righteousness
of CHRIST for pardon and acceptance with GOD. Sensible of the amazing
corruption of your nature, that fountain of sin in your heart from whence the
sins of your life have proceeded, apply to the blood of the REDEEMER for
healing and cleansing. Pray earnestly to GOD through CHRIST, that he will be
merciful to you, a guilty, condemned malefactor.

To conclude, You are now on the very brink of an awful, an endless eternity;
in an hour or two you must enter on the unseen world; and your everlasting
condition will be fixed and determined. This is the last sermon you are to
hear, -- these are the last offers of pardon and salvation through CHRIST that
are ever to be made you. O! accept them immediately, for your eternal happiness
depends upon it.

And now, may that GOD who is able to accomplish those things which are
impossible with men, grant you repentance unto life, sincere faith in HIS SON,
and that holiness without which no man shall see GOD. To his infinitely rich
and free grace in JESUS the all-sufficient Mediator of the new covenant, we are
now in our concluding prayers to commit and commend you.

FINIS.

