THE TRIAL OF FREDERICK CALVERT, Esquire Baron of Baltimore, in the Kingdom of
Ireland, FOR A Rape on the Body of Sarah Woodcock; AND OF El. Griffinburg, and
A. Harvey, otherwise Darby, As ACCESSARIES before the Fact. For procuring,
aiding and abetting him in committing the said Rape.

AT THE Assizes held at Kingston for the County of Surry, On SATURDAY, the 26th
of March, 1768.

BEFORE The Hon. Sir SYDNEY STAFFORD SMYTHE, Knt. One of the BARONS of his
Majesty's Court of Exchequer.

Published by Permission of the Judge.

Taken in SHORTHAND by JOSEPH GURNEY.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCCLXVIII.

THE TRIAL OF FREDERICK CALVERT, Esquire Baron of Baltimore, in the Kingdom of
Ireland; FOR A Rape on the Body of Sarah Woodcock; AND OF Elizabeth
Griffinburgh, and Ann Harvey.
AT the assizes held on the 23d of March, at Kingston, a bill of indictment was
found by the grand inquest for the county of Surry, as follows;

The jurors of our Sovereign Lord the King, upon their oath, present, that

Frederick Calvert, late of the parish of Epsom, in the county of Surry, Esquire
Baron of Baltimore, in the kingdom of Ireland, not having God before his eyes,
but being moved and seduced by the instigation of the devil, on the 22d day of
December, in the eighth year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord George the
Third, King of Great Britain, etc. with force and arms at the parish aforesaid,
in the county aforesaid, in and upon one Sarah Woodcock, spinster, in the peace
of God, and of our said Lord the King, then and there being, violently and
seloniously, did make an assault; and her, the said Sarah Woodcock, against the
will of her, the said Sarah Woodcock, then and there feloniously did ravish,
and carnally know, against the peace of our said Lord the King, his crown and
dignity, and against the form of the statute in such case made and provided.
And Elizabeth Griffinburg, wise of Joseph Griffinburg, late of the parith of
Saint Ann, Soho, in the county of Middlesex, doctor in physic. And Ann Harvey,
otherwise Darby, late of the parish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, in the county
of Middlesex, aforesaid, widow, before the said felony and rape was committed,
in form aforesaid, to wit, on the 22d day of December, in the year aforesaid,
with force and arms at the parish of Epsom, aforesaid, in the said county of
Surry, did feloniously and maliciously procure, aid and abett the said
Frederick Calvert, to do and commit the said felony and rape in manner and form
aforesaid, against the peace of our said Lord the King, his crown and dignity,
and against the form of the statute in such case made and provided.

On Saturday, the 26th of March, 1768, the court being met, the prisoners
surrendered themselves in discharge of their bail, and were set to the bar,
when the court proceeded thus.

The Clerk of the Arraigns ( read the indictment to them as before.) Clerk of
Arraigns. How say thou, Frederick Calvert, Baron of Baltimore, in the
kingdom of Ireland, art thou guilty of the felony and rape whereof thou
stand indicted, or not guilty?


Lord Baltimore. Not guilty.


Clerk of Arr. Culprit, how will thou be tried?


Lord Baltimore. By God and my country.


Clerk of Arr. God send thee a good deliverance.


Clerk of Arr. Elizabeth Griffinburg, art thou guilty or not?


Griffinburg. Not guilty.


Clerk of Arr. Culprit, how will thou be tried?


Griffinburg. By God and my country.


Clerk of Arr. God send thee a good deliverance.


Clerk of Arr. Ann Harvey, otherwise Darby, art thou guilty or not?


Harvey. Not guilty.


Clerk of Arr. Culprit, how will thou be tried!


Harvey. By God and my country.


Clerk of Arr. God send thee a good deliverance.


Clerk of Arr. Make a proclamation for silence.


Crier. Oyez, Oyez, Oyez; My Lords, the King's Justices, strictly charge and
command all manner of persons to keep silence upon pain of imprisonment.


Crier. Oyez; you good men that are impanelled to try between our Sovereign
Lord the King, and the prisoners at the bar, answer to your names, and save
your fines.


The Jury were called over and appeared. Clerk of Arr. You the prisoners at the
bar, these men which were last called, and do now appear, are those who are to
pass between our Sovereign Lord the King and you, upon the trial of your
several lives and deaths; if therefore you will challange them, or any of them,
you must challenge them as they come to the book to be sworn, before they are
sworn: and you shall be heard.


Charles Farmer, of Kingston, challenged by the prisoner William French, of
ditto ditto ditto William Hobbs, of ditto ditto ditto John Warnock Pensold, of
ditto ditto ditto William Porter, of ditto ditto ditto Patrick Johnson, of
Petersham, -- sworn Samuel Christopher, of Petersham -- sworn Geo. Armstrong,
of Richmond, challenged by the prisoner Groves Wheeler, of ditto -- sworn Henry
Tailor, of Kew, challenged by the prisoner Charles Webster, of Richmond ditto
ditto Charles Martin, of ditto ditto ditto Richard Chinnery, of ditto -- sworn
Henry Roak, of Kingston, challenged by the prisoner Henry Hardmead, of Richmond
-- sworn Job Gardner, of Richmond, challenged by the prisoner Joseph Davis, of
Petersham, -- sworn Henry Hunt, of Richmond, challenged by the prisoner John
Scott, of ditto ditto ditto Thomas Roberts, of ditto -- sworn John Platt, of
ditto -- sworn John Green, of ditto -- sworn Thomas Simmonds, of Thames Ditton
-- sworn William Waterman, of Richmond -- sworn Asher Turner, of Egham,
challenged by the prisoner Thomas Gill, of Thames Ditton, challenged by ditto
Benjamin Planner, of Thames Ditton -- sworn


Clerk of Arr. Count these;


Patrick Johnson Samuel Christopher Groves Wheeler Richard Chinnery Henry
Hardmead Joseph Davis Thomas Roberts John Platt John Green Thomas Simmonds
William Waterman Benjamin Planner


Crier. Gentlemen, are ye all sworn.


Clerk of Arr. Crier, make proclamation.


Crier. Oyez, Oyez, Oyez; If any one can inform my Lords the King's Justices,
the King's Sergeant, the King's Attorney General, of any treasons, murders,
felonies, or misdemeanors, committed or done by the prisoners at the bar, let
him come forth, and he shall be heard, for the prisoners stand now at the bar
upon their deliverance; and all persons that are bound by recognizance to give
evidence against the prisoners at the bar, let them come forth and give their
evidence, or they will forfeit their recognizances.


Clerk of Arr. Frederick Calvert, Esquire Baron of Baltimore, in the Kingdom of
Ireland: Ann Griffinburg, and Ann Harvey, hold up your hands. Gentlemen of the
Jury, look upon the prisoners, and harken to the charge. They stand indicted by
the names of Frederick Calvert, Esquire Elizabeth Griffinburg, and Ann Harvey, ( as
in the indictment before set forth). Upon this indictment they have been
arraigned, and upon their arraignment have pleaded not guilty; and for their
trial have put themselves upon God and their country, which country you are:
Your charge therefore is, to enquire whether they be guilty of the felony and
rape whereof they stand indicted, or not guilty. If you find them guilty, you
shall enquire what goods or chattels, lands or tenements they had, at the time
of the selony committed, or at any time since: If you find them not guilty, you
shall enquire whether they fled for the same: If you find that they did fly for
the same, you shall enquire of their goods and chattels, as if you had found
them guilty: If you find them not guilty, and that they did not fly for the
same, say so, and no more; and hear your evidence.

COUNCIL FOR THE CROWN.

Mr. Sergeant Leigh, Mr. Cox, and Mr. Baker.

COUNCIL FOR THE PRISONERS.

Mr. Recorder, Mr. Bishop, Mr. Lucas, and Mr. She.

Mr. Baker then opened the indictment. After which Mr. Sergeant Leigh stated
the case with the several facts, as they will appear in the subsequent trial (
which we need not repeat here) and concluded to the following purport:

"Gentlemen, I told you at first, I would make no appeal to your passions, nor
shall I; I have told you the story as it was told to me; I shall call the
witnesses, and if they do prove the case to your satisfaction, you will, I
doubt not, find the prisoners guilty. If they do not prove it, God forbid that
an innocent person should suffer. It is our business to lay it fairly,
heartily, and fully before you, and then in God's name, let the consequence
follow."


Lord Baltimore proposed the witnesses should be examined apart; to which the
prosecutrix readily agreed.


SARAH WOODCOCK sworn. Sarah Woodcock. I live in King Street, Tower Hill; my
father and sister live there.


Mr. Cox. Did you carry on any business in the mouth of December?


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Mr. Cox. What business?


S. Woodcock. The business of a milliner.


Mr. Cox. If you can speak louder, do; if not, I will repeat to the jury. Do
you remember any body coming to your house in the month of December last? --
but take time, and speak as loud as you can.


S. Woodcock. A gentleman came, which I since find to be Lord Baltimore, he
came to the shop.


Mr. Cox. What was his business?


S. Woodcock. He came behind another customer.


Mr. Cox. Was that customer known to you;


S. Woodcock. She was.


Mr. Cox. What passed at that time between you and the gentleman?


S. Woodcock. The gentleman forced his discourse very much to the lady, and
then asked me what the ruff was that was in the window. I reached it to him,
and told him it was eighteen pence; he bought the ruff, and went away.


Mr. Cox. Did he come at any time afterward?


S. Woodcock. He came again two or three days afterward; I was not at home;
about a week after he came at night; nothing particular passed then, he only
bought nine yards of ribbon, and went away.


Mr. Cox. When did you see him again?


S. Woodcock. I cannot exactly tell the time. I believe about a week after that,
as near as I can guess, I saw him again, he came about noon; he came in a great
hurry, all over mud on one side, and said a coach had flung him down.


Mr. Cox. What did you say?


S. Woodcock. I said it was very odd he should be so near the coach and not see
it. He said it was thinking on me. I gave him no answer, not to my knowledge.
He asked me if he might sit down, if he should not hurt the chair. I told him,
that he would not hurt the chair. He asked me for some silk mi^tins; he said
they were for two little misses, and must be about the size of my arm; he said
he was a neighbor, and lived just by, in Tower-street, and would bring the
ladies some time or other to see me; he then said, he should be glad to
accompany me to the play, if I would go. I made answer, I never was at a play,
and never intended it. That was all that particularly passed then.


Mr Cox. What day of the week was this?


S. Woodcock. I cannot tell.


Mr. Cox. What happened after this at any time?


S. Woodcock. I saw him no more to my knowledge. On Monday, the 14th of
December, at night, one Mrs. Harvey came; she afterward told me her name.


Mr. Cox. Do you see her?


S. Woodcock. Yes; ( pointing to the prisoner Harvey) she bespoke a pair of
laced ruffles, and asked, if I could get them done by the next day noon; after
she had bespoke them, she asked me, if my name was not Woodcock; she said that
I had been strongly recommended to her, and she loved to encourage young
beginners; and told me if she liked the ruffles, she would recommend me to a
lady of her acquaintance which wanted a great many things.


Mr. Cox. Did any thing else pass that day?


S. Woodcock. Not to my knowledge. The next day about noon, she came according
to her time, and fetched the ruffles, and said she wanted several more things,
and asked me, if I could come to her house next day at four o'clock; I
answered, I would come if she pleased.


Mr. Cox. Did any thing more pass then?


S. Woodcock. Nothing particular. The next day, according to my time, I went,
about half an hour after four o'clock.


Mr. Cox. What day of the month?


S. Woodcock. December the 16th, the day of the week was Wednesday. I went to
Curtain Row, just by Holloway mount. The maid opened the door, she went up
stairs and let her mistress know that I was there, and then I was ordered up
stairs; she behaved in a very genteel manner, and asked me to sit down, and
then desired to look at the things which I had brought; she ordered tea
directly; I told her I could not stay to drink tea, and begged to be excused.
Just as I was speaking of that, in came a little man like a Jew, and made a
great many compliments to this lady, as if he had not seen her before that day.
I have since found the name of this man to be Jsaac Jsaacs; then they began to
talk about his going to the play, she said she was going into the city to see a
lady.


Mr. Cox. Did she name what part of the city, or what lady?


S. Woodcock. No; he said he must have a coach to go to the play, and chat if
she would, she might go part of the way in his coach, that he would set her
down. Then the turned to me, and said, this is the lady I told you of; she then
said, she would be glad if I would go along with her; that she wanted a great
many things, and would be a good customer to me. I made many excuses, that my
dress was not suitable, and then desired to be excused from going that night;
she said, the lady was a very agreeable lady, and would think nothing of my
dress, it was all very well, and begged I would go; then the Jew went with a
pretense to fetch a coach; he came back again directly, and hurried away very
fast; we were hurried into the coach, and the maid seemingly, was to bring the
candle, but kept back with it. I went into the coach in the dark, and was not
able to discern what fort of a coach it was. When I got into the coach, the Jew
drew up the glasses; I observed that they were very good glasses for a hackney
coach. He said it was a very good coach indeed. I by and by said, it was a very
good coachman, as well as a good coach, he drove so fast, and I did not hear
him (...) the horses. The lady made answer, and said, she supposed that the
gentleman had put six pen^e in the coachman's pocket in order to make him make
haste, that he might get to the play time enough. In about half an hour we were
got to the house; just as we were got to the house, as we were coming to the
door, Mrs. Harvey said, Miss, this is a very fine house this lady keeps; I
said, I was very sorry I was come in such a dress, for I was quite ashamed;
then they knocked at the door, they drove in so fast, that I did not know that
it was in a courtyard, but thought it was a door in the street.


Mr. Cox. Was it a door in the street?


S. Woodcock. No. Then I was desired to walk up stairs; I went up along with
Mrs. Harvey; they led me into one room, then a second, and out of that into a
third; there was an old man sitting, whom I found since to be Doctor
Griffinburg; he got up in a very complaisant manner, and asked me to sit down;
Mrs. Harvey asked for the lady; he said he would go and see for her; he went
out, and brought in word she would be here presently.


Mr. Cox. Who did you see next?


S. Woodcock. I sat about half an hour with Mrs. Harvey and Dr. Griffinburgh,
and then in came the gentleman, whom I since find to be Lord Baltimore.


Mr. Cox. What passed then?


S. Woodcock. I was much struck, knowing him to be the man I had seen at my
shop before; he came in with a great many compliments, he said, how do you do,
Miss, I hope you are well, and such like.


Mr. Cox. How was he dressed?


S. Woodcock. In a linen nightgown; he pretended he had not been well; as he
came in, I understood Dr. Griffinburg, he was the steward, Mrs. Harvey said to
him something about the lady, I cannot tell what.


Mr. Cox. What passed after this?


S. Woodcock. He said to me, I told you I would recommend you to some ladies,
that they were great ladies, and would want many things in your way. I did not
remember that he had told me that; I made answer, I was much obliged to him,
and asked him where the ladies were; he said he would go and see for them; he
went out, and brought in word that the ladies were not at home, but would be
soon; then after we had sit a little while, he said he would go and call the
housekeeper; he went out, and brought in a woman, which I find since to be Mrs.
Griffinburg.


Mr. Cox. Is she in court?


S. Woodcock. That is her at the bar ( pointing to her.)


Mr. Cox. What passed then?


S. Woodcock. He ordered tea, and asked me to drink tea. I told (...) I was
obliged to him, I had drank tea at Mrs. Harvey's. He said he had not, and
therefore desired it might be brought.


Mr. Cox. Did they drink tea?


S. Woodcock. They did, and with a great deal of persuasion, I drank one dish.
After tea he went out of the room, and brought in a heap of nicknacks; such as
purses, smelling-bottles, tetotums and a ring: He said he had bought them all
for me. I told him. I had no use for them, and did not choose to accept them. He
wanted me to play at tetotum: He said, he supposed I could play, and begged I
would, I told him, when I was a child possibly I might, but now I thought it
rather beneath me. He said, if I would not accept the things we should play for
them; which we did, but I did not accept of them afterward. I said several
times, between, to Mrs. Harvey, I should be glad if she would let me go home.
She said we should go home presently. I told her it grew late, and begged that
I might go, for my friends did not know where I was, and would be uneasy. She
said I should go presently. The gentleman said he wanted me to see the house. I
told him I did not care to stay tonight; and as the ladies were not there, and
I did not see they would come, I could see the house another time. He said, may
be I would not come another time, I said, may be I would. He said, will you
promise me to come another time. I said I did not choose to promise it. I would
not promise, because I never intended it, if I could get out; not that that I
had, at that time, any thoughts of being kept there; but expecting the person
that courted me, I wanted to be at home. He then said, Miss, but you shall see
the house tonight, therefore took me in to see another room or two. When we
came into a room where there was a harpsicord, he asked Mrs. Griffinburg
whether she was sure all the family were out, because if he was sure all the
family were out, he would play the music to Miss. -- This confirmed me that he
was a servant in the house; and because I thought I heard the Doctor before
say, here comes the steward; and the gentleman having so mean an appearance, I
had no notion he was master of the house.


Mr. Cox. What passed after this?


S. Woodcock. As soon as he had said that, Mrs. Griffingburg, turned to Mrs.
Harvey, and said, how glad she was they had got so nice an opportunity to have
the house all to themselves. After he had played the music, and they had staid
a little while, I was had out into the room I was first in. I entreated of Mrs.
Harvey again that she would let me go home, for it was late. They said it was
not late; it was not above eight or nine o'clock, and the lady would come
presently. I told them, as to the lady, I did not see she would come, and I
must go home. Lord Baltimore said, Miss, you shall stay to supper first. I
said, Sir, I don't choose any supper, and begged I might go home. He then
ordered supper. Mrs. Griffinburg went out of the room, and ordered supper. As
soon as she was gone, he took me up behind the window curtain, and said, Miss,
you shall come and see where you are: You don't know where you are, do you. I
said, no; Sir, where is it; but he did not tell me then; he began to show
indecencies, such as opening his breeches, and putting his tongue into my
mouth. I flew into a very great passion, struggled, and got from behind the
curtain. Mrs. Harvey and Doctor Griffinburg came up seemingly to help him: With
that I fought with them all, and said, I would go home directly, and made up to
the door: With that, he said I should stay to supper first. I said I would not
slay, I would go home directly. He then made me sit down by him at supper, but
I would no eat nor drink. He then offered me a glass of syllabub, which I
knocked out of his hand, and got up again, and said I would go home, and made
up to the door. He said it was late, and said there could be no coach got for
me. I told him not to tell me about a coach, I wanted no coach, and would slay
upon no account whatever. I defired he would not attempt to persuade me. With
that he stood over me (I believe it might be then about eleven but cannot
exactly say the time; I think it was about eleven when they had first done
supper) he stlood over me till between twelve and one. I told --


Court. What do you mean by standing over you?


S. Woodcock. (...) me.


Mr Cox. Before this, had you applied to Mrs. Harvey and Griffinburgs to go
away?


S. Woodcock. I applied to them all in general, who saw that I cried and took
on in such a manner.


Mr. Cox. Did you cry at that time?


S. Woodcock. I had cried from about supper time, from the time he had me
behind the curtain, for I had no notion at first of being kept there.


Mr. Cox. What passed after that?


S. Woodcock. Seeing the distress I was in, and that I would go home, and I
said how frightened my friends would be, he said, he would write a letter to my
friends, and say that I was in all safety, and well, something to that purpose.
I said if he could fend a letter, what was the reason he could not let me go
home? I would go home, and he should not keep me upon any account whatever.
With that he said I could not, nor should not go home. I cried very violently,
and said it did not signify, they should not keep me there. He flew into a
passion, and said I need not trouble myself about him, for he should not meddle
with me. I told him no, no more he should. He went away. Then Harvey and
Griffinburg, and Dr. Griffinburg, stood over me for about another hour, to
persuade me to be reconciled, and go up flairs to bed. I told them I would go
to no bed in that house, nor any where but where I was.


Mr. Cox. Was my Lord in the room at this time?


S. Woodcock. No, he was gone. At last they said it did not signify, for if I
would stay up all night they would not, and I should go up stairs. With that
they led me up a pair of back stairs into a room where was a bed. They
persuaded me very much to go to bed. I told them I would not go to bed in that
house. -- They both went to bed some time after in the same room, and I walked
about the room all night, (...), and in the greatest distress poslible. I went
osten to the window to see for daylight: And as soon as daylight came. I
opened the window, to see if I could jump out: but when I looked, I saw there
was no such thing as jumping out and saving life: It was two pair of (...). I
stood at the window till eight in the morning, when I few a young woman coming,
which I thought looked like an honest person, and would go and tell my father.
With that I throwed down my handkerchief, which was as wet with tears as if
dipped in water. She took it up; bat being so high the did not at first see
where it came from, and therefore went on her way. I then called (...) woman,
young woman, twice; with that fine (...) the handkerchief, and made a motion
(...) (...) it down within the rails. I was (...) where to go to my father: The
two (...) of bad in their shists, and pulled me (...) force they could, and
abused me, and (...) could make such a piece of work, (...) reason to cry
indeed, when I was (...) and a gentlemen that would (...) wished they were as
likely to (...) world as I was likely to have.


Mr. Cox. Which said that?


S. Woodcock. Both of them. I said I did not care any thing about it; if he
would give me his whole estate, and settle it all upon me, I would not stay
upon any account whatever, therefore begged they would not think of keeping me,
for I would go home. Sometime after this they went out of the room, and in came
Dr Griffinburg and Lord Baltimore, which terrified me very much: Indeed I was
crying in a violent manner, and said I would go home. My Lord said it was
strange I should make such a piece of work, had not he promised me that I
snould go home at twelve o'clock. I told him I would go home directly, for my
relations would go all about among my other friends, and when they could not
find me they would go out of their senses; therefore I must go home directly.


Mr. Cox. What relations did you allude to?


S. Woodcock. I meant my father and my two sisters. After that I went down
stairs, and I cried just as usual.


Mr. Cox. Into what room?


S. Woodcock. I cannot remember the room; he went with me, and I believe he led
me down stairs.


Mr. Cox. What happened to you then?


S. Woodcock. I cried as usual. They brought the breaksast, but I would not eat
nor drink: I went on in the fame manner till twelve o'clock came; then I was
quite outrageous. I said it did not signify their pretending to keep me, for I
would not stay. He pretended again to write to my father. I told him it did not
signify, for nothing he could do should keep me there. With that he assured me
that he meant nothing but honor, for he loved me to distraction: That he could
not part with me, and I must stay. I told him I would not stay upon any
account; he said he would write to my father, and when my father came, he would
make such proposals to my father as I thould like; and if I did not like them
and like to stay, I should go home with my father: with that he wrote. I do not
know what answer I made to him, and I was so much disturbed, I cannot recollect
what he wrote.


Court. Did he read it you?


S. Woodcock. He did. He then put the pen in my hand, and told me I must write,
dear father, this is true. And should be glad if you will come directly this
afternoon. from your (...) daughter, etc.


Mr. Cox. Did he bid you write those very words?


S. Woodcock. Yes word for word as he dictated, and stood over me to see me do
it. I did it to see my father.


Mr. Cox How came you to put such a subscription as that?


S. Woodcock. I wrote it with this view, that my father might come directly;
but, if it had been otherwise, I must have wrote it because he stood over me.
He put the pen into my hand, and said I must write it, that was enough for me
when I was in his power.


Mr. Cox. Was that the reason of your writing it?


S. Woodcock. It was, and that my father might come directly.

The Letter read. YOUR daughter Sally sends you the enclosed, and desires you
will not be uneasy on her account, because every thing will turn out well, with
a little patience and prudence. She is at a friend's house, safe and well, in
all honesty and honor; nothing else is meant, you may depend on it: and, Sir,
as your presence and consent is necessary, we beg of you to come in a private
manner to Mr. Richard Smith's, in Broad street New Buildings.


Mr Cox. This is what was wrote by my Lord?


S. Woodcock. I believe it was wrote by him,


Mr. Cox. What time?


S. Woodcock. I cannot justly say; I believe it was about noon. When he had
wrote, I observed there was no direction where my father should come; with that
I told him I was very sure he did not intend to send it, that he had put no
directions upon the letter. I asked him, where it was? He said, it was New
Broad street Buildings. I asked him, what his name was? he said, it was Richard
Smith. I asked him, if he could look firmly at me, and say, with truth, that
his name was Richard Smith, and that that was New Broad-street Buildings? I put
it home to him several times; at last he owned his name was not Richard Smith,
but that Richard Smith, lived two or three doors off, and that that was New
Broad-street Buildings. I then asked him, what end of the town? he said St.
James's. I did not know, whether the letter was sent or no, till afterward.


Mr. Cox. What passed that day afterward?


S. Woodcock. I went on crying in the same manner, and pleading that they would
let me go home. I often went to the window to show my distress; which, when
they saw, one or other of these women always pulled me away.


Mr. Cox. Which did?


S. Woodcock. Both of them, as they happened to be in the way. I was present at
dinner, but neither eat nor drank.


Mr. Cox. Who dined?


S. Woodcock. I think, Dr. Griffinburg, Mrs. Harvey, and, I believe Mrs.
Griffinburg.


Mr. Cox. Did you see any more servants during that day?


S. Woodcock. No.


Mr. Cox. Or any other part of the family, besides Dr. Griffinburg, Mrs.
Harvey, and Mrs. Griffinburg?


S. Woodcock. No; I went on in the same manner all the day, crying, and taking
on, and begged I might go home; and they pretended that my father was coming.


Mr. Cox. was any thing said to you about your going so often to the window?


S. Woodcock. Nothing particularly but they pulling me away, and said I should
not stand there. In the evening, on Thursday, Mrs. Griffinburg, or somebody,
had ordered the windows in the room where I had been before, in the night, to
be nailed up.


Mr. Cox. Do you know who gave that order?


S. Woodcock. I do not know who ordered them, of my own knowledge. With that
Lord Baltimore came in, and pretended to be in a great passion, with Mrs.
Griffinburg, and said, what did she mean by ordering the windows to be nailed
up, to make his servants think he was going to murder somebody, or do something
bad indeed, that the windows must be nailed up. He turned to me, and said,
madam, I assure you if you offer to open a window, or make any disturbance any
other way, I will f^ing you out of the window, or do for you. I assure you;
which frightened me very much; and I (...), that may-be he might murder me.
This was before supper. I went on in the same manner, pleading and crying; I
don't know that I stopped crying all that day. They supped together, but there
was no servants: I neither eat nor drank. After supper, when time was come to
go up stairs, I said, I would not go up till he had promised that he would not
meddle with me, nor come near me. He promised he would not, and went away. Some
time after that, I was led again up the same back stairs, into the same back
room.


Mr. Cox. Who led you up?


S. Woodcock. Mrs. Harvey, or Mrs. Griffinburgh, I don't know which; I believe
both of them. They entreated me very much to go to bed; I told them I would go
to no bed in that house; I would neither eat nor drink, if they kept me there
ever so long; they went to bed, and left me. I walked about the room in the
same manner all night, in the greatest distress possible, and in the morning
waked them with my crying. They then asked me how I could make such a piece of
work; they never heard a person make such a crying, or saw such distress in
their lives. With that I told them, I thought I had great reason for it, when I
was taken away from all that was near and dear to me in the world. I did assure
them, that I would not stay there, and they should not keep me upon any
account; for that I would never yield to his base purposes. With that, Mrs.
Harvey said, she did not suppose he wanted to do any thing against my will. I
told her, if he did not, what was the reason that he kept me there from day to
day, and would not let me go home? I told her I would not stay, or yield to his
base purposes, if he would give me his house full of silver and gold -- This
was up in the room, if I remember right. She said, she did not suppose he would
do any thing against my will, or keep me against my will. I told her, he never
would keep me with my will, for it never would be my will to stay there; and
that if he would marry me, and settle all his estate upon me, I never would
have him, for I hated him, and ever should; and therefore begged he would not
keep me in that prison of hell, for it was a prison of hell indeed!


Mr. Cox. Who was in the room at this time?


S. Woodcock. Only Mrs. Harvey.


Mr. Cox. What happened after this?


S. Woodcock. Some time after this, I went down stairs again into the same room
where I was before. He came to me; I was in the very same distress as I was
before; it was before breakfast; and I told him, though he had no compassion on
me -- I asked him if he had ever been a father; if he had, he might have some
compassion for my father: if he was a father himself, surely he must consider
my father, what he must feel for the loss of a child that he loved, and could
not tell where she was; whether she was dead or alive. I told him, not only so,
but that we were engaged in business, and they could not carry on the business
without me. With that, he said, he had been more careful in that respect than I
had, for he had sent my father something, that his business might not stop. I
told him, that would be of no use, for they could make no use of it till I
came. He said with that, I should write to my father myself. I told him, if I
did, it would be to no purpose, for I supposed I must write just what he
pleased; and if he did not like it, he would not send it, let me write whatever
I would. He said, yes he would, and I should write. I said, I supposed he would
stand over me all the time. He said, no, he would go away; but he left the two
women standing over me; therefore he might as well have stayed himself.


Mr. Cox. Explain the meaning of what you call standing over you.


S. Woodcock. Standing close to me, to see how I acted, and take care of me;
this was upon Friday, about the middle of the day. I wrote three or four lines,
and said, more than truth, because I knew it would come into his hands; and if
it did not please him, I knew that he would not let it go.


Mr. Cox. Can you tell what you wrote?


S. Woodcock. I said that he had used me with as much honor as I could expect,
and begged they would come immediately. After I had wrote these two or three
lines, the two women said, he had sent my father two hundred pounds the day
before, and that I ought to put it in, and know if they had it: that they
should return thanks for it. I told them I would not do any such thing, for I
can'd nothing about it.


Court. Which of them?


S. Woodcock. Both jointly, and I refused it several times. After that they
went and asked Lord Baltimore, whether it should be to or not; he came in and
said he did not care much about it, but I might, if I would, put it in; so I
wrote that they told me they had sent two hundred pounds, and I desired to know
if he had it.


Mr. Cox. I think your expression was, that you put into your letter more than
truth; how came you to do that?


S. Woodcock. For the reason I said before; that I knew he would not send it,
if I did not say something in favor of him. In an hour or two after that,
there came up one of the servants, I forget which, and said that a gentleman
had brought a letter, which Lord Baltimore brought in, and said it came from
Richard Smith; and that my father had been there, and would not stay till I and
he could be sent for. With that I said, I would not believe any thing of it. I
did believe it was his own forging, for it was wrote in another language. He
pretended to read it to me, but I told h^ it was nothing at all, for he could
read it as he liked. With that he said he would send for the man, and make me a
liar. I said he could not, but he would make the man say as he pleased, and
could talk to him in another language. The man was brought. I told him if he
would let me ask the man questions, then I would believe, if he gave me
satisfactory answers. He said I could confound the whole world; I told him I
did not know but I might, if they did not speak truth. The man came in and sat
down, and he spoke to him something first in another language; it was not
English I know; and then said, did not you bring this letter? he answered, Yes.
I told him I did not believe he did; the more, because he had been talking to
him in another language. I asked him what sort of a man it was came to him. He
said a middling man. I asked him what he called a middling man; he said a
talish man. I asked whether he was old or young, and what sort of a face he
had, but he could give me no satisfactory answer to any thing I said. I then
said to Lord Baltimore, who is a liar now, you or me? I said they were a parcel
of popish, rubbishing people, and I would not believe any thing they said to
me, (for I thought Lord Baltimore had been a French man and a Papist.)


Mr. Cox. Can you give any reason?


S Woodcock. I thought him a Frenchman, and therefore supposed him to be a
Papist.


Court. Did he speak broken English?


S. Woodcock. I thought so; but that might be my ignorance.


Mr. Cox. What time was this?


S. Woodcock. About dinner time. They went into another room; there was music
and dancing by Mrs. Harvey and this Smith.


Court. Did the person that spoke this foreign language to my Lord, pass for
Smith, or one of my Lord's servants?


S. Woodcock. He passed for Richard Smith. My Lord Baltimore played upon the
music, Richard Smith and Mrs. Harvey danced, and I walked about the room in
the greatest distress. After that they took me to look at the pictures; and
there was a ^ip in distress. I told them that was my picture. They said no, and
took me to another picture of a ship in a storm, and told me that was my
picture. Then they led me back into the room again. They all sat down before
the sire, and I sat down with them. He said to this Richard Smith, as soon as
he had sat down, he should draw Miss's picture. I said he should do no such
thing; I should not think of having my picture drawn. He drew my picture in the
posture I sat crying, in this manner ( describing it, with her head leaning
upon her hand;) they did not put the tears into the picture.


Mr. Cox. What passed that night?


S. Woodcock. Nothing more particular. About twelve at night it was pretended
that the little Jew man that first took me away, was sent with that letter that
I wrote. Broughton came in, who was called the stewart, (that is one that
answered to that name) and brought word that my father had stopped the Jew. Lord
Baltimore was in a violent passion, and swore he would go and pull my father by
the nose. I desired he would give me leave to speak a word or two: that I was
very sure my father had done no such thing, for he had not spirit enough for
it. While I was speaking, in came the other man, the Jew that I had seen at
first, Isaacs; he brought a letter, which he said he had brought from my
friends; and told me they were all well satisfied and pleased, and so put the
letter into my hands. It was wrote by my sister, and my sister writing so
seldom, I did not know her hand at first; but turning the other side of the
letter, I found the seal to be the young man's that courted me, Mr. Davis,
which cousirmed me it was come from them, which was the first word I knew that
came from them.


Mr. Cox. The purport of the letter?


S. Woodcock. It was, as near as I can remember, this: Only please to appoint a
place when and where we may meet you. It was directed to me if I remember
right. This was about twelve at night: time was come that I must go up stairs,
which I would not do till he had promised me he would not meddle with me, nor
come near me. I went up stairs to the same room where I went before, and Mrs.
Harvey and Mrs. Griffinburg came up to the same room, and pressed me very much
to go to bed. I still cried, and said I would not; but finding my strength was
gone, I said, may be I will lie down sometime in the night in my clothes.


Mr. Cox. Had you eat any thing at that time?


S. Woodcock. To my knowledge I had neither eat no^ drank. Upon my saying that,
Mrs. Griffinburg went out of the room, and left only me and Mrs. Harvey. I
fancy that was between one and two, but I cannot say.


Mr. Cox. Did you lie down in the middle of the night?


S. Woodcock. I lay down in about half an hour after Mrs. Griffinburg was gone;
and she coming up about half an hour after frightened me, for I thought it was
Lord Baltimore coming up, which set me in such a tremble, that I was obliged to
get up; then I walked about, and so laid down again, and so I went on all the
night in great distress: then I talked to Mrs. Harvey, and asked her if she had
ever been in love: I think she said yes, I am not positive: with that I told
her, then I was engaged; that a young man kept me company, and we were about
settling; that he had a great regard for me, and that I could not say but I had
the same for him, and therefore begged her to think how hard it must be in my
case.


Mr. Cox. That part of the story was true, was it?


S. Woodcock. Yes. I told her how I had been brought up from a child in a very
religious way.


Mr. Cox. That part of the story is true?


S. Woodcock. Yes; and that I could not bear any of their ways; and that if
Lord Baltimore would settle all his estate on me I would not comply, and a
great deal of such discourse, which I cannot now recollect; but begged that she
would lay it before my Lord, and entreat him to let me go; for I thought, if
she would lay the case before him, and tell him how it was, he would let me go.
I said, I dare say, if she had a mind, she could let me go herself. She said,
no; though she had known the house so long, she did not know the way out of the
house. With my crying, and being in such an agony and distress, she got up
sooner than common, and we went down stairs; but when we came to the bottom of
the stairs every door was locked, and we could get no further; we were
therefore forced to go up stairs, and were upwards of an hour before we could
get into the room, where there was a sire below stairs, where we were before.


Mr. Cox. Did Mrs. Harvey try to get out?


S. Woodcoock. She did, but could not. She did not try to get out of the house,
but only into the room where the fire was down stairs.


Mr. Cox. What was done in consequence of this desire of yours?


S. Woodcock. When we came down stairs she did go out from me, but Mrs.
Griffinburg was present: they did not leave me alone not one five minutes
together, I believe. Lord Baltimore came in soon after. I was in great
distress, as usual. They had some breakfast.


Mr. Cox. Who?


S. Woodcock. Mrs. Harvey and Mrs. Griffinburg. Lord Baltimore was present, if
I remember right.


Mr. Cox. Did he say any thing to you?


S. Woodcock. He did, but I cannot exactly remember what.


Court. What time did Lord Baltimore come?


S. Woodcock. I think about eight or nine o'clock. I pleaded the same arguments
with him as I had done with Harvey, and told him about this same young man.
With that he flew into a violent passion, and called me all the hitches and
whores he could think of, and throwed the news-paper at me; and told me, if I
offered to tell him any thing more about another man, he would fling me out of
the window, or tie my petticoats about my head, and send me home in a
wheelbarrow. The little Jew was present, Mrs. Harvey and Mrs. Griffinburg, and
he said to the Jew, carry the slut to a mean house, like herself. With that I
was terrified very much, and thought he meant a bawdy house. He flew out of the
room in a great pastion, and left the little Jew, Harvey and Griffinburg. They
persuaded me to be reconciled. They said, had he not promised he would send for
my father, and make such proposals as he would like; and if I did not like
them, I should go home again, and had I not better leave it to him. With that
the little Jew came and told me, that all my friends, and Mr. Davis in
particular, were well pleased. I told him I was sure it was a very great story,
therefore begged he would not say another word about it; but with their
persuasions, and fearing he would send me to a bawdy house, I desired Lord
Baltimore might be called in. He came in. I told him, if my father came, and
terms were offered him, I would consider them, and begged that God would direct
me. This was on Saturday about noon: after this I was very ill, and could hold
up my head no longer.


Mr. Cox. Had you eat or drank then?


S. Woodcock. No; only a dish of tea that morning. With that he came to me, and
told me, by that means I put it out of my power to help myself in that which I
was so afraid of; and then he went and mixed a draught and brought it me, and
said, I must take it. I refused it, searing there might be something hurtful in
it. He said there was nothing hurtful in it, and I must take it. I did. This
was about two or three o'clock.


Mr. Cox. What was the draught?


S. Woodcock. Physical, I believe. I took it.


Mr. Cox. did any thing happen at dinner that day?


S. Woodcock. Nothing particular. I lay in that manner, with my head upon the
elbow chair, till nine o'clock. Nothing particular passed that evening. At the
usual time he said we must go to bed again: I got a little more spirits, but I
said I would not go till he had promised not to come near nor meddle with me:
he said he would lead me up stairs, which he did: when he had got there, he
desired me much to go to bed, and ordered Mrs. Griffinburg, before I went up,
to make me some whey: I believe between two and three o'clock, as well as I can
recollect, she brought me some red wine, and I drank a little of it, and eat a
bit of a toast: this was in the morning: I had not laid down then: this was
between two and three o'clock on Sunday morning: I had laid down in my clothes.


Mr. Cox. Did you take any whey?


S. Woodcock. No; I did not: the wine was brought instead of the whey.


Mr. Cox. Who was in the room besides?


S. Woodcock. Only the two women and myself.


Mr. Cox. Who lay in the room that night?


S. Woodcock. Mrs. Harvey. I laid down sometimes, and sometimes walked about,
but was very terrified least he should come to me. Mrs. Harvey said, surely I
must think the man had a great love for me to come from his bed to me. I said,
no, it was not love, it was lust. I pleaded many things as usual with her, but
nothing had any influence upon her: we came down stairs again.


Mr. Cox. Who did you see?


S. Woodcock. This was Sunday morning about nine or ten o'clock. Lord Baltimore
came in to me, and asked me how I did, (this was after I had breakfasted) and
asked me if he had not kept his promise. He asked me if ^ad any whey. I told
him no, I had a little red wine. He was very angry with the housekeeper, and
said that I must take another draught, for it was enough to kill me. With that
he mixed up another draught, and insisted upon it (...) I should take it, which
I refused, fearing there should be something hurtful; but I did take it. He
went out and left me till the afternoon; Mrs. Harvey continued with me,


Mr. Cox. Did any conversation pass between you?


S. Woodcock. As usual I was crying in the same manner. In the afternoon he
came in to me, and desired I would compose myself, and sit down and talk to him
a little. With that he began to ridicule religion, and to say that all things
came by nature; and that man, when be died, went to the dust: that he thought
they had no living souls: and he said that, as a philosopher, he believed there
was neither God nor devil, heaven nor hell. I desired they would bring me a
bible, and I would prove to him that there was all. With that the bible was
brought, and I proved to him from the word as much as was in my power, that
there was a God, a devil, heaven and hell: and after that I concluded my
discourse, which was from two or three in the afternoon till nine at night,
with very little intermission.


Mr. Cox. What time did the family dine that day?


S. Woodcock. About four o'clock.


Mr. Cox. Did you dine with them?


S. Woodcock. I believe that day I might eat a bit; I am not sure. I told him
my reason of having so long a discourse, and being so plain with him, was to
convince him of the difference there was between him and me; and that he might
be assured it was impossible I should comply, and that I would not stay upon
any account whatever, and therefore begged he would (...) me go home. After
supper they all went out of the room; that is, Dr. Griffinburg, Mrs. Harvey,
and Mrs. Griffinburg, went out, and left him and me alone. Then he began to
show indecencies: he first pulled me into his lap. This was about nine o'clock
on Sunday night, and wanted to put his hand in my bosom, which I would not let
him, and got out of his arms. Then I was set down in the other chair, he began
to open his breeches again, and strove to pull my hand to him. I struggled and
got away, and got up; then he pressed me to one corner of the room, and there
pressed me up against the wainscot, as if he would press me to death. I
struggled and got from him; then he got me down in an elbow chair; he opened
his breeches, and strove to pull my petticoats up. I struggled, and cried out
all I could, and begged and pleaded with him that he would take my life, for I
would never yield the other to any one, but upon honorable terms, which was
marriage. He then got up and walked about the room awhile, and then set me
down, and served me in the same manner, but did not complete his base purpose
at that time. This, I believe was near two hours. I struggled and cried all I
could. Then he called in Mrs. Harvey, and said we must go up to bed; and he
said he would lead me up stairs, which terrified me greatly. I did not know
what I should do with myself, least he should fling me upon the bed when he got
me up stairs. Mrs. Harvey made an excuse: she said she had forgot something,
and must go down again. I was afraid they had juggled it between them, and
begged and pleaded he would not meddle with me. He began as before to open his
breeches, and strove to pull up my petticoats. Soon after Mrs. Harvey came into
the room again, and he told me, if I did not undress myself that night, and go
into bed, he would force me to go into bed with him. He went away; and I went
to bed with Mrs. Harvey. This was on Sunday night. All this night I had no
rest: I did not go to sleep any part of the night, as I know of. I started up
and cried, O, he is coming! he is coming! with that I again pleaded with Mrs.
Harvey, to persuade him to let me go home. I met with no success, as she was
just as relentless as ever. This was on Monday morning. When I came down stairs
I was in the same manner. I went on crying as usual, praying that I might go
home, or see my friends.


Mr. Cox. Will you take upon you to say you was crying all this time?


S. Woodcock. I ceased very little indeed, by and by he came to me and said, if
I would go and have my face washed, and another cap on, and clean things, and
leave crying, I should see my father; but if I would not I should never see
him; for what could my father think to see me in that dirty condition, and my
eyes so bad with crying. I had had no change of linen. I went up stairs with
that view. He said, if I would go up he would send for my father, and I should
see him. He then said, now you shall see your father to day. I had put on some
linen, with my own gown and petticoats.


Court. Who furnished you with the linen?


S. Woodcock. Mrs. Griffinburg brought it. Then he said I should see my father,
I should go and take an airing in the coach, and that would divert me a little.
I told him that would be no pleasure to me. If he would carry me to see my
father, that would be a pleasure to me. With that he said I should go and take
an airing, and see my father when I came back. Soon after this they brought
word the coach was ready, and that I mast go. He led me down stairs, into the
coach. It was in the yard at the door.


Mr. Cox. Was the gate shut?


S. Woodcock. I don't know. He handed me into the coach himself. He then got
in: Mrs. Harvey and he sat on one side, and Dr. Griffinburgh and his wife sat
on the other side. He bade Mrs. Harvey sit forward, against the door. I sat
between my Lord and Mrs. Harvey.


Mr. Cox. Had any body hold of you?


S. Woodcock. I don't know exactly. They drove out of the gate with such
violence, that they tore off part of the gate by that means.


Mr. Cox. Perhaps this occasioned the coach to stop?


S. Woodcock. It did not cause the least stoppage. They went through the
streets over Westminster-bridge. They had like to have been overturned, they
went with such violence. They had like to have been overturned within three or
four doors of the house. As near as I can recollect, this was about two
o'clock. When we came to Westminster-bridge, or before, I cannot justly say, I
said, I hoped he was not going to carry me far, that he was not going abroad.
He said no, he was only taking an airing to divert me, and that he should come
back again to dinner. When we came some way farther, and I saw the four and
five mile stones, I said I hoped he was not going to carry me abroad. He said,
yes, to be sure, he was going to carry me to Spain, to see the Spaniards. We
put on. I asked him again, and he said the same. When we got to Epsom, he said,
now we are come to Spain, and these are the Spaniards. There were two or three
men in the streets.


Mr. Cox. How came you to know it was Epsom?


S. Woodcock. I saw the post to direct to Epsom. When they came to Epsom they
began to talk about the country house. Then I began to think we were going
there. When we came to the house they asked me how I liked it. I told them that
was a worse prison than the other, and hoped they were not come to stay there,
for I could not bear it.


Court. Who asked you how you liked it?


S Woodcock. I cannot say; it was when we got out of the coach.


Mr. Cox. Who handed you out?


S. Woodcock. I cannot recollect.


Mr. Cox. Did you go into the house immediately?


S. Woodcock. I did.


Mr. Cox. What passed?


S Woodcock. They went to dinner soon after we were in. It was about four
o'clock.


Mr. Cox. At that time did the same people appear to you, or other people?


S. Woodcock. In the country there were two men servants waited at table. I did
eat a very little bit.


Mr. Cox. Did any thing pass at dinner.


S. Woodcock. Nothing, that I can recollect, particularly. After dinner Mrs.
Griffinburg, Dr. Griffinburg, and Mrs. Harvey, went out of the room. He then
took me behind the window-curtain, and began to show the same indecencies as
before. I pleaded much with him, and struggled all I could, and begged and
prayed that he would take my life away. I told him I would give that up freely,
but never would the other. With that, he said it must (...) so that night,
whether I would or no. Then they came in again. They took me out of that room
into some other rooms, to see the house. I told them I thought it was the worst
sight I ever saw. They then told me it must be so that night: Mrs. Harvey and
Mrs. Griffinburg, told me so.


Mr. Cox. Did they explain particulars?


S. Woodcock. No. I was in great distress, and cried very much. After this they
came in again, and I drank tea with them. Nothing particular passed at tea.
After tea they went up stairs again. Lord Baltimore said, they must do
something to divert themselves; that they would play at blindman's buff, and I
should play with them. I said I could not play at blindman's buff, I would do
no such thing. He said I should not always sit in that manner. I was crying,
and he swang me round the room, and said I should play with them. One of the
women was blinded, and one of them pretended she had catched me; with that I
said positively I would not be blinded. I sat down and cried again. As soon as
he saw that, he came and set down by me, and strove to make me look at him.
Nothing would make me forget my trouble. I still kept crying, and pleading with
God, that he would take me out of time into eternity.


Mr. Cox. Did you speak loud?


S. Woodcock. I don't know whether they heard me or no. After this they went to
supper, but before they went to supper the two women and he himself all joined
together and said, I might as well do it quietly, for it must be so that night.
This was some time before supper.


Mr. Cox. Did any thing particular pass at supper?


S. Woodcock. No. I eat a little bit, but drank nothing, for fear they had put
something it it. After supper he ordered them to go to bed; with that they led
me out of the room. I was crying. They led me into the bedchamber. The two
women began to undress me.


Mr. Cox. Who?


S. Woodcock. Both of them.


Mr. Cox. Did you oppose their undressing of you?


S. Woodcock. I was in such a tremble and fright, that I had no strength left;
therefore I was not able to resist them, but cried, and begged, and pleaded,
that God would take away my life, and preserve me from that wicked creature.
Dr. Griffinburg said (he was by then, I did not know it till he spoke) he
(...), O, my dear Miss Sally, don't cry so, don't take on so, it will be all
well by and by. Mrs. Harvey said she never saw any one make such a piece of
work in her life: if I was going to be killed I could not do more. I told her I
had much rather be killed. I cried and took on in a very shocking manner, and
pleaded much with God to take me out of time into eternity. Then they led me
out of that room into the next, and set me down in the elbow chair.


Mr. Cox. Were your clothes pulled off?


S. Woodcock. My cap was pulled off, but the rest were only unpinned, and such
like; with that they set me down and pulled all the rest of my things off, and
put me into the bed. When the curtains were open I saw that Lord Baltimore was
in bed.


Mr. Cox. When you saw that, you say you was so terrified, and in such a
fright, that you was not able to make resistance. Did you go into the bed with
your own accord?


S. Woodcock. No, they had forced me a-top of the bed: they drew the curtains,
and tucked me up, and went away, as I believe.


Mr. Cox. What happened after this?


S. Woodcock. He turned upon me with all the force he could, and forced himself
between me, and said he would get into me; with that he lay upon me all the
weight he could, and strove to push himself into me with all his might; and I
cried and struggled all I could, but he held my mouth together with his
fingers, that I might not cry; and strove to lie over me, so much as to smother
me. When he had been sometime in me, I felt something come from him; and then
he turned off from me as he came on, and left me to live or die as I could. He
said nothing to me all night. I laid in such a fright and such a tremble, for
fear he should come to me again, I sweat that the drops ran off from me. In the
morning he turned upon me in the same manner, and used me in the same manner. I
cried out as I had done before, and made all the stuggle I could. He said he
never heard such a noise in his life; I should raise the whole house. After
this he asked me if I wanted the pot? I said, yes. I got out of bed, I don't
know how, and there came a great quantity of blood from me. I strove to get on
my things, and to get away, I was so afraid for fear he should pull me in
again, that I got a few of my things on in a loose manner; and he said I could
not get out, but must stay till he let me out.


Mr. Cox. Before we ask you any other questions, was you at either of these
times at all consenting to what he did?


S. Woodcock. No, not in the least, I made all the struggle both times that I
could.


Mr. Cox. Did you cry out?


S. Woodcock. I did.


Mr. Cox. When you was let out of the bed chamber, into what room did you go?


S. Woodcok. Into the next room, where Mrs. Harvey was, I was not dressed. I sat
down and cried. Mrs. Harvey got up. I began to tell her of the usage I had had,
but not particulars. She said, yes, you made noise enough, I heard you. I said,
well I might. She said you will like it well enough by and by. I told her no, I
should ever hate eevery thing of the kind; if that was to be my life, it would
be a burden indeed; but I hoped I should not live long. Finding she answered
me in a rough manner, I thought with myself, that I had lost every thing that
was dear to me, but my life, how should I do to save that? With this I
resolved, to alter my carriage, and do every thing they desired that was
immaterial, for these three reasons -- That I might not be used ill; -- that I
might not be sent abroad; -- and that I might have some opportunity of
returning to London again, which was the only hope I had. By standing at the
windows, I thought that some time or other I might see my friends. With this I
resolved to alter my carriage, as much as possible, and do every thing they
desired that was immaterial.


Mr. Cox. Then you declare this was a resolution took at that time, and for
these reasons?


S. Woodcock. I am positive of it as I stand here, taken at that time indeed.


Mr. Cox. Not at any subsequent time?


S. Woodcock. No; this was before I had come out of Mrs. Harvey's room.


Mr. Cox. What do you mean by immaterial things?


S. Woodcock. Any things that were innocent. As to diversious, I was bred up
not to take any, and therefore was resolved not to comply with playing at
cards, or dancing, or music, or any thing of that kind.


Court. Do you mean by immaterial, any thing you did not think sinful!


S. Woodcock. That was my meaning.


Mr. Cox. It will be proper to ask you if you are not brought up in a
particular seet, and under what denomination are you and your father.


S. Woodcock. We go under the denomination of Dissenters, Independants.


Mr. Cox. I believe you pay a deference to more days than one in a week.


S. Woodcock. No, only the Sabbath, the Sunday.


Mr. Cox. You have been brought up in a very particular way, I believe?


S. Woodcock. I was.


Mr. Cox. Are you taught to think it a crime to dance or play at cards?


S. Woodcock. I am, and that from the word of God.


Mr. Cox. Having said this, inform my Lord and the court what passed the rest
of the day.


S. Woodcock. When I came down stairs, Lord Baltimore sat at breakfast; I
forget whether Dr. Griffinburg was there or no.


Mr. Cox. Were the women there?


S. Woodcock. One of them was, the other came afterward. I took no notice, nor
he neither, no farther than this; my Lord said I was not wen, and I must take a
powder, (this was before breakfast, before I had eat any). While we were at
breakfast, he said to Mrs. Harvey, Miss wants something, does she not? She
said, yes, Sir, she wants some clean linen. He said, you shall go to Epsom and
buy Miss some muslin for aprons, and things, and she shall work, and that will
divert her mind from sitting and thinking. While Mrs. Harvey was gone, he said
I should go and take an airing in a boat. This was Tuesday morning. I told him
I had never been upon water, and so was afraid. I had never been upon the
water, but only crossed our little river at Cambridge.


Mr. Cox. Did you go?


S. Woodcock. I did.


Mr. Cox. Where?


S. Woodcock. I went out of the house. He said I must run, for sear I should
get cold. I did. When I came to the canal, I was all in a tremble, and did not
know how to go in, for I was afraid. When I came in, the bottom of the boat was
very full of water. I thought that was a very unfit place. I thought it would
have killed me, but I thought I was as willing to die as live, therefore I
would go. When I was upon the water, he said it would sit me for going abroad:
this increased my fears that I had had before. Then, if I remember right, Mrs.
Griffinburg said we will take a walk in the park. I then said, if we did, I
should be glad to go to such a place, because I fancied there was a foot-path
and a gate that way to go out of the park, because the way they brought me had
no foot-path near it; therefore I thought, if I could any ways escape, I could
not go that way, so wanted to see if this other gate would lead me out; but
whether she came at my thoughts or not, I cannot tell, but we did not go a
sixth part of the way, I believe. -- Then we came in again, and Mrs. Harvey,
some time after this, came home, and brought a hat, and some white ribbons to
put on the hat, and some pink ribbon, which she said she had bought for a night
ribbon. With that Lord Baltimore said he liked the pink ribbon best upon the
hat. With that I said, if he liked that best I would put it on, for the same
reason as before, that I said I would do any thing in my power that was
immaterial; so I put on the pink ribbon. When we went up stairs again, she said
she would have the white ribbons tied up for favors for a wedding. I said I
should not think of such a thing as a wedding, indeed. She insisted upon it.
She made up one for herself, and made another and fixed it to my breast, but
whether she pinned it I do not know. Then we came down again, and she said to
Mrs. Griffinburg, how fine we were, and that she should have one too; therefore
when I came back they made me tie up one for her. At night he brought me the
Spectator to read, which, when I found something serious in it, he came and
took it away, and gave some of Dr. Swift's works, which was very foolish and
absurd, that I would not read it: I said it was nonsense and stuff. That was
all I remember that night. He did not desire me to go to bed to him that night.
I went to bed to Mrs. Harvey.


Mr. Cox. I believe you made no application to Mrs. Harvey after this?


S. Woodcock. No; as they would not let me go before, I knew they would not let
me go after. There was another circumstance which I believe I forgot, that was
this: He (Lord Baltimore) said one day, (I believe on Friday) that if he was to
be so soolish as to let me go according to my foolish defire, did I think my
friends would take me in? I told him yes, I knew my friends knew me very well,
and would take me in; but if they would not, that should be no excuse to him,
for I would beg my bread from door to door rather than stay there. He said I
should go and expose him finely indeed. I told him if he would let me go then I
would not. He asked me if I would promise him? I said I would. He asked me, if
I would take an oath? I said I would, upon the Bible, and I would keep it. For
this reason I did not importune Mrs Harvey, because I knew she would not let me
go; for as I knew he was afraid I should expose him before, I knew he might be
afraid I should expose him now. Afterward, I only importuned every day that I
might go to London again to see my friends. I importuned Dr. Griffinburg, and
all of them, as they were present.


Mr. Cox. Now you come to Wednesday morning.


S. Woodcock. We took an airing again in the close boat on the water in the
evening of that day. Just at teatime there came in two gentlemen and a lady
that had been sent for from London, as I understood. After they had drank tea,
he called for a sheet, which surprised me a good deal, and I was afraid they
were going to play at some mischief, but I found some time after that they were
going to act the magie lanthorn. While they were acting the magic lanthorn,
they hung up several sheets across the room, and (...) went and danced behind
it.


Court. That is a thing rather they call the ltahan shade.


S. Woodcock. But while they were acting this, the lady that came down from
London said, that is Lord Baltimore that is acting the old man. There was a
person acting the part of an old man. With that I was glad to hear the name,
for (...) had never heard it before; and thonght if I could now get to London
and get a pen and ink, I would write a letter and throw it out of the window.


Mr. Cox. Till that time you did not know the person that had done you this
mischief was Lord Baltimore?


S. Woodcock. No, I did not. Next morning, which was Thursday, I entreated Dr.
Griffinburg that he would ask my Lord to let us go to London again. He said he
would. He went, and came some time after to me, and told me we were to go home
that day; but I was not satisfied till I saw the coach that we were to go to
London in. That day, the women went out into the park, and wanted to run, and
defired me to run along with them, which I did a little way; but I strove to
drop them, which they did not let me, but came up with me.


Mr. Cox. What happened the rest of that day?


S. Woodcock. I do not remember any thing particular till I came to London
after dinner, about four or five o'clock. I sat in the same situation in the
coach I did before.


Mr. Cox. When did you come to London?


S. Woodcock. That evening; they drove much as they did before.


Mr. Cox. What happened on Thursday night?


S. Woodcock. Nothing particular, only I was fearful I should be obliged to go
to bed to him, and was very much terrified. We went up the back way into the
same room we was at first; then Mrs. Harvey said I must go to bed to Lord
Baltimore. I said I would not do any such thing. She said I must go, to be
sure; had not I been before? I said I would do no such thing. I then made
another excuse apphcable to my sex, and desired that she would go and beg me
off, but she would not go, therefore I went myself rather than go to bed. I
went to him and told him, and he gave me leave to go to bed elsewhere. I lay
that night along with Mrs. Harvey.


Mr. Cox. The next day was Friday, what palled then?


S. Woodcock. I was very dull as usual. I don't know whether I cried or no, but
was very dull. By and by, toward noon, I believe, he said he would introduce
me to the other part of the family; and then he told me, if I would be quiet a
few days longer, and make myself satisfied and easy, and not tell any of the
family what had paffed between him and me, I should see my father, and if I
liked to live with my father best, we should have a house and live together. He
had put some money into my hand, and told me, after I had seen my father I
should go where I pleased, do as I liked lay out the money as I chose, and if I
liked to go to meeting I should go. He ordered my hat and cloak to be brought
down, and then he went in and fetched a woman which they call Madam Saunier, or
some such name, and told her that there was a lady come to be a companion to
the young ladies. He told her I was a very religious lady, and something of
that kind. She said she would take care of me.


Court. Who is that?


S. Woodcock. She is governess to the young ladies. Then he introduced me into
the family, and told them I was recommended by my father as a companion to the
young ladies, and then went out. This was a part of the house I had not been
in, except the first night, when I believe they showed it me.


Mr. Cox. You had a sair opportunity now of telling Madam Saunier of the injury
you had received.


S. Woodcock. He had laid the strictest injunctions upon me; and I thought as
they were his servants they would be as the rest had been; therefore I thought
it was best to keep it to myself.


Mr. Cox. What passed in the whole of that day?


S. Woodcock. Nothing particular.


Mr. Cox. Was you with the ladies in the afternoon of that day?


S Woodcock I was


Mr. Cox. Was my Lord with them?


S. Woodcock. No; he only came in at meals. I faw nothing more of Mrs. Harvey;
Mrs. Griffinburg only came in then and brought the victuals.


Mr Cox. What happened that evening?


S. Woodcock. Nothing particular, only after he went up stairs to bed, he sent
Mrs. Griffinburg to fetch me in. As soon as I went into the room I burst into
tears. This was on Friday night. He was in bed. She want into the room, but did
not stay. He asked me to come to bed: I told him no, I would not. He assured me
if I would come to bed he would not meddle with me, he would only lie by my
side. I told him I would not, over and over; at last he insisted upon it that I
should come; and knowing chey would ute force if I did not do it, I went into
bed. As soon as I had got into bed he jumped out of bed and setched the candle;
and when he had done so, he strove to tear up my shift to see my nakedness; I
struggled with all my might, and would not let him get a full fight: I cried
out, and struggled all I could. With that, he exposed himself in the same
manner, and wanted me to look at him; but I would not. After that he went and
set the candle down again, and then he came and strove to do the same things
again.


Mr. Cox. Did you consent that night?


S. Woodcock. No; not at all. I straggled all I could against it. He could not
do what he intended, by reason of my then situation. He did not meddle with me
any more, only pulled my hand to him; I told him I thought it was impoffible
that any creature could take pleasure in such vile abominations: there was
nothing more particular that night, that I know of. On Saturday morning he got
up, and sent Mrs. Griffinburg in to take me up When she came in I was very i^:
she desired I would not stay to dress myself there, but said I must go into
another room, and had me into another room which I had not seen before, where
there was a bed. When I was got there, she seeing the condition I was in, asked
me if I would go to bed again: I told her no; but finding I could not stand it,
I told her yes, I would. I went to bed, and laid about two hours; but they came
so often to me, that I could not get any sleep. They came and took me up: they
sent the maid in to drets me.


Mr. Cox. Who is she?


S. Woodcock. I do not know her name.


Mr. Cox. Had you any converiation with the maid?


S. Woodcock. No. Then there came a woman to take measure of me for a gown.
Just after that Mrs. Griffinburg came in, and said my Lord wanted me in his
room. I went in. He asked me what I would have for a gown? I said I don't care
any thing about it; I would as lief wear what I have. He said, would I have
blue? I told him it might be blue if it would, I did not care. He saw some
bruises upon my hand, as he stood at the window, upon my hand and arm both, and
asked how they came; I told him he did it the first night, and that he had made
it worse again.


Mr. Cox. Was that true?


S. Woodcock. It was strictly true. I went into that room where I was at first,
and they brought me up some gauzes and petticoats, and said I must choose some;
but he had fixed upon the color of the petticoat himself; and as for the
gauzes, I told her I did not care, she might take which she pleased. I took the
petticoat.


Mr. Cox. Did any thing else pass?


S. Woodcock. She said, as I was a milliner, I could make the caps myself. My
Lord said the petticoat should be a light one, and that was light.


Mr. Cox. Did you hear my Lord say so?


S. Woodcock. I think I did, but am not sure. I said I was so ill I could not
work there. She desired I would tell her what I wanted more; I sat down
something about wires, but I don't know what. The said left the pen and ink,
but came back again in a (...). I asked her if she could not leave it, because
I wanted it: she said no, she could not, she would bring it again.


Mr. Cox. What did you want it for?


S. Woodcock. To write to my father, and fling it out of the window.


Mr. Cox. Did she bring you the pens and ink?


S Woodcock No. Mrs. Griffinburg desired I would take the work and work with
the ladies. I took an apron and ruffles to make; and there was a lady to drink
tea that day; after tea, Lord Baltimore said, he thought the ladies should go
te cards. The eldelt Miss entreated me very much to play, but I refused, and
said I could not: I did not choose it. As soon as they had got to play, I
retired to the next room; Mrs. Griffinburg came unto me, and told me she wanted
me to see the apartment she had been preparing for me, for that I could not
have that room I was in in the morning; theresore she carried me up into a
stone garret: it seemed to be all stone; it was very cold, and struck like a
well, and was among all the fervants, that I was very much frightened and
uneafy about it.


Mr. Cox. Was there a window?


S. Woodcock. There was a window cut out of the leading; I could see nothing
but a bit of the leading of the house, which looked out upon the gutter, and a
bit of a sky light. I was very much frightened and uneasy, and thought it very
odd I could not have a better room in such a house as that. I was afraid that
now he had done with me himself, that he did intend I should be exposed to any
body that he might send. Upon that I told Mrs. Griffinburg that I durst not lie
there; she, upon that, said, to oblige me, she would bring up a little bed, and
He there a night or two. Then I came down stairs again to supper.


Mr. Cox. With whom did you sup?


S. Woodcock. With the lady that came to see him, Doctor Griffinburg, Madam
Saunier, and the governess, the two Misses, and Lord Baltimore; but I neither
eat nor drank. On Sunday I kept up in the garret, and they came often and
disturbed me, that I could have no rest any where. I came down stairs to
breakfast, and then went up again, and came down again to dinner; and after
dinner I stood up at the window, and as I was sstanding up at the window, (this
was the corner window, and looked toward Hampstead) as I was standing, I
thought I saw Mr. Davis. the person to whom I was engaged.


Mr. Cox. Who was in the room with you?


S. Woodcock. Two more ladies that came to dinner that day, Madam Saunier, and
the governess and the two children, and myself; they six were standing up at
the fire side while I went to the window; there I saw Mr. Davis; and when I
first saw him I was so struck I could not tell how to stand; and fearing that
he should not see me, when he looked up I thought he did not know me; but he
went behind a wall toward the Foundling Hospital, and there peeped two or
three times, till I was sure he knew me. He took a book out of his pocket, and
made a motion with his hand for me to write; with that I waved my hand for him
to come further, but he did not understand me; therefore, when I went to the
next window, at first sight I lost him, but seeing him again, I waved my hand
for him to come further, and then I ran into the next room, which was the room
Lord Baltimore generally sat in; but I ran in hap hazard, without thinking
whether he was there or no, and called out to him in great agony, I cannot come
to you! I cannot come to you! This was the other corner room, the west side of
the house; I crossed the room the bow-window is in, to go to that room. He said
are you well? But I prevented him, by asking, is my father well! He said Yes,
he is well, and we are all well; he said then, how do you do? Then he said,
where is Mrs. Harvey? I said I knew nothing of her. He then said, is all well?
With that I was ready to drop: I said, good bye, and shut down the window.


Mr. Cox. What was the reason of that?


S. Woodcock. I feared some of the women would come; and before I could get out
of the room Lord Baltimore came in. I was so flurried and was all in a tremble,
that I did not speak to him as he came in, nor he to me. After this I entreated
the maid to get me a pen, ink, and paper, and bring it up into my room, meaning
the garret, and not tell any body of it, because I wanted it to amuse me. I lay
in the garret that night, and next morning she brought me a pen and ink. I
began to write immediately to my father, but was so prevented that I could not
go on with my letter: this is a part of it ( produced) I did not throw it out
of the window: This was on Monday morning. While I was writing this letter,
Mrs. Griffinburg came, and said the milliner had brought me some caps; I said I
did not care to come down: I told Mrs. Griffinburg she might take what she
pleased; she said, I must go down: With that, I went to the milliner; she had
brought some caps and cloaks: With that, I took one that I thought looked the
decentest, and that was all; Mrs. Griffinburgh entreated me very much to speak
for more things: and said I must have some aprons. I asked the woman if she had
any flowered muslin; she said, she would bring it when she came again; that was
the substance of what passed then. I went and I had my breakfast with the
family; Then I went up into my garret again, and Mrs. Griffinburg came after
me. I asked where my Lord was? she asked if I wanted him? I told her, yes. I
wanted to know if ever he intended I should see my friends again; for I could
not bear to live so. She desired I would take my work and go down stairs; which
accordingly I did: And soon after I came in, Lord Baltimore came in, and clapped
me upon the shoulder, as I sat with my back to the door; and told me he was
coming to tell me something that would please me very much, that I should see
my father that day without fail: With this, to be sure I was pleased, and went
up stairs with intent to put my things on. Mrs. Griffinburgh followed me, and
said my father, was sent for to come to her house, and that I must make haste,
and go directly; for he would be there before I could get there; she helped to
put on my things; and I came down stairs into the room next the Foundling
Hospital; there was a lady that had been there the day before. Lord Baltimore
began to tell her what a religious lady I was; and that he was sorry for many
things he had said to me. What his reason was for this I don't know, except he
thought I should expose him too much. Some time after this, he led me into
another room; and when he got me there, he said I now was going to see my
father; that he was sent for, and I was going to Mrs. Griffinburg's to meet
him. He told me I must say I was willing to stay; and if I would tell my father
I was satisfied and easy, he would do any thing for me that I desired: I (...)
him that I would, but I must see my father alone: He said, then he would speak
to him first. I told him, he might, but I would speak to him alone.


Mr. Cox. Explain your meaning.


S. Woodcock. My meaning was this, Sir, that I might put him into some way of
geting me away, if I could not get away with him; then he said, I should take
the little Miss, and I should say to my father, I was a companion of that lady;
to that I only said, very well: Then we were sent on to Mrs. Griffinburg's
house, with an intent to meet my father, in Dean street, Soho; I went to this
house; when I was there, I said to Mrs. Griffinburg, I thought you said my
father would be here, before I should get here; but I see you have deceived me,
as you have done all along. She said he would come presently. In about two
hours after this, or rather more, Lord Baltimore and Dr. Griffinburg came. As
soon as he came in, I said, I thought you told me I was to see my father; but I
see you have deceived me, as you have all along; and I see I shall not see my
sather tonight; he said, yes, you shall: But what do you think has happened?
Your father has taken up Mrs. Harvey, and put her into the round-house: This
gave me some pleasure, but I dared not show it; I did not know what to answer;
at last, I said, I did not suppose that would do any good, for she would not
tell where I was: Soon after this, in came another man, and said, Lord
Baltimore's house was beset with Justice Fielding's men: He fell into a
passion, and said my father must be a fine man indeed, to set to work such
rogues as Justice Fielding, and his men, were, that they were the greatest
rognes that could be. I was frightened, and thought my life and my friends were
in danger, because he was in such a rage; and I was afraid, having much about
the same opinion of him, that he had of Justice Fielding, that may-be he might
send some of his men and set the homse on fire, or do some mischief. After this
there was a great demur about Mrs. Harvey's being at the round-house, and how
they should get at her, and get her bailed: Sometime after this, I found that
Mrs. Griffinburg had been to set if she could come at her; Mrs. Griffinburg
said so, that she could not; with that they were in a great taking, in what
(...) to proceed to get this woman bailed.


Mr. Cox. Who was?


S. Woodcock. Lord Baltimore, and Dr. and Mrs. Griffinburg; then I studied what
I should say and do: At last, I said, that if they had got Mrs. Harvey (I spoke
to Lord Baltimore) they might depend upon it, they would never deliever her up,
till I was set at liberty: I told them, if they had a mind Mrs. Harvey should
be set free, it must be me that could do it; and if they would let me see my
father, and I could settle things to my mind, I could release her if I pleased.
In two or three hours they got a man to go, upon account of speaking English:
they said, if Dr. Griffinburg went, they supposed that the old man (meaning my
father) would think he should be run away with: Then they got some tradesman to
go along with them to carry the letter, which I had then wrote, if I remember
right, at Dr. Griffinburg's, to my father.


Mr. Cox. What was the purport of that letter?


S. Woodcock. The intent of it was for my father to come to me: We went then to
Whitechapel; I went in a coach with Lord Baltimore, Dr. Griffinburg, this man,
the Doctor's niece, and the little girl: This was on Monday.


Mr. Cox. Was there any servants attending the coach?


S. Woodcock. I saw one run on the side of the coach as I went; it was Pierini,
they call him the valet de chamber: We meant to a tavern; I cannot say what it
was; I believe I should know it again, if I saw it: There was only a little boy
that led the way up to a back room: When we came there, this man, the
tradefinan, was sent with the letter to my father: He came back and brought
word, that my father had been out ever since nine in the morning, in search of
me, and brought the letter back. I was very loath to go back again; I did not
know what to do. I wrote to the landlord of our house, to tell my father to be
as easy as he could; for I would send for him next morning at ten, as Lord
Baltimore told me I should: At that time at the tavern he told me I should send
for him in the morning: It was the landlord of my father's house, whose name
is Berry. The tradelman brought word back again, my father was not come home as
yet; so Lord Baltimore would go back again, and said, he supposed they were
making a fine piece of work at the other end of the town. We went back; and
when we came to Covent Garden, the coach stopped, and the tradesman got out,
and went to Justice Fielding's, according to their orders.


Mr. Cox. Did he come back again?


S. Woodcock. He did, along with Justice Fielding's clerk, who brought a card,
with his compliments, and that I should see my friends there: I did not know
what to say to the man; I made no answer, but gave the card into Lord
Baltimore's hand; he read it, and said I should not go. With that, I told the
man to tell my friends, that I was there (I mean at Dr. Griffinburg's house)
and that I desired my friends to come to me there directly; the man did not
come any more; but there was messenger after messenger, came to tell him of men
being about the house, and a great mob in the yard; and withal, that there was
some women had been crying there. With that, I was afraid it should come out,
that I had seen Mr. Davis at the window. I begged of my Lord, to let me speak
to the man first. I found there was another messenger come about something; I
went out of the room, and there was Broughton, which we call the Steward: I
asked him what the woman said? He said I was seen out of the window; I told him
I was, and I wanted to speak to him about that. I told him I thought that my
life depended on its being known; and therefore begged, if he had any value for
a person's life, he would not mention to my Lord, that I was seen at the
window. He said he would promise no such think, his bread depended upon (...).
I told him he need not fear his bread, he might get it another way. At last, he
promised me, that he would not tell him unless he asked him. Then I came into
the room, and what passed, I do not know.


Mr. Cox. What was the reason of this application to conceal it from my Lord?


S. Woodcock. I thought may-be he would murder me that night, or send me away.
After this there was a great deal of consusion, and they talked in another
language; I was fearful they were contriving to go some other way, or send me
abroad. My Lord was so frightened, he was afraid to go home for fear they
should take me out of the coach: I told him they could not take me out unless I
would, and that I would not go with Justice Fielding's men. After some time, we
set out to go to Lord Baltimore's again. When we came within two or three
doors, the coach stopped, by whose order I do not know; Right against the coach
there were several men standing; I got up to see if I could see any of my
friends; but Lord Baltimore pulled me down, asked me what I got up for, and
ordered the coach to drive on immediately: which they did as fast as they
could; and the men strove to'get into the yard along with the coach; Justice
Fielding's men, I believe they were; they strove to get into the gates, and
getting out of the coach, I cried out, let the men come in: He pulled me in,
and said I should not stay. With that, we went up stairs; when we got there,
the little Jew came up, and said, my Lord, Piereni wants you: With that, I got
up, and walked about the room in great distress, fearing it was coming out that
I had been seen out of the window. I thought I would strive to hide it; I
plucked up all the courage I could, and asked him as soon as he came in, what
Piereni wanted. He said I had spoke to somebody out of the window; I told him I
had; he asked what I had said: I told him; but did not tell my distress because
I was afraid: When I had told him, he said he could not blame me, he should
have done the same himself. He supposed I was glad to speak to the first I had
seen. With this, I was rejoiced, I had been in such a terror before, lest he
thould kill me for it. After this, he and the doctor talked a good while in
some other language; what, I don't know. By and by, Lord Baltimore said I must
go to bed to him; that I must lie with him that night, or he should be
wretched: I (...); he promised me be would not meddle with me; I thought if I
did not, he would make me go to bed to him, so I did go to bed to him, and he
did not meddle with me. On Tuesday morning he got up first, and went away, and
sent Mrs. Griffinburg to take me up. She came, and said Lord Baltimore wanted
me directly: With that, I got up and went to him. When I came to him, he said,
Well, now we will write to your father, and send for him as proposed. I had
heard over night, that one Mr. Watts was to come in the morning at ten o'clock:
So I said I thought it was better to stay till ten o'clock, before I sent to my
father. I thought it would be Mr. Davis would come by the name of Watts. At ten
o'clock I wrote a letter to my father, the purport of which, if I remember
right, was this, that I begged my friends would come with all the decency and
respect becoming a nobleman's house: He took the letter, and showed it Mr.
Brown, the attorney, and seemed very much pleased with it, and sent it away.
After this, he wanted to know what I should say to my father, and whether I
would say as I had told him, that I was willing to stay. I said I would, but I
would see my father alone by myself. With that, he said, he would do any thing
to make me easy. With that, I said very well, but could not tell what to answer
him. He said I should have a house to live in, and live with my friends, if I
liked it better than living with him. Just upon that, Piereni came in, and
said, my Lord, here is Mr. Watts come; but before that, I should have told you,
my Lord said, that whoever came, I must say I was willing to stay. The man came
up, and said, there was Mr. Watts. Lord Baltimore went out to him.


Mr. Cox. Who was left with you?


S. Woodcock. I don't know; there was Mrs. Griffinburg and Dr. Griffinburg,
backwards and forwards; but whether they were in the room or no, I cannot say.
My Lord brought Mr. Watts up stairs; he was in the first room, and I was in the
farthest room; he was brought up stairs; The doors happened to stand a jar,
that I could just see them, but I could not hear them. It I remember right,
there was Piereni in the middle room. My Lord talked with Mr. Watts for about
ten minutes; and then my Lord came first, and Mr. Watts almost behind him; and
my Lord said, Miss, here is a friend of yours; I said, I don't know the
gentleman: He then said, Miss, you don't know me, nor do I know you; but I am
come from your friends, to know if you are here by your own consent? I
answered, yes; but I want to see my father.


Mr. Cox. In that very form of words?


S. Woodcock. I think it was; I was in such a flurry at that time, I cannot be
positive. He said, very well, Miss, if you are here with your own consent, no
body has a right to take you away; your servant, Madam; and then he talked with
Lord Baltimore again.


Mr. Cox. What happened to you after this?


S. Woodcock. I went into the next room; I did not know what to think of Mr.
Watts, and I had no thoughts at that time of a lawyer; therefore I went into
the middle of the room, to see if I could see any friends about; when I saw
none, I opened the window; this was on the first floor: I saw several friends
at that time, but one pretty near that I knew, Mr. Cay: He asked me, if I was
there by my own consent? I said yes; but I said I wanted to see my father. He
said, my father would never come within those walls; I then turned away in a
great trembling, and said, then I never shall see him; that was my way of
thinking at that time; I thought, that as they would not let him come in, I
should never get out. After that, Lord Paltimore came in again, and said, I
must go to Lord Mansfield's, and said, I must say I was there with my own
consent, and not to tell Lord Mansfield particulars.


Mr. Cox. Let me ask you this question: Did you before this time, know Lord
Mansfield?


S. Woodcock. I never, as I know of, heard his name.


Mr. Cox. Don't you take in the newspapers?


S. Woodcock. No, Sir, I did not think of his being a magistrate.


Mr. Cox. Did Lord Baltimore explain to you, who he was, or why you was to go
to him?


S. Woodcock. Lord Baltimore said, if I did not stand by him now, he should be
undone: He then said, will you be faithful to me now, and keep your word;
otherwise I am undone? I said I would? but I would tell my Lord Mansfield, that
I wanted to see my father alone. He said, if I would be easy, and tell him I
was easy and satisfied, I should have a house, and live with my friends, and
have the young man. With that, I told him I would say, I was willing to be
there, as I promised him before, but would see my friends alone. He asked, if I
would tell my friends the particulars? I told him, yes; I would tell my friends
all the truth. After this, he said very little. Another message came for him.
He came up, and said, we were to go to Lord Mansfield's immediately. I said,
very well, I was very willing. Mr. Brown, the lawyer, my Lord, and myself, went
together in Mr. Brown's chariot.


Mr. Cox. Did you know the business you was going there upon?


S. Woodcock. I did not.


Mr. Cox. Now tell all that passed?


S. Woodcock. As soon as I came into Lord Mansfield's doors, my Lord Baltimore
had hold of my hand up the steps; I clapped my hand upon Mr. Potts, one of the
gentlemen that stood in the hall, whom I knew; and he took no notice of me;
which struct me very much; because Lord Baltimore had told me, that my friends
would not look upon me; and seeing such a repulse from Mr. Potts it struck me
very much; I saw several other of my friends there; but I did not speak to any
body, nor any body to me; I went into another room, and Lord Mansfield met me
at the door? Lord Mansfield asked me to come in; and Lord Baltimore was to stay
in the next room; then Lord Mansfield and I were alone, only another gentlemen
present. I was not then apprised who Lord Mansfield was.


Mr. Cox. Tell, distinctly, what passed between you and Lord Mansfield.


S. Woodcock. The first words that I remember, were these: Child, was you
carried there against your will?


S. Woodcock. I said, yes, my Lord. He then asked me, if I was kept there
against my will; I said, quite against my will; my Lord then said, quite
against your will; I said again, quite against my will. He was going to ask me
something; but what the words were, I don't know; I said, my Lord, I don't care
to go into particulars.


Mr. Cox. Why did you not tell my Lord Mansfield at that time?


S. Woodcock. It was because I did not know, that he had power to release me;
if I had known, I should certainly have told him what had happened. He then
said, Miss, I think you are of age? I said, yes: He said, well, Child, are you
willing to stay with this man? I said, my Lord, as things are as they are, I am
willing, but not without seeing my friends alone: He asked me, what friends? I
said my father and my sisters. He desired them to be called. Then he ordered
the man would bring Lord Baltimore through such a place, and take me out at the
other door, that I might not see my Lord, and there I met my friends alone.


Mr. Cox. Did Lord Mansfield stay in the room?


S. Woodcock. No.


Mr. Cox. Who were those friends?


S. Woodcock. My father and the next sister to me. Soon after that, my other
sister came; there was no other person that I remember, when I was with my
friends, I asked them, if Lord Mansfield had a power to set me at liberty? They
assured me, he had; I asked it again? They said, yes.


Mr. Cox. Did the questions come from you to them, or they put the questions to
you?


S. Woodcock. I cannot take upon me to say how that was.


Mr. Cox. What did you say?


S. Woodcock. I said, I was heartily willing to go home with them, and desired
Lord Mansfield might be called directly, that I might tell him I would go home.
Lord Mansfield came to the door.


Mr. Cox. Who was in the room?


S. Woodcock. My father, and two sisters; he said, child are you willing to go
home with Lord Balimore, or your father? I said with my father, my Lord, if it
is in your power to let me go; he said, child it is in my power to let you go;
but how comes this change of mind? I said, my Lord, because till I saw them, I
did not know you had power to release me; he then said child, it is in my power
to let you go, let your friends be called, that they may hear your declaration.


Mr. Cox. Do you know whether Lord Mansfield explained to you at first his
power to release you?


S. Woodcock. He might do it, but I do not remember he did. My friends were
called in, and will give you an account of what was said: I was so overjoyed
when I found myself set at full liberty, that I did not then tell my father or
sister what had happened.


Mr. Cox. I believe you went away?


S Woodcock Yes, that I did very joyfully.


Mr. Cox. Before you went away, did you acquaint your father and sister what
had happened to you.


S. Woodcock. No.


Mr. Cox. Then you went to Sir John Fieldings?


S. Woodcock. I did.


Mr. Cox. At whose desire?


S. Woodcock. My friends carried me there, I do not know the reason of my going
there.


Mr. Cox. What passed between you and Sir John?


S. Woodcock. Sir John asked me what had passed, I told him in a sew words.


Mr. Cox. You was in a room by yourself with him?


S. Woodcock. No, not quite, there were some with me, one or two, but I do not
know who.


Mr. Cox. Was he the first person to whom you related it?


S. Woodcock. He was.


Mr. Cox. After Sir John heard the story, what passed then?


S. Woodcock. Sir John asked me, if I was not full of indignation at such
usage, and asked me if I was willing to prosecute Lord Baltimore. I answered,
yes, if it could be done with safety.


Mr. Cox. What did you mean by this?


S. Woodcock. I meant, that as he was a man of so much money and power, that
there might be a great deal of bribery, and that justice might not be done.


Mr. Cox. I believe there was an information taken from your own mouth?


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Mr. Cox. Did it contain the whole of the story?


S. Woodcock. No, only answers to such questions as Justice Fielding asked me.
From thence I went to a friend's house; I have not been at my father's since
for fear, and am afraid to go in the street.


Mr. Cox. It seems to me, as if you might have had some chance of escaping from
the tavern in Whitechapel?


S. Woodcock. I had no chance of making my escape, for Lord Baltimore, Dr.
Griffinburg, his neice, and the little girl were in the room all the time, and
Lord Baltimore led me by the arm in and out; there was a man I met in the
entry, I had a great mind to speak to, but seeing Lord Baltimore had got four
or five of his servants with him, I dared not say any thing to him.


Mr. Cox. Had he got so many?


S. Woodcock. I saw four or five, there was Piereni, and I think I saw two or
three in livery.


Cross Examined. Lord Baltimore. You say, you have not been at home, since the
affair happened?


S. Woodcock. I have been with several of my friends.


Lord Baltimore. With what friends?


S. Woodcock. The first I went to was Mr. Cay, I staid with him one night: from
there I went to Mr. Ridgeway's, I staid there from Tuesday night to Friday;
from there I went to Mr. Wilson's, staid there from Friday to Sunday; on Sunday
I went to Mr. Wallis's, and staid there till the Monday sen'night.


Lord Baltimore. You have been very much hurried and fatigued in shifting about?


S. Woodcock. From there I went to Mr. Yeoman's at Westminster, I staid there
from that Monday to the Monday three weeks? and from thence I went to Mr.
Rutt's in Friday street, and stayed there from Monday to the Friday ^e'nnight;
from Mr. Rutt's, I went to Mr. Keene's, and staid from that time till the
fourth week after my going, and from thence I went to Mr. Wallis's; I went to
no other persons till I came to Kingston.


Lord Baltimore. What, not to Mr. Potts's?


S. Woodcock. No.


Lord Baltimore. Are all or either of these gentlemen concerned in carrying on
this prosecution, you are not able to do it?


S. Woodcock. A set of gentlemen have lent my father money, upon a note of hand.


Lord Baltimore. I understand from your evidence, that you was brought to my
house without knowing where you was coming to; that you was, during the whole
time you was there, under absolute confinement; that you would have get away if
any opportunity had offered and if any opportunity of complaining had offered,
you would have done it; do you insist upon this as the truth?


S. Woodcock. I do.


Lord Baltimore. I think I understand you, that for the first four days, you
neither eat nor drank any thing?


S. Woodcock. No, the first two days, to my knowledge, I don't know that I eat
any thing, from Wednesday till Saturday morning.


Lord Baltimore. And then you only had a dish of tea?


S. Woodcock. No, Sir,


Lord Baltimore. I did not understand from your evidence, that you had eat any
thing till Sunday dinner?


S. Woodcock. The toast and wine I had on Saturday night.


Lord Baltimore. Did you take any thing solid?


S. Woodcock. I don't remember that I did.


Lord Baltimore. You must be very much exhausted, and yet on Sunday you had a
long discourse with me, to prove that there was a God, a heaven, a hell, and
subjects of that kind; how old are you?


S. Woodcock. I am twenty-seven.


Lord Baltimore. Will you swear you are no older.


S. Woodcock. I will swear I am twenty-eight.


Lord Baltimore. Will you swear you are no older?


S. Woodcock. I will swear I am that.


Lord Baltimore. Will you swear you are no older?


S. Woodcock. I do not know I need tell; I am twentynine, and that is my age; I
cannot exactly tell.


Lord Baltimore. To the best of your belief, how old are you?


S. Woodcock. I believe I am thirty next July, I cannot be sure of that,
whether I am or no.


Lord Baltimore. How often had you seen me, before you was brought to my house.


S. Woodcock. Only three times.


Lord Baltimore. You have told us I expressed some respect and attachment to
you; had I never taken the opportunity to give you a civil salute, when you was
behind the counter!


S. Woodcock. No, you never did.


Lord Baltimore. You talked of my having said, I would bring a lady to you?


S. Woodcock. I understood you, that you would bring a lady.


Lord Baltimore. Might I not have said, I would send?


S. Woodcock. No, I understood that you would bring.


Lord Baltimore. You have told us, you never saw Harvey, but twice before this
time?


S Woodcock Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Did you ever see Isaacs before?


S. Woodcock. Isaacs, I never saw before.


Lord Baltimore. You had no suspicion where you was going?


S. Woodcock. No.


Lord Baltimore. Then you trusted yourself with this woman, you had never seen
but twice before. You have given an account of drinking tea, the amusement at
tetotum, the seeing the house, and supper, that there was some rudeness offered
that night, and that you resented it?


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Was that repeated the next day?


S. Woodcock. I don't remember.


Lord Baltimore. Did any thing happen the next day, either to make you more
alarmed, or make you easier. Was any rudeness offered the second night?


S. Woodcock. Nothing indecent as I can remember, but violent threats of doing
for me.


Lord Baltimore. I think you said something of Mr. Smith's drawing your
picture; that Mr. Smith was there the third day, drawing your picture?


Court. That was a man that was called Richard Smith; Lord Baltimore took that
name, and then he said he was not Richard Smith, but it was somebody else.


Lord Baltimore. Was it upon the second or the third day?


S. Woodcock. I think the second day; I reckoned it the second day, because I
did not reckon Wednesday one; it was on Friday.


Lord Baltimore. Did you take any refreshment that day?


S. Woodcock. Not that I know of.


Lord Baltimore. You say, you was even crying at the time your picture was
taking; that you neither drank tea, nor supped; in what room did the rest of
the company drink tea and sup?


S. Woodcock. In the room with the bow-window, that looks into Southampton-row.


Lord Baltimore. That bow-window commands a view of seven or eight foot paths,
that branch off; does it not? Do you recollect that Mr. Smith was of the party
that drank tea and supped that day?


S. Woodcock. I believe he was.


Lord Baltimore. Pray will you tell me when you first heard that I had sent any
thing to your father?


S. Woodcock. On Friday.


Lord Baltimore. Who did you hear it from first?


S. Woodcock. Lord Baltimore; when I was pleading, that if he had no compassion
for me, he might have for my father.


Lord Baltimore. Did it come from me?


S. Woodcock. I believe it did.


Lord Baltimore. Did not Dr. Griffinburgh tell you first of all, that I had
sent a sum of money to your father?


S. Woodcock. I don't remember that he did.


Lord Baltimore. Did not you express great satisfaction upon hearing I had sent
such a sum of money to your father?


S. Woodcock. No, I did not.


Lord Baltimore. If I understood you, you did not lie down till Friday night;
and that you did not pull off your clothes while in the house.


S. Woodcock. Yes, I did on Sunday night; but I never had my clothes off before.


Lord Baltimore. You have given an account of your going to Woodcote; had you
any notion, when you go into the coach, that you was going to Woodcote?


S. Woodcock. No.


Lord Baltimore. Had nobody told you?


S. Woodcock. No.


Lord Baltimore. You was given to understand by me, that you was to to take an
airing, and come back, and then see your father.


S. Woodcock Yes.


Lord Baltimore. In your first information, as read in the King's Bench, you
said you was carried into the coach by force, and they told you, you was going
to Woodcote. You have described your sitting in the coach between me and Mrs.
Harvey; Did you sit forward or backward?


S. Woodcock. My face was to the horses.


Lord Baltimore. You said, Mrs. Harvey was ordered by me to sit forward, so as
to shut up the window as well as possible.


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. So that you could not so well see the people as they passed
by. -- You said that, when the coach stopped, you wished it might overturn.


S. Woodcock. My reason was, I hoped that, by that means I might have made my
escape, if any opportunity had happened. The coach did not stop at all, as I
know of.


Lord Baltimore. Was the glasses down, or up?


S. Woodcock. They were up, till we got off the stones; and then Lord Baltimore
put one of them down a little.


Lord Baltimore. I suppose, as soon as you found that, instead of being carried
out for an airing, you was carried further; you was ill disposed to partake of
the mirth that went forward in the coach.


S. Woodcock. I was.


Lord Baltimore. I understand, you did not know you was going to Woodcote, till
you came to Epsom: there are a great many steps, are there not, that lead up to
the house?


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Who got out of the coach first?


S. Woodcock. I cannot tell; I was led up the steps directly.


Lord Baltimore. Into what room;


S. Woodcock. I believe the first room; we staid there some time.


Lord Baltimore. Did I propose to take an airing in the park?


S. Woodcock. I might go out, but I cannot say whether I did.


Lord Baltimore. I shall be glad to know if you will swear now, that when you
went out of the door to the canal, you did not lay hold of my (...), and run
along with me?


S. Woodcock. I don't know that I did.


Lord Baltimore. It is a pretty strong circumstance; did you go upon the canal
before dinner?


S. Woodcock. Yes, before dinner.


Court. What time did you set out from Lord Baltimore's house?


S. Woodcock. About two o'clock.


Court. What time did you get to Woodcote?


S. Woodcock. About four.


Lord Baltimore. How soon might you dine?


S. Woodcock. I believe in about half an hour?


Lord Baltimore. Where did you dine?


S. Woodcock. In the great dining room, up one pair of stairs.


Lord Baltimore. It was there the first insult was offered behind the curtain,
was it not?


S. Woodcock. Yes.

Lord Baltimore, Was it at that time that I talked to you of coming to bed,
that I told you it must be that night?


S. Woodcock. Yes, he said it must be that night; I got away from him; I don't
know that I made him any answer to it.


Lord Baltimore. Do you say, upon your oath, that when I talked to you of your
coming to bed that night, that you said nothing?


S. Woodock. I told him, I would sooner give him my life a hundred times over.


Lord Baltimore. Upon your oath, did not you say, if I would use you faithfully
and tenderly, you would let me go to bed to you?


S. Woodcock. No, I said no such thing.


Lord Baltimore. Did you not say, some other time might be more convenient.


S. Woodcock. No, I did not.


Lord Baltimore. Where did you drink tea?


S. Woodcock. Below stairs.


Lord Baltimore. Did not the magnificence of that place strike you?


S. Woodcock. Yes, it did; though I would rather have been in the poorest
cottage.


Lord Baltimore. Did not you say, that you believed that room was finer than
any room in the Queen's Palace?


S. Woodcock. I don't know; possibly I might.


Lord Baltimore. I think you told us, you eat nothing at supper?


S. Woodcock. I eat a little bit, but drank nothing.


Lord Baltimore. Then you did not drink several glasses of wine to my health?
Who first withdrew to go to bed?


S. Woodcock. I am not positive.


Lord Baltimore. Was it not me?


S. Woodcock. No, I believe it was Mrs. Griffinburgh?


Lord Baltimore. Did you and Mrs. Harvey go out of the room before me, to go to
bed, or after?


S. Woodcock. Before.


Lord Baltimore. How long might you be in the room before you was put into my
room?


S. Woodcock. I cannot form any judgment.


Lord Baltimore. Can you recollect your desiring to have a little water to wash
your feet?


S. Woodcock. No? the women proposed it: they talked of my having water to wash
my feet, but I refused it.


Lord Baltimore. How soon, after you got into the room, was it, before you
observed Dr. Griffinburg in the room?


S. Woodcock. Not many minutes.


Lord Baltimore. Was it almost immediately?


S. Woodcock. I believe almost, but cannot exactly say.


Lord Baltimore. The Doctor, I think, did not interpose in any other manner
than by endeavoring to comfort you?


S. Woodcock. No.


Lord Baltimore. It is pretty extraordinary, that Dr. Griffinburg should be in
the room at all, at such a time; what reason did he give?


S. Woodcock. You must ask that of him, Sir; I did not hear him give any reason.


Lord Baltimore. The two women led you into my room; can you tell, whether the
doctor staid, or went away?


S. Woodcock. No, I cannot tell.


Lord Baltimore. You have given an account of the women's having put you to bed,
of having tucked up the clothes, and going out of the room; and that in the
morning I got up to open the door to you; you have described the insults
offered you; I shall not wound your modesty, to repeat the account of them. --
Did you sleep that night?


S. Woodcock. Not at all that I know.


Lord Baltimore. Did I?


S. Woodcock. He lay very still the whole night, I don't know whether he was
asleep.


Lord Baltimore. You have described yourself as being under dreadful
apprehensions, left I should repeat it a second time, why did you not endeavor
to save yourself from that second insult, by endeavoring to get out of bed,
and find your way out of the room?


S. Woodcock. For this reason; I was in such a fright, I dared not stir hand or
foot, for fear he should hear me, and turn to me.


Lord Baltimore. In what room did you breakfast, in the morning?


S. Woodcock. In the first room below stairs.


Lord Baltimore. At what time?


S. Woodcock. I cannot particularly tell that.


Lord Baltimore. You had so far composed yourself, that you had intended to do
every thing that was only trivial; to give into my ways, and for that reason
you pinned the ribbons on; did not you puss them up according to the fashion,
that I said they were puffed up too high?


S. Woodcock. They are puffed up no higher than are commonly done.


Lord Baltimore. You wore the hat I presume?


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Now as to these ribbons, you say they were new made up
ribbons, but that they were made up by request of Mrs. Harvey, and the other
woman? -- Did not you think that breaking in upon your rule?


S. Woodcock. I did it by compulsion, not by free choice


Lord Baltimore. Did you think any force would be used?


S. Woodcock. They were very rough with me, and I thought they would be
rougher, if I did refuse it.


Lord Baltimore. How long might you wear these vibbons?


S. Woodcock. I believe all the time.


Lord Baltimore. At your breast?


S. Woodcock. Yes, I believe I did.


Lord Baltimore. Did the two women wear them?


S. Woodcock. I cannot tell.


Lord Baltimore. Some of the millenery goods were gauze, were they not?


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Did not you make Mrs. Harvey a present of some gauze?


S. Woodcock. No, I did not.


Lord Baltimore. Do you recollect, among other amusements, your being carried
to see the house, and the library. Was there not a book of prints that took
your fancy?


S. Woodcock. Yes, I did look at them. The Doctor brought them into the room
for me to look at, but not at my desire.


Lord Baltimore. You was sometimes in the park, and sometimes on the water?


S. Woodcock. Once upon the water that day.


Lord Baltimore. It was useless to you to discover any particular grief for
what had happened, and you did not discover it in your countenance?


S. Woodcock. In my counenance I did, I was very dull.


Lord Baltimore. You eat and drank at dinner?


S. Woodcock. I did.


Lord Baltimore. The same at supper?


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. There was a gloom then. You was out of spirits, and
melancholy; where did you lie that night?


S. Woodcock. With Mrs. Harvey.


Lord Baltimore. It was thought a little strange and extraordinary that I did
not want again to lie with you. I think you and all the company laughed
heartily upon the occasion: Will you deny that?


S. Woodcock. Yes, I will: I was glad he did not lie with me again, but I did
not laugh about it.


Lord Baltimore. Was there any laughing upon the occasion?


S. Woodcock. No, not that I know of.


Lord Baltimore. I think upon the next day you made a visit with Dr.
Griffinburgh, to see a poor woman in the house who had broke her leg?


S. Woodcock. Yes, Dr. Griffinburg carried me to see her, but not at my desire.


Lord Baltimore. I believe while he stayed in that room, you went down for your
hat and cloak to take a walk in the park?


S. Woodcock. We went all in the park together, but this was when we came back.


Lord Baltimore. Then you don't recollect your going out of that room for your
hat and cloak, to take a turn with Dr. Griffinburgh; how many times might you
have been in the park with Mrs Griffinburg only?


S. Woodcock. Not above once.


Lord Baltimore. Do you recollect being on the other side of the pales above
the canal with Mrs. Griffinburg only?


S. Woodcock. No.


Lord Baltimore. How far might you go with Mrs. Griffinburg only?


S. Woodcock. About half a furlong.


Lord Baltimore. I believe there were a great many workmen laying out a piece
of ground by the canal?


S. Woodcock. There were.


Lord Baltimore. And there were workmen altering a stair case?


S. Woodcock. Yes, there were, and putting up paper.


Lord Baltimore. Then for the reasons you have given, you did not think right
to mention to any body what had happened to you while you were at Woodcote?
what day did the visitors come from London?


S. Woodcock. The visiters came on Wednesday, two gentlemen and a lady.


Lord Baltimore. You was sufficiently composed to receive the lady, and do the
honors of the house, to wait on the lady, and show her the pictures, and what
you thought might be agreeable to her?


S. Woodcock. She had a mind to see the pictures, and I showed her the pictures
in the room she was in.


Lord Baltimore. Did not you assist in preparing the sheets, and putting the
things in order for the exhibition?


S. Woodcock. I believe I did take a needle, in order to do a little of it; not
above one bit of thread.


Lord Baltimore. And you let them a few pins?


S. Woodcock. No, I did not; there was a pincushtion on the ground, I might
stick a few of those pins.


Lord Baltimore. Was you on the light or dark side after this apparatus was got
ready?


S. Woodcock. On the dark side. Lord Baltimore was acting the old man part of
the time, and another part be came and fat by me.


Lord Baltimore. Did not you fit upon my knee?


S. Woodcock. No I did not.


Lord Baltimore. Do you pledge your credit upon it, that you did not sit upon
my knee, and did not kiss me?


S. Woodcock. Kiss him! no that I did not. Lord Baltimore came and crowded
himself in the same chair where I sat, that was all; I did not sit on his lap.


Lord Baltimore. Perhaps I was upon your knee!


S. Woodcock. No, not that I know of.


Lord Baltimore. Did not the cords break, and the sheets tumble upon the
ground, after the company had taken so much pains?


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. I believe notwithstanding the misfortunes you were so much
depressed with, you laughed very heartily at it?


S. Woodcock. I might laugh, but I did not laugh heartily, that I know.


Lord Baltimore. Will you say you did not laugh heartily at it?


S. Woodcock. I cannot say I did not, I don't know that I did.


Lord Baltimore. You was on the right side to see the exhibition?


S. Woodcock. Yes, I was.


Lord Baltimore. Was it not amusing?


S. Woodcock. I thought it an amusement beneath gentlemen of sense to employ
themselves in.


Lord Baltimore. Did not you laugh at that time?


S. Woodcock. No, Sir, very little.


Lord Baltimore. Did not you walk with Mrs. Forest about the house, and have
some conversation with her?


S. Woodcock. No, I had none.


Lord Baltimore. Do you recollect her asking you how long you had been in this
family?


S. Woodcock. She asked me no such thing.


Lord Baltimore. Did not you tell her how long you had been in the family?


S. Woodcock. Not that I know of.


Lord Baltimore. Did not you tell her you had been a twelvemonth in my house?


S. Woodcock. Upon my oath, I said no such thing.


Lord Baltimore. I believe you complained to her that you had come down without
a sufficient number of clean things?


S. Woodcock. Mrs. Harvey told her so.


Lord Baltimore. Did not you all dine together, and then come to town together
that afternoon?


S. Woodcock. Yes, we did in different carriages.


Lord Baltimore. During the time these people were there, did you betray by
your manner or countenance that any thing extraordinary had happened to you?


S. Woodcock. No, I did not; I supported myself as well as I could.


Lord Baltimore. I believe you told us that Mrs Harvey returned to her own
house soon after you returned to London?


S. Woodcock. I do not know when she went away; I saw no more of her after
Friday.


Lord Baltimore. You have given an account of your being introduced to the
governess of the young ladies; did you consider it as an innocent thing then,
to impose upon these young ladies?


S. Woodcock. No, I did not present myself to the governess as one come out of
the country, but I did not contradict what he said, because he promised in a
few days I should see my father.


Lord Baltimore. Was not there a bed ordered to be put up for you in Madam
Saunier's apartment?


S. Woodcock. No.


Lord Baltimore. Did you never understand so?


S. Woodcock. No, not upon that day, on Saturday, when Mrs. Griffinburg said
that I must lie in the garret.


Lord Baltimore. Where does Mrs. Saunier lie?


S. Woodcock. In the garret.


Lord Baltimore. Was it in that garret you was to lie?


S. Woodcock. No, not in that garret.


Lord Baltimore. Did not you understand you was to lie in the garret Mrs.
Saunier lay in?


S. Woodcock. No, not while I was there; she lay on the same story, but not in
that room.


Lord Baltimore. You did not chase to lie there?


S. Woodcock. No, I did not, I was afraid.


Lord Baltimore. You lay with me that night. I understood this going to bed
with me was one of the things; you certainly would not submit to: how came you
to make no resistance?


S. Woodcock. I told him I would not go with him, but I knew he would use force
if I did not.


Lord Baltimore. What time did you get up next morning?


S. Woodcock. I don't know: this was on Friday.


Lord Baltimore. There was a (...)?


S. Woodcock. That was on Saturday.


Lord Baltimore. I (...) you had (...) with her!


S. Woodcock. No, none but what I told you.


Lord Baltimore. You entered into the general conversation that was going
forward!


S. Woodcock. No.


Lord Baltimore. You did not, though she was a visiter to them?


S. Woodcock. No, I did not.


Lord Baltimore. How came you not?


S. Woodcock. I thought my Lord and all his company were alike, except the
young ladies.


Lord Baltimore. Did you recollect the music master's being there, and I and
you pulling one another; I pulling you toward me, and you drawing me to you --
some familiarity of that kind?


S. Woodcock. No, he was then come to tell me the news of my father: he took
hold of my handkerchief, which I took from him again.


Lord Baltimore. Then you was not anxious when the gown was made, or whether it
ever was to be made?


S. Woodcock. Not the least in the world.


Lord Baltimore. Then as to giving directions how it should be made, the cut of
the sleeve, and all such things, you did not concern yourself about?


S. Woodcock. No, I did not.


Lord Baltimore. Not was in a hurry to have it?


S. Woodcock. No, I was not.


Lord Baltimore. Whether you did not press the mantua-maker to take care of all
things, that you had it next day at dinner!


S. Woodcock. No, not that I know of.


Lord Baltimore. As you said it was a thing so indifferent to you, you must
know whether you gave such orders or no?


S. Woodcock. No, I did not; Griffinburg ordered the woman to make the gown
next day by dinner, but I did not.


Lord Baltimore. Do you know the name of the milliner!


S. Woodcock. I did not then, but I do now.


Lord Baltimore. Have you not some reason to know it now? Don't you know that
that milliner has been applied to, and told if she comes here she shall lose
lier business?


S. Woodcock. I know of no such thing.


Lord Baltimore. Pray what had you of her?


S. Woodcock. A cap and cloak. There were more things brought; I did not take
them: there were more things ordered by Mrs. Griffinburg's desire?


Lord Baltimore. What were they!


S. Woodcock. A mnslin apron and under-petticoats.


Lord Baltimore. How many?


S. Woodcock. Two under petticoats.


Lord Baltimore. Do you mean to swear they were ordered by her and not by you?


S. Woodcock. She desired I would order what I wanted.


Lord Baltimore. Did you order them or she?


S. Woodcock. I did not order them, to my knowledge, but Griffinburg did. I
don't care to give a positive answer when I am not positive.


Lord Baltimore. Whether you gave any particular directions how they were to be
made?


S. Woodcock. I cannot tell that I did; I did not that I know of.


Lord Baltimore. I would put it more home to you, that you may recollect; did
not you order the miliner to make the two under-petticoats to tie before?


S. Woodcock. No, upon my oath I did not.


Lord Baltimore. Was it the mantua-maker or yourself that made the apron to the
gown?


S. Woodcock. There was none that I know of.


Lord Baltimore. Did not you order an apron to the gown?


S. Woodcock. No.


Lord Baltimore. Nor stomacher?


S. Woodcock. She asked me if I would have a stomacher: I told her I did not
care about it.


Lord Baltimore. Did you, at the time you went to Mrs. Griffinburg's, know that
there was any disturbance about you?


S. Woodcock. No, I did not; I went to meet my father.


Lord Baltimore. You was very anxious to get away from my Lord, and glad to
take any opportunity?


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. How did you go to Mrs. Griffinburg?


S. Woodcock. In a coach.


Lord Baltimore. Was it my coach or a hackney coach?


S. Woodcock. That I don't know.


Lord Baltimore. You was quick enough in pointing out the difference between a
hackney coach and gentleman's in o former case; I desire you would tell now?


S. Woodcock. I looked and think I saw a number, but am not certain.


Lord Baltimore. Was there any body in the coach except yourself, Mrs.
Griffinburg, and the child?


S. Woodcock. No, not that I know of.


Lord Baltimore. What age is the child of?


S. Woodcock. About eight years old.


Lord Baltimore. Mrs. Griffinburg has not got a yard with great gates before
her door, has she?


S. Woodcock. No.


Lord Baltimore. She got out of the coach first, did she not.


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Did the child go out before you, or after you?


S. Woodcock. I cannot tell.


Lord Baltimore. Now you had got into the open street, why did not you get away
into the first shop that was open for you?


S. Woodcock. Because of this; I did not know but the servants were there; and
I did not think of it.


Lord Baltimore. Consider, you was hazarding every thing against nothing: If
your father was there, still you would have been safe if you had gone off; if
your father was not there, you would have been safe, and yet it never occurred
to you when in a public street, with no soul but old Mrs. Griffinburg and a
child, whether that was not a time to run away. I ask you another thing: Did
not this coach stop two or three doors from Mrs. Griffinburg's house?


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. You then had to walk to her house?


S. Woodcock. No, the coach went on again.


Lord Baltimore. What time of the day was this?


S. Woodcock. About two o'clock.


Lord Baltimore. You then was in the public street, exceeding desireous of
getting away from me, and never thinking that was the time to run away. -- What
room did you go into at Mrs. Griffinburg's?


S. Woodcock. A back parlour on the ground floor.


Lord Baltimore. Your father was not there?


S. Woodcock. No.


Lord Baltimore. Did not Mrs. Griffinburg go down into the kitchen to give her
orders about the dinner?


S. Woodcock. She went down and made the door fast after her.


Lord Baltimore. I desire to have a plain answer, without seeing so much of the
consequence: I desire to know whether she did not go out of the room and go
down into the kitchen, and leave you and Miss Fanny alone?


Mr. Sergeant Leigh. She explains every question you ask her, and if you take
the answer, you must let her explain it.


S. Woodcock. I believe she might go once or twice. She went out two or three
times; she always kept the door fast, and kept amusing me with accounts that my
father was coming.


Lord Baltimore. One would have thought such a young woman as you are could
have got out of the parlour into the street. How many hours did you stay there?


S. Woodcock. I cannot tell how many.


Lord Baltimore What part of the afternoon did you set out for the Crown and
Magpye?


S. Woodcock. About nine o'clock. If I had tried to escape from Griffinburg's I
believe I could not.


Lord Baltimore. What time did Mr. Morris the tradesman come?


S. Woodcock. He was brought to carry the letter.


Lord Baltimore. Did he carry the letter?


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Did he not come back and tell you he could not find your
father at home?


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Then you wrote another letter?


S. Woodcock. Yes, I did, and sent it to my father.


Lord Baltimore. That letter was your own letter, wrote by yourself?


S. Woodcock. Yes, it was.


Lord Baltimore. Did not you come to the door to Mr. Morris, and give him that
letter to carry to Mrs. Berry, the landlady of the house where your father
lives? You speak of the boy's leading the way into the room?


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Had you any refreshment.


S. Woodcock. We had a bottle of wine.


Lord Baltimore. Was my body in the bar?


S. Woodcock. I cannot (...), my Lord had hold of my hand.


Lord Baltimore. How far might that tavern be from your father's?


S. Woodcock. The length of the Minories, and a little way up that street.


Lord Baltimore. Had you never been by that house?


S. Woodcock. Yes. I should know it if I was to see it again.


Lord Baltimore. And then you was afraid to attempt to get away because I had
hold of your hand?


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Who brought in the wine.


S. Woodcock. A little boy.


Lord Baltimore. Was any bell in the room?


S. Woodcock. The bell was rung, and the boy went backwards and forewards.


Lord Baltimore. Whether, during the time you was there, you was not more than
once left with no body but the child and the neice.


S. Woodcock. No: Lord Baltimore was in the room all the time; he never went
out.


Lord Baltimore. I believe the tradesman came back, and went back with you in
the coach to Dr. Griffinburg's? did he not?


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. He got out of the coach to go to Sir John Fielding's?


S. Woodcock. So I afterward understood, to see about Harvey.


Lord Baltimore. Was not his business to fetch your father to Dr. Griffinburg?


S. Woodcock. I don't know any such thing.


Lord Baltimore. One of Sir John Fielding's clerks came with a card, you said;
you did not give an answer to it, but put the card in my hand, and I said you
should not go; then you desired your father might come there. Recollect
yourself, and tell me whether that is the account you stand by? You swore, upon
receiving the card, you did not say, I will not go to Sir John Fielding's?


S. Woodcock. Not that I know of; I did not say any such thing.


Lord Baltimore. Recollect yourself?


S. Woodcock. I cannot recollect that I said I would not go.


Lord Baltimore. You recollected with as great exactness as ever I heard a
witness?


S. Woodcock. In giving in my evidence, I gave it in every thing as far as I
could recollect.


Lord Baltimore. Whether, when the card was brought to you, you did not
immediately say, without putting it into my hand, that you would not go to Sir
John's?


Court. Can you say positively one way or other?


S. Woodcock. I cannot.


Lord Baltimore. I think you say, when the coach came back again to my house,
that there was a great mob, and you called out to them, to let them come in?


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. When did you first hear of this thing they call the Habeas
Corpus?


S. Woodcock. I heard the word Habeas Corpus, when they were talking in their
own language.


Lord Baltimore. What did you understand to be the reason of your going to Lord
Mansfield's?


S. Woodcock. I concluded that my friends were taking some step; and that
carrying me to Lord Mansfield's was something done by my friends in opposition
to Lord Baltimore; but I did not know that Lord Mansfield was a magistrate.


Lord Baltimore. When you was first told you must go before Lord Mansfield, did
not you say to me that you was satisfied, and would not leave me?


S. Woodcock. No, I never said so.


Lord Baltimore. You spoke of a letter you wrote to your father upon the
occasion?


S. Woodcock. I did.


Lord Baltimore. I believe there was something remarkable in that letter?


S. Woodcock. Yes, I put a little bill in it, that my father might know it came
from me.


Lord Baltimore. This letter was wrote that day before you went to Lord
Mansfield: how long before you went, had you finished this letter?


S. Woodcock. It was just then out of my hands before. Mr. Warts came in the
first time.


Lord Baltimore. You express in that letter the good treatment you have
received from me, and desire they would make no more disturbance?


S. Woodcock. I did not know what to say, in order that he might let it go. I
wrote it by his order, in a manner contrary to my heart, because I was afraid
he would not otherwise let it go; and because I was afraid my father would be
afraid to come.


Lord Baltimore. So then you really and truly wrote it against your own
sentiments?


S. Woodcock. Yes, I did.


Lord Baltimore. You have mentioned Mr. Brown's being there; was it before Mr.
Watts, or after?


S. Woodcock. Before.


Lord Baltimore. Before the first time?


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Was you not writing a letter before Mr. Srown came?


S. Woodcock. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Had you any conversation with Mr. Brown. or me, about the
habeas corpus?


S. Woodcock. They were a talking, but I paid no regard to what they said.


Lord Baltimore. Did not Mr. Brown ask you, whether you was of age or not?


S. Woodcock. not that I know of.


Lord Baltimore. Did not you tell him you was more than of age considerably,
twenty six?


S. Woodcock. I do not know that I said such a word, I do not know that Mr.
Brown asked me such a question?


Lord Baltimore. Did not Mr. Brown tell you, you was at your own liberty?


S. Woodcock. No, Sir.


Lord Baltimore. And you did not express a satisfaction at it?


S. Woodcock. No.


Lord Baltimore. You went with Mr. Brown and me, in his carriage, did not you?
did not you come to him before you finished your letter, and he desired you to
go back, and finish it?


S. Woodcock. I gave it Lord Baltimore, and he showed it to Brown.


Lord Baltimore. Was you desired to finish it?


S. Woodcock. Yes, Lord Baltimore desired it.


Lord Baltimore. Mr. Brown then went out, did he not?


S. Woodcock. That I do not know.


Lood Baltimore. When did he return back again; before or after Mr. Watts
served the Habeas Corpus?


S. Woodcock. After.


Lord Baltimore. When you went to Lord Mansfield's, what did you do with your
things, had not you locked them up in the garret, and got the key?


S. Woodcock. I carried away the key of the garret, but did not know that I had
it, till a week afterward.


Lord Baltimore. Had not you twenty guineas of me to pay for them?


S. Woodcock. No, he gave me thirteen guineas on Christmas Day, when I was
introduced to the rest of the family.


Lord Baltimore. I did not give you money to pay for them that morning?


S. Woodcock. No.


Lord Baltimore. You have given us an account of what passed before Lord
Mansfield, and that he asked you if you had not been brought to my house
against your consent, and you said twice quite against my will; that he asked
you if you was of age, and you told him yes?


S. Woodcock. He was going to ask me something, I said, I was more than of age.


Lord Baltimore. Did you not tell my Lord Mansfield, that you knew he had no
power, as you was more than of age, to oblige you to go back to your father?
After having said you was taken away, and detained against your consent, you
told Lord Mansfield, that you was willing as things were as they were, to go
back to my house. Now, this is very mysterious, and unintelligible, that you
should tell this gentleman that you was brought before to be got out of my
hands, that you would go back again with me?


S. Woodcock. I did not know what Lord Mansfield's power was.


Lord Baltimore. You knew your friends had brought you there, to get you out of
my hands; you was with Lord Mansfield, and only another gentleman with him;
have you no better reason to give the jury for not telling him you was
unwilling to go with me again, than the not knowing Lord Mansfield's authority.
Now, when you was sent to your friends, did you immediately ask that question,
was that the first?


S. Woodcock. I am not positive that that was the first.


Lord Baltimore. Did you express to your friends no sort of inclination to go
back with me.


S. Woodcock. I expressed an inclination, by which they found I did not know
Lord Mansfield's power, and they acquainted me with it.


Lord Baltimore. I ask you, if when you came to your friends, you did not
express an inclination to go back with me?


S. Woodcock. I had no inclination to go back.


Lord Baltimore. Did you say nothing to your friends of being desireous to go
back?


S. Woodcock. No, not that I know of.


Lord Baltimore. No, nothing of your being better able to supply them, and
provide for them?


S. Woodcock. I cannot now tell what I said; they found that I did not know his
power.


Lord Baltimore. I ask you one more question, whether you did not say, even to
Mr. Watts, after you left Lord Mansfield's, that you was willing to go back to
my house?


S. Woodcock. No, no such thing; and all my friends can testify the contrary.


Lord Baltimore. Who went to bed first, the last night you lay with me?


S. Woodcock. I did.


Lord Baltimore. In what bed?


S. Woodcock. In Lord Baltimore's bed.


Lord Baltimore. Pray, was any body in the room besides me and you?


S. Woodcock. He went out.


Lord Baltimore. You went into the bed, when I was not in the room.


S. Woodcock. I did. He came up afterward; Mrs. Griffinburg's neice was in the
room.


Lord Baltimore. So you went and undressed yourself, and went to my bed, and I
came to you. -- I think you said, it was on the promise that I should not
meddle with you; though you say I had broke that promise the last time I came
to bed to you; yet you yourself got into my bed.


S. Woodcock. I did so, because I was afraid he would kill me that night, if I
did not.


Mr. Cox. Did you express to your friends any desire or inclination toward
Lord Baltimore?


S. Woodcock, I cannot tell exactly what I said; they said, Lord Mansfield had
power to deliver me.


Mr. Cox. Did you, at that time, tell your father, or sisters, that you wanted
te go back again to Lord Baltimore?


S. Woodcock. No I did not.


Mr. Cox. You said, Lord Baltimore had promised to send for your father in the
morning.


S. Woodcock. He said, it was done with a view to get my father to me.


Mr. Cox. What made you write so foreign to your heart?


S Woodcock. Because I knew he would not let it go, if it was not wrote so; and
my father would not come, if he was not pacified.


Court. At the time that Lord Mansfield asked you, if you was of age, and you
told him you was -- Do you recollect that he said, you was at liberty to go
where you pleased.


S. Woodcock. He said something I cannot tell what.


Court. When you went out of one room into the other, to your friends, who
began the conversation first, you or they? Did they know, by what you had said
to Lord Mansfield, that you wanted to go back to Lord Baltimore's.


Mr. Cox. She had not seen them before; they knew not what had passed between
her and Lord Mansfield.


Court. Did you tell them what had passed between you and Lord Mansfield?


S. Woodcock. I don't remember that I did.


Mr. Cox. When you found Lord Mansfield had power to set you at liberty, then
you told them you had been violated.


S. Woodcock. No, not in my Lord Mansfield's house; As I remember, one of my
sisters asked me if I had been ruined, I said yes:


Court. Now with relation to ruining, that is a sort of general term; it may be
with or without your consent. -- Did you tell her whether it was without your
consent?


S. Woodcock. She asked, if with my consent? I said, No, without my consent.


Mr. Cox. What was your reason of not applying to my Lord Mansfield, and
afterward applying to Justice Fielding?


S. Woodcock. I was so overjoyed at being at liberty, that I thought of nothing
else.


Elizabeth Woodcock, Sworn. Mr. Baker. Do you remember a woman coming to your
shop for a pair of ruffles? -- Do you remember one Mrs. Johnson?


E. Woodcock. Yes, and Lord Baltimore followed her.


Mr. Baker. Do you remember his coming several times?


E. Woodcock. Yes, I was at home three times when Lord Baltimore came.


Mr. Baker. Was you at home when he bought some ribbons?


E. Woodcock. No, I was not then; Mrs. Harvey came on Monday the 14th of
December, and desired to know whether we had any flowered gauze; I took down
the book and showed her: she bespoke a pair of double ruffles, and ordered them
to be done the next day by one or two o'clock. She accordingly came, and paid
for them; and ordered my sister to bring some lace with her (to put on a
child's cap) to Curtain-row where she said she lived. The next day my sister
went, about half an hour after four o'clock; that was on Wednesday. My sister
did not come home all night; we were very much frightened; we sat up till one
o'clock; then a letter came that she was at a friend's house; that she was safe
and well. A porter brought it; it was not my sister's handwriting. This was
Wednesday the 16th of December.


The first letter shown her. E. Woodcock. That is it. There was no name, nor
the place she was at. I asked the man who brought it, where he had it. He said
he came out of Whitechapel, and then he went away. This letter said she would
come home at twelve o'clock next day. I sat till that time, and was very
uneasy. I then went to all her friends she used to go to, to enquire after her.
The first night we had any account of her, was a week after she had been gone
away.


Mr. Baker. What methods did you take to get at her?


E. Woodcock. We went to see after Mrs. Harvey, but could not find the place;
nobody knew such a woman. Mr. Davis came and told me he believed he had found
something of it out. I went accordingly to Mrs. Harvey's; the maid came to the
door; I asked for Mrs. Harvey, if she was at home. She said, no. I asked her
how long she had been gone out. She said ever since that night week. I asked if
any body went with her. She said a young lady.


Mr. Baker. Then from that you traced ont that Mrs. Harvey was gone out with a
young woman?


E. Woodcock. Yes; and by the description of her dress I knew it was my sister?


Mr. Baker. Do you know any thing of your own knowledge between that time and
when you saw your sister at Lord Mansfield's?


E. Woodcock. We followed this Mrs. Harvey: she came to her own house on
Christmas Day at night, and was taken up.


Mr. Baker. There was an Habeas Corpus taken out, and you saw your sister at
Lord Mansfield's how did she appear?


E. Woodcock. She appeared almost out of her senses. We had a great piece of
work to persuade her that Lord Mansfield had power to deliver her. When I went
to her, I asked her if she was married. She said, no. We told her she might now
get away, Lord Mansfield could deliver her. We had a great piece of work to
persuade her he had power to deliver her.


Mr. Baker. Did she express any desire of going back to Lord Baltimore's?


E. Woodcock. No, but great desire of going with us: only she was afraid Lord
Mansfield had not power to deliver her.


Mr. Baker. Did she express this more than once?


E. Woodcock. Yes, several times.


Mr. Baker. She did go away, did she not?


E. Woodcock. Yes, very much rejoiced.


Mr Baker. Do you remember any thing that passed when she went away?


E. Woodcock. No; she went with Mr. Davis and several others, I was left behind.


Cross Examination. Lord Baltimore. When you was before Lord Mansfield, I
should be glad to know whether your sister was not told that Lord Mansfield was
a judge, that he was chief justice of the court of King's Bench, and had power
and authority to deliver her?


E. Woodcock. No, not before me.


Lord Baltimore. Did she not express a desire to go back again?


E. Woodcock. No, not that I heard.


Court. Did you ask her any questions with respect to what had happened to her?


E. Woodcock. No, I did not, my other sister did.


Lord Baltimore. You are the person that was in partnership with her, I think?


E. Woodcock. I was.


Lord Baltimore. Do you know any thing about her going to Sir John Fielding?


E. Woodcock. Yes, I went with her; we did not know she was going upon such a
thing. She went about Mrs. Harvey, to see whether she was to be kept or
released; I was at Sir John's.


Lord Baltimore. Had you heard her give an account of the treatment she had met
with?


E. Woodcock. I heard she had met with a great deal of ill treatment.


Lord Baltimore Did she say she had force used to her?


E. Woodcock. Yes, she declared she had force and violence used to her.

Mary Maris sworn. I am sister to Sarah Woodcock; I came to Lord Mansfield's a
little while after she was brought there.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did you go with your father and sister?


Maris. No, I followed them?


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Where was your father and your sister Elizabeth when you came
to Lord Mansfield's?


Maris. They were at that time gone into the room with my sister Sarah. I went
to them.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. What was the first part of the discourse that passed between
them?


Maris. I cannot recollect, I fell upon her neck and kissed her.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did you upon that occasion ask her any questions?


Maris. To the best of my remembrance I said, are you ruined? She answered yes,
I am. I asked her, by force? She said yes, by force.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. What was the next question you put to her?


Maris. I cannot recollect; I think the next question I asked her was, did she
desire to go home to her friends? She said yes, if she could be delivered. I
said, child you are in a place where you can be delivered. She said that was
all she desired.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Do you remember what was said by your father or your sister
to her?


Maris. I really cannot remember now.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. How long was you together before Lord Mansfield came in again?


Maris. I cannot positively say: according to my judgment, it was but a small
space of time.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Was there any other kind of conversation passed between your
father, your sister, and you, whether she could be delivered or not?


Maris. I cannot recollect now.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. You told her (you say) she was in a place now where she might
be delivered; what answer did she make you?


Maris. She said it was all she desired, to be delivered.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did you hear what the said to Lord Mansfield when he came
into the room again?


Maris. I was present; but my confusion of mind was so great that I cannot
recollect all that passed.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. When you went from Lord Mansfield's where did you go?


Maris. I went to Justice Fielding's.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. What did you go there for? Was it to lodge some complaint
against Mrs. Harvey?


Maris. Yes, that was the occasion, to the best of my knowledge?


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Was you in a coach?


Maris, We went on foot.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did you walk with her?


Maris. I walked with her, or behind her.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Do you recollect what the conversation was by the way?


Maris. No, I cannot.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did you ever hear her story of the usage she had received
from Lord Baltimore, till you came to Justice Fielding's?


Maris. No; she had not mentioned any particulars of her story till she told
them to him?


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did you hear that story?


Maris. My confusion of mind was such, that I have no distinct recollection of
mind to give particulars.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. When you asked her whether she was ruined, and she said yes,
did she say it was by force?


Maris. I am positive of that: she said all was done against her will entirely.
This she said at Lord Mansfield's to me only.


Joseph Woodcock sworn. J. Woodcock. I am father to Sarah Woodcock.


Mr. Cox. Do you remember the night when your daughter Sarah was missing?


J. Woodcock. I do; that was the first time ever such an accident happened.


Mr. Cox. Do you remember a letter being brought?


J. Woodcock. Yes, very well; a letter came about one in the morning, to say
she was safe at a friend's.


Mr. Cox. Did the family and friends use their endeavors to find out where
this young woman was?


J. Woodcock. Yes, all possible means were used.


Mr. Cox. Do you of your own knowledge know any thing of an advercisement about
the letter?


J. Woodcock. On Thursday night there came two letters: in one of them there
was a bank note of 2001. the contents of this was, that I was to meet my
danghter at one Mr. Richard Smith's, in Broadstreet New Buildings; and there
was a note at the bottom from my daughter.

( The first letter.) I beg of you not to make yourself uneasy about your
daughter; for she is at a friend's, and will come home about twelve o'clock to
morrow morning. The reason of this is, that she could not get a coach.
Otherways you may sleep secure that she is safe and well as you at home.


J. Woodcock. They came by the hands of a porter.


Mr. Cox. I should be glad to know what you have done with the 2001.


J. Woodcock. I made no manner of use of it; I put it that night into the hands
of Mr. Cay, a baker, in Whitecross-street, to keep it till we should hear from
her: he has that note to show now. On the Friday there came a Jew-like man,
that sent for me and my daughter to a tavern on the other side Tower Hill (I
have forgot the sign) to desire me to meet about my daughter's affairs. He said
to me, this day I saw your daughter. Said I, we are in great concern to know
where she is. Where did you see her? Said he, I saw her this day at
Bethnal-green; but I never saw her before in my life. He promised that on the
morrow following, which was Saturday, I should see my daughter between ten and
three in the afternoon. He swore to it many times. If my Lord had sent me
twenty bank notes it would not have satisfied me; we wanted to see my daughter.
That gave us a little relief; we were in hopes till the time was expired. We
heard no more about her for five or six days. We were seeking after Mrs.
Harvey, and could not sind her for some time. We heard she came home on
Christmas Day at night: we took all the methods we could to take her up; and we
did take her up. I had one that waited in Mr. Goff's house in the same row, to
see if she could see any thing pass in Harvey's house. Accordingly she was
taken up on the Monday. On the Sunday I was told, by Mr. Davis, a person that
keeps her company, where she was.


Mr. Cox. He intended (I think) to marry her with your approbation?


J. Woodcock. Yes, they had approved of one another before.


Mr. Cox. Were any measures taken to get at your daughter?


J. Woodcock. This friend, Mr. Cay, advised me to employ Mr. Watts to find her
out. We went to Lord Mansfield's the Tuesday after we heard where she was,
which was on the Sunday before. I went there; it was some time after my
daughter had been there and Lord Mansfield had examined her. Then my daughter
and I were together in a room.


Mr. Cox. According to the best of your recollection, tell my Lord all that
passed at that time between you and your daughter?


J. Woodcock. To tell every word is impossible, because I was in such
confusion; not having seen or known where my daughter was for eleven days; and
then I am in age too.


Mr. Cox. What age?


J. Woodcock. Threescore-and four. I was glad to see her; but was sorry to see
her in that condition. She seemed like one that was almost bereaved of her
senses at that time. She seemed to be so concerned about seeing Lord Baltimore
again; for she did not know that it was in the power of Lord Mansfield to set
her at liberty. She said that over and over to me. She said if Lord Mansfield
had told her he had, she had forgot it.


Mr. Cox. Had either of your daughters talked to her before about Lord
Mansfield's power?


J. Woodcock. When they saw her, then they told her, that he had it in his
power to set her free. She said then she should be very glad to go with us.
That was the substance of our discourse. Lord Mansfield came into us, and said,
you may go where you please. Have you a mind to go with Lord Baltimore, or with
your friends? Do which you please. She said she would go with her friends to be
sure. He then said she had liberty to go where she pleased.


Mr. Cox. Did Lord Mansfield say any thing about her changing her mind? And
what was her answer?


J. Woodcock. Lord Mansfield said she had changed her mind; I do not remember
whether she made any answer to it.


Mr. Cox. Do you know the reason of her going to Sir John Fielding?


J. Woodcock. She was to go there about Mrs. Harvey. I did not know what had
happened to her while she was at Lord Mansfield's; but as soon as she came to
Sir John Fielding's, she freely made her complaint to him, without any
suggestions from any body.


Rev. Mr. Jame Watson sworn. Mr. Baker. Was you present at Lord Mansfield's
when Miss Woodcock was there?


Mr. Watson. I was present.


Mr. Baker. Did you ask her whether she would go back with Lord Baltimore, or
her friends? Please to tell what passed.


Mr. Watson. When we went to my Lord Mansfield's, the servant told us, he was
not within then, but was at L. C. J. Wilmot's. The servant said he would go and
acquaint his Lordship that we were there. Then he went, and in a short time
Lord Mansfield came in. When he came into the hall, he asked if the Habeas
Corpus was served; Mr. Watts answered, it was. His Lordship then said,
gentlemen, if this young lady should choose to go with Lord Baltimore, or words
to that purpose, so it must be; for no person has any right to compel her to go
any where against her own consent. Therefore, his Lordship sid, none of us must
touch her. To which somebody present said, there was no rescue intended. Lord
Mansfield having said, if any of us touched her he must commit us; he then
said, if she should choose to go with her father and friends, if Lord
Baltimore, or any of his people, touch her, I will commit them. Lord Mansfield
very condescendingly added, I give you this friendly hint that you may know how
to behave. Upon which Lord Mansfield retired into an adjoining room, having
ordered Mr. Watts to send to Lord Baltimore, and let him know that he (Lord
Mansfield) was ready. In a very short time I saw a carriage with two gentlemen
and Miss Woodcock. The first gentleman walked in, and as he appeared to me,
with much presence of mind: from whence I concluded it was not Lord Baltimore.
The other gentleman, whom I afterward found to be Lord Baltimore, handed Miss
Woodcock out of the carriage; when he led her up the steps into the hall, she
put her hand on Mr. Potts's arm, looked up in his face, shook her head, and the
tears stood in her eyes. Mr. Potts lifted up his right hand, as I imagined,
intending to lay his hand upon here is: when I pulled back his hand, and said,
are you mad? recollecting what Lord Mansfield had said. Several gentlemen said,
do not touch her. Mr. Potts said, I did not touch her; she has laid hold of me.
At this time, a servant opened a door of the room adjoining: upon which Lord
Baltimore and Miss Woodcock went into that room, and the door was shut. When
they had been there about three quarters of an hour, more or less, I heard a
bell ring, and the door was opened. And I knew Lord Mansfield's voice when he
said, is Mr. Woodcock the father, and Miss Woodcock the sister, there? To which
it was answered from without, no, my Lord, they are not here, but just by. Upon
which his Lordship ordered they should be sent for. They were sent for; and in
a few minutes came Mr. Woodcock and his two daughters, when they were
introduced, and the door shut after them. After they had been introduced about
a quarter of an hour, or nearly that, a little more or less, the door was
thrown open, and the gentlemen present that pleased, were desired to walk in.
When we walked in to the room, Mr. Woodcock the father, and his three
danghters, were there, and no other person that I observed. I went up to her,
and said, well girl, how do you stand affected now? to go with your father and
friends, or with Lord Baltimore? She answered, to go with my father and
friends. I then retreated a few steps.


Mr. Baker. Whether any of her friends that went in with you said any thing or
no?


Mr. Watson. I cannot tell; in a short time the door was opened, the further
door, Lord Mansfield appeared and said to this purpose; Madam, is it your
desire, or are you willing (I cannot swear positively to all his words, or the
exact position of such of them as I do remember) are you willing to return with
Lord Baltimore to his house in Southampton-Row, or to go with your father and
friends? to which she answered, with my father and friends by all means. Lord
Mansfield asked her, whether she had been taken or carried without her own
consent, and detained against her will? she answered, that as she had been
carried to a place which she did not then know, but found afterward to be Lord
Baltimore's, she had been kept all this time against her will. Lord Manffield
repeated the questions, with some variation of the terms, and told her, that
her going with her father and friends was not to be understood to be in custody
by them, but to be at liberty as usual. After this his Lordship said to us that
were present to this effect; Gentlemen, I would have you take notice of these
answers, because possibly this matter may be variously talked of in public, and
justice ought to be done to both parties; for when this lady came before me on
her private examination, she expressed, at first, her inclination to return
with Lord Baltimore, however she expressed a desire to be permitted to see her
father and sister, or sisters, upon which I called for her father and sisters,
and now she has answered as you have heard. His Lordship then said somewhat,
which I have not been able ever since to recollect, for I had attended to what
he had said, when his Lordship had desired we would take notice of her answers,
but his Lordship concluded with this, and I suppose gentlemen, none of you make
any doubt of it. His Lordship then said, madam you are at full liberty to go
where you please. His Lordship then asked Mr. Watts if the habeas corpus was
regularly served? to which he answered, it was. Then his Lordship said, it was
not served by any of Sir John Fielding's men was it? it was answered none of us
were in any connection with them. Then said Mr. Watts I served it myself, and
would not do such another job for five hundred pounds.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. That part is not material.


Mr. Watson. I shall stop whenever you please; she went away with her friends;
after we were gone from Lord Mansfield's house I asked her, as she was going,
whether it was with any reluctance that she had left Lord Baltimore? She said,
by no means, I am willing to go with my friends, I have reason to be thankful
to God Almighty for this day's deliverance, I hoped in God, as he knew I was
innocent, and taken away without my consent, that some time or other he would
open a door for my deliverance, though I did not see how; I heard some of her
friends making an appointment to dine together at a tavern, and I being under
an appointment to dinner, left them; I never saw her to my knowledge before.


Susanna Spencer sworn. Mr. Serj. Leigh. Do you know the two women prisoners at
the bar.


Spencer. I know them both, I lived with Mrs. Harvey in the Curtain, I lived
with her almost three weeks.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. What time of the year?


Spencer. In December; she tock a house ready furnished and went in, and I went
to her the same day.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Pray do you remember any thing of this young woman, Miss
Woodcock, coming to the Curtain?


Spencer. Yes; it was the 16th of December, it was on Wednesday.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. What time of the day?


Spencer. Between four and five in the afternoon.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Had your mistress given you any orders in case this young
woman came?


Spencer. No.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Was any body else in the house?


Spencer. A little Jew man, I never heard his name.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Where was he when she knocked at the door?


Spencer. In the kitchen.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did he use to visit you in the kitchen?


Spencer. He used to visit my mistress, he was then eating Sprats in the
kitchen.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Who let in Miss Woodcock?


Spencer. I did: she asked for Mrs. Harvey, I said she was within; I showed her
first in the parlour, my mistress was then in the dining room.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. After she had got in, did the Jew say any thing about her?


Spencer. No.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. How long did he stay in the kitchen?


Spencer. He went out as soon as she was shown up stairs, afterward he came
and knocked at the door, I let him in, he went up stairs as if he had not been
there so lately in the kitchen.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. How long did he stay before he went away?


Spencer. Not long; my mistress ordered me to bring up the tea-things, Miss
Woodcock and the Jew drauk tea with her.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. When tea was over did he stay or go away?


Spencer. He went away in a coach, with my mistress and Miss Woodcock; my
mistress told me she should be at home next night, or the night after.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did you see them into the coach?


Spencer. I did see them in; my mistress did not let me dight them in, she bid
me go back and take care of the child, for she said it cried.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. How old is it?


Spencer. I believe it is about three or four years old, she told me to go in
and quiet it.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Was it a hackney or a gentleman's coach?


Spencer. I did not observe.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Pray when did you hear of your mistress?


Spencer. The Saturday afterward; when I saw the Jew again, he told me my
mistress would be at home that night or the next; he came to me on Sunday
night, and gave me two shillings, and said my mistress would be at home on
Monday night. This man came every day afterward, on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
etc. my mistress came home on Christmas Day at night.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did he give you any order from your mistress?


Spencer. I told him I was very much afraid of being in the house.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Had there been any enquiries made after this girl that went
with her?


Spencer. I did not know who she was till the gentleman told me.


Francis Goff sworn. Goff. Mrs. Harvey did live in the Curtain, by Holloway
mount.


Mr. Cox. Do you remember the time of the story being told of a young woman's
being missing? Did you ever see Mrs. Harvey go from her own house?


Goff. I observed her from an application that was made to me from Mr. Davis to
watch Mrs. Harvey, in consequence of that application I did watch her; they
want to Moorgate and took coach, Mrs. Harvey and a Jew with her, I saw her go
to Lord Baltimore's gate, the coach set them down at the Buffalo tavern door,
Bloomsbury-square, and they walked from thence; I saw Mrs. Harvey go in, the
Jew went another way. (He points out the prisoner Harvey.


Cross Examination. Lord Baltimore. When was she taken up?


Goff. The Monday after boxing day.


Lord Baltimore. What time of the day?


Goff. About eight in the morning.


Lord Baltimore. Was she carried before a magistrate?


Goff. No; I and several more went with her to the Devil Tavern, Temple Bar,
then we carried her before Sir John Fielding at eight o'clock at night, that
was when we got there; I believe we staid some considerable time at the house
while she dressed herself; I believe it might be past ten o'clock before we got
away.


Lord Baltimore. What was the reason for keeping Mrs. Harvey from ten in the
morning till eight at night without carrying her before a magistrate?


Goff. Because I believe Mr. Watts was gone with the writ to Lord Baltimore's,
and she was kept there till he returned.


Lord Baltimore. Was you before Sir John?


Goff. I was; she was in a little while before I was in, I did not go in at
first.


Lord Baltimore. What was the charge?


Goff. I believe for seducing her and taking her away.


Lord Baltimore. Was you one of the persons that spoke to her at Lord
Baltimore's window?


Goff. I was not with Mr. Davis then, I left him half an hour before.


Lord Baltimore. Did Mr. Watts serve the writ that time?


Goff. He came once without serving it.


Lord Baltimore. How came that?


Goff. I do not know.


Lord Baltimore. Was not the reason because it was understood she had no mind
to leave Lord Baltimore?


Goff. Mr. Watts told me that she said she was content with her situation; he
went back again and did serve it; I am not certain whether he saw her the first
time.


Mark Ridgway sworn. Mr. Baker. Was you at Lord Mansfield's house when Mr.
Woodcock the father, and daughters, were there?


Mr. Baker. I was at Lord Mansfield's that day, I was there when Miss Woodcock
came there; and after she had been introduced to Lord Mansfield, for some
little time, the parlour door was opened, and we that were in the outer room,
were admitted into the room where she was: then Lord Mansfield asked her,
before us all, whether she would return home with her friends, or return back
to Lord Baltimore's house! she gave for answer, home with her friends: he asked
her no question aster that; he said this, that when he had examined her by
herself before, that she had mentioned returning to Lord Baltimore's house, but
my Lord immediately added that she said, I will tell my father my mind; my Lord
repeated the same question again, she said with her friends: in consequence of
that we all went out of the room and handed her down the steps.


Lord Baltimore. How did she appear?


Mr. Baker. When we had got her down the steps, and turned round the corner,
that was the first time I asked her any question: I asked her if she had been
ill used? she said she had, and immediately expressed herself in the most
striking language that ever my ears heard concerning the cruel usage she had
received, and the mercy of her being delivered; and spoke as much in point of
thankfulness and gratitude as ever I heard in my life.


Court. Are you a relation to the family?


Mr. Baker. Only a person that had heard of this vileness.


Lord Baltimore. Are you a dissenter?


Mr. Baker. I am, Sir. I never saw her before in my life; I am totally a
stranger to her.


John Davis sworn. Mr. Serj. Leigh. We have understood from Miss Woodcock there
has been a friendship and intimacy between you and her, and I want to know when
you had intelligence of her being missing in December last, whether you did not
take some means to discover where the was?


Davis. On Wednesday evening, the 16th of December, I went to Mr. Woodcock's,
agreeable to an appointment before; I was then informed Miss Woodcock went out
about four o'clock, to wait on a customer, one Mrs. Harvey. I waited till about
nine that evening; she did not return; I went then away.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did you not return next morning?


Davis. I came again about eight the next evening; I found Mr. Woodcock and the
other sister in the greatest confusion that could be.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did you endeavor to discover where she was?


Davis. Not at that time, the Tuesday following I did.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Where did you go to make enquiry?


Davis. I went, as I was informed Mrs. Harvey lived in the Curtain, to enquire
for her: Several persons had been to look after her before. On Tuesday, about
three o'clock, I went to the Horse and Groom to enquire for her; they informed
me they did not know such a person.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did you go to the house?


Davis. I did not. I saw the person we had meet at the tavern the Friday night
before, who sent a note to her father desiring an interview with him.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Upon Friday night you say you had an interview with a person;
what person was that?


Davis. This was the first Friday after she went.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Give an account of that?


Davis. On Friday I was in company with Mr. Cay, at the White Heart tavern, and
we had just drawn up an advertisment to put into the papers, relating to this
girl; there was a porter had brought a note to her father to this effect: "Mr.
Jones's compliments to Mr. and Miss Woodcock, desires an interview with them at
the King's Head tavern, Tower Hill." I went there; I saw a short man, to
appearance a Jew; he called himself Jones.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. What message did he deliver?


Davis. He said he came from Miss Woodcock.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did he tell you where she was?


Davis. No, he did not.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Do you know who that man was?


Davis. We suppose his name Jsaacs; he is the person that went away with Miss
Woodcock in the coach, as the maid described him.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Then you don't know. Have you seen the man since?


Davis. I saw him at my Lord Baltimore's house.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. When you saw him at the tavern he would not tell you where
this girl was?


Davis. No.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did he mention at that time any thing of Lord Baltimore's
name?


Davis. No, he said the was a very considerable merchant.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. You did at last learn, by tracing Mrs. Harvey, that she was
at Lord Baltimore's?


Davis. Yes, by information of Mr. Goff.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. When you had that information, what did you do?


Davis. We had no information that she was there, only that Mrs. Harvey was
traced there.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Having that information, what did you do?


Davis. They had obtained a writ for taking up Mrs. Harvey. I went, with some
more friends, about eleven or twelve on Sunday morning; we could see nothing of
Mrs. Harvey: we went to an adjoining house, drank something, and then they
returned; that was on Sunday about noon.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. You did not see Miss Woodcock?


Davis. No, not then. I went into the strand and came back again, and then I
saw Miss Woodcock; I came down Southampton Row that afternoon, about four or
five o'clock, and turned round to go to the Foundling hospital; at the farthest
window in that front, the window next the hospital, I first saw Miss Woodcock.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. How was she employed?


Davis. She was standing at the window, and looking out at the window in a very
pensive manner. When I first saw her, I was within a few yards of the wall that
goes to the Foundling Hospital. My surprise was so great, that I could hardly
believe it; I came nearer, and saw she had taken notice of me.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did she do any thing?


Davis. Not then. I came back from the corner of the wall, and pulled a book
out of my pocket, and made signs for her to write: She shook her head, and
pointed with her finger. I went back to the gate that belongs to the Duke of
Bedford's; I staid there for about a minute; while I was there, she got from
that window to the Venetian window in the center of the front, she waved her
hand, and then I went round to the other corner.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. How did she appear?


Davis. She seemed in the greatest agony that a person could be in.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did she say any thing?


Davis. The first word she said was, I cannot come to you, I cannot come to you.
I said, How do you do? she rather waved that answer, and said, How does my
father do? I answered her, he is well, and we are all well; I think the next
was, Are you well? she said, I am well. I asked where Mrs. Harvey was, for I
had a warrant in my pocket for taking her; she shook her head, and said, I
don't know, I don't know.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did she speak these words calmly and quietly, or in an
appearance of distress and misery?


Davis. She seemed in distress and misery to the greatest degree.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Was this the only question?


Davis. I said, is all well? She seemed then more confused than ever, and put
down the sash.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. After this, I believe you was at Lord Mansfield's, when she
was brought there; do you remember what passed, or what was said in her
presence?


Davis. Mr. Brown said in my hearing, that it was a mere joke for my friends to
attempt any thing of that kind, for that she would certainly go back again with
Lord Baltimore; which confused me, in the manner I stood connected with her.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. This assurance of Mr. Brown, that she would go back with Lord
Baltimore, so confused you, that you did not know what was said or done?


Davis. Yes, it was so.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did you go to Sir John Fielding?


Davis. I did.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Do you recollect any thing material that passed?


Davis. I do not.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did she tell you any thing of her usage?


Davis. No.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Had you put any question to her?


Davis. No, I did not.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Was you present at her information before Sir John?


Davis. I was.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Then the accusation was made?


Davis. Yes, it was.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Was that the first you heard of it?


Davis. Yes, it was.


Lord Baltimore. Was you present at the information?


Davis. Sir John asked the question whether she had been laid with or no; I was
not present during the first conversation; she was in the room with Sir John
Fielding, and when she came out the information was made in form.


William Watts sworn. Mr. Cox. Did you know the family of the Woodcocks before
December last?


Mr. Watts. On the 19th of December, one Mr. Cay, a baker in
White-cross-street, a client of mine, for whom I had done a great deal of
business, applied to me, and told me he was come on an important affair; for a
member of society was missing, and that they could not tell where she was, and
told me the manner she went away; and he told me the appointment made by the
Jew.


Mr. Cox. Tell what you was employed to do?


Mr. Watts. I was employed by him to go to the father, in order to wait for the
coming of this person to the father's; between ten and three of the afternoon
of that Saturday a person was to come; I went and waited at the father's a
considerable time, and no body came. Mr. Cay and I went to the King's-head
tavern, which was a place where this person had been before, and we made every
enquiry we could after that person; there had been no such perspon there that
day. Upon this I advised the making this matter known to Lord Mansfield; it
appeared to me in a very striking light as to the unnatural absence of the
girl; and I went to Lord Mansfield's at Canewood; Lord Mansfield was not there,
but was expected to dinner; I waited till about one or two o'clock; he did not
come; I went to his house in Bloomsbury square; I was told there was a great
deal of company with him; I was recommended by the servants to wait on him next
morning; I went next morning, and saw Lord Mansfield; that was the Monday
before Christmas day; I acquainted my Lord with the appearance in which the
facts struck me, and my Lord said (to the best of my remembrance; I do not
speak the words, I speak of the substance of the matter), it is a very
extraordinary affair, but time will give light to it.


Mr. Cox. When did you apply for a Habeas Corpus?


Mr. Watts. On Christmas day intelligence was brought me, that the house Mrs.
Harvey lived in was found out, upon which I applied to Sir John Fielding for a
warrant; Sir John did not grant a warrant; this was on Christmas day; The next
day Sir John granted a warrant.


Mr. Cox. Do you know when it was put in execution?


Mr. Watts. On Monday. Mr. Davis on Sunday came and informed me he had seen
Miss Woodcock at Lord Baltimore's house; on Monday I ordered the parties to
meet me at a coffee house, and there I drew up that affidavit which obtained
the Habeas, I obtained it directed to Lord Baltimore.


Mr. Cox. Being in possession of this, what did you do?


Mr. Watts. I was desired by some friends of the girl, who were strangers to me
before, all except Mr. Cay, they desired that I would attend them in order to
serve this Habeas: I went there on Monday, and some of us went to the gate of
Lord Baltimore, and some of them did not behave quite in that manner I would
have wished them to have done; there was a sort of disturbance between his
servants and the people along with me.


Mr. Cox. What day was fixed for bringing Lord Baltimore before Lord Mansfield?


Mr. Watts. I enquired which was the upper servant, and nearest his Lordship's
person One Pireni then said, he carried and received messages; and Mr.
Broughton, the steward, was with him, I believe, at that time, and the man
seemed to be an upper servant: I expressed a desire to see them, and that I
came to propose something greatly to the advantage of Lord Baltimore. They
desired me to walk on one side; I walked down the yard, and then I addressed
these persons in this manner: It is now not unknown that Miss Woodcock is at
this house.


Mr. Cox. Come to the point when you saw my Lord Baltimore?


Mr. Watts. I had orders to come next morning, and a promise of seeing my Lord:
this was between 10 and 11 o'clock. I was introduced to my Lord, and my Lord in
a very genteel manner accosted me, he had been told who I was, and that I was
an attorney on behalf of Miss Woodcock. I told him, my Lord, I wait on your
Lordship, in order to acquaint you, that the friends of Miss Woodcock have
found that she is here; but are doubtful whether she is here with or against
her will, and it highly becomes your Lordship to disclose this matter; for as I
find she is of age, if she is here with her will, it is not in the power of her
friends, or the law itself, to release her; if she is here against her will,
you cannot detain her. Upon this, my Lord acquainted me she was there with her
consent, perfectly happy. My Lord retired from me a minute or two, and he came
to me again, and desired me to follow him; I did, and he opened a door that
introduced me into a room where was Miss Woodcock, and Mrs. Griffinburg, I
believe; it was a person much like her. My Lord, in a polite manner, pointed
his hand, and said, that, Sir, is the lady in question. Upon that I made her a
bow, and what I am going to say now is the substance of the matter: I do not
pretend, nor will I swear to the words that passed; I will tell them then as
they were. On my making a bow, it is my present apprehension that she
immediately was standing very near the door, ready to receive some person; I
did not know that; I asked her a question: I asked her, whether she was there
with her own consent. She answered immediately, I am here with my free will and
consent. Upon that my Lord looked upon me with a complacency, and seeming
expectation that I should be satisfied: upon that I said to my Lord, (he looked
to me expecting an answer, whether I was or was not satisfied,) I am not
surprised that your Lordship has got temptations enough to gain the approbation
of this young woman. Miss Woodcock said, where is my father? I said, very near,
Miss: -- And my sisters? -- I said, yes, they are. Said she, can I see them? I
said, I do not know. Says my Lord, I shall take that as a great favor, if you
will fetch the father and the sisters, that they may hear her declarations, and
receive the same satissaction as you have done, Upon this I told them, I was
willing to go: upon this I went out of the house. I did not serve the Habeas,
but went out, and got a promise from my Lord I should come in again. I saw
several friends within a few yards of Lord Baltimore's, and I told them what
she said. They immediately said, they did not care what declarations she made
under my Lord's roof and influence, and would not go there, unless with two
friends, and so see her alone. I went to my Lord, and told him this matter: he
was rather angry at it, and said it was an insult upon him; he did not see any
occasion he had to satisfy any body but the father and sisters, and as to
having two friends he would not agree to it, and gave this as a reason: Have I
not as much reason to suspect that her father and her friends would influence
her to tell another tale, as they have to suspect me? I answered, I thought if
his Lordship was satisfied that the declarations she had made to me were
genuine and clear, that he might even send her home, and they could not keep
her from him. He told me a story of some of Sir John Fielding's men having made
a riot, or something of that sort; I told him, that all that was against him
was what I had in my pocket; nor do I know to this moment, how, or by what
means, Sir John's men came to go there that night, because there was no
accusation whatever. I did not know that they were there: I believe there were
nobody there but ten or twelve persons with me to serve the Habeas Corpus. He
would not believe but I was privy to it. He took hold of me by the arm, and
conducted me down stairs, and I thought was going to turn me out of doors, but
this was my imagination, instead of that, he conducted me into a room, through
another room, and there was a man in the room standing: and then sat me down in
an elbow-chair on the off-side of the fire, to the door: he set himself down on
the off-side of the fire and he ordered the man to sit down by me, or by us. My
Lord kept still angry about Sir John's men, and I endeavored to argue every
thing I could for the sake of his Lordship, to discharge the girl undoubtedly.
My Lord refused to submit to let the girl's father and sister, and two friends
come. I then found it absolately necessary that I must serve the Habeas; I then
gave it to his Lordship: I said, my Lord I will, if it will oblige your
Lordship, I will wait upon my Lord Mansfield, and desire him to appoint a time.
I went to Lord Mansfield; he appointed the time immediately. I wrote a card to
Lord Baltimore, and he attended at Lord Mansfield's. My Lord, Miss Woodcock,
and Mr. Brown, came in his chariot; before they returned, my Lord Mansfield
came out of his study to me, and enquired if her father and sisters were there:
I said not there, but very near; upon which my Lord ordered me to send for
them: I did, and they came, and when they came were introduced to Lord
Mansfield; but when Lord Mansfield thought proper, he ordered all the friends
and me to come in; I went in, and, to the best of my remembrance, Lord
Mansfield said, Gentlemen, I called you in, that you may hear my examination of
this girl; and then he asked her, are you willing to go back with Lord
Baltimore? Or are you willing and desireous to go with your father and friends?
Says she, with my father and friends, my Lord. He repeated that several times,
and she made the same sort of answer. My Lord then turned to us, and he said,
Gentlemen, I think it my duty to acquaint you, that notwithstanding the answers
you have heard to the questions I have put to this girl, upon her first
examination, she did declare she was willing to go back to my Lord Baltimore's.
As this matter may be talked of variously, I think it my duty to declare this;
she declared herself willing to go back to her father and friends, and then was
discharged.


Mr. Cox. At this time had you any knowledge of the violence that had been
offered her by Lord Baltimore!


Mr. Watts. No, that I did not, if I had I should have applied immediately to
Lord Mansfield, and not to Sir John Fielding, Mr. Brown, during the time he was
in the hall at Lord Mansfield's, told me, that he fully apprehended she would
go back again to Lord Baltimore; and that as soon as she and Lord Baltimore
were gone, they would go and bail Mrs. Harvey. I finding the disappointment,
and that Miss Woodcock was returning with her friends, I thought it would be no
ways improper that Miss Woodcock should attend at Sir John's at the time of
bailing Mrs. Harvey, because she knew those facts that were only suspected
before, and charged only by the oath of the sister.


Mr. Cox. When she came before Sir John, how did he examine her, openly or
privately?


Mr. Watts. When she came into the room, they acquainted Sir John Fielding,
that was Miss Woodcock: Sir John took her into a little back room; I went with
her, and there Sir John interrogated her what he pleased, and out it came, to
my great astonishment, the charge of a rape.


Mr. Cox. What said Sir John to the rape!


Mr. Watts. He asked her it she knew the nature of that offense, and the
consequence of it, and that it was a capital offense? she said no. He asked
her, whether she was willing to prosecute him? she answered, she was, if she
could do it safely, or if it could be done: that is all I know of the matter.


Cross Examination. Lord Baltimore. I should be glad to know if I did not offer
that the father and sister, and two or three friends, might see her, if a
friend of mine was present?


Mr. Watts. I do not remember that, nor do not believe it.


Lord Baltimore. Can you take upon you to say it?


Mr. Watts. Safely as I can to speaking any thing else at that distance of time.


Lord Baltimore. You are not clear in it!


Mr. Watts. I am as clear in it as I can be of any thing at that distance of
time.


Lord Baltimore. Can you give an account of the conversation you had with Miss
Woodcock at my house? I shall be glad to know, if, after she went from Lord
Mansfield's after she was discharged, she did at any time say she would go back
to my house?


Mr. Watts. No, never.


Lord Baltimore. What did she say?


Mr. Watts. I had no conversation with her.


Lord Baltimore. Have you never declared to any body, that she declared, as she
was going to Sir John Fielding's, that she would go to my house?


Mr. Watts. I never heard her say so, or declared to any body that I heard her
say so.


Lord Baltimore. When you was talking with me, did you not threaten me, that a
prosecution would be carried on by a great body of dissenters, that would be
too much for any one man to stand against?


Mr. Watts. No; there was then no charge.


Lord Baltimore. Did you ever say any thing about this being carried on by a
body of dissenters?


Mr. Watts. No, I know of no such thing.


Dr. John Ford, of the Old Jewry, sworn. Dr. Ford. I am a physician and
man-midwife. On the 1st of January --


Mr. Baker. Was you acquainted with Miss Woodcock before?


Dr. Ford. No, nor even heard of her name. I was sent for in consequence of the
advice of Mr. Bearcrost the council, who said it was necessary for some
manmidwife to examine whether she was a virgin or not. I did examine her, both
by inspecting the parts and introducing my finger. I found that the perinaeum
was much shorter than, it is the opinion of the best practitioners in physic,
it ought to be in virgins; on my inspecting the parts, they appeared as if they
had been a good deal inflamed; though now the inflammation was subsided; the
vagina was very rough, and the edges were covered with matter, and the parts
were extremely sore. I gave it my opinion she was not a virgin, and had been
lately lain with. There was a great deal of soreness.


Mr. Baker. Was there any external marks of violence?


Dr. Ford. There must have been great force used.


Court. Could you distinguish whether it was by force or by consent?


Dr. Ford. I should imagine a good deal of force had been used; but whether
with her consent or not I cannot be positive: that she had suffered a good deal
of violence was very plain.


Court. Is there more hurt done by struggling, when against consent, than when
voluntarily?


Dr. Ford. I cannot think that, in ordinary cases, the parts, would have been
in that situation, unless there had been a great deal of violence.


Court. You mention matter: was that any thing venereal?


Dr. Ford. No; it had not that appearance; and I asked about six weeks after,
when I saw her, if she had any symptoms of the venereal disease? and she said,
no.


Sir John Fielding sworn. Sir John Fielding. Miss Woodcock came to my house, I
do not recollect the time; a woman whose name was Harvey, was in custody at
that time before me, upon a warrant granted, on an information made by her
sister, Elizabeth Woodcock, relating to Sarah Woodcock's seduction; and that
was the reason of her coming to my house, as far as I could judge.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did you examine her respecting this Mrs. Harvey?


Sir John Fielding. As Mrs. Harvey was in custody, it was necessary for me to
examine Miss Woodcock relating to her offense; for though she was before me as
a person of evil practices, and a seducer, it was necessary for me to take an
account of the whole transaction before I could see the nature of the offense.
I did examine her.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. In the course of her examination, what did she say in
relation to the present affair? did she accuse any body else beside?


Court. The material question is, as to the information, whether she did that
of her own free will?


Sir John Fielding. Would you have me give a mere answer to that question, or
show the method of her giving her account?


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Whether the account at that time was voluntary or freely made
by her?


Sir John Fielding. When she was in my room she was surrounded with a great
variety of friends. I insisted upon it that no person in that room should speak
a single syllable: that it should come in her own language, from her own mouth.
There are two informations taken by me: there is one a very long one; the other
was taken at her re-examination.


Lord Baltimore. Was the present information taken from her own mouth?


Court. The information against Lord Baltimore.


Sir John Fielding. The account of this against Lord Baltimore came out in the
course of her examination concerning Harvey.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Was there no particular examination of her about a rape?


Sir John Fielding. Yes, there was an examination private, and taken in
writing. I asked her if she was ruined? she said yes. I asked her, whether by
force or by consent? she answered, by force and against her consent. And then
the general circumstances of the information were taken in writing publicly,
and, I hope, with the utmost candor.


Council for the Crown. We have now, my Lord, done with our evidence.


Court. My Lord, your Lordship has now heard the whole charge against you for
this offense of which you are indicted: now is the proper time for you to make
your defense; therefore I desire you will say all you have to say in your
defense.


Lord Baltimore. My voice is so low, will you permit the gentleman to read what
I have here writ down?


Court. If you please.


Lord Batlimore's defense, read by Mr. Hammersly, Lord Baltimore's Solicitor.
My Lord, and Gentlemen,

I have put myself upon my country, in hopes that prejudice and clamor will
avail nothing in this place, where it is the privilege of the meanest of the
king's subjects to be presumed innocent, until his guilt has been made appear
by legal evidence. I wish I could say that I had been treated abroad with the
same candor. I have been loaded with obloquy, the most malignant libels have
been circulated, and every other method which malice could devise, have been
taken, to create general prejudice against me. I thank God, that, under such
circumstances, I have had firmness and resolution enough to meet my accusers
face to face, and provoke an enquiry into my conduct. Hic murus ahaeneus este
-- nil cons^ire sibi. The charge against me, and against these poor people, who
are involved with me, because they might otherwise have been just witnesses of
my innocence, is in its nature very easy to be made, and hard to be disproved.
The accuser has the advantage of supporting it by a direct and positive oath;
the defense can only be collected from circumstances.

My defense is composed then of a variety of circumstances; all tending to show
the falsity of this charge, the absurdity of it, the improbability that it
could be true. It will be laid before the jury under the direction of my
counsel; and I have the confidence of an innocent man, that it will be manifest
to your Lordship, the jury, and the whole world, that the story told by this
woman is a perversion of truth in every particular. What could induce her to
make such a charge I can only suspect: very soon after she came to my house,
upon a representation to me that her father was distressed, I sent him a
considerable sum of money; whether the ease with which that money was obtained
from me might suggest the idea as a means of obtaining a larger sum of money,
or whether it was thought necessary to destroy me, in order establish the
character of the girl to the world, I know not; but I do aver, upon the word of
a man of honor, that there is no truth in any thing which has been said or
sworn, of my having offered violence to this girl. I ever held such brutality
in abhorrence. I am totally against all force; and for me to have forced this
woman, considering my weak state of health and my strength, is not only a mo^al
but a physical impossibility. She is, as to bodily health, stronger than I am.
Strange opinions, upon subjects foreign to this charge, have been falsely
imputed to me, to inflame this accusation. Libertine as I am represented, I
hold no such opinions. Much has been said against me, that I seduced this girl
from her parents: seduction is not the point of this charge; but I do assure
your lordship and the jury, this part of the case has been aggravated
exceedingly beyond the truth. If I have been in any degree to blame. I am sure
I have sufficiently atoned for every indiscretion, which a weak attachment to
this unworthy woman may have led me into, by having suffered the disgrace of
being exposed as a criminal at the ^ar, in the county of which my father had
the honor to represent in parliament; and where I had some pretensions to have
attained the same honor, had that sort of an active life been my object.

I will take up no more of your Lordship's time than to add, that if I had been
conscious of the guilt now imputed to me, I could have kept myself and my
fortune out of the reach of the laws of this country. I am a citizen of the
world; I could have lived any where: but I love my country, and submit to its
laws; resolving, that my innocence should be justified by the laws. I now, by
my own voluntary act, by surrendering myself to the Count of King's Bench,
stake upon the verdict of twelve men, my life, my fortune, and what is dearer
to me, my honor.

March 25, 1768.

BALTIMORE.

Court to Elizabeth Griffinburg. The charge is against my lord for ravishing
this young woman, and against you for being accessory before the fact. Now is
the time to make your defense: what have you to say for yourself?

Griffinburg's defense. All that they have sworn of me I am innocent of. All
the while this girl was in Lord Baltimore's house she was not confined at all:
she used to dress herself, and told me she was going into the country. I have
lent her clothes at different times: she did go into my room and choose these
clothes, caps, handkerchiefs, and any thing she desired. She was at all times
ready to please my Lord. After supper was done she went into the room, and she
bespoke of me some water to wash her feet, and I fetched the water; she asked
if the water was brought up; and it was first brought into the wrong room; and
as she came out of the room she undressed herself, and I saw nobody touch her:
she asked me if I had a nightcap for her? I said no: she asked me if I had a
ribbon for her cap? I said no, I have no ribbon, I have a red garter, if you
will have that: she said that will not do, it mu^ be some white; she took a
white tucker out of her black gown, and that she tied to her head. She then
(...) door of my Lord's bedchamber; my Lord said, Who is there? hearing
somebody at the door. When she went open it, Dear Griffinburg, said she, my
Lord will be ^ngry; so she turned back again, and sat by the fire. (...)
husband came and called me to go to bed. My husband said, How can Miss Woodcock
come into the room when there is people in the room. To which she answered, How
should I know that. Then I went into the room, and went to bed; and Miss
Woodcock came behind me again; a rush-light was in the room; I saw her go into
the room, and then came back again. She knew thar before that she would go to
bed to my Lord; she told me so.


Court to Harvey. What have you to say in your defense?

Harvey's defense. I am innocent of the charge laid against me: I solemnly
declare, that no sort of force or violence was used to her, either by me or my
Lord, or any other person. She went to bed to my Lord with all the ease and
freedom in the world, as freely as any woman ever went to a man. All that I
have to say is, I am ready to answer any question that may be asked me.

Lord Baltimore again. As I was sitting, after dinner, with the lady, about the
distance I am from your Lordship, she then addressed herself to me, and said,
My Lord, if you will provide for me, and use me tenderly and faithfully, I will
come to bed to you at night; upon which I arose up, embraced her, and told her
I would treat her so. I went to the window, as she mentioned, and did use some
familiarities with her, and she with me. I put the curtain round me, that the
servants running through the room might not see us. She consented to it. I went
down stairs among the workmen; I came back again: she said, I believe I am a
little out of order; upon which I said, that was not material; which is all I
said to Miss Woodcock, till she came to bed to me, so help me God. I am sure no
body so much as persuaded or asked her.


For the Prisoners. Mr. Way sworn Mr. Way. I was at Lord Manssield's house, I
happened to be in the room with my Lord about ten minutes before Lord Baltimore
and Miss Woodcock came in; his Lorship desired me to stay, saying he had sent
for his clerk, who was not come. A little after, the servant came into the
study where I was, and said, that Lord Baltimore and this lady were without,
upon which Lord Mansfield ordered me to go out and acquaint Lord Baltimore he
could not see him at that time, but to bring Miss Woodcock in to him; his
Lordship desired she would sit down, and desired me not to go out of the room.
After she sat had down, and seemed composed, Lord Mansfield asked her at first
how she came to go away from her father in this manner? she said that she
begged to be excused from giving an account of that, she would tell that to her
father alone: my Lord Mansfield said, he did not want to know any of her family
concerns, but that he wanted to know whether she was under any constrain from
Lord Baltimore, or was confined by him? she answered not in the least, or words
to that effect, for I had agreed to stay with him; he repeated it again several
times, and she said I had agreed to stay with him, several times over. He asked
he^ about part of a letter, something wrote at the bottom of the letter to her
father, if it was her hand writing? she said it was: he asked her about a
person who had seen her from Lord Baltimore's window? she said she had seen a
person whom she knew about the house, and she said that she beckoned to him to
came to another window; accordingly, upon her meeting him at the window, he
asked her if she was well? she said yes; and she said that the reason why she
beckoned him to come to the window was, that her father might be satisfied, and
might know she was well; and that he said, then you are well, and have been
well, or words to that effect, and at last asked, is all well? on which she
said she turned away from the window. Lord Mansfield asked her in this kind of
way I think, from the affidavit, you are of age, of five or six and twenty? she
said she was; because, says he, if you was not of age I should not take your
answer so easily, but I should take you away; she answered, as I am of age I
know you cannot do it, my Lord; she repeated it several times. She had
mentioned something about her father, before Lord Mansfield asked her if she
would see her father; she said she should be glad to see her father and tell
him she was well: he was ordered to be sent for to some neighboring house, and
she sat down about ten minutes, while her father was sent for, and said
nothing. A message was brought in that the father was come into the hall, and
his Lordship directed me to let the father and sister (...) see her sister: he
asked her (...) to see her father? the said (...) her father and sister should
be put into a room with her by themselves, and no other person with them,
accordingly they were left together half an hour (...) more. When they came out
notice was carried in to Lord Manssield that they had had their conversation,
and he came out to them into the (...) to what passed then, a great many people
were called in, and I was not very close by, I happened to be in another room,
and was not very near, a great many were (...) upon a messenger showing unto my
Lord that they were desirous of seeing him, my Lord stepped into his antiroom,
and they were all called in.


Lord Baltimore. Had you an opportunity of making any observation on Miss
Woodcock's behavior, while with Lord Manssield; did she seem to know for what
purpose she was brought there?


Mr. Way. My Lord desired her to be composed, she had a great deal of time to
be so, and after those questions were asked, there was near ten minutes before
her father came; she sat by the fire side, she on one side, my Lord Mansfield
on the other.


Lord Baltimore. Did she seem frightened, or concerned?


Mr. Way. I cannot say that I saw any particular fright, she answered my Lord
Mansfield with a positive smile upon her countenance, when she said no, my
Lord, you cannot take me away, for I am of age.


Cross Examination. Mr. Cox. Was that repeated more than once; I am of age, I
know you cannot do it?


Mr. Way. Yes.


Mr. Cox. Did she say how she came by that information?


Mr. Way. She did not give any account how she came by that information.


Mr. Cox. You say my Lord Mansfield desired her to be composed, then I should
conceive his Lordship thought she might be otherwise:


Mr. Way. He ordered her to sit down and compose herself; she seemed to have a
smile of positiveness, not a direct smile.


Mr. Cox. Did you see her give her evidence here?


Mr. Way. No.


Mr. Cox. That smile seems natural to her.


Robert Rose sworn. Rose. I am servant to Lord Mansfield.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember upon Tuesday the 29th of December Miss
Woodcock's coming, with other people, to his Lordship, and my Lord granted a
Habeas Corpus to bring my Lord Baltimore and the young lady to him?


Rose. Lord Baltimore sent a message to my Lord Mansfield, that he would bring
her any time when my Lord fixed; he came at ten o'clock, and we acquainted my
Lord that Lord Baltimore and the lady were there; he ordered the lady to be
introduced, my Lord Baltimore remained in a little room adjoining to the
library, and I believe Mr. Brown the attorney with him.


Lord Baltimore. Did you observe any of the family of the Woodcock's there?


Rose. There was a message came out a little after from my Lord, to fetch her
friends.


Lord Baltimore. Do you know who the people were that came after?


Rose. They said, the father and two sisters.


Lord Baltimore. Did you see any interview between Miss Woodcock and the
father, and the two sisters?


Rose. I was in the room while some conversation passed between them. She came
and took hold of her youngest sister and her father; and she asked them what
made them so uneasy. She said she was very well off, and very happy; and
desired they would not make themselves uneasy -- I immediately withdrew out of
the room, and went to the hall where all the prosecutors friends were, and, I
believe, Mr. Watts, and Mr. Brown; and I said I believed the young lady would
go back to Lord Baltimore again. I took it from hearing her say so when I went
first. The second time was about five minutes space; she said, what signifies
my going back: all my friends will think me a whore. They said no; all her
acquaintance had a good opinion of her. Upon that she turned round to me, and
defired me to let Lord Mansfield know she had agreed with her friends. Then my
Lord ordered all the persons into that room that were concerned in the affair.
There was a young man they called a sweatheart of the young woman's; he went in
first. There was nothing more particular, besides what my Lord said.


Lord Baltimore. Was any thing said about the manner in which my Lord treated
her?


Rose. She said she was very happy and well; and that he, Lord Baltimore, had
done something for them, and she should be able to do something more for them
yet.


Cross Examination. Mr. Baker. Can you tell how long they were in this room
together?


Rose. I believe, as near as I can guess, she was with him near half an hour.


Mr. Baker. You was there when they first accosted one another; and then you
heard her say what you have mentioned?


Rose. She bid them not be uneasy, she was very well and very happy; Lord
Baltimore had behaved very genteelly to her, in that she was very happy. They
paused and whispered a great deal; they burst into tears; she was not in tears
at all.


Mr. Baker. Then you cannot say what they said to her upon this? You say you
went out of the room, and returned again in five minutes; how long did you stay
in the room?


Rose. About ten minutes. She turned about, and said, Sir, I should be much
obliged to you if you would tell my Lord I have agreed with my friends.


Mr. Baker. So you say, she said the last time of all, my acquaintance will
think me a whore?


Rose. That was at the last time I was in.


Mr. Baker. And then at once she said she desired you would let my Lord know
she had agreed with her friends? Then, Sir, to set this matter right, I ask you
if you heard any thing more than this?


Rose. The first time, that she was well and happy, and my Lord had used her
very genteelly, and done a great deal for her, and that she should be able to
do more for them; the last time was only as to that expression, My acquaintance
will think me a whore.


Mr. Baker. The second time you only heard that expression. As soon as she said
she had agreed with her friends, you told Lord Mansfield: and my Lord said
then, young woman you have agreed with your friends?


Rose. All the prosecutrixs friends were present then: my Lord said, madam, you
are of age, you may do as you like, you are not confined to one or other;
nobody has a ^ight to control you. Said she, my Lord. I will go back to my
friends; she clapped her hand to her breast. He said, do you say Lord Baltimore
confined you. She said, yes, from my heart. They withdrew: the sweet heart took
her down the steps; he seemed very fond of her.


Court. You say they were about half an hour together: how long might you be
there?


Rose. Both times together I believe about twelve or fourteen minutes. I was
rather curious the first time; I was making up the fire; and then I went to
carry some of my Lord's cloths. I told the company that I believed she was
going back with my Lord.


Mr. Brown sworn. Mr. Brown. I was appointed to go to Lord Baltimore; it was a
Monday night the servant came to my house. I saw Miss Woodcock there. About two
in the morning some body came from Lord Baltimore's to my house to desire I
would be at Lord Baltimore's house; I went there about nine; I was shown up
into a room in the one pair of stairs floor; a servant went in, and he came out
to me, and told me, that the night before there had been some people at his
house from Justice Fielding, who had attempted or wanted to force in at his
gates; I asked what could be the occasion of it; he said there was a woman
taken into custody for having seduced a young woman, or to that effect; I said,
Have you got the young woman here; he said she was in the next room. My Lord
told me they said they had come with a habeas corpus, and that upon that
authority they had forced into his gates; I asked him if he had been served
with the habeas corpus, or his servants? he said no, and that one of the
persons was Mr. Watts. Miss Woodcock was in a room; I was introduced to drink
coffee; she was sitting at the upper end of the room, writing. I said to my
Lord, that he should get Harvey bailed, as she is taken up on your account.
This young lady came running up to me with a piece of a letter in her hand, and
said, Sir, I have a letter I am going to send to my father; I told her to
finish it, and send it away; she said she would. I went out with my Lord into
the adjoining room, and advised my Lord to bail the woman; I asked who he had
to bail her; he had not, he said, any body but Mr. Broughton, his
house-steward, and Dr. Griffinburg; he said he would be obliged to me to go to
Justice Fielding's; I did, and Justice Fielding said she was taken up for an
offense, for decoying to my Lord's house a woman. I went from there back to my
Lord, and told him, that bail would not be accepted then, but I must go again
at two o clock. My Lord said, he had just then been served with a writ of
habeas corpus; he said, he should obey this writ. Miss Woodcock came up, and
asked if she must go to my Lord Mansfield, and said, I hope I cannot be taken
from my Lord Baltimore; I should be glad to see my father, but no body else.
Upon this I asked her her age; she said she was twenty-six; I said, I don't
think that any judge or any other power can have any jurisdiction over you;
says she, I am glad of that, for I was afraid I should be forced away; and she
said she would go then to Lord Mansfield's immediately; she took me by the hand
and jumped into the chariot, and all the way she said, Sir, are you sure I
cannot be taken away from my Lord? I said yes, as she was of age.


Lord Baltimore. You was telling us she showed you a letter she had partly
wrote, and not finished, do you know any thing further of that letter?


Mr. Brown. She wrote the letter and sealed it, and I delivered it here into
court to day; I had the letter, and kept it ever since, the habeas corpus
coming immediately after, prevented the letter being sent.


Lord Baltimore. Was she frightened or composed?


Mr. Brown. She seemed very far from low spirits; she was very cheerful.


Lord Baltimore. Did she know for what purpose she was going there?


Mr. Brown. I told her he was Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, and could
set her at liberty; she was afraid my Lord would take her away by force, but
hoped he could not, being twenty six years of age. We had a good deal of talk
before she was inclined to go, for fear of being forced from my Lord.


Cross Examination. Mr. Serj. Leigh. Friend Brown, I think this young lady was
a stranger to you.


Mr. Brown. Yes.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. And yet the first conversation that ever passed between you
she brought you this half-wrote letter, and you say you have kept the letter
ever since; how came you not to return it to the person by whom it was wrote?


Mr. Brown. I did not think of it.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Mr. Brown, I ask you this, If ever before in your life you
kept a letter you was entrusted with ^


Mr. Brown. I was not entrusted with it. The letter was delivered to the
servant to be carried to Mr. Woodcock; when the habeas corpus came, the servant
said he had got this letter, and gave it me, I put it in my pocket.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Pray what business had you with this letter, upon what
ground, what motive, or what inducement?


Mr. Brown. I had no inducement at all.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. I ask if you ever did such a thing before in your life?


Mr. Brown. I have many times, Sir, had letters, and kept them for an hour or
two.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. She went in the chariot with you, then why did you not give
her her letter?


Mr. Brown. I did not think about it.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. It was her letter to her father. Would you, a man of
business, take a letter, directed to another person, and keep it? What was your
motive?


Mr. Brown. I had none at all.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. When you came to Lord Mansfield's, why did you not deliver
the letter to the father?


Mr Brown. I had no reason particularly for not delivering the letter to the
father; there was a great deal of hurry and confusion, and I did not know the
father from any body else.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Very well; then the fact is shortly this: The letter was
wrote by the girl, when only you and Lord Baltimore were there, it was
delivered to a footman, to be carried to her father, that letter you took from
the footman, and have kept to this hour.

( The letter read.) Honner'd Father,

Agreeable to my Promise I have sent for you and beg that you and my sisters
will make yourselves easy and Contented about me I am (...) you before with a
very honorable Gentleman that has acted with the greatest honor toward me
and I make no doubt (...) he will allways due it therefore beg you will calm
yourselves and come and see me with all that becomingness that becomes the
Place and sitavation I am in as being in a Nobleman house and therefore hope
you will make no more Stur about it but act with dicretion and come by
yourselves and I am shure I will give you all the satisfaction you desire I Put
this bit of Paper in the Letter as A witness this is my writing and my will
that you shoud come so Pray make no further adue but come along with the coach
from your Dutyfull

Daughter Sarah Woodcock.


Giles Hitchcock sworn. I am clerk to Mr. Hammersly. I was at Lord Baltimore's
on the 29th of December last, about eleven o'clock or near that time. I was in
the parlour at my Lord's house: and while I was there, Mr. Watts and my Lord
Baltimore came into the parlour where I was. My Lord addressed himselt to me,
and said, this gentleman is come to me concerning a lady that I have in the
house. Upon which some conversation arose between my Lord Baltimore and him;
and Mr. Watts said, the lady's father, and sister, and several friends, wanted
much to see her. My Lord asked where they were. He said, hard by. My Lord said
they are welcome to come and see her, provided I have some friend or friends
present: and said he had been extremely ill used the night before; that his
house had been beset by a parcel of people; that they had not treated him like
a gentleman, but had used him extremely ill, and forced open the gates. Mr.
Watts said, what can you do with such a body of people? He said Methodists or
Dissenters, I don't know which. He served the Habeas Corpus upon him from Lord
Mansfield. My Lord said, I will obey the writ immediately, and go with you; and
fix the time. Upon this Mr. Watts went out of the room. I went with Lord
Baltimore up stairs into a room, where I saw the young lady: I never saw her
before nor since. My Lord spoke to her, and she seemed very cheerful with my
Lord and laughed.

Lord Baltimore. What passed?


Hitchcock. I cannot say; my Lord ordered me into another room. I waited there
some time. Then my Lord desired I would go into another room, because some
people came up into the room, as I imagined, where this lady was. My Lord
ordered me down stairs. I waited there some time. My Lord said he had no
further commands for me. I came into the hall, and saw my Lord and the lady
together. He gave orders to the coachman to drive to Lord Mansfield's. I saw
them go into Lord Mansfield's.


Lord Baltimore. How did she appear?


Hitchcock. The lady appeared very gay and sprightly.


Cross Examination. Mr. Baker. Did Mr. Brown go in the chariot with them?


Hitchcock. Not as I saw; I saw my Lord go into the chariot.


Mr. Baker. Who handed the young lady in, my Lord? Or did she go herself?


Hitchcock. I stood with my back from the door to the fireplace.


Mr. Baker. You said my Lord Baltimore said, the lady's friends might (...) to
her. Did you see any of her friends there!


Hitchcock. No.


Lord Baltimore. Call Dr. Griffinburg.


Mr. Serj Leigh. I object to his testimony. He now stands indicted here for a
conspiracy: in abusing this young woman, in carrying her to Lord Baltimore's:
in the next place, we have here a record of the conviction of Dr. Griffinburg,
for a crime of this nature, for having attempted a rape upon a girl; for which
he was fined 6 s. 8 d. and imprisoned in the King's bench.


Lord Baltimore. I don't care whether he is examined or not; but he is here,
and I tender him that the court may not think I am afraid to examine him; if
they object to his being examined, I don't press it.


Francis Smith sworn. Smith. I am a painter.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember your being in Lord Baltimore's house in
December last?


Smith. It was on the 17th or 18th of December last Lord Baltimore sent for me.
I went to his house; the servant bade me go in; I went into a yellow bow-window
room, Lord Baltimore was there with a gentleman: he desired me to sit down; and
I was to drink tea with his Lordship, Dr. Griffinburg, and this lady. After
tea, there was a little conversation about several indifferent things; and Lord
Baltimore desired me to draw a sketch of that lady's picture; and he gave me a
black pencil. I desired the lady to put herself in a posture to draw her
picture. So she did. After I had begun her picture about half an hour. I
thought the lady was tired, and I desired her to rest. I afterward desired her
to put herself in the same position, which she did. After I had finished it, I
put it in Lord Baltimore's hand; she smiled at it; and the conversation went on
till supper was ready: and then Lord Baltimore desired me to stay to supper
with him. There was my Lord, this lady, Dr. Griffinburg, and another lady, that
supped with us, I took particular notice of this lady, she being a stranger to
me: she eat a bit of fowl, and several other things, and drank to every body's
health; and I did the same as every body does. After supper I went home.


Lord Baltimore. As you took this lady's face, you will be able to tell us,
whether it was a cheerful face, or whether in tears?


Smith. She never cried all the time. No, a figure that would cry would not
stand in that position, and I could not go on. She was very willing to stay in
that position. She was drawn in this position ( describing it.) leaning her
head upon her hand.


Lord Baltimore. Was there any appearance of concern or sorrow about her?


Smith. She was rather chearful^ she behaved with the same ease that every body
did.


Lord Baltimore. She said something of your having carried a letter?


Smith. That was a letter I received from a gentleman a fortnight before; who
sent me a letter to send to Lord Baltimore; which I did: and that day the
gentleman had been to me, and said he desired to speak to his Lordship, but he
would not go to his house: and he desired me to let him know; it was a tall
gentleman in a brown coat.


Lord Baltimore. How came he to find you out?


Smith. Lord Baltimore told me a gentleman should come to me.


Lord Baltimore. Did this lady say any thing to you about your having brought
any letter from her father or friends?


Smith, No; this lady in conversation asked what this gentleman was. I told her
he was dressed in a brown coat.


Cross Examination. Mr. Cox. Well, Mr. Smith, your account is a pretty strange
one; you have been acquainted with Lord Baltimore a good while, have you not?


Smith. Next May, six years, I have had the honor to know his Lordship; and
have had the honor to work for his Lordship.


Mr. Cox. What day of the month was this you drew the lady's picture?


Smith. It was on the 17th or 18th of December last.


Mr. Cox. What brought you to Lord Baltimore's house that day?


Smith. Upon that day he sent for me.


Mr. Cox. Did he let you know what he wanted you for?


Smith. I thought he had sent for me to draw a picture: and I afterward saw
the truth of it. His Lordship sent often for me to draw pictures.


Mr. Cox. And yet when you came there Lord Baltimore lent you his pencil?


Smith. When I was there I told him I had not got a pencil in my pocket.


Mr. Cox. So then you was sent for to draw a picture and yet you went without
your materials: how came you, to be in such a hurry?


Smith. He sent to me to come directly.


Mr. Cox. And so you was in such a hurry that you left your pencil in the other
pocket?


Smith. That is natural for people when they change their clo^ths.


Mr. Cox. What not to take the things out of their pocket?


Smith. The servant told me my Lord Baltimore wanted to see me directly.


Mr. Cox. Well, and then you said, you thought that he was in a hurry; and you
went and left these materials at home: that is the fact, I think. Now when you
came to Lord Baltimore's there was some conversation passed relating to a
letter. Tell my Lord and the jury what the letter was he asked you about.


Smith. The letter I had wrote to my Lord from a gentleman that had been with
me.


Mr. Cox. What gentleman was he?


Smith. I don't know.


Mr. Cox. How did he send it you?


Smith. My Lord told me that such a gentleman should come to me.


Mr. Cox. Now see if I understand you. A fortnight before this my Lord told
you, that a gentleman should come to you; but he did not come, but sent you a
letter. Did you send that letter?


Smith. I sent it to my Lord.


Mr. Cox. Then it was a letter directed to your hands -- to be given to Lord
Baltimore; and this you was informed of a fortnight before?


Smith. This gentleman came just that day.


Mr. Cox. And this was the very day the man came with the message to Lord
Baltimore, and just before that this letter was brought to you?


Smith. No, this letter was brought a fortnight before.


Mr. Cox. When was it delivered to Lord Baltimore?


Smith. The instant I had received it.


Mr. Cox. Then had you any further directions in it?


Smith. No, that gentleman called upon me on that very day, about four or five
o'clock in the evening.


Cox. What did he say to you?


Smith. He said, that he wanted to speak to his Lordship. I asked if he would
go to his Lordship? He said, he would not go, but desired me to let my Lord
know he had been with me; and so I did.


Mr. Cox. Did you do it by message, or go to his house?


Smith. I sent a letter in French, that a gentleman that I did not know had
been at my house.


Mr. Cox. Now all this happened before you went to my Lord the same day, and
yet you thought it was all about drawing a picture?


Smith. My Lord asked me what sort of a man he was? And the lady asked me what
was the color of his coat? I said, a brown coat.


Mr. Cox. Was that the only question she asked you?


Smith. Yes.


Mr. Cox. Only then about the color of the coat the man had on that called
upon you that day. She said nothing about the size of the man, whether taller
or shorter, did she?


Smith. Not a single word.


Mr. Cox. And this was in consquence of a letter that was sent a fortnight
before. What is your name?


Smith. My name is Smith.


Mr. Cox. Where do you live?


Smith. I live in Dufour's Court, Broad-street Carnaby market.


Mr. Cox. What conversation had you at Lord Baltimore's that day about this man
in the brown coat?


Smith. My Lord asked me whether he was an old or a young man? I said, an old
man in a brown coat.


Mr. Cox. Now was it an old man in a brown coat?


Smith. Yes, and a very tall man.


Mr. Cox. Did he ask you that question in the presence of the lady, or behind
her back, in French or English?


Smith. No, in plain English.


Mr. Cox. Did my Lord say any thing to you in French?


Smith. Yes he did speak some words in French, something relating to what had
passed in the news papers.


Lord Baltimore. What is the business you generally do for me?


Smith. I take designs for my Lord.


Lord Baltimore. You being a foreigner, do not I often talk to you in your own
language?


Smith. Yes.


Mr Cox. You say you was present when the lady drank tea, will you, upon your
oath, say you saw her drink one drop of tea?


Smith. She was very merry in conversation as the rest were.


Mr. Cox. You was there at supper; Did she drink every body's health?


Smith. She drank my Lord's health, and she drank to every body round.


Mr. Cox. In what liquor?


Smith. I believe small beer.


Martha Harrison sworn. I am Lord Baltimore's laundry-maid. I was at Lord
Baltimore's house in December; I was there before they went to Woodcote.


Lord Baltimore. Do you know in what bed Mrs. Harvey used to lie?


Harrison. In the next room to my Lord's bedchamber.


Lord Baltimore I would ask you, if you know any person that lay with her there?


Harrison. I suppose Sarah Woodcock did.


Lord Baltimore. Was there the appearance of two persons in Mrs Harvey's bed?


Harison. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Who made the fire in this room?


Harrison. I did.


Lord Baltimore. Did you ever see any people in bed together in that room?


Harrison. I have seen Mrs. Harvey and Miss Woodcock in bed together, I cannot
say how often; I have seen them every morning in bed till the went to Woodcote,
all but the first morning after she came. I have heard them converse there.


Lord Baltimore. I would ask you whether you ever saw any acts of civility
between Mrs. Harvey ands Mis Woodcock?


Harrison. I have always seen her very merry.


Lord Baltimore. Did you see her perpetually in tears, lamenting and pining?


Harrison. No, never; I always saw her laughing.


Lord Baltimore. Did you often see her in the daytime?


Harrison. I did: Mrs. Harvey used to dress her.


Lord Baltimore. And what did she use to do for her?


Harrison. I have only seen her comb her hair, I saw her do that twice.


Cross Examination. Mr. Baker. Who is this Mrs. Harvey? Did she live in this
house? Did she lie there before this girl came?


Harrison. No she did not.


Mr. Baker. Then they came together?


Harrison. Yes.


Baker. You went to make the fire the first morning, where was the girl?


Harrison. She was in the room with Mrs. Harvey: they were both up.


Mr. Baker. Where was Mrs. Griffinburg?


Harrison. In the room too.


Mr. Baker. I ask you upon your oath, was not Griffinburg in the room the next
night?


Harrison. No, she was not. On Thursday night and Wednesday night she lay below
stairs.


Mr. Baker. So in the morning before you went to make the fire, Mrs.
Griffinbugh had got up stairs, and was in the room with them?


Harrison. She went up to show me the room. I had been there almost a
twelvemonth, but did not know they were there; Mrs. Griffinburg told me I was
to go in that way.


Mr. Baker. If I understand you right, you told me you found there the two
prisoners and Miss Woodcock. Pray did Dr. Griffinburg lie in this house!


Harrison No.


Mr. Baker. Pray what was Mrs. Griffinburg in this house?


Harrison. Housekeeper.


Mr. Baker. Pray did the young woman bring any cloths into the house?


Harrison. Not that I know of.


Mr. Baker. When did the change her cloths?


Harrison. After the came from Woodcote.


Mr. Baker. Did the bring any linen with her?


Harrison. Not that I know of.


Mr. Baker. When was the first time she had any clean linen?


Harrison. I cannot say.


Mr. Baker. Who did the have it of?


Harrison. Mrs. Griffinburg.


Mr. Baker. Now I ask you if that was not the Monday morning, the day she went
to Woodcote?


Harrison. I cannot say the day when it was.


Mr. Baker. The girl was always a laughing, constantly, was she not?


Harrison. Yes.


Mr. Baker. What, whether you spoke to her or not? Did she walk all about the
house?


Harrison. Yes, I saw her in my Lord's bedchamber the Friday before she went to
Woodcote.


Mr. Baker. What, never go out all the time?


Harrison. No, not that I know of.


Mr. Baker. What, did she shut up herself in the house?


Harrison. She might have gone out if she would.


Mr. Baker. Then you don't know the reason of Mrs Harvey's staying in the house
at this particular time? You don't know where she lived?


Harrison. No, I did not.


Lord Baltimore. Did not Griffinburg go up with you into the room?


Harrison. Yes, she did; and was giving me directions where to light the fire.


Agnes Mitchell sworn. I am cook to Lord Baltimore.


Lord Baltimore. Pray what apartment did you lie in?


Mitchell. Over the room in which my Lord lay.


Lord Baltimore. Where did Mrs. Harvey lie?


Mitchell. In the same room Miss Woodcock lay in: my room is partly over my
Lord's room, and partly over Mrs. Harvey's.


Lord Baltimore. Pray have you ever heard any conversation, or noise?


Mitchell. I have heard laughing, talking, and merriment.


Lord Baltimore. Then you heard it often?


Mitchell. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. What when Miss Woodcock has been there?


Mitchell. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Did you ever hear any noise or crying out?


Mitchell. No.


Court. This was in London?


Mitchell. Yes, in London: all that I heard was merriment and laughing.


Cross Examination. Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did you ever see Miss Woodcock?


Mitchell. No; but I know she was there. I could distinguish three voices.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. You say that if there had been any crying out, or noise
below, you must have heard it?


Mitchell. I am sure of that; I have heard laughing and talking, but never
heard any crying out: I could hear every thing that moved or stirred.


Lord Baltimore. Can you hear the curtains draw?


Mitchell. I could; I could have distinguished voices in the room; or if any
body was to speak or stir the fire, I could hear it.


John Mackdonald sworn. I am one of Lord Baltimore's postilions.


Lord Baltimore. Was you one of the drivers when I went to Woodcote?


Mackdonald. Yes; I drove the wheel-horses.


Lord Baltimore. Who was in the carriage?


Mackdonald. There was Dr. Griffinburg, his wife, my Lord, and two women more;
I took notice of the people that went into the carriage; they went in very
cheerfully; I observed nothing in particular; it was a post coach with four
horses.


Lord Baltimore. What glasses are there?


Mackdonald. There are sore glasses and side glasses.


Lord Baltimore. Can you tell which way we sat?


Mackdonald. His Lordship and two women sat together; they rode with their
faces to the horses.


Lord Baltimore. Was there not a little accident happened at setting out?


Mackdonald. The porter forgot to fasten one part of the gate; the wind blew
the gate to, and the hind wheel laid hold of it: I expected the carriage was
torn all to pieces, but I found it was the gate, and as soon as I could stop
the carriage, I did.


Lord Baltimore. How long did you stop?


Mackdonald. For about a minute or two; there was a great many people got round
the carriage; the glasses were up.


Lord Baltimore. Upon the accident happening, were they not let down?


Mackdonald. One of the side glasses was; we went on to Woodcote, over
Westminster bridge, at the usual rate.


Lord Baltimore. Had you no particular orders to hurry?


Mackdonald. No.


Lord Baltimore. Could you, who was the nearest postilion, hear the voices of
the people in the carriage as you went along?


Mackdonald. I heard a good deal of mirth and merriment, langhing, and so on;
they seemed all very cheerful: they arrived at Woodcote between two and three
o'clock.


Lord Baltimore. What time did you set out?


Mackdonald. A little after eleven.


Lord Baltimore. Do you speak with certainty as to the time?


Mackdonald. Not to a moment; I speak to the best of my knowledge, I saw his
Lordship get out of the coach, and this Brange woman gave him her hand, and he
led her in.


Lord Baltimore. Did she look as if she was a prisoner?


Mackdonald. No.


Lord Baltimore. Did you see them afterward?


Mackdonald. No, I went to take care of my horses.


Lord Baltimore. Did you not wait at table?


Mackdonald. I never waited at his Lordship's table. They came back again in
the same manner.


Cross Examination. Mr. Serj. Leigh. What was it o'clock?


Mackdonald. Not more than three. It was more than full daylight.


Jonathan Potter sworn. I am one of Lord Baltimore's footmen.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember going to Woodcote?


Potter. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Who went there, and in what manner?


Potter. It was my Lord's own post coach and four^ there was my Lord, Dr.
Griffinburg, Mrs. Griffinburg, Mrs. Harvey, and Miss Woodcock.


Lord Baltimore. What time did you set out from London?


Potter. At about half an hour after eleven or thereabout.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember any accident that happened as you were coming
out, with one of the gates?


Potter. The wind blew it to; it was very near overturning; that it caused a
stoppage for about a couple of minutes, and a great many people were passing
and repassing. I went behind the coach to Woodcote.


Lord Baltimore. Pray which way did the coach go out of town?


Potter. It went over Westminster bridge.


Lord Baltimore. Perhaps as you was behind, you can tell the behavior of the
company?


Potter. I frequently heard the company langhing, and very merry.


Lord Baltimore. Was either of the glasses let down?


Potter. The near glass was let down when the accident happened at the gate.


Lord Baltimore. Then you went the whole journey behind the coach.


Potter. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Did you hear laughing at different times?


Potter. I did, when I was behind the coach.


Lord Baltimore. Who went in first?


Potter. I think Sarah Woodcock; she got in by herself.


Lord Baltimore. When (...) came to Woodcote, do you remember how they go^ out?


Potter. I opened the coach door, and his Lordship got out first, and then
Sarah Woodcock: his Lordship, I believe, offered his hand, and she leaned her
hand upon his arm; I am not certain: then all the company went up the slight of
steps into the house.


Lord Baltimore. Where did you go to?


Potter. Into his Lordship's parlour.


Lord Baltimore. Did you wait at dinner?


Potter. I did.


Lord Baltimore. Who sat at dinner that day?


Potter. His Lordship, Dr. and Mrs. Griffinburg, Mrs. Harvey and Sarah Woodcock.


Lord Baltimore. Did she eat any thing at dinner?


Potter. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Did she drink any thing?


Potter. Yes -- Wine and water.


Lord Baltimore. Did she behave, or not, as the rest of the company did?


Potter. I could see no manner of difference.


Lord Baltimore. Did she appear in distress then she got out of the coach at
Woodcore? Did you see her at any time crying, and in distress?


Potter. No.


Lord Baltimore. Was you not upon the water?


Potter. Yes, I was.


Lord Baltimore. Who was there?


Potter. His Lordship, Mrs. Griffinburg, Mrs. Harvey, and Sarah Woodcock.


Lord Baltimore. Who conducted the boat?


Potter. His Lordship and I rowed it.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember the day that some company came down?


Potter. Yes; it was Wednesday the 23d. They came after dinner: Sarah Woodcock
drank tea with the rest of the company: I waited at table: Mr. Smith was one.


Court. What, Smith the painter?


Potter. No, a Ge^man, and a gentleman and lady besides, whose names I did not
know^


Lord Baltimore. Did she behave at tea as the rest of the company did?


Potter. Yes; I did not see the least sign of discontent.


Lord Baltimore. Did she cut and drink at supper?


Potter. She did; she generally drank wine and water.


Lord Baltimore. I believe next day we went to town!


Potter. Yes they did; I went to town on horseback.


Lord Baltimore. We supped there on Wednesday, did we not? Where did the
company breakfast?


Potter. They breakfasted in the parlour; Miss Woodcock was there.


Lord Baltimore. How was the time taken up?


Potter. I don't know. They walked about the park when they had a mind, and
came into the house when they had a mind, and when they pleased. On Tuesday
morning after breakfast, they went upon the water.


Lord Baltimore. Did Miss Woodcock breakfast on Tuesday morning with the family?


Potter. Yes. I remember seeing them get into the carriage.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember how they got into the coach?


Potter. Sarah Woodcock got in first, and had no assistance, to my knowledge.


Lord Baltimore. Was you near enough the carriage to see the behavior of the
people in the inside of it?


Potter. No; I was on horseback as I returned.


Lord Baltimore. During the time she was in town, or at Woodcote, did you ever
see her in tears?


Potter. I never did.


Lord Baltimore. Were there any doors locked, or the like?


Potter. No, the doors were all open.


Lord Baltimore. Were there any directions given to the servants to stop her,
in cafe the went out?


Potter. No, not by Lord Baltimore or any body else.


Lord Baltimore. Was you at Lord Mansfields? I only ask you to one particular
fact; did you see any little intimacy between any body after the thing was over?


Potter. A young man laid hold of her by the arm, and just as they got down to
the second step, he kissed her.


Lord Baltimore. How did she behave?


Potter. I stood at the bottom of the steps.


Lord Baltimore. Who was the man that kissed her!


Potter. They told me his name was Davis.


Lord Baltimore. Who (...) spoke, or looked, (...) did any thing to you?


Potter. When the (...) down (...) by m^, the (...) and looked me^ (...) and
smiled at me,


Cross Examination. Mr. Cox. You say she got first into the coach, did you know
her.


Potter. I have seen her person. I saw her looking out at the window, but I
never waited on her in London. I waited at table at breakfast, dinner and
supper.


Mr. Cox. You are employed to wait at table, and yet you say you never saw this
girl but at Lord Baltimore's window: This was severe weather, had you been used
to parties of pleasure on the water in such severe weather?


Potter. No.


Court. What fort of a vessel is this?


Potter. A large boat. My Lord has built a fort of a cabin in one of them. The
first day they were in the open boat, and in the cabin the second day.


John Perry sworn. Lord Baltimore. What are you?


Perry. I live in Fore-street, St. Giles's, Cripplegate. I was at Lord
Baltimore's on the 21st of December last; I was going to Dr. Griffinburg to
recommend a friend of mine to him: when we came to Dr. Griffinburg's house, I
went from thence to my Lord Baltimore's, and when Mrs. Vergen my friend and I
came within about ten yards of the porter's lodge, the coach came out with four
bay horses; the coach took part of the gate away; the coach stopped some little
time; I was pretty near the coach; I saw five people in it; I saw Dr.
Griffinburg in the coach, and pulled of my hat to him, and wished him a good
ride, I saw my Lord and the other woman, I do'nt mean the young woman.


Lord Baltimore. Did you hear any call for assistance?


Perry. There was a great number of people, ten or a dozen, passing and
repassing.


Lord Baltimore. Did not you wonder that nobody called out?


Perry. I was surprised, that from the danger the coach was in, that nobody
screamed out that was in the coach.


Thomas Vergen sworn. I was at Lord Baltimore's on the 21st of December last,
and saw an accident with the coach, it ran against the gate, and stopped about a
minute; I looked into the coach, there were five people in it; I did not hear
any body call out in it.

Lord Batilmore. Were there any other people there?


Vergen. Yes, several; I was near the coach, so near that if any body had spoke
I should have heard them.


Robert Stanger sworn. I am a butler (in the country) to my Lord Baltimore.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember the coach coming to Woodcote?


Stanger. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Who were in it?


Stanger. Lord Baltimore, Dr. Griffinburg, Mrs. Harvey, and Miss Woodcock.


Lord Baltimore. Who opened the coach door?


Stanger. The footman that came down with it.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember their geting out of the coach?


Stanger. I don't know who handed her out; they went up the lawn into the
parlour; my Lord came back on the lawn, and Miss Woodcock came after him; she
got hold of his arm and run into the house; that was before dinner; and she sat
down to dinner, and always drank first his Lordship's health; she drank tea,
and was very merry and cheerful. I attended his Lordship in his bedchamber; I
warmed his bed and undressed him; Dr. Griffinburg came in; I heard the other
door open, but who opened it I don't know.


Lord Baltimore. Did you hear any thing said upon that occasion?


Stanger. Dr. Griffinburg was in his Lordship's room, and went round to the
door.


Lord Baltimore. Did you hear any thing in the other room, of any noise, or
outcry, or complaint?


Stanger. No. On Tuesday morning I said the cloth for breakfast; Mrs Harvey and
Miss Woodcock came down together; they were very merry and cheerful.


Lord Baltimore. Were there any marks of deep distress?


Stanger. Not any.


Lord Baltimore Could you have then conceived by her appearance she had been
ravished the night before?


Stanger. No; the always had co^ee between twelve and one o'clock; on Tuesday
morning I saw Mrs. Griffinburg and Miss Woodcock come out of the room; she ran
down the ^airs after her; she jumped down and catched hold of Mrs.
Griffinburg's arm, (...) little piece of water, and was very merry.


Lord Baltimore. Some company came on Wednesday, did they not?


Stanger. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember the entertainment of that evening?


Stanger. It was a kind of magic lanthorn; and Miss Woodcock, for one, downed
on her knees upon the carpet, sewing these table-cloaths together, to make one
piece of it, and she laughed at it, and was extremely merry about it, more so
than any one: the cord broke, and we were obliged to put it up again; Miss
Woodcock laughed very much at that, more particularly than any body; she came
into my pantry one day, and admired the paintings there.


Lord Baltimore. Was there any orders given for restraining her?


Stanger. No, I never saw her but she had her liberty to go where she pleased.


Lord Baltimore. Were there not several workmen about?


Stanger. There were forty or fifty workmen about the house and park: she might
have gone away, I dare say, if she chose it.


Cross Examination. Mr. Baker. You know Mrs. Harvey; was she ever at Woodcote
before this?


Stanger. No. Miss Woodcock was the merriest always, she laughed surprisingly,
and was always the merriest of the company.


William Noble sworn. Noble. I am land steward to Lord Baltimore.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember my coming down on the 21st of December to
Woodcote?


Noble. I saw my Lord's carriage coming, but I did not see him get out; he
staid to the 24th; there was a young lady with him, one Miss Woodcock; I
remember to have seen her there very well; (...) once saw her with Mrs.
Griffinburg a furlong, at least, from the house in the park; the next time I
saw her along with Mrs. Harvey and Mrs. Griffinbu^gh, and they walked down to
the bottom of the lawn, and turned round the pa^es at the bottom.


Lord Baltimore. Had you any workmen employed then?


Noble. Yes; I believe we had ten men at work on the outside, and ten on the
inside of the house.


Lord Baltimore. Did they walk near where these men were?


Noble. They walked so nigh that they could talk to the workmen.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember any thing of some Italian shades represented
there one night?


Noble. Yes; I do; they were sewed together; I was not present at the time they
were sewing; I put them up; when I was drawing it up, the rope broke, and it
dropped; Miss Woodcock laughed very heartily, and the lady that sat next to her.
I was coming out of the great room that evening, and saw Miss Woodcock warming
her feet in a room by herself; that was on Wednesday night the 23d,


Lord Baltimore. Did you see her often when she was down?


Noble. I saw her many times, and she seemed to be very cheerful and easy.


Lord Baltimore. Did you ever hear of any orders given to confine her?


Noble. No, none at all.


Lord Baltimore. Could she not have gone out of the house as well as any body
else?


Noble. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. That seat is not far from Epsom?


Noble. About a mile we call it; it is but half a mile from our park.


Jane Chandler sworn. I live at Woodcote; I am my Lord's house-maid at
Woodcote; I remember Miss Woodcock being there; I was there all the time she
was there.

Lord Baltimore. How did she behave?


Chandler. Very well; the same as the rest of the ladies


Lord Baltimore. Was she dejected, or in good spirits?


Chandler. I observed no difference; she was under no restraint; I saw her on
the lawn on the Monday, the day she came.


Lord Baltimore. Who was walking with her?


Chandler. His Lordship.


Lord Baltimore. Before or after dinner?


Chandler. Before dinner, as soon as they came down.


Lord Baltimore. In what manner did she walk with him?


Chandler. She was close by him; I did not observe whether she had held of him
or not, but she seemed very merry and cheerful.


Lord Baltimore. You warmed the beds there I believe?


Chandler. I did.


Court. Whose bed did you warm?


Chandler. I warmed the bed for Mrs. Harvey and Miss Woodcock.


Lord Baltimore. Did you warm the bed on Tuesday night!


Chandler. I did.


Lord Baltimore. Who were there?


Chandler. Doctor Griffinburg, his wife, Mrs. Harvey, and Miss Woodcock.


Lord Baltimore. Did you observe any thing?


Chandler. They were all very merry.


Lord Baltimore. Did they laugh as if it was something sudden?


Chandler. I cannot say what they were so merry about.


Cross Examination. Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did you ever see Mrs. Harvey there before?


Chandler. No, never.


Elizabeth Greenoch sworn. I am his Lordship's cook at Woodcote: I was confined
to my bed on account of an accident I had; I was visited on Wednesday the 23d
of December.

Lord Baltimore. Do you know by whom?


Greenoch. One Miss Woodcock came in with Doctor Griffinburg.


Lord Baltimore. In what manner did she appear?


Greenoch. Very cheerful.


Lord Baltimore. Did the appear in any distress of mind?


Greenoch. No; she said mine was a very great misfortune; then she said to Dr.
Griffinburg, Sir, will you take a walk; the Doctor said he would; she went out
and put her hat on, and came into my room; then the Doctor and she went out to
take a walk.


John Daniel Smith sworn. Smith. I am a merchant: I have been acquainted with
Lord Baltimore; I have known him about eight years; I was one of the party that
made Lord Baltimore a visit at Woodcote.


Lord Baltimore. Who were the party?


Smith. There was Captain Pezer; a gentleman; and there was a young lady with
us.


Lord Baltimore. Under whose protection was she?


Smith. Under mine. We came there about five o'clock.


Lord Baltimore. What day was it?


Smith. I believe on Wednesday the 23d of December: when we went up stairs I
found my Lord, Mrs. Griffinburg, and Dr. Griffinburg, Mrs. Harvey, and Miss
Woodcock, all at tea.


Lord Baltimore. Did not some amusement go forward in the evening?


Smith. Yes, my Lord proposed to make a shade.


Lord Baltimore. Did Miss Woodcock lend a hand to this!


Smith. Yes; first she pinned them, and afterward took needle and thread and
joined them.


Lord Baltimore. While these shades went on, where was she? after she had done
her work, what became of Miss Woodcock?


Smith. I saw them standing there all together; I went behind to perform,
because we did not perform at a time; I was a performer, and Mr. Pezer, and a
little black boy.


Lord Baltimore. Did you see any more there?


Smith. While this exhibition was going forward, and almost over, my Lord and I
came from behind the curtain; my Lord went on, and I stopped at the chimney at
the corner: I believe he went up to the ladies; I saw my Lord in a moment
afterward, sitting in an elbowchair; Miss Woodcock came after him; my Lord sat
down in the elbow-chair, and Miss Woodcock sat down upon his knee, with her arm
upon his neck, not quite round his neck, rather upon his shoulder: I then
observed my Lord kissed her, and he drew back, and she kissed him, I saw it
plain: after this we went to supper, and I saw Miss Woodcock sit next to Miss
Forest, and she was sitting next my Lord, and she seemed to be very cheerful
and in good spirits; I observed one thing more, she poured out a glass of wine
for Miss Forest, and one for herself, and they drank to my Lord and the
company; after supper was over, they wished us a good night. Next morning the
ladies were not below when I came down; my Lord was already below, and Mr.
Pezer; then the ladies came in successively, and they sat down to breakfast; I
went to take a walk with my Lord; afterward I came back and found the ladies
sitting in the room; I saw particularly Miss Woodcock and Miss Forest running
upon the terras, seemingly in high spirits and cheerful; the other ladies
walked behind.


Lord Baltimore. During the time you was there, was the lady under any
constraint, uneasiness, or concern?


Smith. Not in the least.


Lord Baltimore. Could you observe she labored under any private uneasiness
and grief?


Smith. No, not to me.


Cross Examination. Mr. Serj. Leigh. Pray, Sir, where do you live in London?


Smith. In Newman-street.


Court. You are guardian to Miss Forest?


Smith. No, my Lord.


Court. I thought you said she was under your protection.


Smith. She is my housekeeper.


Henry Pezer sworn. I was one of the three people that went to visit Lord
Baltimore; I went down with the last witness.


Lord Baltimore. Who went down in your party?


Pezer. Mr. Smith, and Miss Forest.


Lord Baltimore. What day did you go down?


Pezer. On Wednesday the 23d of December.


Lord Baltimore. When you came there, how was my Lord engaged?


Pezer. He was in the room with Mrs. Harvey and Miss Woodcock; they were
drinking tea.


Lord Baltimore. How did you amuse yourselves in the evening?


Pezer. My Lord darkened part of the room; on the the other side was placed a
candle; I myself and others played there.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember who assisted in joining the cloths together?


Pezer. The ^dies did, Miss Woodcock and the others; the cords broke and it
sell down.


Lord Baltimore. Did that create any laughter?


Pezer. May be it did; I did not observe these things.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember who supped there!


Pezer. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Miss Woodcock was one of the party; was she not?


Pezer. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Did she refrain from drinking?


Pezer. No, she eat and drank as all the rest did; I took a bottle and said,
You have no wine, ladies: and I poured them out wine; there was a hare froze in
the ice, and they ran down to see it, and they ran up again; Miss Woodcock was
one of them, upon honor.


Lord Baltimore. Did you observe any appearance of gloom in her countenance?


Pezer. No, not the least, or discontent; she appeared as the rest of the
company.


Elizabeth Forest sworn. I am housekeeper to Mr. Smith; I was at Lord
Baltimore's with these two gentlemen.


Lord Baltimore. What time was that?


Forest. It was the 23d.


Lord Baltimore. Of what month?


Forest. I cannot tell.


Lord Baltimore. Was it before Christmas?


Forest. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Did you see me there, and Miss Woodcock?


Forest. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. What time did you go there?


Forest. About five in the evening. I saw there my Lord, Mrs. Harvey, Miss
Woodcock, Dr. Griffinburg, and Mrs. Griffinburg.


Lord Baltimore. What were they doing together?


Forest. Drinking tea.


Lord Baltimore. Was Miss Woodcock drinking tea with them?


Forest. Yes: I joined company.


Lord Baltimore. Was you left alone with Miss Woodcock any time!


Forest. No.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember any pictures?


Forest. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember my taking a walk?


Forest. No; I do not remember it.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember any thing about the pictures?


Forest. She (Miss Woodcock) got a candle, and looked at the pictures, and
showed them me.


Lord Baltimore. Did she then appear dejected?


Forest. No; she was as merry as the merriest.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember the magic lanthorn?


Forest. Yes; there was something of that sort; I don't know what you call it.


Lord Baltimore. Did she join in the company that night?


Forest. Yes; she was as much diverted as the merriest; she laughed; I lent
her my pincushion; she helped to pin them; and when the needles and thread came
up, she helped to sew, she was as much pleased as any of the rest; she appeared
to me to have the same liberty as the rest.


Lord Baltimore. Who supped with you?


Forest. We all supped together.


Lord Baltimore. Did Miss Woodcock eat any supper?


Forest. Yes; she eat the same, and as hearty as the rest; the laughed, and
was as merry as the rest. As soon as supper was over, the women all got up
together, and bid his Lordship a good night. As the four women retired after
supper, we were going through a gallery, I said, there are a great many doors.
She said, Yes; and if I would go with her, she would show me my Lord's
bed-room. I went in with her.


Lord Baltimore. Had you any conversation upon that occasion? Did any thing
more pass that night?


Forest. No nothing at all.


Lord Baltimore. What passed next morning?


Forest. Us women joined together to breakfast: the gentlemen had breakfasted
before, except Dr. Griffinburg; he sat down to breakfast with us; Miss Woodcock
breakfasted with us.


Lord Baltimore. That was on Thursay morning, I believe?


Forest. Yes it was.


Lord Baltimore. Did she eat any breakfast?


Forest. Yes, as much as the rest. After breakfast we walked up the terras; we
talked with Miss Woodcock; at breakfast she said she was ashamed of her linen;
that if she had thought of his Lordship's staying so long down there, she would
have provided herself with linen. When we were walking upon the terras, she
told me, she had never been there before, but had lived in my Lord's family
above a twelvemonth.


Lord Baltimore. Did you walk out that morning?


Forest. It was a very cold morning, and she and I ran several times on the
terras by way of diversion. As soon as I came in again, I lent her a shift, an
apron, and a pair of ruffles. I went into my own room, (the room I lay in.)


Lord Baltimore. Had you any conversation with Miss Woodcock at that time?


Forest. She was not in my room at that time.


Lord Baltimore. What did she tell you there?


Forest. I don't remember. After I had brought up the linen into her room, she
told me not to make myself uneasy; for as soon as she got home to his
Lordship's house, she would send the linen by one of the servants.


Lord Baltimore. So she looked upon my house as her own home?


Forest. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Did she eat and drink there at that time?


Forest. Yes, she did, and poured herself out a glass of wine, and poured out
some for me too.


Lord Baltimore. Did she drink to any body?


Forest. Yes; she drank Lord Baltimore's health.


Lord Baltimore. Did she appear to be in a dejected state, or did she appear to
be a woman that was well contented with her situation? Did she appear to be a
person that was at liberty, or under restraint or confinement?


Forest. She appeared to be at liberty as much as any body else; she might
have got away if she would; she was in as high spirits as any of the rest;
always in high spirits.


Cross Examination. Mr. Cox. You say she was just as cheerful as any of the
rest, neither more nor less, but exactly as cheerful that you observed?


Forest. Yes.


Mr. Cox. And eat and drank just as the rest did exactly?


Forest: Yes.


Mr. Cox. Did you make that observation at that time?


Forest. No, not a particular observation.


Mr. Cox. When did you first make the observation?


Forest. When we were at supper.


Mr. Cox. That was that time?


Forest. No; this is the next day.


Mr. Cox. How came you to think of it?


Forest. I don't know.


Mr. Cox. Upon what occasion did she tell you she had been there a twelvemouth?


Forest. As we were coming off from the terras, I asked her if she had ever
been down there before; she said No; but she had lived in his Lordship's family
above a twelvemonth.


Court. How long have you lived with Mr. Smith, and in what capacity?


Forest. I have been his housekeeper this twelvemonth.


Court. Where did you come from to him?


Forest. From Nottinghamshire.


Court. Who did you live with there?


Forest. I came from my father.


Robert Walter sworn. I work for Lord Baltimore at Woodcote, as a carpenter.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember my coming down in my carriage there?


Walter. Yes, I do. His Lordship came with three ladies and a gentleman; I knew
Mrs. Griffinburg; there were two young ones, whose names I did not know; I have
since heard who they were.


Lord Baltimore. What are their names?


Walter. Mrs. Harvey and Sarah Woodcock. I saw one lady get out, and my Lord
followed her: she appeared very agreeable and loving: I saw her again on
Tuesday walking in the park; Mrs. Griffinburg was with her; she appeared very
gay: she was arm in arm with Mrs. Griffinburg; I saw her walking about at other
times while there; she always appeared gay and cheerful; she seemed to be at
liberty to go where she pleased.


Cross Examination. Mr. Baker. Was not somebody always with her?


Walter. Yes, I believe there was.


Elizabeth Dunning sworn. I am governess to my Lord's daughters; one of them is
since dead.


Lord Baltimore. Pray, Madam, when did you first see this lady?


Dunning. On Christmas Day she was introduced with her hat, cloak, and gloves
on.


Lord Baltimore. As what?


Dunning. A companion to the misses.


Lord Baltimore. Was she introduced by my Lord?


Dunning. He said it was a person very well rocommended by her father to be a
companion to the misses.


Lord Baltimore. What said she to this?


Dunning. She made no reply.


Lord Baltimore. In what way did she live in the family while she staid there?


Dunning. She eat and drank with me and the ladies, my Lord's daughters, as
cheerful as any body; she breakfasted, dined, and supped with Madam Saunier and
the family.


Lord Baltimore. What was she employed in?


Dunning. Sometimes working: on Saturday evening she was at work, and several
parts of the day.


Lord Baltimore. Had my Lord and she any conversation?


Dunning. They had upon Christmas evening.


Court. What was their subject?


Dunning. Many subjects; they were talking of scripture.


Lord Baltimore. What were they talking of?


Dunning. They were talking of Paul, and Saul, and Isaiah, and Adam and Eve. --
Miss Woodcock said Adam was created upright; at which we all laughed.


Lord Baltimore. Pray did she join in that laugh?


Dunning. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Pray do you remember Mrs. Pynson's coming to see the ladies?


Dunning. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. She dined and supped with you I think?


Dunning. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. How was she employed that day?


Dunning. That was on Saturday; she was making gauze ruffles and aprons.


Lord Baltimore. Was any thing said about her playing at cards that evening?


Dunning. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. You had opportunities of couversing with her, and sometimes, I
suppose, alone?


Dunning. I was with her many times alone.


Lord Baltimore. Could you discover, from the style of her conversation, that
she was uneasy, and detained against her will, or any secret discontent?


Dunning. No, not in the least; nor did I know to the contrary, nor who she
was, till the was gone.


Lord Baltimore. From the manner of her being introduted to you, with her hat
and cloak on, she certainly assisted me to impose upon you, or she could
certainly have contradicted it?


Dunning. Yes, I suppose so.


Court. Did she not come from Woodcote that day?


Dunning. I did not know she had been at Woodcote; I never heard a word of it.


Lord Baltimore. Your apartments were distinct from the rest of the family,
were they not?


Dunning. There is a room where the masters attend upon the ladies: there is a
room for writing, and another for music, and the ladies are employed every
hour of the day with one or other of the masters.


Lord Baltimore. It is a very large house, is it not?


Dunning. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Do you know of her being in confinement?


Dunning. Not in the least.


Lord Baltimore. Would she play at cards?


Dunning. No.


Cross Examination. Mr. Serj. Leigh. So you never knew all this time that this
girl was in the house; you who are governess to his daughters and lived in the
same house?


Dunning. No, I did not know she was in the house till they came back again.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Or did you ever know Mrs. Harvey was there?


Dunning. No.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did the young ladies never eat with my Lord?


Dunning. When he has no company sometimes they do.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did you ever see Mrs. Harvey before?


Dunning. No, I never knew there was such a woman in the house till this broke
out; I never saw Harvey or Woodcock till Christmas Day.


Mrs. Saunier sworn. Lord Baltimore. Pray, did you know Miss Woodcock?


Saunier. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember her being at Woodcote that December?


Saunier. No.


Lord Baltimore. Was she introduced to you at any time, and in what character?


Saunier. Yes, on Christ mas-day, as a companion to the young ladies.


Lord Baltimore. How long was she at the house in town?


Saunier. Three days, to my knowledge.


Lord Baltimore. Could she have gone out of my house if she thought proper?
Were any orders given to the family to keep her in?


Saunier. No, she was under no restraint; she could have got out whenever she
pleased.


Lord Baltimore. Did you ever see her in tears?


Saunier. No, she was as cheerful as we.


Lord Baltimore. Do you know of her being to have a bed in your room?


Saunier. Yes, there was a bed made up there.


Lord Baltimore. Did she ever lie in it?


Saunier. No, she would not lie in it.


Lord Baltimore. What sort of a room was it?


Saunier. It was a little room; there were two beds in it; it was a good room;
there was a bed made on purpose for her to lie in my room.


Lord Baltimore. Had she a nightcap in your room?


Saunier. Yes, and she went and fetched it out.


Lord Baltimore. Did you hear any thing said of Miss Woodcock's application to
me?


Saunier. She refused to lie in that room, and said she would speak with me
first: I told her I should see her again; she fetched the nightcap out, and
said she did not choose to lie with any body in the room.


Elizabeth Pynsons sworn. Lord Baltimore sent a note with his compliments to me
on the 26th of December, and that if I was not engaged, he would send his coach
for me. I went; I saw my Lord, his two daughters, Miss Woodcock Mrs. Saunier,
Mrs. Dunning, and Dr. Griffinburg; we all dined together.

Lord Baltimore. How did Miss. Woodcock appear at dinner?


Pynsons. Extremely cheerful, and the most pleased of any person there.


Lord Baltimore. Did she dine, and eat as other people did? -- Did you stay
there after dinner?


Pynsons. I drank tea there and supped.


Lord Baltimore. How did you spend your afternoon?


Pynsons. The young lady after dinner, and Miss Juliet, got up, that is she
that is dead.


Lord Baltimore. I believe she was about fifteen at that time.


Pynsons. Yes. -- They got up, and went into the drawing room together, both
laughing, immoderately. She was cheerful and gay till tea-time came on, and
then they were all at work. My Lord said, My ladies don't love cards: I said to
my Lord, the ladies are very cheerful at work, (she was at work on gauze); she
said it would wash well, and th t the apron I had on would wash well; it had
been washed. I asked Mrs. Saunier how long that lady had been in the family;
she said the day before. I observed she was extremely cheerful, and appeared as
if she had been in the family a twelvemonth. She and Miss Juliet seemed very
fond of each other.


Lord Baltimore. Did you observe any discontent of mind?


Pynsons. She appeared to me to be at her full liberty as much as I; she
appeared under no restraint.


Lord Baltimore. She did not appear to be a person with an afflicted mind, did
she? Did you see her cry?


Pynsons. No: if laughing is crying, she had sufficient of that.


Cross Examination. Mr. Serj. Leigh. Are you a married woman?


Pynsons. No, I am not: I have been married.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Where do you live?


Pynsons. In Warwick Court Holborn.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Are you of any employment, or bufiness?


Pynsons. No, I live upon my fortune.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. You went to my Lord Baltimore's, and there were these people,
my Lord and his two daughters, Mrs. Saunier, Mrs. Dunning, Dr. Griffinburg, and
Miss Woodcock: it struck you very much, I think, that this girl was so very
merry?


Pynsons. As I had not been in the family for five months, I enquired after her.


Mr, Serj. Leigh. So then she was so extremely cheerful, that you enquired
after her on that account?


Pynsons. I was going to say to the ladies, tell me what you laugh at, that I
may laugh with you, but my Lord was there, and so I thought I would not.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. How long did you stay after dinner?


Pynsons. I supped there,


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Did the young ladies and my Lord Baltimore sup with you?


Pynsons. Yes.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. And were they all as cheerful at night?


Pynsons. Yes.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. But this girl struck you?


Pynsons. They were all cheerful.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. You knew Mrs. Dunning was an instructor to the young ladies,
and Mrs. Saunier: and yet you had not the curiosity to enquire who this young
lady was?


Pynsons. No.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Well then, you thought, I suppose, she was brought in merely
to laugh. As you took so much notice of this girl, I wonder your curiosity did
not lead you to enquire in what capacity she was in the family?


Pynsons. No; my Lord was present; it was when Mrs. Saunier went to the fire I
spoke to her.


Mr. Serj. Leigh. Well, but suppose my Lord was there, you was on a good
footing; there was no great distance kept.


Lord Baltimore. If I understand you right, the reason why you took notice of
this young woman was, because you had never seen her there before?


Pynsons. Yes.


Mary Okeley sworn. I am a mantua-maker; I was sent for to my Lord Baltimore's
the 26th of December.

Lord Baltimore. For what purpose?


Okeley. To make a gown for a young lady, whom, I since understand, is Miss
Woodcock: I made the gown.


Lord Baltimore. Did you receive any directions from Miss Woodcock about making
the gown?


Okeley. I did. I asked her if she chose it with an apron, or without? She
said, without an apron.


Lord Baltimore. Did she choose what color her gown should be?


Okeley. I asked her what I was to measure her for? Mrs. Griffinburg asked,
Would she have a nightgown, or a negligee? She chose a nightgown, because I
told her it was impossible to have a negligee made by next day; Mrs.
Griffinburg had said at first, you must have it made by tomorrow: and then she
chose a nightgown. I asked her how she chose to have it made; whether to
button before, or with a loose stomacher? She said with a loose stomacher.


Lord Baltimore. Was it made?


Okeley. It was.


Lord Baltimore. When did you bring it home?


Okeley. I came to try it on at 9 o'clock the same evening.


Lord Baltimore Where did you find Miss Woodcock?


Okeley. At the top of the stairs, with a candle in her hand. I went into her
bed-room; I tried it on; she defired me then to be as quick as I could, because
it was supper-time.


Lord Baltimore. Did you go away as soon as you had done?


Okeley. Yes; and came again the next day, and brought it home: I saw her then.


Lord Baltimore. Had you any conversation with her then?


Okeley. No; none.


Lord Baltimore. Did you bring the stomacher?


Okeley. I asked her to excuse me till Monday; she said by all means, only let
me have the gown by dressingtime tomorrow. And being in so great a hurry,
going to supper, she did not let me take the pins out; I told her I hoped she
would excuse any little flaw that might happen. She said she would, by all
means.


Lord Baltimore. Did you see her on Sunday.


Okeley. ^ did. There was Mrs. Dunning, the two ladies, Doctor Griffinburg, and
another lady there. She appeared very brisk and merry; she was coming to the
fire to Dr. Griffinburg, and there stood talking.


Lord Baltimore. Had she an opportunity to get out if she would?


Okeley. Yes, she had; she was under no restraint, and was alone on the top of
the stairs.


Lord Baltimore. Did her eyes appear swelled with crying?


Okeley. Not in the least.


Isabel Hadley sworn. I am a milliner, and live in Holborn; I was sent for to
Lord Baltimore's; I saw a young lady; I did not know who she was.

Lord Baltimore. What did she bespeak?


Hadley. She chose a cap and a cloak, and some petticoats, and ordered some
muslin to be brought.


Lord Baltimore. Did she show any attention to the fashion and make of the
goods?


Hadley. I showed her some; she did not choose them. She did not say any thing
particular, only objected to a cloak that it was too dear.


Lord Baltimore. The question is, Did she want them sashionable? -- There were
under petticoats?


Hadley. Yes; slannel petticoats.


Lord Baltimore. Did she give any directions how these were to be made?


Hadley. She desired these might be made to tie before, and they must be
brought home by two o'clock. I never had such an order before.


Lord Baltimore. Did this young woman appear easy and cheerful?


Hadley. She did not seem distressed.


Cross Examination. Mr. Cox. You never saw any tears, or any thing of that sort?


Hadley. No; none at all.


Adock Humell sworn. I am a musician.

Lord Baltimore. Did you teach any body music at my house?


Humell. I taught Lord Baltimore's two daughters every day.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember going to my house in December? You know the
time I refer to; you came to see some company in the parlour.


Humell. No; they were up stairs: it was the 28th of December.


Lord Baltimore. What time of the day?


Humell. Between eleven and twelve.


Lord Baltimore. When you came there, where was I?


Humell. I did not see Lord Baltimore at first when I came in; first I met Mrs.
Saunier and a strange woman I did not know.


Lord Baltimore. Who did she turn out to be afterward?


Humell. After that I went to the room to my scholars, and there was the eldest
daughter and my Lord; they desired me to go and fetch a music-book from below;
when I came up stairs into the room, I found his Lordship and the young woman,
Miss Woodcock.


Lord Baltimore. Have you seen her since?


Humell. That was the only time I saw her.


Lord Baltimore. When you came back again, you saw somebody in the parlour; did
you not?


Humell. I saw his Lordship and Miss Woodcock playing together. She had her
back to the fire side, and she was handling her work. My Lord took her work
from her, and pulled it from her; and she pulled it from him.


Court. What was the work?


Humell. A handkerchief, or some such thing.


Lord Baltimore. She was not crying, or weeping then?


Humell. No; she was gay and free.


John Burn sworn. I am butler to my Lord at his house in Southamptonrow. I
remember Miss Woodcock's going out, on Monday the 28th of December, with Mrs.
Griffinburg and Miss Fanny. She is eight years old. They went in a
hackney-coach. I handed them all in.

Lord Baltimore. Did she go there freely?


Burn. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Under no constraint?


Burn. no; not in the least.


Lord Baltimore. Did you see them all go freely into the coach? They were to
drive to Queen Street, Soho?


Burn. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. You being the butler, very frequently attend the hall, and go
to the door, do you not?


Burn. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Is the door ever locked in the day time?


Burn. No.


Lord Baltimore. Are you pretty much in the hall?


Burn. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Was any order given to stop her if she should want to go out?


Burn. No.


Lord Baltimore. Should you have stopped her, if she had offered to go out?


Burn. No.


Cross Examination. Mr. Baker. The time you speak of was Monday the 28th; when
did you first see Miss Woodcock?


Burn. I believe the day they went down to Woodcote: that was the first time I
had ever seen her.


Mary Jacobs sworn. I am servant to Dr. Griffinburg.

Lord Baltimore. Do you remember any body coming in a coach to Dr.
Griffinburg's on the 28th December?


Jacobs. Yes; Mrs. Griffinburg, Miss Fanny, and Miss Woodcock. When they came,
I opened the door.


Lord Baltimore. Who came out first?


Jacobs. Mrs. Griffinburg.


Lord Baltimore. Where did the coach stop?


Jacobs. About five or six doors off. Mrs. Griffinburg took Miss Fanny out, and
brought her into the passage, and Miss Woodcock followed.


Lord Baltimore. Where did they go?


Jacobs. Into the parlour. Mrs. Griffinburg came down twice or three times into
the kitchen.


Lord Baltimore. How long was she out of the parlour at a time?


Jacobs. About eight or ten minutes.


Lord Baltimore. Then nobody was left with Miss Woodcock but Miss Fanny. Was
the street door so fastened that she could not open it?


Jacobs. No? it was not fastened at all: she could have gone to the door in a
minute.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember the parlour fire being out?


Jacobs. I made it up. Miss Woodcock said she was cold. Mrs. Griffinburg took
her cloak, and put it on her. She said, Madam, you will spoil me. She seemed
merry.


Lord Baltimore. Not at all dejected?


Jacobs. No.


Cathcrine Smith sworn. I am fourteen years old.

Lord Baltimore. When was you fourteen?


Smith. A quarter of a year ago.


Lord Baltimore. Don't you live with Dr. Griffinburg?


Smith. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember any thing of any company coming to your
master's house in December?


Smith. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. Who were they?


Smith. Miss Woodcock, Mrs. Griffinburgh, and Miss Fanny.


Lord Baltimore. How did they come?


Smith. They came in a coach.


Lord Baltimore. Do you know where they stopped?


Smith. They stopped at a milk-cellar.


Lord Baltimore. How far is that from your street-door?


Smith. About five yards.


Lord Baltimore. Then they were obliged to walk five yards to your door. Could
the coach have come nearer up to the door?


Smith. No.


Lord Baltimore. What room did they go into?


Smith. The back parlour.


Lord Baltimore. Is that on the ground floor?


Smith. Yes.


Lord Baltimore. How far is it from the door of that parlour to your street
door?


Smith. About three yards.


Lord Baltimore. When Mrs. Griffinburg was come home, there was some dinner
preparing, was there not?


Smith. There was.


Lord Baltimore. Did she stay in the room all the time?


Smith. No; she went down stairs: the first time, she staid a quarter of an
hour, I believe, and went again after that.


Lord Baltimore. Could she have gone to the door, and let herself out, if she
pleased?


Smith. Yes, she could.


Lord Baltimore. Was nobody with her besides the little girl?


Smith. No; there was not.


Lord Baltimore. When did they come?


Smith. At four o'clock.


Lord Baltimore. That was daylight, was it not?


Smith. Yes.


Mary Vanburg sworn. I am a servant of Lord Baltimore's. I went to Dr.
Griffinburg.

Lord Baltimore. Did not you go from thence to Whitechapel?


Vanburg. Yes; I went with Lord Baltimore, Dr. Griffinburg, Sarah Woodcock,
Miss Fanny, and Mr. Morris.


Lord Baltimore. Pray what time did you get to the tavern?


Vanburgh. It might be between eight and nine.


Lord Baltimore. How long might you stay there?


Vanburg. It might be two hours. Miss Woodcock, Miss Fanny, and I, were left by
ourselves in that tavern in Whitechapel.


Lord Baltimore. Where were the others gone to?


Vanburg. I don't know; they went out of the room.


Lord Baltimore. Had Miss Woodcock any opportunity to get out of that room, if
she pleased? If she had offered to go out of the room, should you have stopped
her?


Vanburg. No; I had no such orders; and if I had, I should not have pretended
to have stopped her.


Lord Baltimore. Where did Miss Woodcock lie that night?


Vanburg. I saw her in my Lord's bed.


Lord Baltimore. Pray how did she go to bed?


Vanburg. She went up stairs; she sat some time in the room before she went to
bed; she was as cheerful as any person could be, and was very merry.


Lord Baltimore. Was the under any restraint?


Vanburg. No; she was under no restraint whatever.


Lord Baltimore. Had she her liberty?


Vanburg. She had her full liberty.


Lord Baltimore. Do you remember her going to my Lord Mansfield's? Do you know
what became of the key of the door where she lodged?


Vanburg. She put it in her pocket.


Hugh Morris sworn. Morris. I am a linen-draper.


Lord Baltimore. Have you any connection with these people? How came you one of
the party at the Crown and Magpye?


Morris, Dr. Griffinburg had paid me some money that day, and he desired me to
carry a letter.


Lord Baltimore. For what reason?


Morris. Because he could not speak English very well.


Lord Baltimore. Did he direct you where to go?


Morris. No; he went with me in the coach. We went to the Crown and Magpye,
Whitechapal. I asked Dr. Griffinburg what was the matter? He said nothing at
all. I followed him into the room.


Lord Baltimore. Where was the room?


Morris. On the ground floor. I passed by the bar; there was a woman selling of
oysters on one hand, and two or three people in the bar, and several in the
kitchen, all of which we passed; and I saw in one room a dozen people.


Lord Baltimore. What passed when you got into the room?


Morris. Miss Woodcock asked who had got the letter? I said, I have. She took
the letter out of my pocket, and said, this is my own hand writing; go and tell
my father or sister to come here directly. I went. Mrs. Berry said, they were
not at home, and could not tell when they would come home. I went back to my
Lord again. He was for sending me to Justice Fielding to enquire for Mr.
Woodcock. Miss Woodcock thought Justice Fielding would do no business at that
time of night, and her father would probably be at home soon. We staid about
half an hour. She proposed sending the letter, and leaving it there. My Lord
asked her if she thought Mrs. Berry would deliver the letter? She said she
would. She proposed writing a sew more lines. She opened the letter, and wrote.
My Lord desired to see what she wrote. She read it to him. There were about
five or six lines. I went and gave the letter to Mrs. Berry. Mr. Woodcock was
not yet come home.


Lord Baltimore. If this young woman had wanted to have gone herself to her
father could any body have hindered her?


Morris. She stood between me and the door. There was nothing could hinder her
from going out, if she chose to lift up the latch of the door. We went back,
and I was set down at Bridges-street to go to Sir John Fielding's. My Lord
desired me to ask for Miss Woodcock's father and sister, and desire them to
come to her at Dr. Griffinburg's house. When I went there, I could not find her
father. I was carried directly to Sir John. He asked me, how I came to go with
them? I told him Dr. Griffinburg asked me to go with a letter. He called one of
his clerks to write a card to Miss Woodcock, to desire her to come to him to
meet her father and friends there. I went with Mr. Lee, one of Sir John
Fielding's clerks, to Dr. Griffinburg's. He delivered the card to Miss
Woodcock. I was rather frightened by Sir John. He told me it was a dangerous
affair, and advised me to have nothing more to do with it. I said I would not.


Court. Was the card desiring her to come that night, or some other time, to
meet her father?


Morris. That night.


Court. Was not her father then at Sir John's that night?


Morris. I don't know.


Lord Baltimore. Was not you sent to enquire whether the father was not at Sir
John Fielding's?


Morris. They never satisfied me?


Lord Baltimore. What was the answer she made on delivering the card? What did
she say with regard to Sir John?


Morris. The last words she said was, But desire them to come to Dr.
Griffinburg's.


Lord Baltimore. When she was at the tavern writing that letter, did I give any
direction to her?


Morris. I did not hear my Lord say a single word. It was all wrote by her own
hand, and of her own dictating.


Cross Examination. Mr. Serj. Leigh. Was my Lord Baltimore in the room?


Morris. Yes.


Mr. BARON SMYTHE. Gentlemen of the Jury,

THE prisoner at the bar, Lord Baltimore, stands indicted for feloniously
ravishing and carnally knowing Sarah Woodcock, spinster, against her will, on
the 22d of December last at Epsom; against the statute which makes this offense
felony: and the other two prisoners are indicted as accessaries before the
fact, by feloniously and maliciously procuring, aiding and abetting Lord
Baltimore, to commit the said rape, at the said time and place. To this they
have pleaded Not Guilty; and you are to try if they are guilty. Before I state
to you the evidence, I will mention to you two or three things: In the first
place, my Lord complains of libels, and printed accounts of this transaction,
which have been circulated. It is a most unjustifiable practice, and tends to
the perversion of public justice; and therefore if you have seen any thing
printed on the side of the prosecut^ix or the prisoners, I must desire you to
divest yourselves of any prejudice that such publications may have occasioned,
and give your verdict only on the evidence now laid before you. Another thing I
desire, is, that whichever way the verdict is given, none of the friends of any
of the parties will make use of any expression of approbation o^ applause,
which are extremely improper and indecent in a court of justice, and I shall
certainly commit any person whom I shall know to be guilty of it. The last
thing I shall mention to you, is, to desire that no resentment you may feel at
the manner in which she was carried to Lord Baltimore's house, may have any
influence on your verdict; for however unwarrantable the manner was, in which
she came into his power, if at the time he lay with her it was by her consent,
he is not guilty of the offense of which he is indicted; though it was proper
to be given in evidence in this trial, to account for her being with him, and
his having an opportunity of committing the crime; and to show, from the
indirect manner of getting her to his house, the greater probability that her
account is true. Having said this, I will now state to you the whole evidence
as particularly as I can.

Mr. Baron Smythe then stated the whole of the evidence to the jury, as before
given, which took up three hours, and on account of the length of it is not
repeated here; and then concluded,

In point of law, the fact is fully proved on my Lord and the other two
prisoners, if you believe the evidence of Sarah Woodcock. It is a crime which
in its nature can only be proved by the woman on whom it is committed; for she
only can tell whether she consented or no; it is, as my Lord observes, very
easy to be made, and hard to be disproved; and the desence can only be
collected from circumstances; from these you must judge whether her evidence is
or is not to be believed. Lord Hale, in his history of the pleas of the crown
Vol. I. p. 632, ^
, lays down two rules: I. If complaint is not made soon after the injury is
supposed to be received; 2. If it is not followed by a recent prosecution; a
strong presumption arises that the complaint is malicious. She has owned the
injury was received December 21st, and the complaint was not made till December
29th; but she has accounted for it in the manner you have heard. The strong
part of the case, on behalf of the prisoners, is, her not complaining when she
was at Lord Mansfield's, the supreme magistrate in the kingdom in criminal
matters: you have heard how she has explained and accounted for her conduct in
that particular, which you will judge of. Upon the whole, if you believe that
she made the discovery as soon as she knew she had an opportunity of doing it,
and that her account is true, you will find all the prisoners guilty; if you
believe that the did not make the discovery as soon as she had an opportunity,
and from thence, or other circumstances, are not satisfied her account is true,
you will find them all not guilty; for if he is not guilty, they cannot be so;
for they cannot be accessory to a crime which was never committed.

After Baron Smythe's summing up of the evidence, the jury went out for about
an hour and twenty minutes, and then returned to the court.


Clerk of Arr. Gentlemen, are you all agreed on your verdict?


Jury. Yes.


Clerk of Arr. Who shall say for you?


Jury. Our Foreman.


Clerk of Arr. Frederick Calvert, Esquire Baron of Baltimore, hold up your hand. (
which he did) Gentlemen of the Jury, look upon the prisoners: How say you, is
Frederick Calvert, Esquire Baron of Baltimore, guilty of this felony and rape
whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty?


Jury. Not guilty.


Clerk of Arr. How say you, Gentlemen, is Elizabeth Griffinburgh guilty of this
felony and rape whereof she stands indicted, or not guilty?


Jury. Not guilty.


Clerk of Arr. How say you, Gentlemen, is Ann Harvey, otherwise Darby, guilty
of this felony and rape whereof she stands indicted, or not guilty?


Jury. Not guilty.


Clerk of Arr. Harken to your verdict, as the court has recorded it. You say
that Frederick Calvert, Esquire Baron of Baltimore, in the kingdom of Ireland, is
not guilty, and so you say all.

And you say that Elizabeth Griffinburg and Ann Harvey are not guilty, and so
you say all.


FINIS

