The Freeman's Directory; Or, well accomplished, and faithful Rulers discribed:

A DISCOURSE, Delivered at the Freemen's Meeting in Killingworth, APRIL 11th,
1768.

And now published at the Desire and Expense of many who heard it.

By ELIPHALET HUNTINGTON, A.M. Pastor of the first Church in KILLINGWORTH.

Ye have been called unto Liberty, only use not Liberty for an Occasion to the
Flesh; but by Love serve one another. GAL. v.13. Ye ought to be quiet, and do
nothing rashly. ACTS xix 36. HARTFORD: Printed by GREEN and WATSON, at the
Heart and Crown, opposite the Courthouse, 1768.

The Freeman's Directory, etc.
PSALM c1.6. Mine Eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may
dwell with me: He that walks in a perfect Way, be shall serve me.
ALL those in whom is the spirit of wisdom, are, in an influential manner
sensible, that the true prosperity of states and kingdoms (under God) depends
upon the good qualifications of rulers and counselors. Of this, king David was
fully sensible; wherefore he determined to look well to the accomplishments of
those whom he chose to stand around him.

The words now read, and the psalm in which they are contained, were composed
by David, between the times of God's promising him the kingdom, and his actual
and plenary possession of it; which appears from the second verse, where he
thus addresses himself to God, O, when will thou come unto me? q. d. when will thou fulfill thy gracious promise, and give me to sit upon the throne of Israel?
He expresses a settled determination that no one should be admitted into his
house, as a domestic servant, or into his court as a counselor, unless free
from a vicious character -- free from an assuming, corrupt and deceitful mind
and conduct. Mine eyes, says he, shall be upon the faithful of the land (in
conformity to my glorious antitype) upon those who are governed by a spirit of
wisdom, integrity and goodness, for in them is the favorable presence of God.
The real and enduring prosperity of the people are the most likely to be
secured. No state or community on earth can flourish, or subsist, unless God is
present to counsel its counselors, and succeed their endeavors. Now, the
promise of his favorable presence and assistance, is peculiarly to them that
fear him, and walk, in his perfect way: Such therefore, were the persons upon
whom holy David had his eyes, to search them out, to favor and advance them,
from among the people, to fears of government. He well knew, that as the throne
is established by righteoussness, Prove. xvi.13.
thosse who surround it, must walk in a perfect way. This was so rivetted in
his mind, that he repeatedly expresses his settled determination, to make
himself a pattern, by ordering his conduct according to God's will, and
entertain none in his court but such as walked by the same rule. It was not,
with him, a sufficient recommendation for high advancement, to be forward and
warm in pursuit of it. To be of quick apprehension, of polite address, or
learned in politics. Though the latter of these are good, yet the king after
God's own heart, did not confine his views wholly here; he extended them
farther in quest of qualifications more divine and God-like. As God invested
him with a right to promote to honor and government, he esteemed it necessary,
in order to be free from abusing and forfeiting this privilege, to see well to
the real worth, and sufficient accomplishments of those he called to public
service in the state. This is highly worthy of our serious attention. Since
God, in his good providence, has seen fit to indulge us in this colony with
this power, of electing our rulers, and this day calls us to the service, we
are bound, with impartiality and faithfulness, as in the presence of God, and
accountable to him, to improve this privilege which was, and still is in many
places, the sole prerogative of kings. Every abuse of this most valuable
liberty, is a forfeiture -- and a forfeiture may soon be followed with total
loss. But we may farther meditate upon this general observation from the words,
viz.

That it is a duty incumbent on us, and on all who have a right to, and are
active in advancing men to places of public trust and eminence, carefully to
have our eyes upon, and give our suffrages for those who are well qulified, and
are faithful. Here we may consider,

Who we are to view, and act for, as well qualied for public trust. Then,

Show the duty and necessity of giving our suffrages for such, and consider
some arguments for it.

Now, by the faithful and well qualified, we are not to understand those only
who are of our own particular taste, sentiments or party. It Is possible a man
may think and act in conformity to, and in conjunction with us, and still be
unfaithful to his God, his country, and his king. A person may greedily adopt,
and drink in our scheme of religion and politics, and yet be essentially
unqualified for a public ruler.

Neither are we to confine this important character to those who are peculiarly
obsequious to us. To those who we imagine in all controversies in which we may
be concerned will be ever ready to espouse our cause, (whatever it is) and be
servent and active in promoting us; our private interests, or friends. This
would favor too strongly of self and party.

It Is with much disapprobation St. Jude V. 16. of his Epist.
mentions some, who thus have men's persons in admiration, because of
advantage. So, we are not to understand by this, such only as are wise and
faithful in their own matters, awake to their own personal interests, and
neglectful of the public. But,

1st. We are to understand by the well qualified, men of approved varacity. I
trust there is none of you my friends, but what think it worthy of your care,
to elect those to represent and govern you, on whose varacity you may safely
rely: you would be fearful of reposing even the least confidence in any you
esteemed defective in this point. Our public affairs, and particular
circumstances; call for a just representation: and such a representation we can
never be assured of, either at home or abroad, unless our public concerns are
committed into the hands of men possessed of this virtue. We shall not be
likely to have our real wants supplied, or grievances redressed, unless made
known to such, as have the power of redressing them in the light of truth.
Those who preside in the republic or kingdom, must be informed of the true
state of the people, before they can minister to them according to their needs.
Doubtless, for want of due information, given to the heads of government,
communities and states have often long groaned under calamities from which they
might soon have had relief, if matters of fact had been justly related. We
always need the help and supports of truth. So Jethro counseled Moses, Exodus
xviii.21.
Thou shall provide out of all the people, men of truth. Holy David says, v. 7
cont.
He that works deceit, shall not dwell within my house. This was a virtue
Solomon had found very chearing and valuable in ambassadors; he says, Prove.
xiii.17.
A faithful ambassador is health.

Again, they must be men of impartiality and justice. God, the supreme head of
the universe, is a God of truth, and without iniquity, Deuteronomy. xxxii.4
so he delights in these virtues, and would have all the children of men
possess them -- in an especial manner those who govern under him. He would have
all under his government, partake the benefits of equity and justice: wherefore
he says, 2 Samuel, xxiii.3^
He that rules over men, must be just. As every person has an unalienable
right to equity and justice, rulers must be such as will administer these,
faithfully and impartially, and hear the small, and do them justice as well as
the great. If there is no proper regard to these in rulers, our estates, our
most valuable privileges, yea, our lives, will have but a very slender
security. We are bound to give our voices for such as we, with greatest
probability judge, will never desert the path of righteousness, or the common
safety, from the tear of frowns, the hope of rewards, or the adulations of the
insincere and designing. The prophet Isaiah xxxiii, 15, 16.
points out who is worthy, and shall be owned of God. He that walks
righteously -- that despises the gain of oppressions, that shakes his hands
from holding of bribes -- he shall dwell on high.

Where there is a partial administration, you may expect that the wicked will
be promoted and justified, and the righteous be overthrown in judgment. That
the offending and vexatious will appear in high places, when the innocent, and
his just cause, shall be neglected or turned aside. We cannot rationally expect
that rulers who are partial, tempered in the heat of party, will properly
concern themselves for the good of the whole political body. Their peculiar
friends and party interests, will very much terminate their pursuits, whilst
the general welfare is trampled upon. Not that they are to be regardless of
individuals, for they are to rule for the particular good of every one, which
will encompass the whole; wherefore it is incumbent on us, to afford a promoting
hand to such as are most likely to conduct with due reference to these, and to
(...) herein. But,

Farther to answe^ this character, they must be men of found understanding, of
firm and steady resolution. It is evident, such us are ignorant of the things
of our peace, cannot judiciously, and with success, pursue them. Though, it is
true, there is a possibility of their taking right measures; but who of us
would be willing to risk his own, and the common safety, upon a mere
possibility? Wou^d it not be an argument of weakness, should you place your
most valuable measures under the slenderess security? Would you hazard your
own, and the public's ALL upon a weak and insufficient bottom? Would you, in a
tempestuous sea, commit your life, and every thing valuable, to the guidance of
an unskilful pilot? To conduct wisely, our care for the security of our
valuable effects should be proportionate to their real valuableness. Wisdom is
a defense; more so than many mighty.

There is a very rare composition requisite to complete the character of a
well-accomplished and faithful ruler; but it is a composition most worthy of
our critical search: it is a composition which (blessed be God) may be found on
earth. There is really need of a spirit of wisdom and understanding as well as
of integrity, in those we constitute fathers and protectors, of their country:
unless our legislature are knowing, what will be our system for civil
government and justice? the wise king of Israel was sensible, that every other
qualification short of this, would leave him very unfit for the head of
government. That the success and equity of his administrations depended here is
wherefore in preference to all other state accomplishments, he prays to God for
this, 3 Kings iii.^.
Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart, etc. Men for rule must have
a spirit of discernment. Able even at a distance to discover threatening evils,
and avoid them; and things tending most to the public emolument, and pursue
them. I should account that person either unwise, or brought to straits, who
chose one blind for his guide. It was the direction of Moses to the people of
Israel, Deuteronomy. i.13.
Take ye wise men, and understanding etc.

It Is evident a man's practical integrity and goodness, cannot exceed the bounds
of his knowledge; wherefore the public will have but little benefit from
those, who have but little understanding in politics.

So likewise there is required magnanimity and firmness of resolution in our
political heads. Where those are wanting in any, our public and private
interest would be very unsafe in their hands. The preservation of our most
important and darling privileges would be very precarious: for although it is no
remarkable discovery to see a person firm and resolute in his endeavors for
the security of his private interest; yet it is rare to find a man who will
conduct thus, with regard to the common welfare. There is general cause of this
apostolic complaint, "all seek their own, etc." though this may not be universal.
Now the civil magistrate would be very deficient, if destitute of a public
spirit, and true greatness of soul: without this patriotic virtue, all our
boasted privileges would be likely tamely to be given up, even upon the
slightest attack. There is a spirit of fear, which God has not given, from
which rulers should be free; and a spirit of power, or fortitude and of a sound
mind, which he has given, and which they should possess. 2 Timothy i.2.


He who from such a spirit of fear -- from a secret hope of ^egal rewards, or
aggrandisement, will desert and give up to ruin, the political edifice at it is
first apparent shake, and leave his fellow subjects to be buried in its ruins,
is too much like the unfaithful shepherd, with much dishonor mentioned by our
Savior, John x.1^.
who even at the distant prospect of the devourer, was eager to give up to
ruin, his defenseless charge.

But on the other hand it is possible they may be too adventrous -- by being too
precipitant in catching hold to save the ark, they may be instrumental in its
overthrow. As the former may plunge themselves and the state in ruin for want
of fortitude, and true public spirit; so these by being too ardent, and
consequently too unguarded in their measures, may prove equally fatal.

There is a proper medium between these extremes worth looking after -- a
medium which if we could be so happy as to discover, and generally unite in, we
might expect that the public safety would rest upon the firmest basis. So
likewise those who are unstable, and contiually wavering, even with the
smallest breeze -- who appear to do nothing by found judgment and steady
resolution, are not likely to promote and secure the lasting good of the
community. You at once grant that so respectable and ^onderous a fa brick
requires the most solid foundation, and supports. Conscious of this, king
Solomon leaves this direction to his son and successor, Prove. xxiv.21
Meddle not with them that are given to change.

But we may go on to observe, that the well accomplished for rule, must be men
of faithfulness: this holy David mentions as a summary of the good qualities of
those he determined should complete his court and serve in the state. Mine
eyes, says he, shall be upon the faithful -- there is much contained in this --
there is faithfulness to God -- faithfulness in the temporal and spiritual
interests of the people. God, whose dominion is universal, demands the first
and principal regard of all; wherefore, we cannot suppose he who is negligent
and regardless of his duty to him, will conscientiously discharge his duty to
his fellow men.

The civil magistrate is said Rom xiii 4.
to be the minister of God: wherefore he should have his eye to him. Unless he
believes that God is, can he obey him? he should manifest his faithfulness to
him, by believing in him, as to that essential mode of subsistence in which he
has revealed himself. By believing in Jesus Christ as the King eternal, and the
only savior -- by embracing his truths, and walking according to them. Now we
can not suppose that those who are regardless of his laws, will regard man's. A
steady and uniform attendance to the duties which he owes to God, will
recommend to public confidence.

To add yet farther, we shall do well to take a survey of the past transactions
and conduct of those we endeavor to promote to dignified stations. It is
unquestionably a good recommendation for advancement, where any have been
faithful in the places which they have filled heretofore, or fill now, and in
the trusts which have been reposed in them. Such we may with a good degree of
safety continue to confide in. We may farther trust him, who has given
sufficient proof of his good abilities, and fidelity. But should we not be
suspicious of him, who had betrayed a trust, and esteem him unworthy of future
confidence? you would not readily trust to a bow, which had proved deceitful,
or boldly tread where your feet had well nigh slipped.

Those who have evidenced a serious concern for the public good, and done all
in their power to promote and secure it; (if otherwise qualified) bid the
fairest to answer the great ends of government. By past faithfulness, they
recommend themselves, to honourary advancement, and more important trusts. Thus
God in things spiritual, gives grace for grace. So our blessed savior asserts
this truth, John xvi.10.
He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much. Like
principles will most probably govern him in greater matters, which governed him
in those that were less, tho it is confessed that not every one who is faithful
in the lower offices of the state, is qualified for the highest -- these may be
too weighty for his shoulders. As has been shown, there are other
qualifications requisite: there must be a good understanding, and a public
spirit; a spirit of universal benevolence, which influences to an intimate
concern for the good of the community, and of mankind in general.

The qualified patriot is ambitious not only to serve himself, or a partial
interest, but to build up, and entail lasting happiness to the common wealth --
a happiness which shall rejoice the hearts of ages, and generations, which come
after him. He esteems it contemptible -- it is beneath him, to "coil himself up
in his own contracted shell." He possesses true greatness of soul, which cannot
be confined to party, or faction, but extends as far as possible in promoting
particular, and public happiness. He is continually watchful for the
preservation of the religious and civil rights of the people; and contends
earnestly, and with perseverance, that the foundations may not be removed.

It is necessary that magistrates, and all civil rulers should be such as will
seriously regard, highly prize, and be engaged for the security of our
religious as well as civil enjoyments: wherefore they should be men of real
piety -- men of the serious profession and practice of christianity.

Rulers may possibly do well in things temporal, and not in things spiritual;
thus Joash, king of Israel, did that which was right in the sight of the Lord
-- Yet the high places were not taken away -- He also took all the hallowed
things of the house of the Lord, which his good predecessors had gathered, and
gave them to Hasael king of Syria. 2 Kings, xii 2. 3 and 1^
Their religious matters lay in a most melancholy and affecting waste.

It Is acknowledged that men destitute of the pure principles of the divine
life, may have much understanding in politics, be most skilful in a plan, and
of a correct and proper address: they may be instrumental to the public
emolument -- yea, they may from various motives, be induced to exert themselves
in the cause of religion. But is it probable, that man who has not the fear,
the love, and saving truths of God in his heart, will be as steadfastly engaged
to maintain the cause of true religion at all adventures, against all unjust
claims and oppositions, as he who really possesses these divine virtues?

Rulers are to be nursing fathers to the church as well as to the state:
wherefore they must have a most tender love and affection for it is head, and
(...) all it is members: it should even be graven upon the palms of their hands,
and lie nearer their hearts than children. If they have these sentiments rooted
in their hearts they will be inspired with that laudable ambition, "which is a
powerful source of good," in advancing the prosperity of our Zion, which is our
glory, more than with an ambitious notion of popularity and preferment; for
real christianity will form the heart to virtue, and even mould it into the
divine image, and benevolent sentiments of its glorious author. Other
principles are unstable, and may soon be shaken or rooted out of the mind, but
these are established upon an immovable foundation.

We observe, in the history of the Jews, that when their chief rulers were
really men of God, and ruled in his fear, they generally flourished in success
and prosperity, both in things spiritual and temporal. Blessed art thou, O
land! blessed art thou, O Zion, and people of God, when such are exalted! Is
this the case with us? then our hopes for the establishment of our most dear,
spiritual enjoyments, and their being perpetuated, may triumph over our
disquieting fears of the irreparable loss of them. When rulers, instead of
being examples of christian faith and purity, are examples of renouncing and
slighting the peculiar doctrines of grace, and the fundamental articles of the
christian religion -- when they are in practice, examples of impiety, we may
expect that surprising evils will ensue -- that error and wickedness will be
prevalent, and the cause of the dear Redeemer be clad in mourning.

Mankind are greatly inclined to imitation; in an especial manner, to imitate
those in places of eminence, and high life. Sensible of this, holy David
resolved to behave himself wifely, in a perfect way. 2. v. context.
If their examples are bad, we may expect that the wicked will walk on every
side, and that immorality will prevail like the spreading leprosy. When the
rulers among the people of the Jews were idolatrous, oppressive or any ways
notoriously impious, impiety and wickedness, even at once, in general deluged
them. The real faults and imperfections of those in distinguishing seats of
government, and of the polite world, are, in the view of many of lower
characters, and of those who emulate them, even crowned with a sanction, and
imitated as really enobling: from whence the accursed thing which God hates,
and which brings final ruin, loses it is malignity, and when thus fashionable,
sacreligiously puts on the pretended appearance of honor, and indicates a great
and adventrous soul. When this is the case with any people, what cause of
lamentation and grief! O Termpora, O Mores!

The impiety of princes and rulers, has often proved the corruption and
calamity of the state: this history both sacred and human, puts beyond dispute.

We may now proceed to confider the duty of giving our suffrages for such as
are thus well qualified for public trust, together with a few arguments (in
addition to what have been noticed) exciting to it.

Now, we are bound to this, as it is the will of God, that those who bear his
name, should resemble his moral character. Rulers are called Gods, Exodus
xxii.38.
from that faint resemblance they bear to him, the supreme Ruler. They are
called thus, on account of the office they are appointed to under him, to enact
laws, to govern, to protect, and to administer justice; and it is his pleasure
that they should conduct worthy of this most exalted and honorary title -- that
they should possess and honor all the moral perfections which belong to the
name. We may not only confider King David speaking in the text, but Christ, the
blessed and only potentate, of whom he was eminently a type, and to whom his
throne was promised. It is required by him, that those who are to rule for him,
should be faithful, and walk in a perfect way. Yea, that all his subjects
should, as far as possible possess, and exhibit all his most glorious moral
excellencies. In an especial manner, rulers as his ministers, must like him be
no respecters of persons, but imitate his most amiable character, by doing
justly, loving mercy, and walking humbly with their God.

Again, we should be animated to this, because it is our duty and wisdom, wisely
to improve our privileges. It is a privilege truly great, for a people to have
the free election of those that have the immediate rule over them; and it has
ever been accounted and proved so, by those who have had this power, and duly
improved it. That people whose rulers are appointed by those whose distance
necessarily keeps them in a degree unacquainted with their particular
circumstances, (without any hurtful design in those that appoint them) are
doubly liable to have such set over them, as care more for absolute dominion,
and increase of wealth, than for justice and equity, or the real prosperity of
the community; perhaps for instances of this kind, we need not look into
distant climes, or ancient records. Are not such more likely to bind heavy
burdens upon men's shoulders, than those chosen by the people out of their own
tribes, members incorporated in the same body?

But in the good providence of God, and clemency of our rightful King, we in
this colony live in the freeest part of a kingdom, the best constituted of any
of the kingdoms of the earth. Wherefore we are faithfully to improve this
liberty, and endeavor by all warrantable measures to have it perpetuated.
Every abuse of it is impious, and exposes to a total, irrecoverable
deprivation. And if this is lost by our misconduct, or abuse of it, the evil
consequences will justly return upon our own heads.

But to proceed, we do well to consider that our most important interests
(under God) are put into their hands -- yea, the highest interests of every one
of us. Rulers are not merely for the benefit of any particular person or party,
but for the whole community. Every member of it (as such) has an equal right in
them; so that if we strive to raise those into place, whom we imagine will be
partial in favor of us, and of those that think with us, to the neglect of
others, we act unrighteously, and endeavor, to prevent others from their
unalienable right. Now since every individual, and so the whole body is to be
cared for, if we act from partial views, for favorers of a party, we
counteract this plain direction, Look not every man on his own things, but
every man also on the things of others. We are bound by all legal measure, to
promote our own, and others good and happiness. Surely, you would not be
willing to commit your most valuable effects, or those of your friends, to the
custody of one who was unfaithful, and would embezzel and destroy them -- to
one weak and unable to defend them, or to one who would attend to ill advice
and desert them. We learn that by weakness and ill advice, Rehoboam took
measures which occasioned the revolt of ten of the tribes of Israel.

So farther, you may consider that the blessing of God is most likely to come
to a people in, and attend the administrations of good and faithful rulers. As
he loves righteousness and hates iniquity, so he loves those that work
righteousness, and in this service he will establish their ways. Such as are
wise and holy, have a peculiar promise of his favorable presence, and he will
instruct them. David says, the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him,
and he will teach them. So we find that God would not hide from faithful
Abraham, the thing he was about to do to Sodom. Genesis xviii.19.
The holy records inform us, that he has signally blessed his people, when
their rulers were just, ruling in his fear, he is with them in the judgment.
When this is at any time the case with us, we may expect that the Lord of hosts
will be for a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty unto us; and for a
spirit of judgment to him that sits in judgment. Isa. xxviii.5, 6


This likewise should be a moving consideration to the present duty, that as
rulers are to rule for God, we have bound ourselves by free and solemn oath, to
help him by giving our votes as in our conscience we judge most for the good of
this government, without respect of persons, or favor of any man. Now is such
an oath binding? if it is, we are guilty of a most aggravated crime in
counteracting it: -- a crime of too deep a stain to be easily effaced. Is it
not to be feared this is often much too little regarded, and that favorite men
and schemes unreasonably biass our minds, and bear us away from the path of
duty?

To add yet farther, we do well to consider, in the elections of this day, that
we are to be subject unto those who are by us advanced to seats of rule. God
commands us to be subject to principalities and powers, and to obey
magistrates; since this subjection and obedience is required of us, it highly
concerns us to endeavor to promote those, to whom we may cheerfully submit,
and to whom we may do service as unto the Lord. -- Not that we owe passive and
blind obedience to all their commands, without any qualification -- where their
commands are contray to God's we are bound in conscience to refrain from them.
When Saul told Jonathan that he should surely die, it being unjust, the people
said, As the Lord lives, there shall not an hair of his head fall. It is their
just and righteous commands which we are bound by, and if they are not such,
then we must see that we obey God rather than men.

But finally. -- We should bear it upon our minds that we must account with God
for this day's transactions. This should be a powerful incentive to a
conscientious attendance to the services of it -- that God, who at one view
pervades the universe, who searches the hearts, who knows all our ways, all our
most secret springs of action, will soon call us before his awful tribunal. Let
this most solemn thought, excite us to a wise improvement of all our advantages
-- to an uniform, and steady attendence to all the parts of our duty, and
engage us now and ever to conduct in the fear of God, in the uprightness and
integrity of our souls, For happy -- forever happy and blessed will those
servants be, whom their Lord when he comes shall find so doing.

I shall now conclude with a few inferences from what has been said.

First. We from hence learn, that we should endeavor to obtain a just
knowledge of the good accomplishments of those we elect to represent, and rule
over us. Moses commanded the people to take men for service in the
commonwealth, who were known among their tribes etc. whose good qualifications
they were well assured of. We act in the dark, and at too great a risk, if
ignorant of those we give our voices for. If such a knowledge cannot readily be
obtained, it is worthy of labor in pursuing after it, as we cannot act according
to the character of moral agents in this affair without a degree of it.

But as you are unable, universally, to have the benefit of personal
acquantaince, with such as you call to public service in the state, you will
be ready to enquire how you may attain to such a knowledge? to this I reply;
Not from those who are leading and hot in a party; it would be even a prodigy,
to receive a just and impartial character from such; for we find it frequently
(not to say universally) true, that of whatever party they are, they are prone
to give us partial information -- You may predetermine, that men to their
liking will be warmly recommended to yours; and those foreign from their taste
will if possible, be sowered to the taste of every body else. Seeing this is so
frequently discoverable among us, we need be cautious upon whose recommendation
we rely. There is occasion almost universally, where parties run high, to make
more or less abatements, as we see the parties characterized, prejudiced for,
or against those whom they characterize. It is an observation which will
generally bear, that in all warm controversies, you will find truth growing in
greatest plenty in the happy medium.

2d. Are rulers God's ministers, bearing his name? then we should not rashly
speak evil of them. We ought in regard to them, and to him who sent them, to
speak of, and conduct toward them, with due respect and reverence. Should we
indulge ourselves upon every trivial occasion to speak evil of them, we should
transgress the commandment of God. It Is said, thou shall not revile the Gods.
And again, thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people. This is not
only a violation of the divine law, but tends to bring them into contempt -- to
alienate people's minds from them, and subvert government. Railing came so much
in contrast with the meeckness of Moses, that he could not practice it, even
against the common adversary. The apostle Jude, paints the guilt of those who
speak evil of dignities in a crimson dye. It is not from hence to be
understood, that we are obliged to refrain from opening our mouths in
disapproving them, in order to obtain relief, supposing they are really hurtful
and oppressive. There is a way open for us to seek for, and obtain deliverance,
from oppressive and wicked rulers; the law is above the highest of them. But if
we have occasion at any time to protest against their measures, it should be in
the temper of meekness; not with haughty arrogance and clamorous bitterness: to
pretend to judge and condemn them as evil, with our private decision, would be
conducting, as though we partook of the divine prerogative to pour contempt upon
princes; to lead counselors away Spoiled, and to make the judges fools. By
speaking reproachfully of rulers, as being weak, unfaithful or wicked, we
reproach the body of the people by whom they are elected; yea, we even reproach
ourselves, being members of this body. If they conduct unjustly, contrary to
the fundamental rules of government, they are not above the law; but in a legal
method are to be pointed to the path, and roused to a sense of duty, in that
temper of charity which the gospel is full of.

3d. Hence, (if the things mentioned render a person well accomplished for a
ruler) it is evident that no particular place of abode in the community can
disqualify him. If any particular spot of ground can qualify for public
service, then those who have a laudable ambition for this service, must with
unwearied application search for it; yea, they must even sell all that they
have to purchase it. This is too trifling a matter for the least contention.
Though a principal ruler in the eastern, or western part of the government, may
perhaps, honor those more frequently with his presence and breath, who dwell
near his qualifing place of abode, yet of how much more importance is it to all
who belong to the community to be honored, and blessed with his just and
equitable administrations?

4th. Since every member of our corporation has an equal right with others in
public rulers, we counteract equity and justice, if in our elections we are
governed by self or any particular party. It Is manifest that party contentions
and prejudices in any society or commonwealth, are of most disquieting, and
hurtful consequences, and a small acquaintance with our public affairs, will
convince that the present times are not free from them -- can a kingdom or
house divided against itself stand? Now when apprehensive of a fatal disease,
an antidote may preserve health and life. When the natural body is in pain; and
convulsed, there is need of some specific; so there is much incumbent on every
one, to promote the health and quietude of the political body. In these days of
foreign and domestic disputes, we should all (if from nothing else) from the
principle of self preservation, be moved to throw by all party spirit -- to
cast out this old man with his deeds, and unite all our vigorous endeavovrs for
the public safety. The times are such that we verily want the wisest heads and
the uprightest hearts; and if we and all the rest of the freemen in this
colony, could in this, be of one heart, and do nothing through strife or
partiality, we might reasonably hope, that our peace would be as a river, and
our prosperity like that of the field which the Lord has blessed. But if ye
bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another.

Lastly. Let the elections of this day, raise your minds above the rulers of
this world, to him who is the prince of the kings of the earth, and to that
peaceable kingdom of his, which can never be moved; where, (if sincerely
subjected to him) we shall all be made kings and priests unto God, in a more
glorious manner, than any whilst here. May what has been said of obedience to
civil rulers, remind us of our duty in yielding constant obedience unto God,
whose requirements are all without exception, perfectly just and holy.

We may make choice of such to rule over us in civil matters, as may be
instrumental in maintaining peace, and administering justice. But would we be
justified before God? would we enjoy peace with God? we must make choice of
Christ who is our leader and commander, and submit to him as such. Temporal
rulers, may protect from temporal evils, but Christ, the mighty God, can save
us from those which are eternal. Rulers may likewise promote our present
interests, but he whose kingdom rules over all, can bestow upon us, riches
eternally enduring, and inexpressibly more excellent. He is Lord over all, and
all who submit to him as their protector, their savior, and guide, shall be
rewarded with distinguishing and everlasting favors.

It becomes us not only to exert ouselves for the advancement of the kingdoms
of this world; but principally for the advancement of the kingdom, and
interests of the dear Redeemer.

Let us all watch unto faithfulness, and walk before God uprightly, and fulfill
the duties of our respective places and characters unto death, and then we
shall receive a crown of life, which will God of his great mercy grant, in
Jesus Christ,

AMEN.

