Mr. Maccarty's SERMON ON THE Day of the Execution of a Criminal.

The Power and Grace of Christ displayed to a dying Malefactor. A SERMON
Preached at Worcester October the Twentieth, 1768. Being the Day of the
Execution of ARTHUR, A Negro of a about 21 Years old, for a RAPE.

By THADDEUS MACCARTY, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Worcester.

"When Lust has conceived, it brings forth Sin: And Sin when it is finished,
brings forth Death".

Apostle JAMES. "The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all Sin".

Apostle JOHN. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by KNEELAND and ADAMS, next to the
Treasurer's Office, in Milk-Street. MDCCLXVIII.

LUKE 23d Chap. 42d and 43d Verses. And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me,
when thou come into thy Kingdom. And Jesus said unto him, verily, I say unto
thee, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise.


THE preceding part of the chapter gives us the narration of the condemnation
and crucifixion of our blessed Savior. -- This was a glorious event to an
apostate world; herein an effectual foundation was laid for the recovery of
apostate man to the image and favor of God, and the bliss and immortality for
which he was at first designed; howbeit his crucifiers meant not so. I shall
omit taking notice of the many circumstances here made mention of, that relate
to our Lord's crucifixion, save only what is necessary in order to place the
words of our text in their proper point of light.

It appears then, from the Evangelist's account, that, agreeable to what was
spoken in prophesy by Isaiah, chapter 53. last verse -- he was in his death
"numbered with the transgressors": For two malefactors, who were under sentence
of death, adjudg'd to the painful and ignominious death of the cross, the same
death that our Savior was adjudg'd to, were led away with him to the place of
execution, and all three to be nailed to the cross and die together. "And when
they were come to the place, which is called Calvary, there they crucified him,
and the malefactors; one on the right hand, and the other on the left".

What a dreadful, distressed situation was our blessed Lord in at this time!
But were there any relentings toward him in the men that stood about him? Any
pity and compassion shown to him? No, He was mocked and derided and insulted in
the most cruel and shameful manner, by the people and the rulers at the head of
them -- as you may see ver. 35. and onwards. Notice is taken in the 40th ver.
that one of the malefactors railed on him, in like manner, as others had done.
But in Matthew and Mark, it is expressly said, that both of them did so. -- "The
theives also which were crucified with him cast the same in his teeth", says
Matthew, chap. 27.44. referring to what the scribes and elders had insolently
demanded of him, that he would come down from the cross, etc. In Mark it is, "
They that were crucified with him, reviled him".

It is plain from what both these Evangelists declare, that both these
malefactors treated our Lord in the same manner, at the time of his
crucifixion. The reason why the Evangelist Luke mentions only one of them,
railing on him, was doubtless because one of them ceased railing at him, before
he expired, a sudden and extraordinary change having passed upon him, so that
he had other apprehensions of Christ from what he had when he came to the place
and was first fastened to the cross, and was very differently affected toward
him. None of the other Evangelists relate what Luke does respecting these
things. One of the malefactors kept on railing to the last: But the other, who
had just before joined with him, by a wonderful, divine influence upon his
heart, suddenly changed his note, thinks and speaks in a very different strain.

Here were so many evidences given in a short time of a blessed change wrought
in him, as that more could not have been given in so little a compass. He that
had just before railed at Jesus, now administers a serious and pungent reproof
to his fellow -- "Do not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same
condemnation? And we indeed justly; for we receive the due reward of our deeds,
but this man has done nothing amiss". -- What must this rebuke be owing to,
but the sudden and extraordinary change that passed over him? It seems very
plain from the Evangelist's account, that He, equally with his companion, was a
sinner when he came to the place of execution. Both of them had lived in
abominable practices, particularly in a course of theft, so that they had
forfeited their lives into the hands of public justice, and for the public
safety were condemned to die, to be drove out of the world, as not fit to live
any longer in it, such pests and nusances had they been to the community. And
the day of execution comes, and both go to it, hardened and impenitent, having
no fear of God in their hearts and before their eyes, prejudiced against
Christ, who was to be crucified with them, and reviling and reproaching him.
But one of them at the eleventh hour was wrought upon by the power of divine
grace -- as appears from what he said to his companion in iniquity and in
suffering: And so also from the prayer he addressed to our Savior in our text.
"And he said unto Jesus, Lord remember me", etc. And from the answer, that
Jesus immediately gave to him, "Verily I say unto thee, this day shall thou be
with me in paradise".

This (as one notes) is the prayer of a dying sinner to a dying Savior. --
Perhaps he never prayed before, and yet now was heard and saved at the last
gasp. While there is life, there is hope; and while there is hope, there is
room for prayer.

There are several things worthy our consideration, from this dying prayer of
this malefactor, and our Savior's answer to it. These I shall but briefly
speak to, that I may leave more room for that which is the more especial design
of our being assembled at this time, in this house of worship, upon so very
melancholy and affecting an occasion.

Here then, we may, in the first place, consider, wherefore it was that this
dying criminal, who came to the place of execution in a state of sin and
impenitence, did, before he expired, address this prayer to Christ, "Lord
remember me", etc.

Now it must needs be, that by his thus praying to Christ, he was brought truly
to believe in him, as the Son of God and the Savior of sinners, and as able to
save such a sinner as he was, though he had gone on even to the last,
impenitent and at enmity with him. How can it be otherwise, than that he who
had just before been a railer, and became all at once a humble suppliant,
paying an act of religious homage to Christ, and in a matter so interesting to
himself; how, I say, can it be otherwise, but that he should have such a faith
as this, and in a lively exercise too? Had it not been for this, is it not
likely that he would have gone on railing with his companion to the last,
instead of rebuking him? It must needs be that he had a very different view and
apprehension of Christ from what he just before had, and was differently
affected toward him. It had been insolently and tauntingly demanded of him, by
the chief priests, rulers, elders and people, that if he were the Son of God,
he would come down from the cross, save himself from the death they were now
putting him to, and save the two thieves also, and so give proof of such his
relation to God. They treated his claim to this relation with contempt,
upbraiding him, that he was not able to come down from the cross, to deliver
himself, or the thieves; and so that it was a mere pretense that he was the Son
of God, and the true Messiah, and "the thieves", both of them, "cast the same
in his teeth". But he who offered the prayer to him in our text, was at the
last brought to believe, that though he did not come down from the cross, as it
had been demanded of him, but submitted to the death of it, yet he was indeed
what he had declared himself to be, the Son of God and the anointed Savior; to
see and believe the necessity of his dying this death, that so he might to all
intents and purposes become the Savior of sinners.

The death of Christ upon the cross is a main and principal article in the
gospel-scheme of redemption. This is spoken of, especially in the writings of
the new testament, as a sacrifice; a sacrifice of atonement. Diverse things
spoken by our Savior himself express this, as might be particularly shown; and
the epistles of the Apostles are abundant in expressing the same thing,
especially the epistle to the Hebrews. The blood of Christ is represented as
"precious blood", incomparably more so, than such "corruptible things as silver
and gold", as that "through which we have redemption, even the forgiveness of
sins, according to the riches of God's grace". "It cleanses from all sin". By
the application of this blood, the most heinous and aggravated sins, those that
have been of a scarlet and crimson color, may be washed away, and the guilty
sinner become as white as the snow and as the wool. And what is it now that
renders the blood of Christ so efficacious? I answer, because it is the blood
of him, who though he took upon him the human nature, and in that nature died
the death of the cross, yet was truly the Son of God; a higher character than
his being the son of man; denoting a sameness of nature with the Father.

Jesus, whom the Jews with wicked hands crucified and slew, was the "Lord of
glory"; a character entirely incompatible with any finite nature whatever,
though of the highest rank and dignity. Now the divine character of Christ, his
being the Son of God, in a higher and more exalted sense, than saints and
angels, who are sometimes so called; this is that, which derives an infinite
virtue and efficacy into his blood which he shed upon the cross. So that it is
justly said of him, that he is "mighty to save", "able to save to the
uttermost", etc.

So that the faith of the dying thief, respected Christ, (as was said before)
as the Son of God and the anointed Savior; and so that the death he was now
dying, was a sacrifice to put away sin, to make a complete satisfaction to the
justice of God for it; that he himself, notwithstanding his heinous wickedness,
and abusive treatment of the suffering Savior, even until that time, might,
through the virtue thereof, be pardoned, justified and saved; and his trust and
dependence was firmly placed in him accordingly. And now sin, which he had been
so deeply guilty of before God, appears to him in its vileness and malignity.
He is not exempted from the capital punishment he is adjudg'd to; the sentence
of death passed upon him could not legally be reversed: But this is not the
main thing with him, he is more affected with his wickedness which had brought
him to this capital punishment; the vileness of which, principally as against
God, is what he is now led to grieve and mourn for after a godly sort. He was
doubtless now in the exercise of a true repentance toward God, as well as
faith unfeigned toward the Lord Jesus Christ. And so from a vile, hardened
sinner, he suddenly became a justified and sanctified man; and could with a
humble confidence make the prayer to Christ that he did, that he would
"remember him, when he came into his kingdom".

This sudden and happy change in him, just before he expired, contrary to all
his inward enmity, hardness and prejudice against Christ, was (as was hinted
before) effected in him by the gracious and powerful influences of the Spirit
of Christ, which is the Spirit of the living God, to whom nothing is
impossible; who has an immediate access to the souls of men, and contrary to
all improbabilities, can in his adorable sovereignty work in them to will and
to do of his own good pleasure. This poor, dying criminal, becoming at last a
true penitent and a sound believer, thereupon entertains a lively hope, that he
should be happy in that invisible state into which he was now passing, and
accordingly he makes the prayer of faith to Jesus -- "Lord remember me", etc.

And so I go on in the next place, to consider the import of the prayer itself.

It is plain from this prayer, that he believed that though Jesus was condemned
and crucified as a malefactor, yet that he was the "Holy One of God", owned and
accepted of his Father, and that when he expired he would ascend to the
heavenly kingdom. And he now fervently prays to him, that when he came there he
would remember him, that he would admit him to be with him in that kingdom,
admit him in his spirit thereinto, when it should leave his body, as presently
it would do; much such a prayer as that of the excellent martyr Stephen to the
exalted Jesus, whom he had an amiable and happy vision of, through the opened
heavens -- "Lord Jesus receive my spirit", Acts 7.59. He was fully convinced
that his soul would live after his body was dead, and that it would at once
enter upon an invisible state. And the general purport of his prayer is --
Lord, may my soul be happy in that state, may it be admitted to the glories of
thy kingdom, "remember me and prepare a place for me" when thou come into it.
He does not go into any particulars, he sums up all in this, "Lord remember
me", sensible that if he did so, it would be enough, that he should then be as
happy as he could desire. But without enlarging here, I go on,

In the next place, to consider the gracious answer of Jesus to this dying
prayer of this poor criminal, "Verily I say unto thee, this day shall thou be
with me in paradise".

He speaks here of heaven under the name of "paradise", and it is diverse times
thus spoken of in the new testament, in allusion to the ancient garden of God,
that seat of innocence, joy and felicity to our first parents.

Our Lord had himself an undoubted prospect of his human soul's ascending
immediately to the heavenly paradise, so soon as it should leave his body. That
(as one notes) was the beginning of the joy that was set before him: And hence,
"He endured the cross, despising the shame of it". The malefactor believed this
of him: And accordingly he prays, Lord when thou arrivest at paradise, remember
me. -- The answer he gave was kind and gracious. He did not upbraid him with
his past heinous wickedness, and particularly with his abuse of himself in
reviling him, as he had just before done; did not tell him, no -- I will reject
you, as you deserve; you shall have no lot or portion in that blessed place,
where I am going -- you shall be a monument of my everlasting wrath in the hell
of the damned; but knowing his faith was genuine, and his repentance sincere,
though late; he gives him a most comfortable and reviving answer, "to day shall
thou be with me in paradise". He speaks peremptorily in the case, as that which
he might certainly depend upon, " Verily, I say unto thee", etc. "I the Amen,
the faithful witness, say unto thee", etc. "I say Amen to this prayer, put my
fiat to it". It is observable here, that though our Lord was now dying the
death of the cross "through weakness", yet he speaks to this malefactor, as one
having authority -- I have power to grant your request, and you may depend upon
it, that I will do so. Your departing spirit shall immediately, even this day,
be with me, where I am my self going, even in the paradise of God above. And so
this poor dying criminal, who had run a sad race, ventured upon the very
borders of eternal destruction, yet being at the last cast, visited with the
gracious and powerful influences of the Spirit of Christ, as was observed
before, had, from this answer to his prayer, even as his suffering Savior had,
"a joy set before him", a certain prospect of going immediately to a state of
complete blessedness in the heaven of heavens. And this we may well suppose,
made him, as it were, insensible to the excruciating pains and tortures of his
body, which was fastened to the ignominious, accursed tree, nor can he find it
in his heart to ask or wish to be taken down from it and discharged; but his
soul must rather earnestly aspire after and passionately wish to go to the
possession of that glorious, exalted happiness, his Savior had now promised
him, and that immediately, even that very day. This was infinitely more
desirable than to be discharged from the cross, return to the world, be in a
state of ease, credit and reputation among men, yea than to be put into the
possession of all the splendour and magnificence it can afford. To have the
promise of Christ fulfilled to him, of going to be with him in paradise, this
was by far the best of all. Nothing further is recorded of him; but we may be
well assured, that this great and precious promise of Christ was verified to
him -- that that very day, he had a joyful, blessed meeting with his Savior in
the heavenly paradise, that he met with a hearty welcome by him thereinto, that
he was congratulated upon his arrival by all the shining ranks of angels and
archangels, and filled with the highest praises and adorations for the rich and
abundant grace of the crucified Jesus, in snatching him as a brand out of the
burning, and raising him to so high honor, dignity and felicity, as to receive
him to be with him and to fix him in those heavenly mansions, when he might
have justly left him in his impenitence and unbelief, and to sink irrecoverably
into the regions of eternal death and despair, as was the case with his poor
wicked companion, who, it is probable, kept on to the last gasp, railing and
reviling.

Thus I have, with all convenient brevity, considered the most material things
in the dying prayer of the malefactor in our text, and our Lord's answer to it.
-- I shall now offer a few remarks briefly upon what has been said.

First, We may hence see, what it is that the heavenly happiness, into which
the souls of the faithful do immediately pass at death, eminently consists in,
viz. -- their going to be with Christ.

This we may gather from his answer to the dying prayer of the criminal --
"This day thou shall be with me", etc. You shall be admitted to the heavenly
paradise, to be with me there -- that shall be your happiness, and that will be
sufficient. So it was in the estimation of that eminent servant of Christ, the
apostle Paul, "I desire to depart and be with Christ". Phil. 1.23. -- Being
with Christ is comprehensive of every thing great and good -- a total freedom
from all sin, sorrow, temptation; a being fixed in a state of undisturbed rest
and tranquillity, raised to a perfection of holiness and rejoicing with joy
unspeakable and full of glory, in the clear shinings of his countenance, and in
the divinest tokens and manifestations of the love of this transcendantly
amiable and excellent person: And all this to last through a boundless
eternity. O what a sublime and glorious happiness is it for souls at death to
go to be with the Lord Jesus Christ! When they are absent from the body, to go
to be present with the Lord! Verily, in this case, the day of death, let it
come in what shape or form it will, is better than the day of their birth, for
it proves a sure passage to the highest possible felicity, as that of being
with the blessed Jesus is.

Secondly, From the prayer of this criminal, and the answer of Christ to it, we
may be led to remark, the divinity of his person.

The criminal had a further view of him, than the man Christ Jesus, bleeding
and suffering upon the cross; a view of him as the glorious Son of God --
accordingly addresses a servent and most interesting prayer to him, pays him
divine homage. -- The dying Savior does not rebuke him for this, as offering
such homage to a mere creature; but attends to it with satisfaction and
pleasure, gives a reviving answer, and lets him fully know and be assured of
it, that he had full power to grant him his petition and request. But this
would not have been, had he not a higher and more excellent nature, than merely
the human.

Thirdly, This instance of the dying criminal, his believing and repenting at
the last, and being thereupon admitted to be with Christ in the heavenly
paradise, is far from affording sufficient grounds to sinners, to persist in a
course of wickedness, presuming upon it that at last they shall truly repent,
obtain an interest in the redemption by Christ, and on the whole, eternal
salvation in heaven.

It is certain, that those who go on thoughtless and impenitent in wickedness,
are daily provoking the divine majesty -- treasuring up wrath against the day
of wrath: The wrath of God is swiftly pursuing them, and they are daily in
danger of its overtaking them, and then they are irrecoverably lost and
miserable. But if God should continue them in life even to old age, as they are
daily affronting and dishonouring him, so he may be provoked wholly to take his
Holy Spirit from them, to give them up to hardness and blindness, to their own
heart's lusts, and to walk in their own counsels; and the event of all will be
their "everlasting destruction from God's presence, and the glory of his
power". For in this case, it is impossible, that they should ever be brought to
true repentance toward God, and faith toward the Lord Jesus Christ, and so
finally obtain salvation. So that if any take encouragement from this example
of the dying malefactor, whose case we have been considering, to go on
impenitent in sin, yea habitually allowing themselves in any one known sin,
presuming upon it, that all will be well with them at last, they run a
desperate venture, they are in the most iminent danger of perishing eternally.
Let all who have hitherto gone on impenitent in wickedness, seriously think of
these things in time, and no longer harden themselves against God. Let them
attend to the call of God, to day while it is called to day, to repent and turn
to him, that they may live and not die; let them fly to the Lord Jesus Christ,
that they may be cleansed and purified, and made partakers of his purchased
redemption.

Fourthly, From what we have heard of the case of the dying malefactor in our
text, we may learn, that it is a thing at least possible, that impenitent
sinners who have gone on such to the last, may be effectually brought home to
God and Christ, and obtain eternal salvation.

Upon various accounts, the thing is very improbable, and what may not be
presumed upon by any, as was just said. However we see, from the example we
have been considering, that this has in fact been the case: And what has been,
may be again. For there is nothing impossible with God, that does not imply in
it, a repugnancy to his nature and adorable perfections. Here we see a very
signal display of the riches of divine grace to a poor hardened sinner, that had
gone on in enmity against God and Christ, even to his dying hours. So that,
though the circumstances of this dying malefactor were different from those of
gospel-impenitents now, as I might show, would the time allow, yet, from what
happened to him, thus much may be gathered, that impenitent sinners, even at
the last, are not wholly excluded from hope. By the powerful and gracious
influences of the Spirit of Christ, they may be brought, even at the last, to
look to Jesus the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world; to look
to him with an eye of faith, as the all-sufficient Savior, whose precious
blood has virtue sufficient in it to cleanse from all sin; to look to him and
mourn, and be in bitterness of soul, and to commit the poor, perishing and
departing soul into his hands, persuaded that he will keep what is committed to
him. Such may be the case, I say. So that none, even in the near views of death
and eternity, may totally despair of being saved. The dying thief upon the
cross (as one speaks) forbids thee to despair utterly, though thou have run a
terrible risque, and ventured on the borders of destruction; and if thou art
saved at last, it is so as by fire, it is like a brand plucked out of the
burning, or as a man escaping naked out of the flames, and passing on the very
brink of hell into everlasting life.

This that I have now said, is especially applicable to you, poor Arthur! a
prisoner of death, and this very day to be cut off by the sword of civil
justice! O what a gloomy, melancholy day is this, to see you in this unhappy
situation! cut short in the prime of life! obliged to flee to the pit, and no
man to stay you! The sentence of death passed upon you cannot be recalled! --
The fatal tree is erected! -- The officers of justice surround you! and all
things are made ready to carry the sentence into execution! and before the sun
closes upon us this evening you will launch into an awful eternity, and go to
appear at the tremendous bar of God, to give up an account of your conduct in
the body. And your eternal state will this very day be fixed and unalterable!
At these things does not your heart tremble, and is it not moved out of its
place? Death is an awful change at any time, and in any form, though to
righteous ones a blessed day, their glorious birthday into immortal life; but
a dreadful day to the wicked and ungodly: For they enter at once upon a state
of endless miseries and torments with the devil and his angels. -- Methinks, it
is impossible that you should meet death, especially in such an ignominious
form, with carelessness and indifference, but that your soul must be filled
with anxiety and distress at the near prospect of it, and at what will follow.
But as terrible as the death before you may seem to be, yet it is nothing to
the second, the eternal death that will follow to the wicked and ungodly. --
But now, this temporal death that you must in a few hours die, may prove gain
to you, and will do so, if you are, as was the poor malefactor who suffered
with our Savior, a true believer in him, a sincere penitent. In this case your
departing soul shall, as his did, immediately upon its leaving the body, go to
be with Christ in the paradise above.

Since now, there is a necessity of your dying this day, O of what infinite
importance is it to you, that you die in a state of favor with God, interested
in the merits of the all-sufficient Redeemer, and possessed of that holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord! And is it so, that you are indeed in
such a happy state as this? If so, you need not be afraid of dying, though a
shameful death. You may meet it with courage, because it will prove a sure
passage to the glorious presence of Christ in paradise.

What I now say, is not with a design to flatter you, as though your state
Godward was certainly good, and so that you might be sure of salvation. I only
propose this matter to your own heart and conscience, whether that tells you,
that the case stands thus with you, or the contrary? See now, what answers your
conscience makes to the questions I shall propose to you. --

Have you been led to see what an infinite evil sin is, not merely because of
the punishment temporal or eternal that follows upon it, but principally as it
is against God? A vile dishonor and affront offered to his glorious majesty,
whom all reasonable beings in all worlds ought to honor and obey? And as it is
most base and shameful ingratitude to him who made you, who has upheld you in
life, and bestowed so many mercies upon you, and who has given his dearly
beloved Son to redeem you by his precious blood? For in this consists the great
evil of sin, viz. that it is against God. And have you a hearty grief and
sorrow for it, mainly on this account, penitently acknowledging to God with
David, "against Thee, Thee only have I sinned"? Psalm. 51.4. Does sin appear
vile and odious to you for its own sake? And what your soul desires above every
thing to be freed from? Have you such a thorough sense of the vileness of it,
as that if you could be set at liberty, and escape the capital punishment you
are sentenced to, you could never find it in your heart any more to indulge
yourself in any one known sin? Have you good reason to think that you should no
more return to foolishness; but that it would be the main business of your life
to serve and honor God? Attend carefully to the answers, your own conscience
gives to these questions. --

Again, Do you justify man in the punishment you are sentenced to? Have you no
risings of heart, no ill will to the honorable Court or the Jury, before whom
you were tried, convicted and condemned? And as to the person that accused you,
that you do not harbor any malice toward her? And even supposing you think
you was unfairly and injuriously treated in the matter, yet do you find a
disposition freely and heartily to forgive her? -- Such a disposition as this,
however contrary to corrupt nature, the gospel of Christ makes absolutely
necessary, even in cases of the greatest injuries, as persons would hope to
obtain forgiveness of God themselves.

Again, I would ask you, what sense you have of your deserts at the hands of
God? Have you such a sense of your guilt, as to see, that you have forfeited
all mercy from him, that he might justly cast you off, and make you a monument
of his eternal wrath, and this, though you could shed an ocean of tears,
sensible, that this would make no atonement to his justice for the least of
your sins? And are you truly sensible, that if you are saved, it will be
contrary to your deserts, that it will be owing solely to the free, rich, and
sovereign mercy of God through Jesus Christ? -- Therefore do you see your need
of Christ, that mercy cannot be extended to you, but only for his sake, who by
shedding his blood upon the cross, has made a full satisfaction to the justice
of God on the behalf of sinners, and opened an effectual way for their
obtaining an acquittal from guilt, a free and full pardon at the hands of God,
a reception to his favor now, and to eternal life hereafter? Do you truly
believe the record that God has given in his word, with respect to the blood of
Christ, the incomparable preciousness of it, that it can cleanse from all sin,
and particularly your sins however numerous and heinous? and do you heartily
trust in it accordingly? Is the blood of Christ, the main, principal ground of
your hope? Are you yourself nothing, and is Christ all?

These are very solemn and important questions. -- O how happy must it be, if
you can answer them to the satisfaction of your own heart, and can at the same
time appeal, with a humble holy confidence, to that God, who is greater than
the heart and knows all things!

But now, on the other hand, what a sad thing is it, if you have not such a
sense of things, and such a disposition as has now been said! O sad and
deplorable case, if, now that you are brought to the very borders of the
eternal world, you have not truly repented and believed in Christ, and made
your peace with God! But a few sands more in your glass, and a solemn account
soon to be given up! Must you die impenitent and unbelieving, and suffer the
second death, which is eternal? Are you under a fatal necessity of all this?
Blessed be God, no! -- While there is life there is hope. And behold! even now
at last, I bring you glad tidings of good things. -- You may yet be a subject
of the pardoning mercy of God, and be cleansed from your guilt and defilement
in the precious blood of Christ. Behold! a poor criminal upon the cross with
our Savior, in his dying moments, effectually brought home! -- His heart
touched by the gracious and powerful hand of the Spirit of Christ! He believes
and repents, and has a blessed, reviving promise of being with him, that very
day in paradise, though he had been a heinous sinner, and continued such to the
last!

This, poor dying man! is left upon record for you, that you may not totally
despair, if you remain, even until this very hour in a sinful guilty state! The
blessed Spirit can effectually reach your heart also, and bring you now at the
eleventh hour, into the same happy circumstances. O that it would please God to
come mightily upon you, and enable you heartily to embrace the offers of mercy,
that are still made to you, and to fly to the blood of the all-sufficient
Redeemer, which still stands as a fountain opened for your purification and
cleansing! -- For this, we shall not cease looking to God for you, while you
are a subject of prayer. And do you also yourself, spend the few remaining
moments you have, in crying mightily to God for mercy. And so we leave you with
him, humbly and earnestly hoping, that that blessed promise of Christ, which he
made to the poor, penitent thief upon the cross, will be verified to you. --
"This day shall thou be with me in paradise".

I shall close the discourse in a few words, briefly, to this numerous
audience, come together upon this sad and affecting occasion.

My Brethren! What a sad and sorrowful spectacle have we before us! One of our
fellow creatures, whose soul is as precious as ours, to be made an example of
public justice this day! Don't you pity, and compassionate his unhappy case?
And don't you find it in your hearts, to lift up your fervent cries to God,
that he would have mercy upon his immortal soul that will presently be required
of him? Methinks there is none of you, but what must find your bowels yearning
toward him. That there are none here present, or in the great multitude
assembled in this place, this day, that can find it in their hearts, upon such
a melancholy occasion, to give into any merriment and jollity. How very
unsuitable, yea, how shameful and scandalous would this be! unworthy their
character as men, and especially as christians! Instead of this, every one
should be concerned to make a wise and good improvement of this dispensation.
Every one should take occasion to thank God that he has not been left to such
heinous transgressions, as would have exposed him to be cut off by the sword of
civil justice, as this poor prisoner is to be.

Those that have habitually indulged themselves in sin and wickedness, should
take warning by this example, that they do not go on any longer in it; lest
they be left to such high-handed commissions, as to expose themselves in like
manner. They should be put upon earnestly repenting and reforming, and devoting
themselves to God, through Christ, that so they may be in favor with God and
man.

Those that have the charge of youth, should be put upon the greatest care, to
train them up in the ways of God -- frowning upon their vices, exercising
proper discipline toward them, when they give into any, restraining them as
far as possible, setting virtuous, religious examples before them; by which
means abundance of mischief may, by the blessing of God, be prevented, and much
good promoted.

None should presume too much upon their own strength -- "Let him that
stands, take heed lest he fall". All of us should live a life of humble
dependence upon God, looking to him daily for his grace, which alone is
sufficient for us, to keep us back from presumptuous sins and from secret
faults -- we should "watch and pray, lest we enter into temptation".

The saints and people of God should praise him for his grace, by which they
are what they are; pardoned, justified, sanctified, heirs of God, and
joint-heirs with Christ to the heavenly inheritance. Let them live by faith in
the Son of God, be strong in the grace that is in him, abound in every good
word and work -- continue faithful to the death, and with joy and pleasure and
patience wait for their glorious advancement to the presence and enjoyment of
Christ in the heavenly paradise.

Lastly, Though the death of this poor criminal this day, is a violent,
unnatural death, yet it should, however, put us all in mind of the great change
of death that will pass upon us all, and it may be, as to some, sooner, than
they may be aware of. If then we are found ready, blessed and happy are we, for
a glorious life and immortality will succeed. But if this great change should
overtake us, in an impenitent, unpardoned, guilty, sinful state, it will be
awful to us indeed, though the circumstances of our death should not be with
the ignominy of this day. Persons may descend into everlasting burnings, though
they should expire upon a bed of down, and every thing about them, be nice and
delicate. In short, it is no matter where we die, or when, or after what
manner, if our souls at death go to be with Christ in the heavenly paradise. --
O let this be the main thing with us all, that when we quit this mortal life,
as we must all do; that our souls, our nobler and better part, may be convoyed
by the angels of God, to the presence of our exalted Redeemer in the paradise
above. Our vile bodies, he will take care of, where ever deposited, and
whatever changes may pass upon them, and recompact them, and raise them up,
beautiful and glorious, like to his own body, in the morning of the great day.
And in our whole man he will invite us to the heavenly paradise to eat of the
tree of life in the midst of it; rendering us eternally healthful, vigorous and
active. God of his infinite mercy grant, that this may be the case with us all,
and that it may be your case, poor Arthur! among the rest, for the sake of
Jesus Christ to whom be glory, forever and ever. AMEN.

The following Speech was delivered at the Place of Execution, in the Name and
at the Desire of the Criminal.
I Arthur, being just leaving the world, sincerely, as I hope, die in charity
with all mankind. I desire to die, penitently acknowledging my wickedness
before God and man, which has brought me to this untimely end. I humbly hope
for mercy from God, solely through the merits of Jesus Christ. And as a dying
man, just ready to step into the eternal world, I would give solemn warning to
this great concourse, especially to young people, that they avoid all vices and
immoralities, especially, the sins of stealing, lying, uncleanness,
profaneness, and drunkenness, by the indulgence of which, I have provoked God
-- fallen into the hands of civil justice, and must now die before the time. --
I beseech all young people to fear and serve God in their youth, and that all
who have the care and charge of them, would do all that lies in their power to
restrain them from every vice, and to encourage them in the practice of every
thing virtuous and religious. -- I now commend my departing soul into the hands
of the all-sufficient Redeemer; beseeching you all to lift up your hearts in
fervent prayer to God, that he would receive me to his everlasting mercy.


