Mr. Lord's HALF-CENTURY DISCOURSE.

Jubilee; An HALF-CENTURY DISCOURSE, IN TWO PARTS; On Occasion of the
completion of FIFTY-YEARS, Since the Author's Ordination. DELIVERED at NORWICH,
on the LORD'S DAY, Nov. 29th, 1767. AND PUBLISHED AT THE DESIRE OF SOME THAT
HEARD IT.

By BENJAMIN LORD, A. M. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH THERE.

PSALM. 92. 14, 15. They shall still bring forth Fruit in old Age -- to show
that the Lord is upright. -- JOHN 15. 20. Remember the Word that I said unto
you. II TIM. 2. 14. Of these Things put them in Remembrance. JUDE 17. v. But,
beloved, remember ye the Words which were spoken before of the Apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ. REV. 3. 3. Remember therefore, how thou have received and
heard, and hold fast. NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. GREEN, 1768.

An Half-Century DISCOURSE, etc.
PART I. THE CHARACTER, DUTY, AND PRACTICE OF a GOOD MINISTER of JESUS CHRIST.
II PET. 1. 12, -- 15. Wherefore, I will not be negligent to put you always in
remembrance of these Things; though ye know them, and be established in the
present Truth; yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to
stir you up, by putting you in remembrance; knowing that shortly, I must put
off this Tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me. Moreover, I
will endeavor, that you may be able, after my Decease, to have these Things
always in remembrance.
THE chief Design of our Existence, is high and noble; worthy of a God to have,
in making his Creature Man, and of our utmost attention and solicitude to reach
unto it. As God, in his Works, could not have an higher End, than his own
Glory, and his Creature's good; we are not in all our Life and Service, to stop
at a lower; but, ever keep it in view, to rise up unto it, in the exercises of
Religion, that excellent and important Business assigned us; which, it seems,
even the apostasy of Man, and malice of Satan; is not an irremoveable Bar in
the Way of: When; sovereign Grace in Christ, has opened the Way of our recovery
unto it, and the happiness connected with it. Religion then, thus revives in
the World, and Heaven again opens to View; according to the Gospel of God our
Savior, which brings life and immortality to light. I say, this Business, is
yet to occupy the chief Room in the whole course of our life here, that it may
gloriously fill an Eternity hereafter. But for which, how could it have been
worth while for Man to exist, that rational, conscious Creature, that he is;
capable of a connection and communion with God.

BUT, how short a Time has Man, as a probationer for a better State of
existence? which, the Apostle in our Text, appears to have a clear and
affecting View of; as he counted shortly to put off the Tabernacle of the
flesh; and have done preaching the Gospel of Christ, that delightful Business
of the better part of his Life. Man's Life is soon cut off; and he flys away to
yonder World of Spirits -- So that, the whole run of Business here, of this and
that kind; is short, and soon over, with Time; which, hastens to an end. But,
short as Time is, (always on the wing,) it is long enough to reach unto, and
introduce Eternity; which, certainly follows upon the shortest Life that is. We
therefore, had need be early adorned with God's Image, and the Savior's
Righteousness; and by the Grace of God, fill up our Time well; to be ready for
the important Change of States and Worlds for ever. The very Thing, the Apostle
pressed in the course of his Ministry, and experienced in the Case of his own
Soul. And, while we are spared in Life; may it be, as God spares a Son to
serve him. For, it is a forfeited Life, that is spared* which carries in it,
the greater obligation on us, to spend it well, as the fruit of having
dedicated it, and our selves unto God.

VERY justly may each one of us say; having obtained help of God, I continue
unto this Day. Yea, in the midst of diseases, dangers and deaths; and that,
which is more; notwithstanding all our Offenses. For, if in any single Moment,
God had withdrawn his Care, in that Moment, we had retired from Life.

BUT, more especially, may I adopt the Words, having obtained help, etc. with
an animated Gratitude, to the great Preserver of Men: who in the riches of his
forbearance, has continued me, (through many Years infirmity in former Life,
and many scenes of heavy Trial in the greater part of Life) into the
Seventy-fourth Year of my Age; with confirmed Health, in some late Years. A
rare Instance of signal Mercy. A Wonder to many, most justly so to my self:
more especially, as through Grace, I have been carried along to the completion
of half a Century, in the Ministry -- Selah -- Pause a little here, Oh my Soul;
and acknowledge him in all this, who is glorious in Holiness, fearful in
Praises, doing Wonders.

AND now justly looking forward to the close of my Life and Ministry; which is
gathering in apace upon me: And, with this argument before me; to animate me,
by the grace of God, to fill up the residue of my Days, with the important
Business of Religion and of my Station; I have thought it my Duty, to take this
public Notice of God's great Goodness, in continuing me in some Measure capable
of public Business, to so remarkable a Period. A kind of Jubilee for rejoicing
in the divine Goodness; and for Liberty yet to serve the most High in his
Church. Verily, this Day, is Witness for God that he is good, and does good.
This Day, the last Sabbath of the Fiftieth Year in Office; may be noted indeed,
as an Ebenezer, indicating that hitherto the Lord has helped me: And may serve
both as a Memorial, and Monitor unto me. I say, a Remembrancer of God's Mercy
to me, and a Monitor of my Obligation to him; to be indeed, more than ever
devoted to his Service. With which view, I have chosen the Words read, to
improve to the Glory of God, and to my own Advantage and yours.

THIS Apostle, who in his second Epistle, inserts these important, affecting
Passages, which I have read; had been faithful in preaching the very gospel, so
worthy of their Attention and Remembrance; to whom he wrote. And then, he
didn't think he had done enough, without reminding them of these Things; and
doing all that was proper to fix them in their Minds for lasting Profit: And
therefore, says, I will not be negligent always to put you in Remembrance of
these Things: The very Doctrines, and great Things of the Gospel, which he had
delivered to them. And they (some of them) had a good knowledge of, and at
present appeared well established in them; yet, this, he thinks to be the Work
of his remaining Days, to be bringing them to their Remembrance; and one great
Argument, he had to excite him unto it; was his View of the small remains of
Life now before him, and swift approach of Death, which, by revelation had been
showed him. And therefore, adds, a pathetic Moreover, I will endeavor that you
may be able after my decease, to have these Things always in Remembrance, i. e.
as long as they should live after him; they might, by his faithfulness to them
now, be profited by them; yea, carry the good favor thereof, to their own
Grave, and find the unspeakable Benefit of it, beyond all Time.

Whence, I collect these OBSERVATIONS.

I. IT IS the Character of a good Minister of Jesus Christ, and faithful in his
Service; to be in the course of his Ministry, preaching the great Doctrines and
Duties of the Gospel: insisting chiefly on them for the saving good of Men's
Souls.

II. WHEN he has done this, in his former Ministry; yet, he is not to neglect
proper Means to refresh their Memories herewith, to impress them deep on their
Hearts.

III. HE is accordingly to fill up the residue of his Days, very much to this
Purpose. And,

IV. FROM this Consideration, that he cannot live long to do this Service. And,

V. FOR this End, are Ministers to exert themselves; that their Hearers may
reap the Advantage of it after their decease.

I. I observe, it is the Character of a good Minister of Jesus Christ, and
faithful in his Service; to be in the Course of his Ministry, preaching the
great Doctrines and Duties of the Gospel, insisting chiefly on them for the
saving good of Men's Souls.

THE Apostle Peter, as also Paul and others did so. When, God had put them into
the Ministry, as counting them faithful, they spent their Life in it. And so
have others, down to this Day; who were of the right Stamp: giving themselves,
(as charged) to reading and meditation, on those Things, which belong to the
important Business of their Office; studying to show themselves approved of
God, and unto Men's Consciences; as Workmen that need not to be ashamed,
rightly dividing the Word of Truth; which is yet, and always will be the
Character of true and faithful Ministers of the Gospel. Our Apostle here, in
what is said of him, in his Epistles, is a good Pattern indeed, for imitation,
through all Ages.

IN his first Epistle he discourses of the great Doctrines of Grace -- of
Predestination unto Life, according to the fore-knowlege of God the Father,
through sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the
Blood of Christ. ver. 2. -- of Regeneration by the Spirit of God, as the sole
Author; while the Word is the well chosen and appointed Means thereof: as here
declared to be according to his abundant Mercy, that he has begotten us again
unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection of Christ from the dead. v. 3. to the
same Purpose with that most express passage in Jam. 1. 18. Of his own Will
begat he us, with the Word of Truth. -- And of Perseverance unto Life; as is
declared in v. 4, 5. that the Regenerate who are born to an heavenly
Inheritance, are kept by the mighty Power of God, through Faith unto Salvation.
-- And this we find also; in his preaching the important Doctrines of the
Gospel; that he omits not, but insists upon the sacrifice of Christ, upon the
Cross, the all-availing Merit of his whole obedience; for our Justification
unto Life, see ver. 11, 19.

As also the great Duties of the Gospel, are what he much inculcates. As, that
Christians do gird up the Loins of their Minds, be sober and hope to the End,
for the Grace, that is to be brought to them, at the revelation of Jesus
Christ. As obedient Children, not fashioning themselves according to the former
Lusts, in their Ignorance; but, as he which has called them is holy; so that
they be holy in all Manner of Conversation and Godliness; passing the Time of
their Sojourning here in fear. ver. 13, -- 17. And if we look through his whole
first Epistle into this; where, he speaks particularly of The Righteousness of
God, and our Soviour Jesus Christ; which becomes our's by a precious Faith. And
where he particularly presses Diligence, in adding to Faith Virtue, and to
Virtue Knowledge; and so on to the completion of the Christian Character. And
so, to make our Calling and Election sure. -- I say, if we view, what he has
wrote clear through we shall find, what important Doctrines and Duties, he
insisted on; wherein, all faithful Ministers, will in some good Measure follow
him: Yes; all such, will preach up free Grace -- Christ Crucified -- and Faith
in him, etc. -- Hence,

II. I OBSERVE, that when the faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, has done
this, in his former Ministry; still, he does by no Means, neglect proper Steps,
to remind his People of these Things; for their deeper Impression on their
Hearts. It was so, with the Apostle, when he had preached the great Doctrines,
and urged the great Duties of the Gospel; and shown the vast Importance of
them, with respect to present Comfort, and future Happiness; He don't think, he
had done enough; but says, as in the Text; Wherefore, I will not be negligent
to put, you always in remembrance of these Things. -- Wherefore; that is,
because of the great Importance and Necessity of these Things, which I have
taught in the Course of my Ministry heretofore; "I will not be Negligent," --
No; nothing shall make me so; nothing shall divert me from my duty, not any
worldly Views and Motives; nor shall any Thing which mine Enemies throw in my
Way, as an embarrasment to my Work; discourage me: Nor yet, that which looks
the most Plausible by way of Excuse, to relax my Care in this Matter: ( viz.)
that "you do know these Things" already; and appear to be established, in the
present Truth, the laboring Truths of the Day; yet, I will not be negligent to
put you always in remembrance of these Things: But will be frequently
refreshing your Memories with them; and so endeavor by all Means, to keep
these Things with you, to confirm you more and more in the faith of the Gospel,
and practice of Christianity.

So, faithful Ministers to this Day, (as it is the Character of such,) will not
only, by preaching sound Doctrine to their Hearers, endeavor to instruct them
well in the very Things of God, that they may know them well, and be
established therein, in the Faith once delivered to the Saints, etc. -- But,
and though many of them, may already know them well, and profess to be well
established in them; they will yet insist upon them over, and over; with fresh
Illustrations and Arguments, and every Way, they can properly take; be putting
them in Remembrance hereof.

III. I OBSERVE, that the faithful Minister, who has served long already, is
to fill up the residue of his Days much to this purpose: Reminding his People
of the important Things, they have been taught. "I think it meet" (says the
Apostle) fit and highly proper, as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you
up, by putting you in Remembrance. As if he had said, Upon the most serious
review of the Duty of my Office, of the importance of those Things, I have
taught you, and of your receiving them to saving Profit; it is my settled
Thought and Resolution; that as long as I live, I will exert my self to excite
you, unto a fresh assent to the Truth, by a most impressive Review of the
excellence and worth thereof, that you might better than ever yield Obedience
unto it; that you might not lose, (or seem to lose) what you have gained, nor,
any way fail of a right Christian stedfastness in Faith and Duty. What the
Apostle was after, by all his Pains in this Matter, was, that they be thorough,
persevering Christians, and be excited abundantly to exercise themselves unto
Godliness.

AND thus, will faithful Ministers of Christ, in all Ages of the Church, do;
not be content with preaching up moral Virtue, Self-Government, Righteousness,
and Charity; but insist much on the Subjects of christian Revelation, as Paul,
who would especially preach Christ and him Crucified. They will enter into the
Marrow of the Gospel, and dwell much upon the Words of Christ, that "are Spirit
and Life." They will esteem it fitting and necessary, that as long as they
live, and can do it, to preach often upon Subjects of the greatest Moment, and
thereby be exciting their People to "obey the Truth:" (and more and more so,)
in which consists the Life of Religion. Oh; this "doing the Truth" as St. John
expresses it, is what Crowns all, If ye know these Things happy are ye if ye do
them. Those who have some good Understanding of the Principles of Religion, and
appear well set in the Practice thereof; do yet need Line upon Line, to stir
them up, even their pure Minds by Way of Remembrance, in Order to better
Practice.

IV. I OBSERVE that Ministers are to be faithful in all their Duty, from the
Consideration of the scanty Measure of their Opportunities for it; that they
are not to live long, especially, when the most of their Day is gone already.
And so, will have but a little Time for this Service. Hence says the Apostle, I
think it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle to stir you up -- knowing
that shortly I must put off this Tabernacle, as the Lord Jesus has showed me.
Some have had strange premonitions of their Death, the near approach of it:
But, there was something more special in the Case of Peter; the Lord Jesus had
showed him above 30 Years before, the Manner, if not the Time of his Death --
See Joh. 21. 18, 19. -- When thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thy
Hand, etc. This spoke he, signifying by what Death he should glorify God. That
is, by dying on the Cross, in which, he was to follow Christ, die as he did; he
was, in the Day, when Christ spoke these Words to him, very confident, that he
could follow Christ any where, even to Death. This was Self-confidence, and
failed him; that, instead of dying with Christ, he denied him over and over,
before Christ came to die himself: But Peter repents of this; and after his
Recovery, has a better kind of Confidence and Courage: so that, when called to
suffer Martyrdom for Christ, as the Lord told him he should, he stretched forth
his Hands, freely yielded to be Crucified, which was at Rome, under the cruel
Persecution of Nero, but a little after he wrote these Epistles; Anno Dom. 65.
or 66. For then he was grown old, when the Lord Jesus said he should be
Crucified. So that he might well say now, "I must shortly put off this
Tabernacle." It Is observed by Historians, the exact Time is not ascertained,
but, by all Accounts, might not be far from 67. or 68. and some say, at the
same Time, yea, the very Day, that Paul was beheaded there, by Nero, for
converting one of his Concubines to the Christian Faith. Which Death, he might
have some previous Warning of, or at least, of the near approach of Death, in
some Form; when he says, The Time of my departure is at Hand: And both of them,
aware of this; did exert themselves the more, to do all the good they could,
whilst they lived and had Opportunity for it. --

THUS faithful Ministers since; in the View of their uncertain, but short Stay
at the longest, may well be excited to Diligence in their Master's Work:
especially, if they have lived long already: as their old Age then, (without a
special Revelation from the Lord Jesus) speaks the near Approach of their
Death, When a Minister is far advanced in Life, to Threescore Years and Ten,
or more, he must needs know, that shortly, he shall put off this Tabernacle;
and resign Office and Life; and all Opportunity here, of doing good. For of
such an Age, it is justly and aptly said; It is soon cut off, and we fly away,
Psalm. 90. 10. It is something as the Sun, when past the Meridian, (and in short
Days too) it suddenly shoots down, and Sets at once. So the Life of an old Man,
far past the Meridian, hastens a-pace to the Close, and is suddenly up, and
gone. But, no improving the small remains of Life, so well, as by filling it up
with Duty to God, and Usefulness to Men; and the more cheerfully, as our Days
draw on a-pace to a Period.

IT is the Character, and will be the Practice, of faithful Ministers, to exert
themselves, in Study and Diligence, in all the Exercises of their Office, that
they can; to fulfill the Ministry which they have received of the Lord Jesus.
And endeavor to the last, the best good of their Charge. A Minister of Christ,
is to be eminently like the Sun that rejoiceth as a strong Man to run his Race,
and Shines as he goes; even till he Sets. When a good Minister's Days, and
Time, contracts apace; and his Thoughts grow more Weighty; and full of
Religion, and of the World he is going to; his Zeal increases; and according to
his Capacity, he will be truly fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord.

V. FOR this End, are Ministers to exert themselves, and the faithful will do
so; that their Hearers may reap the Advantage of it, after their Decease. As
the Apostle here adds, Moreover, I will endeavor, that you may be able, after
my Decease, to have these Things always in Remembrance. This Word, is much used
by the Apostle, as if very Significative and Emphatical; like the Burden of a
Song; which has the carrying Sound with it, and the leading Sentiments
expressed by it: which, indeed is the Case here. Not enough (it seems) that
People know, and are established in the Truth: To be sure, not enough that they
have a speculative View of it, and have a rational Belief of it; but, they must
Remember it; have it always ready, as Food to feed upon constantly, and as a
Rule always to live by. They must attend to it, not for present Amusement, or
to be pleased just while they are hearing a good Sermon; but attend to it, as
Lydia did to the Things spoken by Paul; attend to the very Important Things
spoken of, with a View of having them impressed on their Minds, fixed there, for
lasting Good; which, you see the Apostle was greatly concerned about: and
therefore, insists upon it here, as he does. I will not be negligent, (a strong
way of expressing his Care in this Matter) to put you always in Remembrance of
these Things. Again, I think it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to
stir you up, by putting you in Remembrance; ah, and exert my self in this;
because, I know, that in a little Time I can do it no more; Therefore, while I
live, I will endeavor that you be able, after my Decease, to have these Things
always in your Remembrance. Thus, he dwells upon the Subject, as a very main
Thing with him, and what should be so with us; else we read and hear, as if we
did it not; nor were like to be the better. The Apostle, (it seems) in the very
decline of Life, just as he was finishing his Ministry, was laying in greatly
for the future Advantage of Men's Souls; that, when he was dead and gone, they
might be able to have those Things in Remembrance, which they had heard. And so
always, as long as they lived after him, be reaping the good of his Sermons and
Epistles.

THUS, faithful Ministers now, the nearer they come to the finishing their
Course; will be the more concerned for the Salvation of their dear Charge; that
after their Decease, their Hearers, may be able to recollect what they have
been taught; have it present with them, and fixed in their Minds to their best
and lasting Advantage; (that is) well grounded in Faith and Love, never to be
moved away, from the hope of the Gospel. Therefore, they will Pray and Preach,
Converse and Live, in a good Measure as Persons looking into Eternity. They
will treat important Subjects with great Plainness and Solemnity, and as much
perspicuity and openness to Men's Understandings, as they can: speak with
Pathos and Concern to have these Things well received and fixed in their Minds,
and their Faith in them Established, -- This, good Ministers love to see much
of, and of the probability of its existing after they are gone. Oh, how careful
that their People do not forsake the right Ways of the Lord, that they be not
Wavering, and driven to and fro, by every Wind of Doctrine, after their
Decease; but by an exemplary Soundness in the Faith, be happily secure from
Declension in any Thing of Religion; or true Comfort and the Peace of religious
Society and Christian Communion. It was very Affecting to St. Paul, what he
told his Hearers, and knew, viz, That after his Departure, grievous Wolves
would enter in among them not sparing the Flock, and that of their own selves,
would Men arise, speaking perverse Things, to draw away Disciples after them.
See Acts 20, 29, 30. But, yet he would do all he could, (to prevent this as
much as might be,) in not shunning to declare the whole Counsel of God. As he
says in v. 27. -- And so Peter would do, all he could, that People might have
what he taught them, always in Remembrance: To continue sound in the Faith, and
steadfast in the Order of the Gospel. --

AND thus faithful Ministers down to this Day, will Study hard, Pray earnestly,
Preach clearly and powerfully; yea, Converse and Argue, and do all they can, to
instruct the People in the very Truth, as it is in Jesus; the very Faith and
Institutions of the Gospel, and to establish them therein; by having all that
done for them, which, by the blessing of God shall enable them to have the
Things of God and Jesus Christ, always in Remembrance; as the Matter of their
Faith, and Guide of their Practice, from Generation to Generation; that, a
right Scriptural Religion, and Gospel Order, may live on, to all succeeding
Time. AMEN.

PART II. THE APPLICATION, with something HISTORICAL.
1. USE, FROM hence it appears, that a Minister's Life, is set at a great
Distance from Indolence; admits of but little Vacation. Scarce any Man's Life
so closely filled up with Duty and Exercise; not only of the stated Worship of
God in Public, with diligent Reading and Study to prepare for that; but much of
a more private Kind, visiting the Distressed in their various Sorrows; one Sick
here, and another Dying there, and many Cases of Individuals to attend unto;
that it may be eminently said of a Minister's Work, that it is never done, as
long as he lives, and is capable of it; and that old Age, will not excuse him
from Application; while God keeps up his Capacity for it. -- His Work is great
all his Life through, as he is to be giving himself wholly to these Things,
which belong to the ministerial Office, that he may fulfill the Ministry, he has
received of the Lord Jesus, instructing Men truly in the great Points of
Religion, and laboring both their Edification and Establishment in the Truth,
etc. And when he comes near the close of his Life and Ministry; how desirable,
that this be adorned with the most evident Marks of Grace, of Faithfulness and
Success. Thus, though his Beginning was Small, to have his latter End greatly
Increased is Glorious: And even in his closing Days, he must not be negligent
to put his People in Remembrance of those Things, they have heard; insist upon
them over and over, with new Illustrations and more Proof, to fix them deep in
their Minds; and so to stir them up most effectually to the Christian Life:
Yea, endeavor by all Means, they have these Things always in Remembrance,
ready at Hand, for their own personal Benefit, and for the Defense of the Truth
against Gainsayers. And though the Minister is shortly to put off this
Tabernacle, and he has much to do, before it is dissolved, through Grace, to dress
up with the Garments of Salvation, to stand complete in Christ; waiting his
Order to go, when called, as a Servant waits the Order of his Master; yet,
even then, when drawing near, to finish his Course; he must endeavor, to
impress the Minds of his Hearers with the great Things of the Gospel; that they
be able, after his Decease, to have them always in Remembrance.

II. USE. WE learn from the Premises, the great Duty of those that live under
the Gospel, to attend faithfully to the preaching of it. If Ministers must give
themselves to this Work, and be all the Time faithful in it; who then may, for
trifling Excuses, forbear to attend unto a preached Gospel, or be inattentive
to it, when they do attend. If the Minister must not, by any Means, be
negligent to put his People always in Remembrance of pure Gospel; but it is of
so much Worth to them, that he must be always setting it before them, as long
as he lives; that they may not fail of the Benefit of it, when he can speak no
more to them? then surely, it claims their most diligent Attention now, to have
it ever with them. Oh think of it, with respect to the Doctrine of
free-forgiveness of Sin, and Justification unto Life, by the all-availing
Atonement, and perfect Obedience of Christ. May this be disregarded? Is this
ever to be forgotten? or wholly out of Mind one Day? Can we pass a Day without
Sin? and what they do, one Day without a Savior, and unless we have these
Things always in Remembrance? Very worthy then, of our Attention, with the View
of laying them up in our Mind and Heart: Yes, surely; if the Apostle in the
close of Life; when his Thoughts would be so full of his own personal Concerns;
gathering in all needful Comfort in the View of Death; I say, if yet he esteem
it his Duty, and think it meet to lay out so much of the precious remains of
his Time, for this End; to stir up others' Minds by way of Remembrance, and to
the last; endeavor that they be able, after his Decease, to Profit by his
Ministry, by having these Things, he was teaching them, always in Remembrance,
ready for Use in Meditation, in Prayer, in religious Converse, etc. for
strengthening of their Faith and Hope in God? Certainly then, this teaches
People to attend constantly and well on the Word preached; and to hear, as for
their Lives; while they may; and with a View of their reaping the Advantage of
it, after their Minister is gone from the Pulpit, to the Grave.

III. USE. WE hence learn, that it is a vain Curiosity which excites in People,
an Itch of hearing (...) always, something New; either as (...) the Matter or
Mode: Something (...) is Novel, without proper Regard (...) Truth, to
Substance, and Importance. Indeed, to hear one Thing over and over, in Sermons,
continually, in a short round of Sentiments; though they be Sound and Weighty,
is not fitting; and cannot relish well; when the Field is Wide, and many very
important Things are to be spoken: And desirable it is, to have a variety of
Subjects, within the Compass of Orthodoxy and great Moment; and well handled.
Yet, (I say,) to have such a Thirst for Novelty, as not to Care, whether what
we hear, be True, if it be but New, or to nauseate old Truths, merely because
we have heard them, and known them before; is very wrong; and favors much of a
vain Mind. The Apostle supposes Men to know the Truth, and to be established
therein; and yet, to need being "put in Remembrance thereof." Men of pure
Minds, may need, and be greatly Profited by this. So that, an Itch for new
Things, for the sake of Novelty, is a vain Curiosity. Our Text will justify a
Preacher's insisting much upon what the Apostle means by these Things, these
important Doctrines, etc. which are to be brought to Remembrance; and going
over with them again and again, in the Course of his Ministry; But, the more
with new turns of Thought and Expression, to the same Purpose; to rivet these
Things in Men's Minds; and the more with new illustrations and enforcements of
the Subjects, to give them a more lively Impression on the Heart; the better.
This is all well: and what the Apostle intends, by putting Men that had heard
the Gospel, always in Remembrance of the same Things for Substance; which they
had known and believed before.

IV. USE. If there be so much Stress laid upon putting People in Remembrance of
the important Things, they had heard; that the Apostle thought it meet to do
it, as long as he lived; and however much he had done at instructing them well,
in the Course of his Ministry; yet, and in the close of his Life, to make it
his Business, to put them in Remembrance of these Things; then it follows, as a
just Inferrenee, that there are many, who, after a Sort, hear them now; that
think little of their Excellence, and of the vast Importance of their attending
duly unto them, to lay them up for their Advantage hereafter. I say, think
little of this, through the long Day of their Opportunity; ah, little of this,
till their Day is over, not only for hearing them, from this, or that Minister;
but for attending to them at all. For, they let the Candle of their Life, under
the Means of Grace, sweal away, by their own abuse and neglect thereof. O how
reprehensory and awakning is this? that the Apostle, in the short Time he had
to live, before he must suffer Martyrdom, and die on the Cross; I say, the
short Time he had now, when old; to think of this, and have his own Heart well
braced up to meet it; and be in the most ample readiness for Heaven: That yet,
even then, he would endeavor by all Means, that others, after his Decease,
always have these Things in Remembrance, to their own everlasting Advantage.
Verily it reproves, and may justly startle such, as do yet, after all Means
used with them, neglect the great Salvation, and stupidly spend their Life in
Sin; or in worldly Concerns, to the neglect of the one Thing needful.

V. USE. WE see here, what is one great End of all good Preaching the Word, and
Writing on divine Subjects: It is, to excite Men to right Practice, the
Apostle's Aim in all he said and wrote; instructing People in the Truth, and
putting them in Remembrance of those Things which they had been taught; was to
stir them up, to their Duty, to receive the Truth most fully into their Hearts,
and obey it in all Things; to excite in them a just Concern, to be approved of
God as the upright. Yea, he neglected not to stir up the purest Minds by way of
Remembrance: to put them upon exercising themselves unto Godliness in all the
lovely Branches of it; to love God supremely, to love the Lord Jesus Christ in
simplicity, and most exemplary godly sincerity; and to love one another
fervently; and thus, fulfill the Law of Christ.

WELL now, having given some Account, from our Text, of the Duty of Christ's
Ministers, in the Course of their Ministry to be insisting on the great
Doctrines and Duties of the Gospel: and yet in the close of their Life, to be
putting People in Remembrance of these Things. May I not on this Occasion, in
the FIRST PLACE, humbly say, That through the Grace of God, I have not shunned
to declare the whole Counsel of God unto you. Are you not my Witnesses, that in
some good Measure, I have preached both the Law and the Gospel, in their Place,
and with their Views. The Law as the great Means of convincing Men of their Sin
and Misery; as by it, is the knowledge of Sin. And as the Rule of Life, the
obligations of which, being Moral and of perpetual Force, yet lie upon us; and
in this View, fitted to give Men conviction of Sin; as that, is the want of
Conformity unto, and Transgression thereof: -- And preached the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, as "the Grace of God bringing Salvation," opening and proving the great
Doctrines of Grace -- the nature and necessity of Regeneration -- the only Way
of Forgiveness and Justification by the atonement and obedience of Christ, the
Lord our Righteousness -- together with the necessity of Holiness, etc. etc.

IN the next Place, observe, this is still my Duty (as aforesaid) to put you in
Remembrance of these Things: Which I trust, you will (every Way) encourage me
in; that you may be able, after my Decease, to have them in Remembrance, to
your own Advantage. The Reasons to urge me to Faithfulness in this, are chiefly
the Glory of God and your Salvation; which are intimately concerned herein. But
then, my Life and Opportunity, which remains for this; is very short; and my
Concern for you, after I am gone, never the less. Besure, that you hold fast
the Faith and Order of the Gospel, and be well established in the Truth, and
obedient to it; you and your Children after you. God only knows, how it will be
with you hereafter. But I think it meet, as long as I am with you; and in a
Measure capable of it, to stir you up, to all Attention and Regard to the
Truth, by putting you in Remembrance thereof; that you may never be easy,
without a sound, pious, learned, faithful, heartsearching and edifying
Ministry: The which, you will the more likely be blessed with; by how much the
better Attention and Regard, you give to divine important Things now; and have
them well fixed in your Minds, for the establishment of your Faith and Love,
which is in Christ Jesus. For, the manifest Declension of a People in Point of
Principles and Practice, in one Generation; makes Way for a growing Corruption
thereof in the following Generations.

FOR AS MUCH then, as it is my Duty, in some Imitation of the Apostle, to stir
up your Minds, (even the purest of them) by Way of Remembrance of these Things,
to fix and establish you well in them; you will suffer me to Remark upon the
Importance of this Remembrance, which is a Kind of Capital Word, in Scripture;
much used there, as expressing what is of great Consequence.

AS for Instance; what is the doing this and that, at the Lord's Supper, eating
of the Bread, and drinking of the Cup there, without doing this, in Remembrance
of Christ? This, is essential to the Duty of attending that Institution, and to
our Advantage by it.

AGAIN, The Words which Christ had spoke (to the Disciples) in his Sermons, (it
seems) must be brought to their Remembrance: else, they don't fully Answer
their Design. See John 14. 26. The Comforter -- He shall teach you all Things,
and bring all Things to your Remembrance, whatsoever I have said to you, that
ye may have a more just and full Understanding of them, and be more Profited by
them. And how did the Disciples fail of their Duty, and Suffer by not
remembering Christ's Words, respecting his Death and Resurrection, to apply
them, for the strengthening of their Faith in him, etc. But, when they recalled
his Words, they answered the Purposes for which they were uttered. When Christ
said, Destroy this Temple, (meaning his Body) and I will raise it up again the
Third Day, at first his Disciples understood it not: But when he was risen from
the dead, then they remembered his Words, and believed the Scripture, and were
confirmed in his being the MESSIAH. Joh. 2. 22. And when he was going up to
Jerusalem in a kind of Triumph, amidst the Hosannas of the People, he observed
to his Disciples a Passage of Prophecy, that related to him; Fear not Daughter
of Zion, thy King comes sitting on an Ass's Colt. -- Now, these Things
understood not his Disciples at the first; but, when Jesus was Glorified, then
remembered they, that these Things were Written of him, and so were Established,
Joh. 12. 16. Thus were they, and Oh how many since are helped in a distressing
Hour, by remembering Christ's Sayings. Ah! and brought to Repentance too by this
Means -- After Peter had denied Christ most shamefully, he is brought to
Repentance, as he called to Mind the Word, that Jesus said unto him, Before the
Cock crow Twice, thou shall deny me Thrice; and when he thought thereon he Wept
bitterly. And how is Repentance a genuine Thing in any, without calling to
Remembrance our Sins: And what is Israel's God to them; who forget him? or what
the Most High to such Youth, as remember him not so much, as in the Character
of Creator?

AGAIN, What says Paul of the Character of a good Minister? See 1 Timothy 4. 6. If
thou put the Brethren in Remembrance of these Things, thou shall be a good
Minister of Jesus Christ. And Peter you see, was eminently this good Minister:
For, he would not be Negligent in this Matter by any Means; but, as long as he
was in the Body, would be stirring up People by putting them in Remembrance of
those Things, and do all that he could, that after his Decease, they might not
forget them. The good Opinion he had of some; that they knew, and were
established in the Truth, did not relax his Care of this Matter; yea, however
much Charity he had for some, as Christians of great Simplicity, yet he writes
these Epistles, as he says, 2 Pet. 3. 1. To stir up their pure Minds by way of
Remembrance. So that it is verily something of great Moment, that is here
intended, and what every Minister is to be engaged in; and the rather, as the
import of the Word, is so Magnified in Acts 10. 31. Thine Alms are had in
Remembrance. God Remembers and Rewards them. And in Rev. 16. 19. Babylon came
into Remembrance before God. He remembered her Sins to Punish them. And if the
Most High, represents himself, as remembering Men's Virtues and their Vices; to
Reward the one, and Punish the other? then surely, we are to call to Mind our
Sins, to repent of them in Season, and escape Punishment: And to remember our
Duty, what God says to us in his Word, to excite us to embrace the Faith of the
Gospel, to believe in Christ, and be careful to maintain good Works; to obtain,
through Grace in Christ, the Reward of the Faithful.

THESE Hints, respecting Remembrance, I have given to show, that it is not
enough, that we read and hear the Word, and appear to know it, and, be
established therein; but we must have it always in Remembrance: as it were
continually present with us. And to show, that, it is no trifling Thing, which
Ministers urge and take Pains in, viz. To stir up their Hearers, by way of
Remembrance. The Memory, (a Faculty or Power of Recollection) is of vast
Service to the Mind; well improved; especially, in Matters of Religion; as it
looks up, and reviews what it had some Knowledge of before; and now, by
reviewing the same, has deeper Impressions of it, made upon the Soul; and, to
have Helps to Memory, as faithful Ministers, (among others) to bring to
Remembrance, is a great Benefit. To be sure, the Apostle thought so, when he
judges it meet, as long as he lived to labor this Matter.

AND not only is a Minister to put his People in Remembrance of the great
Doctrines and Duties of Religion; but also, of the great Event of Death, which
awaits all Men, and first or last will open to every one, a most clear view of
the Importance of those Things.

SOME have once a Year given to the Congregation, the Number of their Deceased,
in that Term, for the awakning of the Living. For the same Purpose, I will now,
as near as I can, count to you, the Numbers of the Deceased here, in the Course
of 50 Years. And learn ye, something, by the Voice from the Dead: i. e. So to
Number your Days, that you may apply your Hearts to Wisdom.

ACCORDING to some exact Account of the Deaths, in this Society, for a Number
of Years together; including therein the extremes from 14 to 30 in a Year; it
appears, there have Died of all Ages, about 20, in a Year, one with another.
And in such Proportion as this: -- From the Age of 70 and upwards, an 112. Of
this first Class, many lived to above 80 Years; a few to above 90; and one,
Mrs. Abigail Lathrop, who lived into her 104th Year. And on the completion of
an 100, she had, at her Desire, a Century Sermon preached at her House, Jan.
13, 1732; when she appeared a most rare Instance of Piety and strength of Mind.
to above an 100. -- From the Age of 50, to 70, an 140; of this Class, many
lived to above 60; and some, near 70. -- From the Age of 30, to 50, there died,
an 154: many of whom, as they died in the vigor of Life, so, in the midst of
growing Usefulness; to the great Lamentation of Survivors. -- From the Age of
20 to 30, about an 140: many of whom, were as hopeful, and promising to be
great Blessings to the Church and Society, as those who now fill important
Places therein. -- From the Age of 14 to 20, have died about 70; a Number of
whom, had they been spared in Life, might have filled it eminently well,
according as they were the Hope and Joy of the Generation, in which they lived.
-- From the Infant of Days, to 14, there have died about 390: Some of which
appeared to have an uncommonly sprightly Genius, and a promising turn of Mind;
some of the most likely Branches of humane Nature, we had; full as Promising
for their Age; as others, who are now, forward and useful in their's; who, if
spared, might have been as great Blessings in their Day, as any that now are
so: which shows the great Loss, the Public may sustain in the Death of
Children, as well as of Youth; in which Respect this Society has had great
Breaches, made therein, not soon forgotten. Now, by the Account I have given of
Deaths, in this Society, from the Year -- 17, to this -- 67, in the several
Ages; you see the Amount of the whole Number, is about 1000. -- A great Number,
for any one Person to have taken from his Charge by Death, and to have attended
the Funeral of the greater Part of.

OH how much to be learned by looking into the Grave, and being put in Mind of
the series of Deaths, of one Age and another; continually carrying off People
into the House appointed for all living; and into another far distant State
from that!

THE first Set of aged People, are all gone long ago. Thus, in every Age, is
the propriety of them Words kept up, "Your Fathers, where are they?" The next
Set are almost all gone, after them; which we continually learn, is "the Way of
all the Earth:" And indeed, when People arrive to Threescore and Ten, their
Life is soon cut off* and they fly away at once, as it were. Some of a middle
Age have died; died in the full Strength of Body and Mind: and there is no
Discharge in that War. And, may not some of this Class now living, also die in
that Age? They are like a Company, a little behind others in the same Road --
Therefore, "be ye also ready" is the Direction for them; and as it is said,
they Die in Youth so it has been; and may be even with the present Youth:
Therefore, let them Remember their Creator in the Days of their Youth. Be
early, and effectually Religious, have it fixed in their Minds to be so. And
that so many Children Die, who carry a great Proportion of the whole Number: it
teaches us, that all Flesh is Grass; and as the Flower of the Field, so, it
fades.

AND now, let the Remembrance of Deaths, so many; (which may serve to raise our
Admiration of God's distinguishing Goodness to us, who survive;) really quicken
us, to make a Business of living to God, more than ever. -- That, living and
dying we may be the Lord's. --

IT IS now 51 Years, the 19th of last Month, O. S. since, at the invitation of
the People here, I came to Norwich, which was then all one Society, excepting
two Parishes just then set off; and now Eight. And, 50 Years, reckoning by the
Sabbaths, since I was Ordained a Pastor here. At the Time of my coming to Town,
no small Cloud of Discouragement, appeared in the Way of any one's peaceable
Settlement, though mostly gone off, before I settled; as the Difficulties on
Account of the People's former Divisions gradually abated to clear the Way.
Through God's goodness, and the best Advice, I was wholly kept from interesting my
self in those Divisions. And those Words, who made me a Judge, who made me a
Divider? were then, and since, a good Guard to me, against taking in, with a
Party. And as all were united in my Settling here; so, (as I have often said) I
never could tell which, were most Friendly to me. The unhappy Discord that had
been long in the Place, and among Brethren, in a little Time, began to Subside;
and more and more; till it became generally undesirable to keep it up. And it is
like, the more, and the sooner did those Difficulties wear away, by the
influence of a good Work, which early then, discovered its self among them; as
Persons' Minds were awakned, and some powerful Turn given them, to religious
Matters; of which, some now alive, are Witnesses. And as Things, of a spiritual
Nature, became generally the Topic of Conversation, and Matters of serious
Enquiry; those that had been Matters of Contention dropped, and disappeared.

WHEN I first came here, there was a beautiful Sight of venerable aged Fathers,
and many of them appearing much of the right puritan Stamp The hoary Head found
in the Way of Righteousness. And as there is now some greater Number of the
aged, from 70, and upwards, than there was at that Time; the more these are
found in the Imitation of them, in respect of Religion; the brighter the Aspect
on the succeeding Generations.

THOSE of elder Life now, (but young then,) I began with in my Youth; and we
are grown up together, and so the more naturally love as Brethren. As I had
your Fathers to Pray for me, to be a great Comfort, and Help to me, in my
Youth, (of which the Elder now, are Witnesses, as they saw the Spirit and Way
of their Fathers;) So, you will not fail, (I trust) to Pray for me, in my old
Age; and be my Comfort and Help therein, as far as may be. -- God was pleased
to favor me in my Youth, in this, that I had the Esteem and Affection of the
Fathers then; which, was a great Encouragement to me; especially, when so
Sensible of the great inequallity of such a Youth, to the great and arduous
Work of the Ministry: But, as they Prayed much for me, and the Success of the
Ministry to themselves and dear Posterity, it was animating: and I lived in
their Hearts, and they in mine. And in that Respect, very happy the Situation,
for a great Number of Years: and well indeed, that it was so; for, I was with
them in much Weakness, and sore Affliction, in Person and Family, Not an entire
Year of Health for 16 Years.
in many the Years, of my former Part of Life: When signal Kindnesses were
shown me and my distressed first Wife, For the greatest Part of 16 Years,
Bedrid, and Eight Years, incapable of feeding her self; and other Ways, extreme
Helpless, and much in extreme Pain.
from some, (besides the general Support from the whole) whose former loving
Kindnesses, (I trust,) have, the same Place in God's Book of Accounts, as Alms
have; which are had in Remembrance by Him, to Reward them.

IT IS now, one Half Century, that I have been with you, in many Scenes of
Trial; and in a long Series of Service, which I hope has been, some labor of
Love; and in a Measure to your Profit: And, trust, by the Grace of God, while I
live, to seek you, rather than yours; as, I seriously think I have done: and,
yet to Spend and be Spent for you. And may I not, Hope and Trust, (without a
Shock to my Hope in the Matter) that the Spirit of the Fathers, wherein they
followed God and Duty, will in every Respect dwell in, and influence the
Children. So, shall I have the Comfort of such a good Spirit, and they the
Blessing that attends it.

WHEN I took the pastoral Office here; there were Eleven Male Members of the
Church, of its standing in the Rev'd Mr. Fitch's Day, with about the same
Number of Females. Also, there were at that Time, Fifteen Male Members, who had
been admitted in the Rev'd Mr. Woodward's Day; with the ordinary Proportion of
Females. There have since been admitted, 330, of which an 124 have died; as
almost all of them beforementioned; 410, have owned the Covenant, of which
Number, 90 have afterward joined to the Church, in full Communion. 2050, have
been Baptized here, in this Course of Fifty Years; of which Number, many have
died in Infancy. Thus, Death spares no Sort or Age.

Now, among the Numbers, that have attended on the Means of Grace, more or
less, these 2600 Sabbaths in these 50 Years; (besides a great Number of other
public Occasions,) the Lord knows the Number and the Persons who have received
the Grace of God, to their Salvation; and who, through their Unbelief, have
died in their Sins; or are in danger of Destruction, as being yet in their
Sins. For, to some, the Word preached, and the preachers of it, are a Savor of
Life unto Life, and to others a Savor of Death unto Death.

THAT the Number of the former Kind, may be happily Increased in the small
proportion of Time, I have to be with you: let it be your Prayer, the same as
some Time since made for me, in this Desk: That my latter End greatly increase.
And amidst all other Decline, may there be a rich Increase of spiritual
Knowledge, Grace, Experience, Faithfulness and Success, to the Glory of God; to
my own and your best Advantage.

I OBSERVED, I had in my Youth, the Encouragement which your Fathers, and the
Grandfathers of some of you, gave me: who appeared to Prize these very Things
which I am to bring to your Remembrance. I hope, those who have "grown up with
me," and their Children, who began Life, since I came here; will ever show the
Spirit of their pious Ancestors; to treat the Gospel with Esteem and Love: As
also the Ministers thereof with that Regard in all Things, which the Gospel
requires. And may there not ever a Generation rise up, that know not the God of
their Fathers; but, such as have the like precious Faith with them.

IT is a great Thing, to have the Religion of Jesus Christ, transmitted from
Generation to Generation, pure and incorrupt; both as to the great Principles
and permanent Institutions thereof, etc. And that every Generation in their own
Day, stand fast in the Liberty, Faith and Order of the Gospel: as those who
take it well to be always put in Remembrance of these Things. And if the
Discourse this Day, on the Remarkable Occasion thereof, has any good Tendency
to this; then look we back to this Day hereafter; as to a Kind of Monument set
up, to remind us of Fifty Years Experience; yea, of all former Testimonies of
God's great Goodness to me and you; in upholding Christ's Ministry, and
preserving his Church through all Trials, from Dissolving, and falling a Prey
to Error and Confusion. Yea, review all as in a Kind of Jubilee, which speaks
out the Ground of Rejoicing in God's Salvation, and of Praise to his great
Name. And may the same, as looking forward, proclaim Liberty from Embarrasments
to Religion, and greater Freedom in the Service of God for the future.

AND, as I may justly think it Meet, while in this Tabernacle, to be reminding
you; especially, of the most Important Things; so I may agreeably now, (as a
Specimen thereof) give you the following Advice. -- Be thoroughly Engaged in
searching the Scriptures, which testify of Christ, and show the Way of Life by
him. -- Be much in Prayer, for the holy Spirit, to guide you (in the Use of the
Scripture) into all Truth and Duty. -- Be thorough in your Repentance and
Conversion to God. Take not up with slighty Appearances thereof: Know, that by
the Work of the Spirit in effectual Calling, the Man becomes a new Creature,
created in Christ unto good Works. -- Rest not short of an entire
Self-Dedication to God, and apprehending the Righteousness of God, which is by
Faith in Jesus Christ, for Justification unto Life. Behold the Lamb of God,
which takes away the Sin of the World, by the Sacrifice of himself, by his
Obedience unto the Death of the Cross. -- Despair of Salvation by the Works of
the Law, in your own Persons. -- Steadfastly View the Glory of the other Way, by
Grace; wherein, God has made us accepted in the Beloved: -- The Argument to
fall in with this Way of Acceptance with God, is very great: From the glorious
Origin, free Grace; the Dignity of the Medium, God's own beloved Son: And so,
from the high Security, it gives the Believer: As also, the everlasting high
Relish he will have of it. On the Dignity, Sweetness, and Glory of this Way!
More honorary to God, than to be Justified by Works of ours: As much more so,
as the Lord from Heaven is more Honorable than an innocent Adam could have
been, with all his Posterity, an unsinning Race. And therefore spoke with an
Emphasis, in Praise of this new, and living Way of Acceptance with God. Ephesians. 1.
6. To the Praise of the Glory of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted --
Of his own Grace, he has made us so; which implies in it, a divine Influence,
as well as a glorious Constitution. -- Be then entirely Satisfied in the Gospel
Way of Justification before God, and live by the Faith of the Son of God, the
Life you now live in the Flesh.

NOT knowing, but I may obtain Help of God, to continue with you, for more
Service, though but for a little while; shall I earnestly Invite you, to take the
Advantage of my confirmed Health and Strength, in further Service for your
Souls; which, I know, it concerns me to improve this Way.

THERE is a large, an attentive, and animating Assembly of you, who meet here
for public Worship, as, the Society is large, and the People greatly increased.
Every Class, from Children, to aged People, seem to be multiplied. From the Age
of 50, to 70, now, above 100 Persons: And from 70, and upwards, near 40; all
advanced, and some far advanced in the Road to the Grave; unto dying Work, new
Work; and to be done but once; -- and gloriously done by such as Die in the
Lord.
But, if you should fail of keeping up a general Attendance, on social public
Worship, and other Branches of Religion, which will fail in Proportion as this
does; it may be said, as in Isai. 9. 3. Thou have multiplied the Nation, and
not increased the Joy. There is much in the Gospel of Christ, and in the divine
Worship that we attend on, to animate us to the Attendance. And a Multitude
that go to the House of the Lord together, seriously, harmoniously, etc. do
animate one another. -- By all Means, be ye animated to attend; yea,
universally, and more faithfully and devoutly than ever, to the Word preached.
--

AND here now, shall I for my self and you, by the Grace of God, adopt the
Language of Psalm. 132. And say, as there, Recorded; We will go into his
Tabernacle, we will Worship at his Footstool; Arise, O Lord, into thy Rest,
thou and the Ark of thy Strength: Let thy Priests be clothed with
Righteousness, and, let thy Saints shout for Joy; for the Lord has chosen
Zion, he has desired it for his Habitation. This is my Rest for ever, and here
will I dwell, for I have desired it. I will abundantly bless her Provision, I
will satisfy her Poor with Bread. -- You will then suffer me to go on with my
Advice to the Congregation at large; and say, Acquaint now thy self with God,
one and all, and be at Peace, thereby good shall come unto thee; all the good
of Peace. -- Peace with God, Peace of Conscience, -- and Peace among your
selves. Oh how Glorious thus to be at Peace? Yea, to be engaged, in earnest, to
pursue, and happily possess mutual Love and Esteem; abiding Harmony, and Peace
in Community, Civil and Religious. As represented in Psalm. 133. Behold how good
and how Pleasant it is, for Brethren to dwell together in Unity: It is like the
precious Ointment used for a sacred Officer of old; of sweet Perfume. And as
the Dew descending upon the Mountains of Zion, to refresh them, -- for there
the Lord commands the Blessing: good indeed, to be of this Disposition, and
in that Situation, where the eternal God, the great Father of Blessing, does
command it, ah and that, which in the End, does come to be Life for ever-more.
This is glorious indeed; some Resemblance of Heaven. --

Now, whatever failure of this mutual Esteem, Love and Peace, etc. there has
ever been here; God saw it, and was much Displeased with it: and you have been
the Sufferers. And in whatever Degree, this christian Affection and Harmony
has since been, and now is; God is Witness, and approves of it; whose
Approbation it is, that determines the Worth of any Thing in, and among us, and
done by us, pleasing unto him. But whatever Peace and good Agreement, we now
live in: Still the Advice is, be more and more intent upon it; to live in Love
and Peace, always following Holiness with it.

LOVE, and Peace! of what importance and sacred Worth is this? it is honored
with God's having a Character to this Purpose, God is Love. The God of Peace:
and Christ, he is our Peace: And Peace it self comprehends all good. As in Joh.
14. 27. My Peace I give unto you, that is every Thing: Yea, put for the Crown
of all that is called good. As expressed in that glorious Benediction -- Grace,
Mercy, and Peace be multiplied to you. So, let it be now, and hereafter so let
it be, through my Days, and all succeeding Generations, for ever.

AMEN.

