William Dewsbury's SERMON

A SERMON, PREACHED AT GRACE CHURCH STREET, the 6th. of the 3d. Month, 1688.

By WILLIAM DEWSBURY, One of the Christian People called QUAKERS.

PROVIDENCE: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOHN WATERMAN, AT THE NEW PRINTING-OFFICE, AT
THE PAPER-MILL. M.DCC.LXVIII.

A SERMON, Preached by WILLIAM DEWSBURY, at GRACE CHURCH STREET, the 6th. of
the 3d. Month. 1688.
My Friends, Except you be regenerated and born again, ye cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God.

THIS is the Word of the Lord God to all people this Day, this lies not in airy
profession, and in vain Imigination, and whatsoever else it is that you deck
your selves withal; you must every particular Man and Woman be born again, else
you cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. This was the Doctrine of Christ in
that prepared Body, wherein he appeared in the World, and preached to
Nicodemus, that standing Doctrine to this Moment of time, and will be so while
any Man breathes upon the Earth; there is no other Way, no other Gate to enter
into Life, but by this great Work of Regeneration. Now to enforce People to
come to this great Work, and to set forward from Earth to Heaven, all being
driven out of Paradise by the Cherubim set with a flaming Sword, there is no
returning to that blessed Life, but by the Loss of that Life that did grieve
the Spirit of God, and which did cause Man to be driven out; there is no other
Way of Return again but by this new Birth. As you are all driven and forced out
(...) the flaming Sword and the Cherubims are set to keep the Way of the Tree
of Life, so you must return into the favor of God again, by the Light of
Christ; and you have Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept, here a little, and
there a little, to direct your Minds to the Light of Christ Jesus. As the first
Adam was made a living Soul, so the second Adam is a quickening Spirit. This
know for certain, no Man or Woman can be quickened, and raised up into the Life
of the second Adam, till the Life of the first Adam be taken away from them.

So now, let every one of you deal plainly with your own Hearts, how you came
to be a slain people to the Life of the first Adam, in which Life there was a
working of the Mystery of Iniquity in every Part of Man. One cries, lo! here is
Christ, another, lo! there is Christ, and every one is following his own
Imagination about the Letter of the Scripture; this is still but the vain
Spirit of Man, running and striving to recover himself; and this is the Cause
there is so much Profession of God, and so little of his Nature appearing among
the Sons and Daughters of Men. Now all of you that come to be regenerated, you
must come to the Light of Christ, there is no other Way to it. He will search
your Hearts, and try your Reins, and set your Sins in order before you, and
trace out the Iniquities that compass you about; therefore you must see your
selves a lost People, a sinful People, and so come to feel the Weight of your
Sins upon your Consciences, there is no other Way to come to Life; you will
never complain of Sin till you be burdened with it, 'till you have a Trumpet
sounding in your Ears, to awaken you, that you may arise from the dead, that
Christ may give you Light; there is no other Way, dear People, you must bring
your Deeds to the Light of Christ, and abide in the Sentence of Condemnation:
If you save your Lives, you lose them; if you Will lose your Lives for Christ's
sake, there is no Danger of your eternal Life. John the Baptist, Christ's
Forerunner, declared, I indeed baptize you with Water unto Repentance, but he
that comes after me is mightier than I, the Latchet of whose Shoes I am not
worthy to unloose, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire,
whose Fan is in his Hand, and he will thoroughly purge his Floor, and will
gather his Wheat into his Garner, but the Chaff he will burn with unquenchable
Fire. What is it the better for you to read the Scripture, if you know not this
fiery Baptism, which all must know that are regenerated; deceive not your
selves, Christ will appear in flaming Fire, and take Vengeance on all them that
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

I stand here as a Witness of the Lord of Life this Day, there is no Way for
People to come to Salvation, but they must know Christ revealed in all their
Hearts. What is he doing but rendering Vengeance upon the carnal Mind,
self-pleasing, and all inordinate Affection; he comes with Vengeance to take
away thy Life -- he will baptize thee with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire. If
thou know not this, thou art not a true Christian, thou will never look
Death in the Face with Joy, nor go down to the Grave with Triumph.

If thou live at home in the Body, and flyest for thy Life, and wilt not be
willing to lose thy Life for Christ, if thou art called to it, and if thou will
not have Christ to wash thee (some for Shyness, and some for self Love will
refuse this) if Christ does not wash thee thou have no part in him; you must
come to Christ to purify you in the Fiery Furnace; the Day of the Lord shall
burn as an oven, (as the prophet speaks) this is a dreadful Day, a Day of
Vengeance, the Day of the Lord Jesus Christ, who redeemeth his People from
their Sins, Sion is redeemed with Judgment, and established with Righteousness.

Do not make the Way to Heaven easier in your Minds and Imaginations than
indeed it is, and think it not sufficient to live in an outward Observance of
the Ways of God. If your own Wills be alive, and your Corruptions remain
unmortified, the Judgment of God will be your Portion, therefore in the Lord's
Name come along with me, I am come to declare what I have heard and seen of the
Father. Come and examine thy Conscience, have thou brought thy Deeds to the
Light? Then thou have received Condemnation upon thy self, and thy Haughtiness
is bowed down, and laid low, and thou see thy self a poor miserable Wretch
before the eternal God.

Whatsoever thou know of the Mind of God, have thou reformed thy Ways, come
along with me, and tell me what is the Ground of thy Faith and thy Confidence!
is it thy Obedience and (...) Because thy Obedience is right, and thy
Qualifications right, what Use do thou make of them? Read the Book of
Conscience. have thou no Ground for thy Faith? Thou have put on the reformed
Faith, and live an unreformed Life; search and try thy self, Man, or Woman.
Do thou watch over thyself, and keep in a Sense of thy Dissolution,
notwithstanding all thy Qualifications and partial Reformation? Do thou
strive to enter in at the strait Gate, and the narrow Way here is the lost
Sheep, thou seek the Life of thy Will, the Life of the first Adam: The
Justice of God will not suffer thee to make a Savior of thy Duties and
Qualifications, and to take God's Jewels, and to deck thy self with them, thou
can not be saved without the Righteousness of God in Christ Jesus. What
says thy Conscience, art thou brought to this Change of thy Mind, and of thy
Conversation? Are you all willing to part with your Sins, with your Pride and
Haughtiness? Are you willing to part with your vile Affection? This is the Work
of God's Grace upon you; do thou place thy Confidence in thy Duties and
Qualifications, and take God's Jewels and Ornaments, and deckest thy self
with them? Thou tookest my Jewels says the Lord, and did play the Harlot; if
thou return to the Lord, and humble thy self, and get through this Difficulty,
thou will be happy for ever. This Judgment of God, this flaming Sword that
turns every Way, will keep thee from returning to Sin, and bring thee to Christ
(...) thee off from all Hope of Salvation but by him, and make thee to see the
absolute Need of a Savior, and that thy Life is hid with Christ in God.

It is God's infinite Goodness to men, that he will hide Pride from them, and
humble them under his mighty Hand. This is the Condition of poor Creatures that
are slain by the Hands of the most High: How may I know when I am slain and
baptized, and come to have Sincerity? They that have this Baptism enter into
the heavenly Life, if you love the Light of Christ Jesus, it will be thus with
you, God will make short Work in the Earth. He will set thy Sins in order
before thee, and make thee watchful unto Prayer, and lead thee to Holiness of
Life and Conversation, and make thee abhor thy self, and despise all the Pomps
and Pleasures and Vanities of this World; when he has adorned thee with his
Graces, then watch for the Light, and in the Light of Christ thou shall see
Light, and that all thou have done, and can do, is but thy Duty. All this
thou ought to do, thou art God's Creature, and all this will not justify
thee in order to thy eternal Salvation for these Services thou owe unto God.
If thou diligently wait, thou shall see more Light; then the Sword that
proceeds out of the Mouth of Christ, who is called the word of God, will cut
thee off from all thy Hopes of Salvation from any Thing thou have done, from
any of thy Qualifications, from any Thing that thou can do, so that thou will
be a hopeless Soul, nothing (...) thine own Sense and Apprehensions; the Power
of the first Adam must die before him, and thou will cry out. I am a dead,
lost, and undone Creature, but there is a Life hid with Christ in God for me,
but I can never have it till I be slain into the Will of God, and become as a
little Child, and be stripped of all my own Excellency that I have attained; I
must come to a Sense of my own Misery, and fall down at the Foot of God; when I
am become as a little Child, humbled and slain as to my own Will, and
Confidence in my own Righteousness; I will not then question but I shall live a
holy Life, but I will give all that Life I had, for that Life which is hid with
Christ in God; O! there is none come so far that ever miss of eternal Life. All
shuffling People that would have Salvation by Christ, and will not let him
exercise his heavenly Power, his princely glorious Power to baptize them into
his Death, it is they that come short of Salvation; but all those that yield
themselves up to Christ to be redeemed through Judgment, and are become as
little Children, these are in a happy State. You know that our Lord Jesus
Christ took a little Child in his Arms, and said, whosoever becomes not as a
little Child, cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; you must all of you
become as little Children, and depend upon the Mercy and free Grace of God; you
must all come to a holy Resignation of your Wills to God's Disposal: If you
come to Christ as little Children, and depend upon him, you cannot miss (...);
it is entailed upon such Souls as hear the Voice of Christ, they that hear the
Voice of the Son of God shall live.

I stand here as a Witness for the God of Heaven, I never heard the Voice of
Christ (as his Follower) till I was slain and baptized, and lay as a little
Child under his heavenly Chastisements; as soon as ever my Soul was brought to
this in my Humiliation, O then the dreadful Judgment was taken away, and the
Book of Life was opened unto me, and the Lord spoke comfortably to me, I have
loved thee with an everlasting Love; and I was made a Christian through a Day
of Vengeance, and of burning as an Oven; and the Haughtiness and pride of Man
in me was brought low! Now in this Conformity to Christ's Death people may die
into Life, and blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, for they rest from
their Labors, and their Works do follow them. Away with all your own Wills,
and your Pride, and haughtiness, and your Hypocrisy, and Deceit, and all
Dependency upon any Qualifications of your own; you must come to have your Life
separated from you, else you will all perish. Those that will die with Christ,
and be willing to die for him, he is revealed as a Savior to them. He was
before us in the Days of his Flesh, and complied with his Father's Will, he was
nailed to the Cross. The Son of God, when he was come to the Depth of his
Sufferings, what was his Cry? my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? This
was for thy Sake, and my sake, and every Man and Woman's Sake that do believe
in him; he drank the Cup which his Father gave him to drink; if it (...) done
thus to the green Tree, what shall be done unto the dry? He went before us, and
when he comes again he will take us to himself, and take us from the Filth of
Sin, that we may be made new Creatures.

Now except we be born again, we cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, and
there is no becoming new Creatures, till we be slain to the old Man.

Thou must be slain to thy Pride and Haughtiness, and the Corruption of thine
own Will, and all Selfishness, thou must have God to burn it up in the: The
Holy Ghost will destroy, and burn up nothing in thee, but that which will bring
an eternal Fire upon thy Soul, show me thou whom my Soul loves; where is the
Path of Life, the Footsteps of the Flock of thy Companions? Why should I be as
one that goes aside? Now every one that lives at Home, in the bosom of self,
take this with you, though you profess the Truth, and live in an outward
Conformity thereunto, yet if you secretly indulge your corrupt Will, and live a
Flesh-pleasing Life, and consult with Flesh and Blood, and are not rent off
from your Lusts, you cannot enjoy the Lord of Life; While I am at Home in the
Body, I am absent from the Lord.

The Body of Sin is a loadstone to draw you from the Life of God, and from
glorying in the Cross of Christ: This is Flesh and Blood, and Flesh and Blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. For the Lord's Sake, for your Soul's Sake
and for the Sake of your eternal Happiness, put not off this Work, but pursue
it, and it will be perfected; See how Christ is revealed in you by the Holy
Ghost, and with Fire. God will redeem you by the Spirit of Judgment and
Burning; it is not ranging abroad in your Minds, but you must know Christ is in
you except ye be Reprobates; If he has set your Eyes and Hearts upon himself
and made you to water your Couch with your Tears; If he has broken your Sleep,
so as you have cried out, I shall be damned, and never come to Salvation; (This
will be your Cry, it was once my Cry,) O let not your Eyes slumber, nor your
Eyelids take any Rest, till you be sure the Lord is your God; If you find
these Qualifications, you are on your Way, otherwise you will be like a
deceitful Bow, and never abide in Judgment; If you reject the Counsel of God
against yourselves, and refuse to be crucified with Christ, (...) to be
baptized with his Baptism, you will never have Life; but by his Baptism, and
through the heavenly Operation of his Spirit; if thou have Faith in Christ's
Name, thou shall be married to him in everlasting Righteousness; Salvation
shall be brought to us, and eternal Life be bestowed upon us, even that Life
which is hid with Christ in God, he will give to every poor mournful Soul that
submits to his blessed Will, and believes in the Lord Jesus Christ: This is
not a Faith of our own making, nor a Garment of our own Embroidery, but that
which the Lord has given to us.

O happy Man or Woman, that obtainest this Gift of God! O! Who will not lose
their Lives for this everlasting Life? Who will not die for this eternal Life?
Now the Matter lies in the Death of your own Wills, when you have done the Will
of God, then watch that your own Wills be slain, and that your cursed self take
not the Jewels of God, and his Bracelets and Ornaments, and bestow them upon
self, and paint and deck cursed self? and take not the Members of Christ, and
make them the Members of an Harlot; If you be dead to your own Will you are
risen with Christ, and shall receive a Resurrection to eternal Life: Crucify
self, and set the World at naught, and trample upon it, and all Things of it,
and count them as Dross and Dung in comparison of Christ, that the Father has
revealed to be our Life, in the Days of our Sorrow and Mourning, in the Day of
our Calamity, in the Day when we cried our Hope is lost.

Thus it has been with the holiest People on Earth; it is not by Works of
Righteousness of thy own that thou can be saved; Christ comes to cut all
these down, that thou may be ingrafteth into him, and justified by his
Grace. Do not make this Matter of Talk, and say I have heard this and that, but
look into your own Hearts, and see what heavenly Workings are there; what there
is of the Power of the Lord Jesus, that has made you to loath this World, and
the inordinate Love of the Creature, that you may enjoy all these Things, as if
you enjoyed them not. We cannot when we are slain and (...) say, my Life is in
Christ, when we come to ascribe nothing to our selves, and all to Christ: Here
is a blessed Harmony, broken Hearts, melted Spirits, and yet joyful Souls; poor
Creatures that were mourning and sighing, and crying before the Lord in retired
Places, and yet rejoicing in Christ Jesus: I am risen with Christ. I said, my
Hope is cut off, I will lie down in thy Will, O God; do what thou will with me,
it is in thy sovereign Pleasure and free Gift, whether thou give me Life, or
deny it to me: There must be a Resignation of our selves to the Will of God; it
was so with the Lord Jesus, and it is so with every true Saint of God; you must
be humbled as little Children before Judgment be taken away, and the Loving
Kindness of God sealed up to your souls; if you seek this Work of God, you will
find it; if you seek it upon your Beds, in all your Labors and Concernments,
in all your Stations and Relations; if you press after the new Birth, you must
use this World as if you used it not, and live a married Life as if you were
unmarried, for the Fashion of this (...) passes away. This is not Rantism.

(...) let me tell you, a new World comes by Regeneration, a Man is not lifted
up in his own Mind, but laid low in his own Eyes, he waits for the Wisdom of
God to govern him, and he is as a Steward of the Grace of God, to give to them
that stand in Need. When a Man is regenerated and born again, he is as
contented with Bread and Water, as with all the Enjoyments of this World: What
is the Matter? His own Will is gone, and put down under his Foot and whatsoever
it is that gives Life to all his (...) Desires and Affections, there is a
Harmony of all within, a Man praising of God, and blessing his holy Name: there
are no Intanglements shall draw away the Heart from serving of God, and seeking
his Glory; and if God shall call the Husband from the Wife, or the Wife from
the Husband, for the Glory of his Name, there is no whining and complaining,
and crying out, but giving them up, and a praising and blessing God, when they
are called to such an Exercise; and if they are not called to that, then they
set their Hearts to glorify God in their several Places and Stations; then they
have a full Content in a blessed Resignation. Here their Wills are slain, but
they praise God they have no Desire, but Lord thy Will be done, always praising
God, always having the Fear, and the Glory of God before their Eyes. All the
Mischief is hatched in pleasing Men's own Wills: That is, the Counsel of every
Heart that Christ does not govern: Will you live as the (...)? Then you must
live contemptibly, (...) and the Maid are hail-fellows, well met: (...), every
one must walk in Humility, and live in Acquaintance with the God of Heaven; she
that is wrought upon by the same Spirit, must with all Diligence behave herself
as becomes a Servant of the Lord. Here is now a new World, and the Fashions of
the old World are gone; all Pride, Haughtiness, Crossness, and Trampling upon
one another, are all gone all slain through the Operation of Christ.

What remains now, Christ is in me, and we are all one in him; Christ laid down
his Life for thee and me; now he reigns in me, and he has prepared my Body to
die for the Truth, as his prepared Body was laid down for my Sins. It is a Kind
of foolish Profession to make Profession of Christ, and live in Covetousness,
Profaneness, Sensuality, and the like; they that are come to this heavenly
Birth, seek the Things that are above, thou can do no other: Make the Tree
good, and the Fruit will be good. You must be ingrafted into the Vine of God's
Righteousness: O! slight not the Day of your Visitation. What was it to me to
read of any being born again, till I was slain, and knew the heavenly Baptism
of Christ Jesus? Till I saw the flaming Sword ready to slay me in every Way, in
every Turning. The Light of Christ convinced me of Sin, and his Righteousness
justified me, and those Works were abominable to me, that hindered my Soul's
Passage to (...): Christ Jesus in marrying my soul to himself (...) upon me,
and did work effectually in me. There is the Testimony of Christ in me, he has
sealed, up my Soul to the Day of my Redemption, here is a certain Passage, and
a certain Way which never any miss of, that lose their Lives for Christ: If you
be not ready and willing to lose your Lives for Christ, you shall never come
here; the Gate is straight, and the Way is narrow, none come hither but those
that (...) into an heavenly Oneness with Christ. O Friends, let us empty our
selves, that Christ may fill (...) let us be Nothing in our own Eyes, that we
may be all in him, and receive of his Fullness.

Now I commend you to God's Witness, that you may remember what has been
spoken among you; but consider, if you do not hearken to it, it will follow
you, and be a Plague to you to all Eternity: if you will not yield up your
selves to Christ, this Day that burns like, an Oven, this Fire you must dwell
with when out of the Body, there will be no quenching of this Fire for ever;
but if you be so wise for your Souls, as to resign your selves up to Christ,
and come to him as little Children, this will not hinder your earthly Concerns,
though the World may account thee a Fool, yet thou have that Part of heavenly
Wisdom to do what thou do as unto God; thou carriest to thy Wife, as in the
Sight of God, that she may be sanctified to thee, and thou to her; and thou
carriest becomingly to thy Children and Servants, and thou will abound in
Grace, and in every good Work, which will be for thine eternal Welfare.

O! I beseech you People, for the Lord's Sake wait for the Light of Christ to
guide you; learn of him to be meek and lowly, then happy are you; for he
dwells with the humble; but he beholds the proud afar off. This new Birth,
which is a true Work, a sincere and heavenly Work, it will make you forever. O
make Room for Christ in your Hearts, or else he is never like to dwell with
you; he loves to dwell with the poor and humble and (...) Spirit, he abhors
the proud, he will empty your Souls, that he may fill them.

And so I commend you to God. I have been long held in Druance under great
Weakness; and I was restless, till I could come up to this great City of
London, to preach the everlasting Gospel among you, and you see I am among you
here; pray every one of you turn inward; let not these Words passing through a
mean Vessel be as a bare empty Discourse of Truth to you, which you only hear,
and take no farther Care of your Salvation. Take heed of despising the Light
that shines in the midst of you, and be pressing forward to the heavenly Work
that is laid in the Power of Christ Jesus, even through Judgment into Death,
and then he will give eternal Life; the Lord confirm this, that it may rest
upon your Hearts, that you may be dead to the Things of the World: We are not
come to Mount Sinai, that genders to Bondage, but we are come to Mount Sion,
the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable
Company of Angels, to the general Assembly, and Church of the Firstborn which
are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just
Men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the
Blood of Sprinkling, that speaks better Things than that of Abel. This is the
Inheritance of the redeemed of the Most High, blessed be the Name of the Lord;
let us rest in hope, till he bring us to Humility and Lowness of Mind, that he
may cloth us with heavenly Glory, according to his Promise, I will beautify my
House with Glory, says the Lord. This is the Portion of a poor People, that
cast down themselves before the Lord, that he may lift them up, and be all in
all to them, in whose blessed presence they shall have Joy, and Rivers of
Pleasures at his right Hand for evermore.

And the Lord will prosper his Work in your Hand, and cause his Truth to
flourish, and spread abroad. For it shall have the Victory, and no Weapon
formed against it shall prosper.

A Short Account of the LIFE, and CONVINCEMENT, of WILLIAM DEWSBURY.
IN the Year 1688, died William Dewsbury, one of the first Preachers among
those called Quakers, having been a very zealous Teacher, and an eminent.
Instrument to the Conversion of many. He was born in Yorkshire, and in his
Youth was a Shepherd, and afterward put (...) a Clothier; but when the civil
Wars broke out, he became a Soldier, and joined with those who said they fought
for the Gospel.

Now though he was religious according to his Knowledge, yet growing more and
more serious, and turning his Mind inwardly, he saw there were inward and
spiritual Enemies to encounter with, according to the Saying of the Apostle, We
wrestle not against Flesh and Blood; but against spiritual Wickedness, etc. And
this State was inwardly manifested to him in the words of our Savior, put up
thy Sword into the Sheath. -- If my Kingdom were of this World, then would my
Servants fight. This wrought so powerfully upon his Mind, that he could no
longer meddle with martial Affairs, but left the Army, and returned to his
former Calling; endeavoring to improve in true Godliness, in which he so
advanced gradually, that when George Fox in the Year 1651, came to Balby in
Yorkshire, and preached the Gospel there, he could not but consent to the
Doctrine declared by him, as being the same of which he himself was already
convinced in his Mind, viz. that Heed ought to be given to the inward divine
Reprovings for that which is evil; which Doctrine was preached by George Fox
under the Denomination of the true Light, which enlighteneth every Man coming
into the World. And that Heed must be given thereunto, as being the Grace which
brings Salvation, of which the Apostle speaks in his Epistle to Titus (...) 11.
saying, that it has appeared to all Men. -- W. Dewsbury having heard such a
(...) agreed not only with G. Fox in this Point of Doctrine, but in Process of
Time became himself also a very zealous Preacher of it, for which he fell under
great Sufferings; insomuch that he was a Prisoner at Worwick nineteen Years for
Religion's Sake, besides the Imprisonments he suffered on that Account in other
Places. But being now released, he came in the Month called May to London, and
preached a Sermon there concerning Regeneration, which was taken from his Mouth
in Shorthand, and afterward printed, as you may see in the forepart of this
book.


