A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED in PROVIDENCE, IN THE COLONY of RHODE ISLAND, upon the
25th. Day of July, 1768.

AT The DEDICATION of the TREE of LIBERTY, From the Summer House in the TREE.

By a SON of LIBERTY.

PROVIDENCE: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOHN WATERMAN, AT HIS PRINTING OFFICE, AT THE
PAPER-MILL. M.DCC.LXVIII.

A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT THE DEDICATION OF THE TREE OF LIBERTY, IN PROVIDENCE.
Dearly beloved Countrymen.
WE His Majesty's subjects* who live remote from the throne, and are
inhabitants of a new ^orld, are here met t^gether to dedica^e the Tree of
Liberty On this occasion we c^ear^u^^y recogn^ze our allegiance to our
sovereign Lord. G^orge the third, King of Great Britain, and ^upreme Lord of
these dominions, but u^terly deny any other depen^ence on the inhabitants of
that island, than what is mutual and reciprocal between all mank^nd. -- It is
good (...) us to be here, to confirm one another in the principles of liberty,
and to renew our obligations to con^end earnestly therefore.

OUR forefathers, with the permission of ^h^^r sovereign, emigrated from
England, to avoid the un^a^ura^ oppressions which then took place in that
co^ntry. They endured all sorts of m^^eries and ha^dships, before they could
establish any tolerable footing in the new world. It was then hoped and
ex^ecte^ that the bl^ssings of fr^edom would be the inh^ritance of their
posterity, which they preferred to every other temporal consideration. With the
extremest toil, ^ifficulty, an^ d^nger, our great and noble ancestors founded
in America a number of coloni^s under the allegiance of the crown of England.
They forfeited not the privileges of Englishmen by removing themselves hither,
but brought with them every righ^, which they could or ought to have enjoyed
had they abided in England. -- They had fierce and dreadful wars with savages,
who often poured their whole force on the infant plantations, but under every
difficulty and discouragement, by the good providence of GOD they multiplied
exceedingly, and flourished, without receiving any protection or ^ssistance
from England. They were free from impositions. Their kings were well di^posed
to them, and their fellow subjects in Great Britain had not then gaped after
Naboth's vineyard. Never were people so happy as our forefathers, after they
had brought the land to a state of inh^bi^ancy, and procured peace with the
natives. They sat every man under his own vine, and under his own fig-^ree.
They had but few wants; and luxury, extravagance, and deba^c^ery, were known
only by the names, as the things si^n^fied thereby had not then arrived from
the o^d world. The public worship of GOD, and the education of children and
youth, were never more encouraged in any part of the globe. The laws which they
made for the general advantage were exactly carried into execution. In fine, no
country ever exp^rienced more perfect felicity. Religion, learning, and a pure
administration of justice were exceeding conspicuous, and kept even pace with
the population of the country.

WHEN we view this country in its extent and variety of climates, soils, and
produce, we ought to be exceeding thankful to divine goodness in bestowing it
upon our forefathers, and giving it as an heritage (...) their children. -- We
may call it the promised land, a good land and a large -- a land of hills and
valleys, of rivers, brooks, and springs of water -- a land of milk and honey,
and wherein we may eat bread to the full. A land whose stones are iron, the
most useful material in all nature, and of other choice mines and minerals; and
a land whose rivers and adj^cent seas are stored with the best of fish. In a
word, no part of the habitable world can boast of so many natural advantages as
this northern part of Americ^*

BUT what will all these things avail us, if we be deprived of that liberty
which the GOD of nature has giv^^ us. View the miserab^e condition of the poor
wretches, who inhabit countries once the most fertile and happy in the world,
where the blessings of liberty have been removed by the hand of arbi^rary
power. Religion, learning, arts, and industry, vanished at the deformed
appearance of tyranny. Those countries are depopulated, and the scarce and thin
inhabi^an^s are fast fixed in chains and slavery They have nothing which they
can call their own; even their lives are at the absolute ^isposal of the
monsters who have usurped dominion over them.

THE dreadful scenes of massacre and bloodshed, the cruel tortures and brutal
b^rbarities* which have been committed on the image of GOD, with all the
horrible mi^eries which have overflowed great part of the globe, have proceeded
from wicked and ambitious men, who u^urped an absolute dominion over their
f^llows. If this coun^ry should experience such a shocking change in t^eir
aff^irs, or i^ despotic sway should succeed the fair enj^ym^n^ of liber^y, I
should p^efer a li^e of freedom in Nova-Zembla, Greenland, or in the most
fr^zen regions in the world, even where the use of fire is unk^own, rather than
^o live here to be tyrannized over by any of the hum^n race.

GOVERNMENT is necessary. It was instituted to secure to individuals that
natural liberty, which no human creature ha^h a right to deprive them of. For
which end the people have given power unto the rulers to use as ther^ may be
occasion for the good of whole community, and not that the civi^ mag^strate,
who is only the peoples tr^stee, should make use of it for the hurt of the
governed. If a commander of a fortress, appointed to make defense against the
approaches o^ an enemy, should breech about his gu^s and fire upon his own
town, he would commence tyrant, and ought to be treated as an enemy to mankind.

THE ends of civil government have been well answered in Am^rica, and justice
duly administered in general, while we were governed by laws of our own make,
and consented to by the Crown. It is of the very essence of the British
constitu^ion, that the people shall not be governed by laws, in the making of
which they had no hand, or have their moneys taken away without their own
c^nsent. This privilege is inherent, and cannot be granted by any but the
Almighty. It is a natural right which no creature can give, or has a ^ight to
take away. The great charter of liber^ies, commonly called Magna Charta, does
not give the privileges therein mentioned, nor does our Charte^s, but must be
considered as only declaratory of our rights, and in affi^mance of them. The
formation of legi^latures was the first object of attention ^n the colonies.
They all recognized the King of Great Britain, and a government in each was
erected, as like to that in England, as the nature of the country, and local
circumstances, would admit. Ass^mb^ies or parliaments were inst^tuted, wherein
were present the King by his substitutes, with a council of great men, and the
people, by their representatives. Our distant si^uation from Great Britain, and
other at^endant circumstances, make it impossible for us to be represented in
the parliament of that country, or to be governed from thence The exigencies of
state often require the immediate hand of governmen^; and confusion and misrule
would ensue if government was not topical. From hence it will follow that our
legislatures were complete, and that the parliamentary authori^y of
Great Britain cannot be extended over us without involving the greatest
con^radict^on: For if we are to be controu^ed by their parliament, our own will
be useless. In short, I cannot be persuaded that the parliament of Great
Britain have any lawful right to make any laws whatsoever to ^ind us, because
there can be no fountain from whence such right can fl^w. It is universally
agreed amongst us that they cannot tax us, because we are not (...). Many other
acts of legislation may affect us as nearly as taking away our moneys. There
are many kinds of proper^y as dear to us as our money, and in which we may be
greatly injured by allowing them a power in, or to direct about. Suppose the
parliament of Great Britain should undertake to prohibit us from walking in the
streets and highways on certain saints days, or from being abroad after a
certain time in the evening, or (to come nearer to the matter) to restrain us
from working up and manufacturing materials of our own growth, would not our
liberty and property be as much affected by such regulations as by a tax act?
It is the very spirit of the constitution that the King's subjects shall not be
governed by laws, in the making of which they had no share; and this principle
is the great barrier against tyranny and oppression. If this bulwark be thrown
down, nothing will remain to us but a dreadful expectation of certain slavery.
If any acts of the British parliament are found suitable and commensurate to
the nature of the country, they may be introduced, or adopted, by special acts
of our own parliaments, which would be equivalent to making them anew; and
without such introduction or adoption, our allowance of the validity or force
of any act of the English or British parliament in these dominions of the King,
must and will operate as a concession on our part, that our fellow subjects in
another country can choose a set of men among themselves, and empower them to
make laws to bind us, as well in the mat^er of taxes as in every other case. It
has been fu^ly proved, and is a point not to be controverted, that in our
constitution the having of property, especially a landed estate, entitles the
subject to a share in government and framing of laws. The Americans have such
property and estate, but are not, and never can be represented in the British
parliament. It is therefore clear that that assembly cannot pass any laws to
bind us, but that we must be governed by our own parliaments, in which we can
be in person, or by representation.

BUT of late a new system of politics has been adopted in Great Britain, and
the common people there claim a sovereignty over us although they be only
fellow subjects. The more I consider the nature and tendency of this cl^im, the
more I tremble for the liberties of my country* For although it has been
unanswerably proved that they have no more power over us than we have over
them, yet relying on the powerful logic of guns and cu^lery ware, they cease
not to make laws injurious to us; and whenever we expostulate with them for so
doing, all the return is a discharge of threats and menaces.

IT is now an established principle in Great Britain, that we are subject to
the people of that country, in the same manner as they are subject to the
Crown. They expressly call us their subjects. The language of every paultry
scribler, even of those who pretend friendship for us in some things, is after
this lordly style, our colonies -- our western dominions -- our plantations --
our islands -- our subjects in America -- our authority -- our government --
with many more of the like imperious expressions. S^range doctrine that we
should be the s^bjects of subjects, and liable to be controuled at their will!
It is enough to break every measure of patience, that fellow subjects should
assume such power over us. They are so possessed with the vision of the
plenitude of their power, that they call us rebels and traitors for denying
their authority. If the King was an absolute monarch and ruled us according to
his absolute will and pleasure, as some kings in Europe do their subjects, it
would not be in any degree so humiliating and debasing, as to be governed by
one part of the Kings subjects who are but equals. From every part of the
conduct of the administration, from the acts, votes, and resolutions of the
parliament, and from all the political writings in that country, and libels on
America, this appears to be their claim, which I think may be said to be an
invasion of the rights of the King, and an unwarrantable combination against
the liberties of his subjects in America.

LET us now attend a little to the conduct of that country toward us, and see
if it be possible to doubt of their principles. In the 9th. of Anne, the
post office act was made, which is a tax act, and which annually draws great
sums of money from us. It is true that such an establishment would have been of
great use, but then the ^^gul^tion ought to have been made among ourselve^. And
it is a clear point to me that let it be ever so much to the advantage of this
country, the parliament had no more right to interfere, than they have to form
such an establishment in the electorate of Hanover, the King's German dominions.

THEY have prohibited us from purchasing any kind of goods or manufactures of
Europe except from Gr^^t-Britain, and from selling any of our own goods or
manufactures to foreigners, a few inconsiderable articles excepted, under pain
of confiscation of vessel and cargo, and other heavy penalties. If they were
indeed our sovereign lords and masters, as they pretend to be, such regulations
would be in open violation of the laws of nature. But what adds to this
grievance is, that in the trade between us they can set their own prices both
on our and their commodities, which is in effect a tax, and of which they ^ave
availed themselves: And moreover, duties are laid on diver's enumerated
articles on their import, for the express purpose of a revenue. They freely
^ive and grant away our moneys without our consent, under the specious pretense
of defending, protecting, and securing America, and for the charges of the
administration of justice here, when in fact, we are not indebted to them one
farthing for any defense or protection from the first planting the country to
this moment, but on the contrary, a balance is due to us for our exertions in
the general cause; and besides, the advantages which have accrued to them in
their trade with us has put millions in their pockets. As to the
administration of justice, no country in the world can boast of a purer one
than this, the charges of which have been always cheerfully provided for and
paid without their interposition. There is reason to fear that if the British
people undertake the business of the administration of justice amongst us it
will be wo^se for us, as it may cause an introduction of their fashionable
corruptions, whereby our pure streams of justice will be tainted and polluted.
But in truth, by the administration of justice is meant the keeping up an idle
fett of officers to rob us of our money, to keep us down and humble, and to
frighten us out of our undoubted rights.

AND here it may be proper to mention ^he grievances of the custom house. Trade
is the natural right of all men, but it is so restrained, perplexed and
fettered, that the officers of the customs, where there happens a judge of
admiralty to their purpose, can seize and get condemned any vessel or goods
they see fit. They will seize a vessel without showing any other cause than
their arbitrary will, and keep her a long time without exhibiting any libel,
during all which time, the owner knows not on what account she is seized, and
when the trial comes on, he is utterly deprived of one by a jur^, contrary to
the usages among our fellow subjects in Britain, and perhaps all his fortune is
determinable by a single, base, and infamous tool of a violent, corrupt, and
wicked administration. Besides, these officers, who seem to be born with long
cl^ws, like eagles, exact most exorbitant fees, even from small coast^ng
vessels, who pass along shore and carry from plantation to plantation, bread
meat, firewood, and other necessaries, and without the intervention of which
the coun^ry would labor under gr^^t inconveniences, directly contrary to the
true inten^ and meaning of one of the acts of trade* by which they pretend to
govern themselves, such vessels by that act not being obliged to have so much
as a reg^ster. It is well known that their design in getting into office is to
enrich themselves by fleecing the merchants, and it is thought that very few
have any regard to the interest of the Crown, which is only a pretense they
make in order to accomp^ish their ava^icious purposes.

THE common people of Great Britain very liberally give and grant away the
property of the Americans without their consent, which if yielded to by us must
fix us in the lowest bottom of slavery: For if they can take away one penny
from us against our wills, they can take all. If they have such power over our
properties they must have a proportionable power over our persons; and from
hence it will follow, that they can demand and take away our lives, whenever
it shall be agreeable to their sovereign wills and pleasure.

THIS claim of the commons to a sovereignty over us, is founded by them on
their being the Mother Country. It is true that the first emigrations were from
England; but upon the whole, more settlers have come from Ireland, Germany, and
other par^s of Europe* than from England. But if every soul came from England,
i^ would not give them any title to sovereignty or even to superiority. One
spot of ground will not be sufficient for all: As pla^es fill up, mankind must
disperse, and go where they can find a settlement; and being born free, must
carry with them their freedom and independence on their fellows, go where they
will. Would it not be thought strange if the commonalty of the
Massachusetts Bay should require our obedience, because this colony was first
settled from that dominion? By the best accounts, Britain was peopled from
Gaul, now called France, wherefore according to their principles the
parliaments of France have a right to govern them. If this doctrine of the
maternal authority of one country over another be a little examined, it will be
found to be the greatest absurdity that ever entered into the head of a
politician -- In the time of Nimrod, all mankind lived to^ether on the plains
of Shinar, from whence they were dispersed at the building of Babel From that
dispersion all the empi^es, kingdoms, and states in the world are derived. That
this doctrine may be fully exposed, let us suppose a few Turks or Arabs to be
the present inhabitants of the plains of Shinar, and that they should demand
the obedience of every kingdom, state, and country in the world, on account of
their being the Mother Country would it be one jot more ridiculous than the
claim made by the parliament of Great Britain to rule and reign over us? It is
to be hoped that in fu^ure, the words Mother Country will not be so frequently
in our mouths, as they are only ^ounds without meaning.

ANOTHER grievance to be considered, is the alarming attempt o^ the people of
Old England to restrain our manufactures. This country abounds in iron, yet
there is an act of parliament, passed in the late King's reign to restrain us
from manufacturing it into plates and rods by mill-work, the last of which
forms are absolutely necessary for the making of nails, the most useful article
in a new country that can be conceived. -- Be astonished all the world, that
the people of a country who call themselves Christians and a civilized nation,
should imagine that any principles of police will be a sufficient excuse, for
their prohibiting their fellow subjects in a distant part of the earth from
making use of the blessings of the GOD of nature! There would be just as much
reason to prohibit us from spinning our wool and f^ax, or making up our
clothes. Such prohibitions are infractions on the natural rights of men, and
are utterly void.

THEY have undertook, at the distance of three thousand miles, to regulate and
limit our trade with the natives round about us, and from whom our lands were
purchased -- a trade which we opened ourselves, and which we ought to enjoy
unrestricted. Further, we are prohibited by a people, who never set foot here
from making any more purchases from the Indi^ns, and even of settling those
which we have made. The truth is, they intend to take into their own hands the
whole of the back lands, witness the patents of immense tracts continually
solicited, and making out to their own people. The consequence will be
shocking, and we ought to be greatly alarmed at such a procedure. All new
countries ought to be free to settlers; but instead thereof every settler on
these patent lands, and their descendants forever, will be as complete slaves
to their landlords, as the common people of Poland are to their lords.

A standing army in time of profound peace is cantoned and quartered about the
country to awe and intimidate the people -- Men of war and cutters are in every
port, to the great distress of trade. In time of war we had no station ships,
but were obliged to protect our trade, but now in time of full peace, when
there are none to make us afraid we are visited with the plague of men of war,
who commit all manner of disorders and irregularities; and behave in as hostile
a manner as if they were open and declared enemies. In open defiance of
civility, and the laws of Great Britain, which they profess to be governed by,
they violently seize and forcibly carry on board their ships the persons of the
King's loving subjects. What think ye my brethren, of a military government in
each town? -- Unless we exert ourselves in opposition to their plan of
subjecting us, we shall all have soldiers quartered about upon us, who will
take the absolute command of our families. Centry boxes will be set up in all
the streets and passages, and none of us will be able to pass, without being
brought too by a soldier with his fixed bayonet, and giving him a satisfactory
account of ourselves and business. Perhaps it will be ordered that we shall put
out fire and candle at eight of the clock at night, for fear of conspiracy.
From which fearful calamities may the GOD of our fathers deliver us!

BUT after all, nothing which has yet happened ought to alarm us more then
their suspending government here, because our parliaments or assemblies (who
ought to be free) do not in their votes and resolutions please the populace of
Great Britain. Suppose a parcel of mercenary troops in England should go to the
parliament house, and order the members to vote as they directed under pain of
dissolution, how much liberty would be left to them* In short, this dissolving
of government upon such pretenses as are formed, leaves not the semblance of
liberty to the people. -- We all ought to resent the treatment which the
Massachusetts Bay has had, as their case may soon come to be our own.

We are constantly belied and misrepresented to our gracious sovereign, by the
officers who are sent hither, and others who are in the cabal of ruining this
country. They are the persons who ought to be called rebels and traitors, as
their conduct is superlatively injurious to the King and his faithful subjects.

MANY other grievances might be enumerated, but the time would fail. -- Upon
the whole, the conduct of Great Britain shows that they have formed a plan to
subject us so ^ffectually to their absolute commands, that even t^^ freedom of
speech will be taken from us. This plan they are executing as fast as they can;
and almost every day produces some effect of it. We are insulted and menaced
only for petitioning. Our prayers are prevented from reaching the royal ear,
and our humble supp^ications to the throne are wickedly and maliciously
represented as so many marks of faction and disloyalty. If they can once make
us afraid to speak or write, their purpose will be finished. -- Then farewell
liberty. -- Then those, who were crowded in narrow limits in England will take
posse^sion of our ex^ended and fertile fields, and set us to work for them.

WHEREFORE, dearly beloved, let us with unconquerable resolution maintain and
de^end that liberty wherewith GOD has made us free. As the total subjection of
a people arises generally from gradual encroachments, it will be our
indispensible duty manfully to oppose every invasion of our righ^s in the
beginning Let nothing discourage us from this duty to ourselves and our
posterity. Our fathers sought and found freedom in the wilderness; they
clothed themselves with the skins of wild beasts, and lodged under trees and
among bushes; but in that state they were happy because they were free --
Should these our noble ancestors arise from the dead, and find their posterity
trucking away that liberty, which they purchased at so dear a rate, for the
mean trifles and frivolous merchandise of Great Britain, they would return to
the grave with a holy indignation against us. In this day of danger let us
exert every talent, and try every lawful mean, for the preservation of our
liberties It is thought that nothing will be of more avail, in our present
distressed situation, than to stop our imports from Britain. By such a measure
this little colony would save more than 173*000 pounds, lawful money, in one
year, besides the advantages which would arise from the industry of the
inhabitants being directed to the raising of wool and flax, and the
establishment of manufactures. Such a measure might distress the manufacturers
and poor people in England, but that would be their misfortune. Charity begins
at home, and we ought primarily to consult our own interest; and besides, a
little distress might bring the people of that country to a better temper, and
a sense of their injustice toward us. No nation or people in the world ever
made any figure, who were dependent on any other country for their food or
clothing. Let us then in justice to ourselves and our children, break off a
trade so pernicious to our i^terest, and which is likely to swallow up both our
estates and liberties. -- A trade which has n^^rished the people, in idleness
and dissipation. -- We (...), we will not, betray the trust reposed in us by
(...) ^^cestors, by giving up the least of our libert^es. -- We will be
freemen, or we will die -- we cannot end^re the thought of being governed by
subjects, and we m^ke no doubt but the Almighty will look down upon our
righteous contest with gracious approbation. We cannot bear the reflection that
this country should be yielded to them who never had any hand in subduing it.
Let our whole conduct show that we know what is (...) to ourselves. Let us act
prudently, peaceb^y, firmly, and jointly. Let us break off all trade and
commerce with a people who would enslave us, as the only means to prevent our
ruin. May we strengthen the hands of the civil government here, and have all
our exertions tempered with the principles of peace and order, and may we by
precept and example encourage the practice of virtue and morality, without
which no people can be happy.

IT on^y remains now, that we dedicate the Tr^e of Liberty.

WE do therefore* in the name and behalf of all the true SONS of LIBERTY in
America* Great Britain, Ireland, Corsica, or wheresoever they are dispersed
throughout the world, dedicate and solemnly devote this tree, to be a TREE of
LIBERTY. -- May all our coun^ils and de^iberations under it is venerable
branches be guided by wisdom, and directed to the support and maintenance of
that liberty, which our renowned forefathers sought out and found under trees
and in the wilderness. -- May it long flourish, and may the SONS of LIBER^Y
^ften rep^ir ^ither, to confirm and strengthen each other. -- When they look
toward this sacred ELM, may they be (...) with ^ sense of their duty to
themselves, their country, and their posterity: -- And may they, like the house
of David, grow stronger and stronger, while their enemies, like the house of
Saul, grow weaker and weaker. AMEN.

JOHN WATERMAN, The Printer hereof;
GIV^^ (...) Customers (...) he continues to make all Sorts of Paper as usual,
and that he sells the same ^t the cheapest Rates for Cash. He also carries on
the Printing Business at his Office at the Paper-Mill, but intends shortly to
remove his Office into the most public Part of the Town, where he proposes to
extend the Business. The Public may depend upon h^s Fidelity, Care, and
Dispatch, in such Printing Work as they may employ him about.


