On the Important Duty of SUBJECTION to the CIVIL POWERS. A SERMON Preached
before his EXCELLENCY WILLIAM TRYON, Esquire, GOVERNOR, and Commander in Chief
of the Province of NORTH CAROLINA, AND THE TROOPS raised to quell the late
INSURRECTION, AT HILLSBOROUGH, in ORANGE County, On SUNDAY September 25, 1768.

By GEO. MICKLEJOHN, S. T. D.

NEWBERN: Printed by JAMES DAVIS, M,DCC,LXVIII.

DEDICATION. TO HIS EXCELLENCY WILLIAM TRYON, Esquire, Governor and Commander
in Chief of the Province of NORTH CAROLINA.
SIR,
THE Kind Approbation with which YOU have favored this DISCOURSE, is as much
an Honor as it is a Satisfaction to me; for which I desire Your Excellency to
accept my grateful Acknowledgments: And as You, with many other Honorable
Gentlemen, have, in so particularly obliging a Manner, signified Your Desire of
seeing it published, I have complied with Your Request; which, indeed, I must
own, You put it out of my Power to refuse. I heartily pray GOD it may be
attended with those beneficial Effects, which You seem to entertain so much
Hopes of: And if it should be instrumental in bringing any to a just Sense of
the great DUTY inculcated therein, and a religious Observance of it for the
future, My Pleasure would be greatly heightened, by the Happiness I am sensible
You will receive Yourself. With My earnest Wishes for Your Excellency's present
Felicity, as well as Eternal Welfare, which it will always be a peculiar Joy
to Me to promote,

I remain, SIR, Your EXCELLENCY's Ever faithful and obliged Humble Servant,
Geo. Micklejohn.

A SERMON, etc.
ST. PAUL's Epistle to the ROMANS, Chap. XIII. Verses 1st and 2d. Let every
Soul be subject unto the higher Powers; for there is no Power but of God; the
Powers that be, are ordained of God.

Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation.


I AM persuaded, that every one who feels the least regard for the welfare and
happiness of his country; and the peace and comfort of his fellow subjects and
countrymen, will look upon the subject as highly proper, and seasonable at this
time.

FOR who can reflect upon so many wretched and unthinking men, thus madly
attempting to subvert the laws of the kingdom; thus inconsiderately involving
friends, relations and neighbors, in the most direful calamity, and foolishly
bringing upon themselves destruction here, and damnation hereafter: -- who can
look upon so deplorable a seen, without feeling the most earnest desires, that
every such rash and misguided person could be made duly sensible of the
dreadful impiety of so daring and wicked an action, as well as of the certain
misery that must inevitably be the consequence?

IT is possible this alarming consideration may prevail with some persons, when
every other more laudable motive fails of its proper influence; and, it is to
be hoped, that a sight of their danger may bring them to a sense of their duty.

WITH this view, I have singled out the words of the text for the subject of
our present meditation: And though I have the pleasure to think I am speaking
before those who stand not in need of the admonition they contain, yet I
thought it not improper for us to consider the several arguments which enforce
this great duty here enjoined; that we may not only be preserved steadfast in
our obedience to it ourselves, but may be able to convince others of the
danger, as well as error of their ways; and keep them, for the future, in the
paths of duty and allegiance, from which they have lately so unhappily wandered.

YOU cannot but observe then, in the first place, that this important duty of
subjection to lawful authority, is one plain and principal doctrine of
christianity. It is here delivered to the world by an inspired Apostle of
CHRIST; by Him, whom our LORD, in a vision to Ananias, honors with the
distinguishing title of "a chosen vessel to Himself." He it is, who, thus
commissioned from above, gives us, in the name of the most high GOD, this
solemn command in the words of the text; to which we are, all of us, both high
and low, rich and poor, wise and ignorant, indispensably obliged to pay the
highest reverence and regard; and no rank nor station in life, can possibly
exempt any one from the strictest obedience to it: For it is directed to all
men in general, without any exception -- Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers -- and it comes to us by the Authority of the same GOD and
SAVIOR, who has given us every other precept that we meet with in holy
scripture: -- It comes to us from that sovereign LORD OF ALL LORDS, whose name
we have the honor to bear; whose subjects we profess ourselves at present; and
whose eternal kingdom we hope to become inheritors of hereafter: 'Till men,
therefore, have renounced CHRIST, and apostatized from his religion -- 'till
they have disowned his sovereignty and dominion over them, and given up all
expectations of future happiness from his favor, they must acknowledge
themselves bound, by the strongest ties, both of interest and gratitude, to
comply with this sacred injunction, no less than with every other command of
his Divine Gospel.

BUT we may still further judge of the singular importance of this duty
enjoined us in the text, from that remarkable stress laid upon it by the great
Apostle in several other of his Epistles. When he is delivering his apostolical
injunctions to Titus, and instructing him in the several branches of his duty
as a minister of Christ, he gives it him in charge, in a very solemn manner, to
put men in mind, to be subject to principalities and powers; to obey
Magistrates; to speak evil of no man; to be no brawlers, but gentle; showing
all meekness to all men. These things, says he, I will that thou affirm
constantly, that they which have believed in God, that is, they who have
acknowledged the truth of that revelation he has made us in the Gospel, might
be careful to maintain good works: These things are good and profitable unto
men.

AND in the first Epistle to Timothy, he carries this request and reverence for
the powers that are lawfully set over us, to a still greater height; making it
our duty, not only to be subject unto them, but to implore the favor of Heaven
upon them, and the divine blessing on their endeavors for the public happiness
and tranquillity. I exhort first of all, says the Apostle, that Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks, be made for all Men: For Kings,
and for all that are in Authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life,
in all godliness and honesty; for this is good, and acceptable in the sight of
God our Savior.

JUDGE therefore in yourselves, my beloved brethren, and beseech others, in the
name of God, to consider how dreadful a breach of this duty they must be guilty
of, who, instead of praying for the safety of our governors and protectors,
presume to threaten their sacred persons with violence, to whom God has
commanded us to pay the highest veneration, because they derive their authority
from him.

AND this leads me to a second very material argument, arising from the words
of the text, which strongly enforces this duty, and to which it becomes every
one seriously to attend: For surely nothing should more fully convince us of
our obligation to pay the most ready obedience to this precept of christianity,
than the solemn reason which the Apostle has immediately subjoined: Let every
soul be subject to the higer powers; for there is no power but of God: the
powers that be, are ordained of God.

HAD this precept been delivered to mankind without pointing out to them at the
same time, this particularly awful sanction; yet even then our observance of it
would have remained indispensible: For when God commands, man is to obey.

THAT God, from whom we have received life and breath, and all things, and to
whom we are indebted for every comfort and blessing we enjoy -- that God, upon
whom alone we are to depend to all eternity, and by whom our unalterable fate
is to be finally determined; -- this great and adorable BEING has an
uncontrollable right over his dependent creatures, to lay upon them whatever
commands his wisdom sees proper for them, without being obliged to satisfy them
of the reasons for such his sovereign will and pleasure. But in the case before
us, you cannot but take notice, in how very different a manner God has been
pleased to deal with us; for while he gives us this command by his holy
Apostle, he graciously condescends to inform us of those weighty reasons upon
which the duty is founded, and which would be most likely to engage us in a
religious observance of it.

WE are commanded, therefore, to be subject to the higher powers, because the
authority they are invested with is from HEAVEN: The powers that be, are
ordained of God! -- They are God's vicegerents upon earth, and instruments in
the hand of his providence, for carrying on the grand purposes of protection
and government, and for securing the peace and happiness of mankind.

AND though, indeed, they are sometimes unhappily obliged, through the
perverseness and wickedness that is in the world, to become unwilling avengers,
to execute wrath upon every one that does evil; yet are they, in general, the
ministers of God to us, for good, and for the praise and reward of them that do
well.

WAS it not for this necessary power which has been committed to them by the
ALMIGHTY, every thing must soon be involved in the most dreadful anarchy and
confusion. Every man's own will would then be his law; and no language can
fully describe those various scenes of misery and horror which would
continually arise before us, from the discordant passions and divided interests
of mankind. But God, in his infinite goodness, has provided a natural security
against all these mischiefs in those different ranks and orders of men, which
his wisdom has thought proper should subsist in the world; and in which some
are allotted to govern, and others obliged to obey, that so the happiness of
the whole community might the more effectually be preserved. And upon these
guardians of the public and general welfare, God has been pleased to confer a
divine authority, to render their persons, as well as ordinances, the more
sacred and venerable.

IT is by him, therefore, that kings reign, and princes decree justice; by him
princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of the earth: And as it is very
beautifully expressed in the book of Wisdom, power is given them of the LORD,
and sovereignty from the Highest: To the truth of this important point, we have
a greater than Solomon bearing testimony; even our blessed Savior himself;
who, when Pilate was boasting of that power he had over him, either to crucify
or to release him, puts him in mind from whence he had received his authority;
and gives him this mild and instructive answer, Thou could have no power at
all against me, except it were given thee from above.

HERE we learn from the mouth of our Redeemer himself, whence is derived that
dignity and sacredness, which belongs to those who are invested with any public
power and office. -- Here we behold the God of the universe submitting to that
supreme authority he himself has conferred upon man; and acknowledging the
reverence due to that very power, which was shortly to pronounce the sentence
of death against him.

BUT we have a still more striking and remarkable instance of submission and
respect to the Civil Powers, which our blessed Lord, upon another occasion,
condescended to show, and which highly deserves every one's serious attention
and regard: It is recorded by the Evangelist St. Matthew, in the 17th chapter
of his Gospel, that when our Lord was come to Capernaum, they who received the
tribute money, which was required of every Jew above the age of twenty,
demanded of St. Peter, whether his Master intended to pay it. St. Peter very
readily engages for his Lord's willing and cheerful compliance; as he well knew
how exact had ever been his observance of every civil, as well as religious
duty: But when he came into the house to inform his master of this demand, our
blessed Savior, by an easy similitude, leads him to understand, that he had
been too hasty in his promises for him; for surely, if the children of earthly
princes could plead a freedom from paying any custom or tribute, (as appeared
by his own reply to the question our Lord had proposed) much more reasonably
might he be exempted from it, who was himself the Lord of all things, and the
Son of that heavenly King, for the service of whose temple this particular
tribute was paid. -- But notwithstanding our Lord might have justly claimed
this privilege and exemption; yet, you see, he willingly declines it; and,
Least we should offend them, says he to the Apostle, go thou to the sea, and
cast an hook, and take up the fish that first comes up; and when thou have
opened his mouth, thou shall find a piece of money; that take, and give unto
them for me and for thee. -- What condescension was this in the Son of God! --
Who but must be struck with admiration at this amazing instance of goodness, in
thus vouchsafing to work a miracle, rather than not satisfy the demands of
public authority; lest, by refusing compliance himself, he might countenance
others in disobedience and rebellion! And who is there that will presume to
offer insult to the powers that are in authority, or show the least resistance,
when he considers how remarkably our Lord was pleased to honor them, by
expressing the most cautious fear of displeasing them, and thus wonderfully
providing against giving any offense? -- In order, therefore, to guard men from
incurring the guilt of so heinous a crime, let us, in the third place, briefly
consider the dreadful conquences that must attend it. -- This the Apostle gives
us, in these few, but awful words, They that resist, shall receive to
themselves DAMNATION; not only condemnation in this world, but eternal
vengeance in the life to come. -- And here again, we cannot but observe, the
great importance of this duty of subjection, from that tender care which the
goodness of GOD has taken to secure our obedience to it. Some precepts are
delivered to us without any particular intimation of the punishment attending
our neglect: But this was a matter of so much consequence to the general
comfort and happiness of the world, that the divine wisdom thought it necessary
for us, while we read the sacred injunction, to have before our eyes that
future misery which must follow the violation of it: So that, if the love of
God, and reverence for his commands, should fail to produce this becoming
submission, a regard for our own Everlasting Interest might possibly prevail.

GOD has, therefore, been pleased, by his holy Apostle, to pronounce the
sentence of inevitable perdition upon all those who refuse subjection to lawful
power and authority; as hereby, they not only show the highest contempt of his
positive command, but do all in their power to obstruct the gracious desings of
his providence, for the good and welfare of mankind. So that, upon calm
consideration, every one must acknowledge, there cannot possibly be offered a
greater insult to Almighty GOD, than thus contemptuously to disregard his will,
and despise those sacred powers whom he has ordained and appointed to carry on
the best and noblest purposes in the world: And what wonder then is it that so
terrible a portion is reserved in store for every such bold and presumptuous
offender? -- GOD is represented in scripture as the God of Peace, and Lover of
Concord; and we are, for this reason, commanded, in another place, to follow
peace with all men; because, without this, no man shall see the LORD. Every
one, therefore, shall hereafter be banished from his presence and glory who
dares to disturb, in the least degree, that peace and harmony; or endeavors,
in any respect, to destroy that good order and government, which it is the
intention of HEAVEN should be supported in the world.

BUT though we were not able to assign any particular reason for this severe
judgment mentioned in the text, yet ought it to be a sufficient warning to
every rebellious sinner, to find how positively it is there denounced: For what
God has so solemnly threatened, he will most assuredly inflict.

THESE then are the principal reasons which enforce the duty enjoined by the
Apostle; but there are several others, which, if duly attended to, cannot but
add considerable weight to the arguments already offered, and which I shall,
therefore, beg leave briefly to mention.

LET it be considered then, that resistance to that lawful power and authority
which God has set over us, can never possibly be productive of any thing but
the wildest uproar, and most universal confusion; and, in the end, can never
fail of being attended with the most shocking and dismal effects.

OF this we would have seen a dreadful and melancholy proof; and God only
knows what worse consequences might have ensued, had they not been happily
prevented by the good conduct of those brave men, who distinguished themselves
as remarkably by their HUMANITY, as by the VALOR, they showed on that trying
occasion.

To their courage and intrepidity will ever be due our warmest gratitude and
thanks; which, blessed be God, gave so timely a check to the desperate fury of
those rash men who were engaged in that execrable attempt; and to their
humanity these very men must ever acknowledge themselves obliged, which bore so
long and patiently their repeated and exasperating insults, and treated them
afterward with greater lenity than they could reasonably expect; for where one
has not fallen, twenty ought to have suffered.

LET every one learn, that outrage and violence can never answer any other end
but to spread slaughter and desolation around us; and to introduce the most
wretched scenes of misery and distress: Let them consider further, how
impossible it is that any good can ever be brought about by such wicked means;
and that though some may only meet the ruin their rashness has sought, yet many
others must unavoidably become partakers in the calamity, who were never
partners in the crime.

THE consideration therefore of the present misfortunes, in which many of their
fellow creatures must be involved, as well as the future destruction to which
others are exposed by such daring acts of rebellion, will naturally restrain
every man from uniting in them who has the least spark of humanity and
compassion remaining in his breast.

ANOTHER motive which cannot but have great weight with every generous mind, is
the reflection that every the least Insult offered to magistrates and
governors, is an act of the basest ingratitude against those who are, under
god, our protectors and guardians, not only from foreign Enemies, but from
every domestic foe: To them we owe our security from all that numerous train of
mischiefs to which we should be daily liable, from the corruption and
wickedness of the world, if under no restraint from human laws, and and unawed
by by proper authority! -- To them are we indebted for the safe and comfortable
enjoyment of all the blessings of private life, and all the advantages we
derive from civil society! -- Were there not some who would take upon them the
arduous business of public government, the execution of laws, and
administration of justice, how would vice and iniquity every where triumph! And
what must become of the welfare and tranquillity of every individual, were men
left at full liberty to plan their malicious schemes against them, and knew
they could safely execute them whenever they pleased? What must become of the
general peace and happiness of the whole community, when fraud and injustice,
oppression and violence, with every other crime that is injurious to society,
might be perpetrated with impunity, and without control? How infinitely then
are we obliged to those persons who willingly undertake so important a trust,
and by whose care, abilities and vigilance, these evils are prevented, and the
public felicity preserved? And how very enormous and shocking is the offense,
when in the discharge of their laborious office, they are treated with
insolence instead of honor, and meet with threatenings instead of thanks!

BUT lastly, there is one remark I have further to make, and which ought to
have a peculiar force with the people of this land, in leading them cheerfully
to that subjection which is represented in the text, as the common duty of all
men. -- I would beg leave to observe therefore, that for an Englishman to
oppose the laws of his country, is an instance of the highest folly and
contradiction we can conceive: For such is the singular excellence of our happy
constitution, that the laws to which our obedience is required, are, in
reality, no other than what we ourselves have been partly concerned in making.

ALL men must know, that it is impossible for a whole province to meet together
for this important work; and every one, I believe, will acknowledge, that were
they so assembled, very few would be found capable of carrying it on: For as
the wise son of Sirac very justly observes, How can he get wisdom that holds
the plough, and that glories in the goad; that drives oxen, and is occupied
in their labors; and whose talk is of bullocks? They shall not be sought for
in the public council; nor sit high in the congregation; they cannot sit in the
judges seat, nor understand the sentence of judgment: Since therefore, we
cannot all be present in this great assembly, wherein the weighty business of
public government is transacted, we have this peculiar privilege, and a
glorious one it is, of appointing such persons, in whose abilities,
understanding, and integrity, we think we may safely confide, to appear for us,
in that august assembly; and who are, upon that account, very properly styled
our representatives.

IN consequence then of this choice, which we have the liberty to make, and
that full power we voluntarily give into their hands; we not only yield our
consent beforehand, to whatever laws they may judge it expedient to enact, but
may be justly said to have had a principal share in enacting them ourselves;
inasmuch as they are framed by their wisdom, and established by their
authority, whom we have appointed for that very purpose.

So that every man, of the most common understanding, if he will allow himself
a moment's reflection, may easily see how particularly it is the duty of every
one of us, to submit to the laws of his land; and, how astonishining an
absurdity it must appear to all the world, if ever we refuse that becoming
subjection.

How happy would millions think themselves at this hour, who know no other law
than the imperious will of some arbitrary prince, could they change situations
with us, and taste the singular blessing we enjoy, in being governed by the
laws we ourselves have made! Let us take care, we set a due value upon this
inestimable privilege; lest, if we slight these distinguishing marks of God's
favor, and disturb that excellent form of government which his providence has
so long preserved among us, -- He may be provoked to deprive us of it, and
bring upon us the misery which such ingratitude would deserve.

I SHALL now briefly sum up what has been said in this discourse, that we may
see how many, and powerful, are the arguments we are furnished with, to engage
us in a steadfast observance of this duty, and enable us to convince others of
their indispensible obligations to practice it.

YOU find, then, it is a duty which is guarded from violation by all the most
sacred and awful sanctions that could possibly be thought of; and bound upon
us, by every tie, civil, moral, and divine. -- The peace and tranquillity of our
fellow subjects and countrymen demand our obedience to it. -- The well-being
and happiness of society in general, and the comfort and felicity of our dear
relations, friends and neighbors in particular, depend upon it; and without
our conscientious performance of it, an universal scene of confusion must soon
prevail, and all be involved together in the deepest calamity and horror.

LET all such persons therefore who dare to think of engaging in any act of
rebellion and disobedience, be entreated to contemplate a little those various
and horrible miseries they will unavoidably occasion, and that may possibly
deter them from it: -- Let them listen to the cries of the disconlate widow; --
behold the tears of the helpless orphan; and consider, how they will be able to
endure the sad upbraidings of those miserable mourners, who may justly take up
against them the lamentation of the prophet Jeremiah: Is it nothing to you, all
ye that pass by? behold, and see if there be any sorrow like unto our sorrow,
which your rashness and iniquity have brought upon us!

BUT particularly let them remember, that the blood which may be shed by their
means, will hereafter be required at their hands; and that every one of those
unhappy souls who shall be brought to an untimely end through their evil
counsels and wicked instigations, and sent into another world with all their
sins about them, will rise up in judgment against them at the last day, and
call for tenfold vengeance on their devoted heads.

LET them be farther put in mind, that gratitude to those who afford us a
peaceful security from every ill, should engage us in a steady adherence to
this duty, at all times and upon every occasion: Should lead us to return
obedience for protection, and repay the kind exertion of their abilities and
endeavors for the public happiness, with the easy tribute of reverence and
affection.

BUT some men may have neither humanity nor generosity enough in their tempers,
to be affected by such considerations as these. To them therefore we must open
the sacred page, (which, perhaps, they have never before looked into) and point
out the solemn and positive command of God enforcing this great duty; and though
they may not regard an earthly potentate, yet surely they will stand in awe of
the MAJESTY of HEAVEN: Or, as holy Job emphatically puts the question; Shall
not HIS EXCELLENCY make them afraid? and shall not His DREAD fall uopn them? --
Show them, moreover, the foundation upon which the reasonableness of this duty
is supported: Tell them, that obedience to the civil powers is required of us,
not only because God has commanded it, but given us also this very solemn
reason, enforcing that command; -- that they were instituted and ordained by
Himself. When they read therefore, that there is no power but of God, beseech
them seriously to consider how detestable they must render themselves in His
sight, who, instead of summitting to every ordinance of man for the Lord's
sake, (as we are taught by another Apostle, is our bounden duty) dare to rise
up themselves, and compel others to unite with them, in opposition to any law
that has been legally established; or to obstruct the ministers of justice in
the execution of that high office they are obliged by oath to discharge, and
which has been derived to them from the authority of the Almighty himself.

NOTHING, one would think, could so effectually strengthen our obligation to
the duty of subjection, as this single consideration, that whosoever resists
the power, resists the ordinance of God; and that every such wicked and
desperate attempt is not only treason against an earthly sovereign, but
rebellion against the most high God.

AS a farther motive to this duty, and because example is more prevailing than
precept, bid them turn their eyes upon the meek and blessed Jesus, and behold
him in that gracious and condescending act of submission, I mentioned in the
former part of this discourse. -- Ask them, if they are not sensible, that He
who could feed five thousand men with a few loaves and fishes, could have
supported millions with the same ease, to have protected him from the
resentment of the civil powers, if he had thought fit to have made the least
opposition? but instead of showing resistance, we behold Him here manifesting
the most tender concern and regard for the support of their authority; and by
that miraculous method he took to pay obedience to it, convincing mankind of
the necessity and importance of this great duty.

SHALL man then presume to refuse that submission which God himself has thus
condescended to pay? This aimiable pattern we have before us in the person of
our great Redeemer, ought to have an irresistible influence upon all who call
themselves by his name; and was, no doubt, intended for our imitation by that
gracious Being, who came from HEAVEN with this peculiar design, to leave us an
example that we might follow his steps.

FINALLY, whereas the more various and powerful the motives are, which enforce
any duty, so much more aggrevated will be the crime which leads us to break
through them: Oh! beseech them therefore, in the pathetic words of St. Peter,
to repent of this their wickedness; and pray God, if perhaps the thought of
their heart may be forgiven them. This repentance and contrition, if
accompanied with future obedience, may not only procure them pardon at an
earthly tribunal, but when they come to stand before the judgment seat of
CHRIST, will be one means of their obtaining mercy from the Lord in that day,
and escaping the vengeance which will otherwise fall upon them. And this leads
me to the last motive we have, to enforce their observance of this christian
duty enjoined in the text; the consideration of that eternal misery denounced
against those who neglect it.

IF men have no love for their country; if they have no regard for the peace
and happiness of those around them; if they have neither humanity nor
compassion; neither gratitude nor generosity in their breasts; if they have no
veneration for their king, nor reverence for the best constitution in the
world; yet they must have some affection for themselves: And though they may
despise the commands of GOD, and the example of a SAVIOR, yet they cannot
disregard their own everlasting welfare. This motive then may possibly bring
them to repentence, and a better mind, when every other has failed of its
influence; and let us not omit incessantly, and importunately, to urge it upon
them.

WARN them of the certain perdition they must inevitably bring upon themselves;
and exhort them to consider in time, how fearful a thing it is to fall into the
hands of the LIVING GOD! Tell them our God is a consuming fire to such workers
of iniquity, and able to destroy both body and soul for ever; and bid them
therefore remember, that though they may escape from the sword of justice in
this life, they cannot escape the DAMNATION OF HELL.

MAY the good grace of God preserve us at all times from falling into the like
crime, that we may never incur so dreadful a condemnation. And as we of this
land are peculiarly blessed at this time with one of the most aimiable and
excellent Governors that ever adorned a province, who has given us his promise,
that the felicity of his people shall ever be his principal care; let it be our
perpetual study and delight, by every means in our power, and particularly by
all dutiful submission to him, and those whom he shall set over us, to render
his government as peaceful and happy to our affectionate SOVEREIGN, as he will
endeavor to make it to us his grateful subjects.

SO shall we secure the blessings of Heaven on ourselves and our posterity; and
whenever we are removed out of this troublesome world, shall become members of
that blessed kingdom, where universal peace and love, and uninterrupted concord
and harmony, will reign for ever and ever. Amen.


