THE TRIAL OF DANIEL DISNEY, Esquire Captain of a Company in His Majesty's 44th
Regiment of Foot, and Town-Major of the Garrison of Montreal, at the Session of
the Supreme-Court of Judicature, holden at Montreal, on Saturday the 28th Day
of February, and thence continued by Adjournments to Wednesday the 11th Day of
March, 1767, before the Honorable WILLIAM HEY, Esquire Chief Justice of the
Province of Quebec, upon an Indictment containing two Charges, the one for a
Burglary and Felony, in breaking and entering Mr. Thomas Walker's House, at
Montreal, on the Night of the 6th Day of December, in the Year 1764, with an
Intention to murder the said Thomas Walker; the other for feloniously and of
Malice aforethought, cutting of the Right Ear of the said Thomas Walker, with
Intention thereby to disfigure him, against the Form of the Statute of 22 and
23 Car. II. Cap. i. in that Case made and provided.

Supposed to be written by FRANCIS MASERES, Esquire Attorney General of QUEBEC.

Qubec, Printed: New York, reprinted, and Sold by JOHN HOLT; at the EXCHANGE.
M,DCC,LXVIII.

INTRODUCTION.
CAPTAIN DISNEY, with five other Gentlemen, residing in the District of
Montreal, had been taken up in the Month of November, 1766, for the cruel
Assault committed about two Years ago, upon Mr. Thomas Walker. They were
apprehended by Virtue of Warrants of the Honorable WILLIAM HEY, Esquire his
Majesty's Chief Justice of the Province of Quebec, which are sounded upon a
long, minute, and positive Information given against them, upon Oath, before
the said Chief Justice, by George M'Govock, a Soldier of the 28th Regiment of
Foot, who declared himself to have been an Accomplice with them in that Affair,
and to have been an Eyewitness of all the proceedings in it. The Persons so
apprehended immediately came to Quebec, and applied to the Chief Justice to be
bailed; and many of the principal Persons in the Province offered to become
bound for their Appearance, at the ensuing Session of the Supreme Court, at
Montreal, in order to take their Trials. But, by reason of the Magnitude of the
Crime, (it being a Capital Offense, of a very odious Nature) and the
Positiveness of the Charge against them, the Chief Justice thought he was not
at Liberty, consistently with the Rules of Law, to admit them to Bail;
grounding his Opinion herein, both on the general Principles of the Law
relating to Bail in criminal Cases, and on some very strong modern Authorities
on this Subject, and particularly the two Cases of Acton and Greenwood,
reported in Sir John Strange's Reports, Page 851 and 1138, which seem to be
decisive in the Point. They were therefore committed to Custody, but confined
in the easiest and most indulgent Manner possible in Mr. William Grant's House,
at Montreal, which is said to be the best House in the Province; it having been
suggested, as a Ground for this Indulgence, that the King's Prison at Montreal
was in bad Repair, and not in a fit Condition to receive them. On the 28th Day
of the February following, in the Year 1767, the Chief Justice held a Session
of the Supreme-Court of Judicature at Montreal, both for criminal and civil
Matters, which was continued by several Adjournments to the Middle of March.
And about the 8th or 9th Day of March, a Bill of Indictment, that had been
presented to the Grand Jury against Captain Disney, by the Attorney General was
returned by them a true Bill; and on the 11th Day of the same Month, Captain
Disney was tried upon this Indictment, and acquitted.

The whole Record of this Proceeding from the Bill of Indictment to the
Acquittal and Discharge of the Prisoner, inclusively, is as follows:
PROVINCE of QUEBEC ss.
BE IT REMEMBERED, That at the Session of the Supreme-Court of Judicature of
the said Province of Quebec, holden at Montreal, in the Province aforesaid, on
the Twenty-eighth Day of February, in the Seventh Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord GEORGE the Third, of Great Britain, and the Territories
thereunto belonging, KING, Defender of the Faith, and so forth, before the
Honorable WILLIAM HEY, Esquire, Chief Justice of the said Province, assigned
by Letters Patent of our said Sovereign Lord the King, under the Public Seal
of the said Province, to inquire by the Oaths of honest and lawful Men of the
said Province, and by other lawful Ways, of all Treasons, Misprisions of
Treason, Murders, Felonies, Burglaries, Trespasses, and other Misdemeanors
whatsoever committed within the said Province, and the said Treasons, Felonies,
Burglaries, and other the Premises, to hear and determine according to the
Laws and Customs of that Part of of the Kingdom of Great Britain called
England, and the Ordinances of the said Province, and to deliver the Goals of
the said Province, of the Prisoners therein being, and to inquire by the Oaths
of honest and lawful Men of the Province aforesaid, and by other lawful Ways,
of all Civil Pleas, Actions, and Suits, as well real and personal as mixed,
between our said Sovereign Lord the King and any of his Subjects, or between
Party and Party and the said Pleas, Actions, and Suits, to hear and determine,
according to the Laws and Customs of that Part of the Kingdom of Great Britain
called England, and the Ordinances of the Province aforesaid, by the Oath of
Samuel M'Kay, Esquire, Monsr. De St. Ours, Isaac Todd, Esquire, Monsr. Francis
de Bellestre, Lewis Matterel, Esquire, Monsr. De Contrecoeur, Monsr. De
Neverville, Thomas Lynch, Esquire, Monsr. De la Bruiere, John Livingston,
Esquire, Mr. Jacob Jordan, Monsr. De Neverville, Monsr. De Normanville, Moses
Hazen, Esquire, Monsr. Dailbout de Cuisy, Mr. James Porteous, John Dumas,
Esquire, William Grant, Esquire, Samuel Mather, Esquire, Monsr. Augustine
Baille, and Mr. John Jennison, honest and lawful Men of the said District of
Montreal, in the Province aforesaid, being then and there sworn and charged to
inquire for our said Sovereign Lord the King, touching and concerning all
Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons, Murders, Felonies, Burglaries, Trespasses,
and other Misdemeanors, committed within the said District of Montreal, It is
presented, in Manner and Form following, that is to say, Province of Quebec,
District of Montreal, ss. The Jurors, for our Sovereign Lord the King, upon
their Oath, present, That Daniel Disney, of the Town of Montreal, in the
District of Montreal, in the Province of Quebec, Esquire, Captain in the
Forty-fourth Regiment of Foot, on the sixth Day of December, in the fifth Year
of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord GEORGE the Third, by the Grace of God, of
Great Britain, and the Territories thereunto belonging, KING, Defender of the
Faith, and so forth, Between the Hours of Eight and Nine of the Night of the
same Day, with Force and Arms, at the Town of Montreal, in the District of
Montreal, in the Province aforesaid, the Dwelling House of Thomas Walker,
Esquire, there situate, with diverse other evil minded Persons, did, feloniously
and burglariously, break and enter, with an Intent feloniously and of Malice
a-fore-thought, him the said Thomas Walker, then and there being, to kill and
murder against the Peace of our said Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity: And
the Jurors aforesaid, Do further present, that the said Daniel Disney, on the
said sixth Day of December, in the Year aforesaid, at the Town of Montreal
aforesaid, in the District aforesaid, did, with diverse others evil minded
Persons, with Force and Arms, feloniously and of Malice a-fore-thought, and by
lying in Wait, make an Assault upon the said Thomas Walker, in the Peace of
God, and our said Lord the King, then and there being, and did then and there
feloniously, and of Malice a-fore-thought, and by lying in Wait, cut off the
Right Ear of the said Thomas Walker, with Intention thereby to disfigure the
said Thomas Walker, against the Peace of our said Lord the King, his Crown and
Dignity, and against the Form of the Statute in that Case made and provided:
Whereupon the Pravost Marshal, of the Province aforesaid, was commanded that he
have the Body of the said Daniel Disney, then being in the Custody of the said
Provost-Marshal, for the Offense aforesaid, by Virtue of a certain Warrant to
the said Provost-Marshal directed in that Behalf, by the aforesaid
Chief Justice of the said Province, before him the said Chief Justice of the
Province, on Wednesday the eleventh Day of March, at the said Court of Oyer and
Terminer and General-gaol delivery, held by him the said Chief Justice, at the
Courthouse at Montreal aforesaid, in the District of Montreal, aforesaid, in
the Province aforesaid, on the Twenty-eighth Day of February, aforesaid, and
continued by Adjournment until the said eleventh Day of March next after
following, to answer concerning the Premises: And on the said eleventh Day of
March, the said Daniel Disney was brought to the Bar in his own proper Person
by the Provost-Marshal aforesaid, and being then and there arraigned of the
Premises above charged upon him in the Indictment aforesaid, and demanded
whether or no he were guilty of the same, and how he would acquit himself
thereof, he says that he is not guilty of the same and that he thereof puts
himself upon his Country for Good or Evil: And FRANCES MASERES, Esquire, who
prosecuteth for our said Lord the King in this Behalf does the like: Whereupon
the Provost-Marshal aforesaid is commanded to cause to come forthwith before
the Chief Justice aforesaid, twelve good and lawful Men of the Neighborhood of
the Town of Montreal aforesaid, in the District of Montreal aforesaid, in the
Province aforesaid, and who neither, etc. to recognize etc. And thereupon
Thomas Cox, Randle Meredith, Alexander Patterson, Forest Oaks, Jacob
Vanderheyden, John Dumoulin, Jonas Desaols, William Wier, Samuel Holmes, James
Morrison, John Neagles, and George Young, were by the said Provost Marshal
impannelled for this Purpose, and being demanded, come, and being chosen,
tried, and sworn, to say the Truth concerning the Premises, say upon their
Oath, That the said Daniel Disney is not guilty of the Premises in the
Indictment aforesaid charged upon him in Manner and Form, as the said Daniel
Disney, for himself above by his Plea has alleged, and that he did not
withdraw himself for the same: And thereupon it is considered by the Court here
that the said Daniel Disney, be acquitted of the said Indictment, and go hence
without Day.

After the Prisoner had pleaded not guilty to the Indictment, and the Jury were
duly sworn and charged to try the Issue, the Case was opened to the Court and
Jury by FRANCIS MASERES, Esquire his Majesty's Attorney General for the Province of
Quebec, (who was the only Person of Counsel for the Crown on this Occasion) in
some such Manner as hereafter follows:
May it please your Honor, and you, Gentlemen of the Jury,
IT is my Duty, as Prosecutor for the Crown, on the present Occasion, to lay
open to you the Circumstances of the Crime with which the Prisoner at the Bar
stands charged; which I am persuaded you will look upon as one of the most
outrageous Violations of the of the public Peace and Order that ever was
brought before a Court of Justice; Nothing less than assaulting a Magistrate of
unblemished Character in his own House, in the Nightime, with an Intention to
murder him; -- and this in Revenge for an Act done by him as a Magistrate, in
Conjunction with three other Magistrates of the Province, in Support, as he
thought, at least, of the Laws and Liberties of his Country. -- If this is an
Action that ought not to be the Subject of a Prosecution, surely nothing can
deserve to be so: And if those who are charged with being guilty of it are just
Objects of the Compassion of the Public, I know not what Offenders can excite
their Indignation. It approaches in a great Degree to the most dangerous of all
civil Crimes, High Treason itself, as it has an immediate Tendency to over awe,
to check, and even entirely to stop the Proceedings of the Magistrates of the
Province in the Administration of Public Justice; without which our excellent
Laws are but a dead Letter, and our boasted Liberties and Properties an empty
Sound: And it was attended with Circumstances of deliberate Malice, Revenge,
and Cruelty, that, in the Opinion of all Persons not destitute of the Feelings
of Humanity, must make it completely odious: To which may be added the less
important Circumstance of the cowardly Manner of its Execution, if the
employing ten or twelve armed Men to surprise and attack one poor,
unsuspecting, unarmed Man, sitting peaceably at Home in the Company of his Wife
and Family, can entitle it to that Appellation.

Gentlemen, I am sorry to observe further, that the Persons who committed this
Outrage were Military Men: For surely this is an Aggravation of the Offense. It
is in them an Act of Treachery: It is betraying the high and honorable Trust
reposed in them by their King and Country, by employing to the Purposes of
Revenge and Malice those Arms which had been put into their Hands for the
Protection of their Fellow Subjects, and the Maintenance of the Public
Tranquillity.

Gentlemen, I will now lay before you, in the first Place, the Occasion that
gave rise to the Crime with which the Prisoner at the Bar stands charged, and
afterward the Manner and Circumstances of its Execution and the Share the
Prisoner at the Bar took in it.

When the Civil Government was established in this Province, in the Year 1764,
a Number of Persons, in the District of Montreal, were commissioned by Governor
MURRAY, to act as Justices of the Peace for that District, and new and great
Powers of determining. Matters of Civil Property, not belonging to those
Magistrates in England, were given them by the great Ordinance of September
17th, of that Year, by which the Courts of Judicature were erected. Among the
Persons so commissioned were Mr. Thomas Walker, Mr. Dumas St. Martin, Mr.
Livingston, Mr. Knipe, and Mr. Lamb: These Gentlemen, as I am informed, all of
them acted in their new Office with Honor and Integrity, and gave general
Satisfaction to the People by their diligent Endeavors to promote their
Welfare. There was one Abuse in particular which they earnestly labored to
reform, as it was then very generally and very severely felt by the Inhabitants
of Montreal, and the Subject of frequent Complaints. This was the Oppression
exercised by some Officers of the Army, under the Color and Pretense of their
Right of billetting Soldiers. The Power of appointing Billets was often
employed by them to serve the Purposes of gratifying their private Disgusts,
and of extorting Money from the People. Three or four of the most drunken and
riotous of the Soldiers would be sent to take up their Quarters at the House of
a substantial Citizen, that was thought able to pay a good Price for an
Exemption. This would alarm him, and oblige him to make the humblest and most
earnest Entreaties to be excused from receiving them; upon which an Intimation
would be given him, that, if he would consent to pay Six or Eight Dollars a
Month in Lieu of it, he might be excused, and the Soldiers with that Money
would provide themselves other Quarters. This the poor Man would readily submit
to (if he could by any Means raise the Money) rather than see his House taken
up, his Furniture broken and spoiled, his Provisions wasted, and sometimes his
Wife and Daughters insulted by such boisterous and profligate Inmates: And thus
by paying the Tax required he would obtain his Exemption. They would then go to
another Citizen of two, and by the like Menaces extort from them the like
Contributions. Those were the Oppressions which Mr. Walker and his
Fellow-Magistrates endeavored to remove. Mr. Walker, in particular, drew out a
Scheme for billeting the Soldiers, by which he made it appear, that there was
no Necessity that more than two Soldiers should ever be quartered in one House,
whereas there were several Houses at that Time that were burdened with five or
six: So that the Hardships the People labored under in this Respect were by no
Means Evils of Necessity (in which Case they ought patiently to have been
submitted to) but were mere Abuses of Power, to answer these sinister Purposes.

Gentlemen, in the Beginning of the Month of November, 1764. Complaint, that
took its Rise from this Power of billeting, was brought before Mr. Walker, Mr.
Livingston, Mr. Dumas, and Mr. Lamb, the Justices of the Peace before
mentioned, against Captain Benjamin Charnock Pain, of the 28th Regiment, which
proved the immediate. Occasion of Mr. Walker's Sufferings. Captain John Fraser,
Pay-Master-General of the Troops in the District of Montreal, and one of the
Prisoners now in Custody on Account of this Affair, had been billeted by
Lieutenant Colonel Christie, the Quarter-Master-General, on the House of one
Mr. Reamue, a French Gentleman in Montreal, where he accordingly resided till
the latter End of October, or Beginning of November, 1764, at which Time he was
appointed to an Office by which he became entitled to, or at least possessed
of, a House at the Public Expense; upon which he left his Quarters at Mr.
Reaume's House, and went to live in the House, so assigned him. Mr. Reaume,
imagining his Billet was at an End, immediately invited Mr. Knipe, an English
Gentleman, who was at that Time in the Commission of the Peace, and who
occupied the Rooms underneath those possessed by Captain Fraser and had hired
those likewise of Mr. Reaume, at the Time that Captain Fraser was about to
leave them, but had not yet taken possession of them, to come and take
Possession of them according to his Agreement. But he was prevented from doing
so by Captain Pain, who took, Possession of them in the Name and Right of
Captain Fraser, who insisted that he still retained a Right to these Quarters,
and might either occupy them himself, if he so thought fit, or permit any other
Person to occupy them in his Name. Mr. Reaume desired Captain Pain to resign
them to Mr. Knipe, to whom he had let them; but Captain Pain refused to quit
them, and insisted upon his Right to continue in them by Virtue of Captain
Fraser's Billet. Mr. Knipe thought these Pretensions of Captain Fraser, to
occupy these Quarters thus by Deputy, to be both hard and illegal, and wrote
two or three Letters to him to complain of them: But, instead of receiving any
kind of Satisfaction, he was answered in a Style of incredible and unsufferable
Insolence. Upon this he applied to the other Justices for Redress; and Mr.
Livingston, Mr. Dumas, and Mr. Walker, held a Court in Mr. Reaume's House, to
inquire into the Affair; and being satisfied by the Depositions of Mr. Knipe
and Mr. Reaume, that Mr. Knipe had, by a fair Agreement, hired the Apartments
in in Question of Mr. Reaume, long before Captain Pain came into them, and
being of Opinion likewise that Captain Fraser's Right to them was at an End the
Moment he became possessed at the Public Expense of another Lodging, which he
thought a better one, they determined that Mr. Knipe had a legal Right to the
Apartments, and that Captain Pain ought to resign them to him. And
accordingly, in Conjunction with Mr. Lamb, a fourth Justice of the Peace, they
signed a Warrant to a Bailiff, to command Captain Pain to quit that Lodging.
In what Manner this Command of the Justices was to be enforced, I do not find
to be certainly agreed. Those who are disposed to censure this Proceeding of
the Justices, say that there was a Clause in the Warrant commanding the Bailiff
to carry Captain Pain to Prison, if he refused to quit the Lodging, and should
make Resistance; others inform me otherwise: This however seems to be certain,
that it was never their Intention that Captain Pain, should be imprisoned.
This will appear by the subsequent Part of their Conduct.

Gentlemen, I will now minutely inquire how far these Proceedings of the
Justices were legal, that is, how far they had Right to inquire into and
determine this Contest between Mr. Knipe and Captain Pain, and to enforce
their Decision of it (if they did so enforce it) by the Penalty of
Imprisonment. But I will only observe that there seems to be a very reasonable
Ground for supposing that all these Things were within their Jurisdiction by
Virtue of the Powers before mentioned, given by the great Ordinance of
September 17, 1764, to any two Justices of the Peace to hear and determine any
Disputes concerning Matters of Civil Property, not exceeding the Value of ten
Pounds, which probably might take in the present Contest. Nor need we inquire
whether or no the Decision they thought proper to make, that Captain Pain had
no Right to these Apartments, was good in Point of Law: Though here, as well as
before, I should incline to think that the Law was with them: For, if we
consider that the being free from the Necessity of quartering Soldiers is one
of the greatest and most valued Privileges of an English Subject -- that it is
one of the great Points of Liberty ascertained and confirmed for ever by that
best of Laws in the Statute-Book, the Petition of Right in the third Year of
Charles the First -- That all the Laws of England had been introduced into this
Province by the great Ordinance of the 17th of September, 1764, and that these
favorite and beneficial ones were promised by the King's Proclamation, in 1763
-- and that in England itself the Troops are only quartered hi Public-Houses,
but never in private ones; and that only by Virtue of a particular Act of
Parliament, annually passed for that purpose; we shall nor wonder at the
unwillingness shown by these worthy Magistrates to allow of the Legality of
billeting Soldiers upon private Houses upon any other Ground but that of mere
Necessity; or for any longer Time than such Necessity continued; of which, in
the Case then before them, there could be no Pretense, since the Moment Captain
Fraser received a House from the Government, in consequence of his new
Employment, which by going to live in it he acknowledged to be better than his
Quarters, it was evidently no longer necessary that those Quarters should
belong to him. But whether they were right or wrong in their Opinions upon
these Points is not very material. This is certain, that they meant to
determine a Matter that they took to be within their Cognizance, and that they
meant to determine it according to Law, and to do Justice to the Person they
thought to be aggrieved. They therefore ought rather to have received the
Thanks of their Fellow Subjects for their faithful and spirited Discharge of
their Duty, than to have become the Objects of so deep and deadly a Revenge.

This Warrant of the Justices of the Peace was served upon Cap- Pain the next
Day, or rather, if it be true that there was a Clause of Imprisonment in it,
but half served by one of the Bailiffs of of the District. For the Bailiff
showed it him, and required him to give up the Apartments to Mr. Knipe; but did
not, upon the Captain's refusing to do so, offer to make him a Prisoner, or
convey him to the Gaol. He neither laid hold on him, as is usual in Arrests,
nor said to him, You are to my Prisoner, nor told him that he had Orders to
carry him to Prison. But Captain Pain, as if anxiously desirous of suffering
an Indignity that might serve to irritate the Soldiers to a high Pitch, and
dispose them to some desperate Act of Revenge against Mr. Walker, insisted upon
going to Prison, and forced the Bailiff to show him the Way thither. The
Bailiff complied, and the Captain went to Gaol: And when he got there, the
Keeper of the Prison was unwilling to receive him, because he had not a Warrant
directed to himself to authorize him to do so. But the Captain insisted upon
continuing in the Prison. In the mean Time the Bailiff went and acquainted the
Justices with what had happened, who immediately sent him back to the Prison to
acquaint Captain Pain that he was not a Prisoner in Consequence of their
Warrant, that it never was their Intention to commit him to Prison, and that he
might go out of the Prison when he pleased: And at the same Time they sent him
a Billet to be quartered at Mr. Croston's House, which was the very best
Public-House in the whole Town, the Magistrates being unwilling, except where
Necessity obliged them to it, to give Billets upon private Houses. Captain
Pain, however, thought fit to continue in the Prison, notwithstanding these
Declarations from the Justices that he was at Liberty to leave it whenever he
pleased; and that his Imprisonment might be the more public and make the deeper
Impression on the Spirits of the Soldiers, he had Recourse to a more formal
Method of obtaining his Discharge from it, by applying to the Chief Justice of
the Province for an Habeas Corpus: And by this Means he was set at Liberty.

When the Circumstances of this Affair came to be public, and it appeared that
Captain Pain had been a voluntary Prisoner, and had continued so for several
Days, it was by most People made the Subject of Mirth and Laughter. This
enraged the Captain to a high Degree, and made him resolve to seek some
immediate Revenge against the Justices, and most particularly against Mr.
Walker, as having been the most active Man amongst them in all the Complaints
about the billeting of Soldiers, and, as he imagined, the principal Promoter of
the Warrant by which he was ordered to give up his Quarters, and in consequence
of which he had committed himself to Prison. Soon after a Resolution was taken
to punish Mr. Walker for his Insolence (that was the Language they made use of)
by setting a Mark upon him, or by disfiguring him in some signal and
disgraceful Manner: And some of the wickedest and most desperate Soldiers of
the 28th Regiment, under the Direction of two Sergeants of the same Character,
Sergeant Meas and Sergeant Rogers, were employed to put it in Execution.

Gentlemen, we shall produce a Witness that was himself employed in this
Business, and was present at the Execution of it, and who is consequently well
acquainted with all the Circumstances attending it. His Name is George
M'Govock, and he is a Soldier of the 28th Regiment.

He will tell you, amongst other Things, Gentlemen, that on Monday the 3d of
December, 1764, that is, three Days before the Perpetration of this Crime, he
was desired by Sergeant Meas (who and before that Time acquainted him with the
Design and engaged him to be an Actor in it) to go with him to Lieutenant
Tottenham's House at Montreal (a Lieutenant and Adjutant of the 28th Regiment,
who was deeply concerned in this Affair) to meet some Genmen who were Friends,
as the Sergeant told him, to the Design of configuring Mr. Walker, though they
were not of the 28th Regiment, and to take an Oath of Secrecy never to discover
any of them if they should happen to be present at the Execution of it: That he
accordingly went with Sergeant Meas to Lieutenant Tottenham's; and that when
they got there, the Lieutenant himself opened the Door to them, and was
accompanied by Captain Daniel Disney, the Prisoner at the Bar, and Lieutenant
Simon Evans, of the 28th Regiment: That Lieutenant Tottenham said to him in the
Passage, in the Presence of Captain Disney, Lieutenant Evans, and Sergeant
Meas, some Words to this purpose, George, this Gentleman (pointing to Captain
Disney) and others that are within, are desirous that you would promise that,
if any of them should make any Attempt to disfigure Mr. Walker, you will never
discover it, and that you would for their further Security, take an Oath to
keep it secret: That there upon he consented to take the Oath, and took it
immediately, Captain Disney administering it to him on a Book which Lieutenant
Tottenham produced, and which the Witness believes to have been a Bible.
Lieutenant Evans at the same Time threatened him, that, if ever he discovered
it, he should soon be made an End of, wherever he might happen to live, and
that he himself would blow his Brains out. Tottenham thereupon said to Evans,
that he need not be afraid of his discovering the Matter; for that Sergeant
Meas and Sergeant Rogers knew him very well, and could answer for his being
faithful.

After this Conversation in the Passage, Sergeant Meas and the Witness M'Govock
went into the Parlour with Captain Disney, Lieutenant Tottenham and Lieutenant
Evans; and there they saw the following Persons, Captain John Campbell, of the
27th Regiment, Captain John Fraser, the Person already spoken of,
Lieutenant Colonel Christie, Deputy-Quarter Master-General; M. St. Luc la
Corn, and Mr. Joseph Howard. He staid in this Room about a Quarter of an Hour,
during which Time the Resolution taken to disfigure Mr. Walker was the general
Subject of the Conversation. They all expressed their Approbation of this
Design, and their Hopes that it would succeed. This Witness says that this
Conversation was addressed to him or Sergeant Meas, or spoken with an evident
Intention that they should hear it; and that Lieutenant Tottenham further
explained to him the Design of introducing him and Sergeant Meas into that
Company to be that they might know that those Gentlemen who were there
assembled were Friends to the Design of disfiguring Mr. Walker, and that
therefore they might not be surprised or alarmed if they should see them
engaged in the Execution of it, either before, or at the same Time with, and as
Assistants to, the Gentlemen of the 28th Regiment.

Sergeant Meas and the Witness then quitted the Parlour, after a Stay of
something more than a Quarter of an Hour, and went, by Lieutenant Tottenham's
Direction into the Kitchen to drink, and afterward returned home about Nine
o'Clock.

Gentlemen, What I have here laid before you concerning this Conversation at
Lieutenant Tottenham's House, and the Oath of Secrecy administered to this
Witness by the Prisoner at the Bar, I have spoken from the Deposition of this
Witness, which I have here in my Hand and before my Eyes, with particular Care
not to go one Jot beyond the Contents of it.

Gentlemen, I must further inform you, that this Oath of Secrecy had a great
Effect upon the Mind of this Witness; a Circumstance that adds considerably to
the Credit of his Testimony. When he had made his first Deposition, which made
mention only of Persons to whom this Oath of Secrecy did not relate (which
Deposition he swore to before Mr. Dumas St. Martin, the Justice of Peace, on
the eight Day of last September) he was asked whether that Deposition contained
all he knew of the Matter; upon which he declared that it did not, but said he
would not reveal any more, because he could not do it without accusing certain
other Persons that were concerned in that Affair, whom he conceived himself to
be under an Obligation never to discover, in Consequence of an Oath of Secrecy
he had taken for that Purpose. He was afterward brought before his Honor the
present Chief Justice, to confirm and swear again to this Deposition in the
Presence of Mr. Walker and myself. And his Scruple about the Oath of Secrecy
being then mentioned as an Objection to his telling the rest of what he knew,
he declared that he would be guided by the Opinion and Advice of the
Chief Justice and myself concerning the Obligation of this Oath: And upon our
telling him that we thought such an Oath unlawful and void, that it was
unlawful to take such an Oath, and still more unlawful to keep it, as it was
contrary to a prior and stronger Obligation that every Man is under, for the
Sake of the Public Good, to declare the whole of what he knows concerning any
public Crimes, when called upon to do so in the Course of a judicial Inquiry,
he was persuaded to give up his Scruple and declare the rest of what he knew,
which makes the Contents of his second Deposition. This Deposition I took down
in the Course of a very long Examination in the Presence of his Honor the
Chief Justice and Mr. Walker; and can safely affirm that every Word of it came
freely from the Witness without any Suggestions whatsoever from Mr. Walker;
whose Conduct with respect to this Witness, so far as I have been able to
observe it, has been so very strict and delicate, that, instead of bribing him
to swear as he should dictate to him, as Mr. Walker's Enemies have given out,
to invalidate this Witness's Testimony, he has barely allowed him a necessary
Maintenance since he has made those Depositions, (not without some
Dissatisfaction and Complaints of the Witness on that Account) and has
cautioned him over and over to say nothing but what he was absolutely sure of:
And now, since this Witness has been at Montreal he has not taken, as I
believe, the justifiable Precaution (nor have I, nor any other Person to my
Knowledge, taken it for him) of reading over to this Witness either of his
Depositions in Order to refresh his Memory against the present Trial. We leave
him to relate to you what he can himself recollect of the Circumstances of this
cruel Transaction, unassisted either by our Admonitions or his own former
Accounts of them. I will not proceed in the Narration of this unhappy Business.

On Tuesday, the 4th of December, the Day after the Meeting abovementioned at
Lieutenant Tottenham's House, a Plot was laid in Sergeant Meas's House in the
Presence of this Witness by Sergeant Meas, Sergeant Rogers, John M'Laughlin,
James Coleman and Daniel Ashman, Soldiers of the 28th Regiment, to way-lay Mr.
Walker that very Might about the Dusk of the Evening upon his Return from his
Storehouse to his Dwelling House, which were at the Distance of about a
Furlong from each other. The Design was to beat and disfigure him. (The Word
constant used in all their Consultations was, To disfigure.) And the Witness
saw them go accordingly in the Evening into proper Places for accomplishing
their Purpose, armed with Bayonets, and one of them with a Broad Sword. They
staid upon the Parade in Hopes of meeting with Mr. Walker, till past Eight
o'Clock, and then went Home, concluding that Mr. Walker must have gone Home by
some other Way. And this Witness heard some of them that Evening, give this
Account of their Disappointment.

On the next Day, the Wednesday, another Design was concerted at Sergeant
Meas's House, between the Hours of Ten and Eleven o'Clock in Morning, to
way-lay Mr. Walker again that Evening near his own Dwelling House, in Order to
beat and disfigure him. This Witness was present at Sergeant Meas's House at
the Time this Design was concerted; and the Persons who concerted it were
Sergeant Rogers, Sergeant Meas, M'Laughlin, Coleman, Ashman, and Philip
Castles, another Soldier of the 28th Regiment. And accordingly about Eight
o'Clock that Evening these Persons did set out from Sergeant Meas's House to
different Parts of the Town, in Parties of two Men each. Rogers and Coleman
were in one of these Parties, and did meet with Mr. Walker, and were seen and
taken Notice, of by him, as he will inform you, as Persons, who, by their Looks
and Behavior, seemed to have some Design of attacking him. But they were
prevented from doing it by the Appearance of some People that had happened to
come out just at that Time and followed Mr. Walker, and who, these Russians
apprehended, might interpose in his Defense or raise an Alarm in the
Neighborhood. They therefore returned to Sergeant Meas's House about Nine
o'Clock. The Witness M'Govock heard them afterward give this Account of their
Disappointment.

On Thursday, the 6th of December, the Assault was actually committed. And
though they had hitherto, according to the Account of George M'Govock, intended
only to beat and disfigure Mr. Walker, in such a Manner as to leave a lasting
Mark of Disgrace upon him, they now seem to have changed their Purpose to a
safer and more complete Revenge, by resolving first to murder him, and then to
carry off one of his Ears in Triumph, as the Indians do the Scalp of an Enemy.
That this was their Design at the Time of committing this Assault, will appear,
not only from the Manner and Violence of the Blows they gave him, some wounding
him on the Head with all their Force with Broad Swords, one with a Tomahawk,
another with an Iron Bar upon the Loins, with a Design to break his Back but
from the Words spoken by them at that Time, such as that the would finish and
dispatch him, and their Declarations that they though he had been dead before
they left him. Those Words, and the Blows which they accompanied, and most of
the Circumstances attending the Assault itself, will be proved to you by the
Testimony of Mr. Walker himself, as well as of the other Witness; and the
Presence of Captain Disney, the Prisoner at the Bar, on that Occasion, to
encourage and animate the Soldiers who give, the Wounds, will be proved to you
by the united Testimony of Mr. and Mrs. Walker.

About a Quarter before Nine o'Clock at Night, as Mr. and Mrs. Walker, were
sitting in their Hall at Supper, a sudden Noise was heard at the Door, as of a
Number of People striving hastily to get into the House. This Noise was
occasioned by their violent Manner of opening the Outer-Door, though shut only
upon a Latch. Mrs. Walker upon hearing it immediately cried out Entrez,
imagining it was, a Number of Canadians coming to Mr. Walker upon Business as a
Justice of Peace, as he had that whole Day had a great many such Applications:
But almost in the same Instant, looking toward the Door, and seeing through
the Glass of the inner Door a Crowd of black Faces rising one above another, as
they stood on the Steps without, she cried out with the utmost Surprise, Good
God! What is this! This is Murder; this is the Army come to revenge themselves.
Mrs. Walker saw them first; because she sat with her Face to the Door. Mr.
Walker sat at the other End of the Table, with his Back to the Door and very
near it; I think he cannot have been more than four Feet from it, which is a
Circumstance, Gentlemen, it will be proper you should attend to. While Mrs.
Walker was crying out in the Manner I have mentioned, the Russians entered the
Room, bursting open the inner Glass-Door and breaking one of the Panes of
Glass; and Mrs. Walker clearly distinguished Captain Disney, the Prisoner at
the Bar, to be one of them, notwithstanding the Crape he had over his Face,
which is but an indifferent Disguise. Mrs. Walker's Exclamation made Mr. Walker
turn his Head back at the Instant they were entering, which gave him an
Opportunity of having one short, but full View of them, and at a very small
Distance, before he received a Blow: And it was in this full and near View of
them that he clearly distinguished Captain Disney amongst their Number. He also
took such Notice of two other Faces among them, that he thinks he should know
them again whenever he should see them: But he declares they are not any of the
Prisoners now in Custody in this Place, nor any other Persons whose Names he is
acquainted with.

Gentlemen, upon the Sight of these Assassins, Mr. Walker started up from his
Chair, and in rising received a Wound on the Forepart of his Head with a
Broad-Sword. This Wound was five Inches long, and was given with such a Force
that one of Mr. Walker's Servants, who was then attending him and saw it given,
concluded that it must be mortal to him. Mr. Walker however did not sink under
it, but recollecting that his Arms were in his Bedchamber, he endeavored to
make toward it, in Hopes of making some Defense, and for that Purpose rushed
into the Parlour which lay between the Hall and the Bedchamber. But he
received so many Wounds from five or six of the Russians as he passed, that he
never could reach the Bedchamber, but sunk down, spent with Wounds and the
loss of Blood, into an armed Chair that was standing in the further Corner of
the Parlour adjoining to the Door of the Bedchamber. In this helpless
Condition he received several more Wounds and Blows all over his Body, both
with Bludgeons and sharp Weapons, and in particular one very dangerous Blow on
the Bone of his left Leg with some Iron Weapon, which the Witness M'Govock will
inform you was given him by one Clark, who was by Trade a Smith, who carried
with him a Piece of Iron fitted to his Hand besides a Bludgeon. He continued in
this Situation for a short Time, half a Minute, perhaps, or a Minute, almost
deprived of his Senses, but was roused to make one more Attempt to defend
himself by the Terror occasioned by the Threat of instant Death. For he heard a
Voice, which seemed to come from the opposite Corner of the Room, pronounce
these Words, Damn him, let me come to him, and I Will dispatch the Villain with
my Sword. Upon this he looked up, and saw two Persons, whom he conjectured to
be Officers, advancing toward him from the opposite Corner of the Room, from
which the Voice had seemed to come, one of whom was armed with Pistols, and the
other held a Small Sword in his Hand, which he pointed at Mr. Walker's Breast.
This latter Person Mr. Walker believed to be the Prisoner at the Bar; but as
his Eyes were then full of Blood from the many Wounds he had received, and his
Mind in great Confusion, he will not take upon him to swear it was he. But
M'Govock the Accomplice, who was present on this Occasion, will confirm the
Suspicion of Mr. Walker, and inform you that he saw Captain Disney advance in
that Manner, with his Sword drawn, toward Mr. Walker, and heard him pronounce
those Words. Whoever it was, you will observe, Gentlemen, that it proves beyond
a Doubt that the Intention of the Assassins at this Time was to murder Mr.
Walker, and not barely to disfigure him. Mr. Walker resolved, though quite
unarmed, to do what he could to defend himself, and accordingly advanced
toward these two Persons and attacked them furiously with his Fists, and had
the good Fortune to put aside the drawn Sword with his left Hand without
receiving a Thrust from it. But he was immediately surrounded by the other
Russians. One of these Seized him by the Throat; and Mr. Walker did the same to
him, and at the same Time endeavored to get near the Fireplace in Order to
take up the Shovel or Tongs for want of better Weapons. Upon this another of
them took hold of his Right Thigh, and they both together endeavored to lift
him up and lay him on the Fire; the Terror of which cruel Death giving him new
Strength and Spirit, he disengaged himself from them both, by suddenly putting
his Hands against the Chimney-Piece, and pushing himself from it with all his
Force. But in the Instant of his doing this he received a deep and dangerous
Wound from another of the Assassins on the left Side of the Head near the
Crown, which felled him to the Ground; and soon after, while he lay helpless on
the Floor, he received another most violent Blow on his Loins, which would have
broke his Back (as no Doubt it was intended to do) if it had not been for a
large Silver Buckle in the Waistband of his Breeches, which received the Blow
and somewhat broke the Force of it, which was such that the Buckle was very
much bent by it. After this blow on the Back, Mr. Walker continuing to lie
helpless and almost motionless on the Floor, with his Face downwards, one of
the Villains either knelt or sat upon his right Side, and cut off a Part of his
right Ear, and endeavored at the same Time to cut his Throat: But finding this
to be difficult by Reason of the Motions Mr. Walker made to prevent it by
squeezing his Head down close to his Shoulders, and putting up his left Hand
(the little Finger of which was by this Means cut to the Bone) and being in a
Hurry to get away, as the Neighborhood began now to be alarmed, he made of
with the Rest of his Companions without effecting it, and carried off the Ear
in Triumph. They thought however that they had left Mr. Walker either dead or
in a dying Condition: For Mr. Walker heard one of them say, just before they
went off, Damn him, he is dead, and another say, We have done for him. And with
good Reason indeed they might suppose so, since there are very few Men in the
World that could have survived such a Number of Wounds and Blows as he had
received, they being no fewer than Three Score, of which Eight were dreadful
Wounds from sharp Weapons, and Fifty-two were Confusions.

The Ear was immediately carried to Lieutenant Tottenham, as appeared by his
own Examination, where he says that two Men in disguise and masked, or with
their Faces blacked, came into his House about 9 o'Clock at Night, and throwing
down a Piece of Flesh upon the Table, said, There Is that Rascal Walker's Ear,
and then withdrew without saying a Word more. Mr. Welsh, the Officer of General
Burton's Guard, and Mr. Baker, the Surgeon's Mate of the Regiment, were at that
Time with Mr. Tottenham. But it does not appear that they made any Attempt to
stop the Men who brought them the Ear. As soon as they were gone, Mr. Tottenham
wrapped the Ear up in a Piece of Paper, and sent Mr. Welsh with it to General
Burton, who some Hours after sent it to Mr. Lamb, the Justice of Peace
beforementioned, to be disposed of as he should think proper.

These Particulars of this Assault will all be proved to you by Mr. Walker
himself without the Assistance of the Accomplice, whose Evidence however will
confirm them and acquaint you with the Names of the principal Persons concerned
in the Execution of them. He will tell you that the Blow on the Head that
brought Mr. Walker to the Ground and quite subdued him, was given him by
Sergeant Meas with a Tomahawk, and that the Person who gave him the Blow on his
Back when he was down was Thomas Donnelly, who afterward boasted of it in the
Hearing of the Witness, and said he thought he had broke his Back; and that
Sergeant Rogers was the Man that cut off his Ear and carried it off.

While some of these Russians were employed in attacking Mr. Walker in the
Manner that has been related, others of them were employed in assaulting and
driving away the rest of the Family. Mrs. Walker and Miss Heard (who is since
married to Mr. Wade, who was sitting at Supper with Mr. and Mrs. Walker, and
John Lilly, Mr. Walker's Clerk) escaped through the Kitchen into the Yard;
where, not being pursued, they remained till the Affair was over. John Lilly
was attacked by some of the Russians, who gave him three deep Cuts on the Head
with a Broad Sword, one of which knocked him down; but recovering himself
pretty soon; he struggled with one of the Fellows and pushed him into a Window,
and then rushed out at the Street Door through the Midst of a Party of five or
six more of the Ruffians that guarded it, in Order to alarm the Neighbors; to
prevent which two of their Number pursued him, the rest crying out to them,
Damn him; shoot him; don't let him escape. But they did not overtake him. And
William Fontaine, Mr. Walker's Servant, who was waiting upon him at Supper at
the Time of this Assault, was pursued by one of them with a naked Broad-Sword
in his Hand into the Gallery: There he escaped the Fury of his Pursuer by
leaping down from the Gallery into the Yard through some of the broken Rails.
The Stroke aimed at him by his Pursuer fell upon the Rails of the Gallery, and,
as he believed, upon his Coat, as he afterward found it had been cut.

Such, Gentlemen, were the Circumstances of this tragical Affair. Before I
proceed to lay the Proofs of them before you, I will beg leave to mention a few
Observations concerning the Nature of the Charges contained in the Indictment.

The first Charge in the Indictment is for a well known and very high Offense
at the Common Law, called a Burglary; which consists in breaking; and entering;
a Man's House in the Night time with an Intent to Commit a Felony. In the
present Case it is charged that the Felony intended to be committed was a
Murder, of which I believe, when you have heard the Proofs of the Particulars I
have opened to you, you will have little Room to doubt. If this Intention in
the Russians who assaulted Mr. Walker is proved to your Satisfaction, together
with the Presence of the Prisoner at the Bar at this Transaction, you must find
him guilty of this first Charge in the Indictment, which will render the
Consideration of the second Charge of less Importance. But if it should appear
to you that the Prisoner was concerned in this Affair, but that there was no
Intention to murder Mr. Walker, (though this is what I cannot well suppose) the
Prisoner must be acquitted upon the first Charge, and found guilty only upon
the Second.

The second Charge is founded upon the famous Act of Parliament for preventing
malicious Maiming and Mutilation, passed in the 22d. Year of CHARLES the II.
and usually known by the Name of the Coventry-Act, from the brave Sir John
Coventry, whose Sufferings were the Occasion of making it. Concerning this Act
of Parliament two very strange Opinions have been entertained by some Persons
in this Province: The First is, that the Act of Parliament is not in Force in
this Province; the Second, that, supposing it to be in Force here, the Injury
done to Mr. Walker does not fall within it. I will endeavor to show the
Falsehood of both these Opinions.

It has been said in Support of the First of these Opinions, that this Law is
not in Force in the other Provinces of North America, and therefore ought not
to be so here. This Conclusion is by no Means just. This Province has nothing
to do with the other Provinces of North America; nor indeed have those other
Provinces any Connection with each other. The Laws in each Province are
different from those in every other, as the different Acts of their Assemblies
(which have exercised a Legislative Authority in them) and the different Dates
of their original Settlement by English Planters have contributed to vary them.
And the Laws of all the Colonies are, from the same Causes, different from the
Laws of Great Britain itself. The common Principle, upon which they all seem to
be established, I apprehend to be this; that every Set of English Planters,
upon their first occupying and settling a new Colony, have carried with them
the Laws of England then in Force at the Time of their leaving it to go to the
new Colony: That this is the original System of Laws which they imported into
the new Colony; and that this System was increased or varied either by new Acts
of the British Parliament passed since the Settlement of the Colony, containing
express Words extending to it, or by the Acts of their own Assemblies under the
Powers communicated to them by the Royal Charters. Thus the Laws of England in
Force in the Reign of JAMES the I will be the Basis of the Laws of a Colony
that was first settled in his Reign: And in such a Colony the Coventry-Act,
which was made in the Reign of CHARLES II. will not of Necessity be a Part of
the Law of the Colony, because that Act does not expressly mention the
Colonies: It will therefore be, or not be, a Part of the Laws of such a Colony
according as their Governor, Council, and Assembly shall have, or have not,
adopted it, supposing that those provincial Legislatures have a legal Power to
make Laws of that high Importance. And thus it may happen that some of the
North-American Colonies this Law may be in Force, and not in others. Whether in
Fact it is in Force in any of them, we need not here inquire. With Respect to
this Province, it is certain that this excellent Act of Parliament is as much
in Force here as Magna Charta, or the Petition of Right, or the Law of HENRY
VIII. that takes the Benefit of the Clergy from Wilful murder of Malice
aforethought, or any other the most useful or most respected Laws of England:
For it is founded on the same Authority with them, namely, the Authority of the
great Ordinance of the Legislature of this Country, General MURRAY and his
Council, of September 17, 1764, by which they introduced into this Province, at
one Stroke, the whole System of the Laws of England then in Force, and
consequently among the rest this excellent Act of Parliament. That Ordinance
institutes the present Court of King's Bench, or Supreme Court of Judicature,
in which we are now assembled, and ordains that the Chief Justice of the
Province, who presides in it, shall hear and determine all criminal and civil
Causes agreeable to the Laws of England, which certainly must mean the Laws of
England then in Being. And besides, the Chief-Justice's Commission, which you
have heard read, runs in the same Style with this Ordinance, and directs him to
hear and determine all Matters that come before him agreeably to the Laws of
England and the Ordinances of this Province hereafter to be made. Either
therefore this great Ordinance (upon which all the Proceedings of the Courts of
Judicature in the Province, both civil and criminal, have been founded ever
since the passing it) and likewise the Directions contained in the King's
Commission to the Chief Justice, are void and of no Authority, and none of the
Laws of England are now in Force in this Province, but the French Laws that
prevailed here before the Conquest are the only Laws that are really still in
Force (as they certainly would have been if this Ordinance had not been made)
or it must be allowed that this excellent and beneficial Law, called the
Coventry-Act, was introduced here by that Ordinance, together with all the
otter Laws of England in Being at the Time of passing it.

The second Opinion, that the Injury done to Mr. Walker does not come within
the Coventry-Act, though not so entirely destitute of all Color of Reason as
the former Opinion, will yet, I believe, upon Examination appear to be
ill-grounded. The Coventry-Act says, that, whoever shall on purpose, and of
Malice-aforethought, cut or disable the Tongue, put out an Eye, slit the Nose,
cut off a nose or Lip, or cut off or disable any Limb, or Member, of any
Subject, with Intention in so doing to maim or disfigure him, shall be guilty
of Felony without Benefit of Clergy. These are the Words of the Act, in which
it is certain the Cutting off an Ear is not mentioned. But Gentlemen, is it not
plainly comprehended within the Word Member? To what Purpose, after enumerating
the several Features of the Face, does the Statute add the Words Limb or
Member, unless it be to extend its Protection to all the other Organs of the
Body by using the most general and comprehensive Words the Language affords.
Certainly by the Word Limb we must understand the larger Parts of the human
Body that are separate from the Trunk, namely, the Arms and Legs, and perhaps
the Hands and Feet, and by the Word Member the smaller Parts of it, such as the
Fingers, and particularly the Ears, as being more likely to be the Object of a
malicious Intention to disfigure by Reason of the Resemblance of such an Injury
to a disgraceful Punishment in some Cases inflicted by the Law; which is the
very Sort of Injury this Statute was intended to prevent.

Gentlemen, this Act of Parliament has always been reckoned a most excellent
and salutary Law. It was passed in Opposition to the Court, as a Law of
indespensable Importance, in the peaceable Part of the Reign of King CEAELES
the II. in Consequence of a base piece of Cruelty committed upon Sir John
Coventry, a Member of Parliament at that Time, by assaulting him in St. James's
Park, and slitting his Nostrils. This was done, as it is generally supposed, at
the Instigation of the Court, and probably of the King himself, in Revenge for
some light Expressions thrown out By Sir John Coventry, in a Debate in
Parliament, reflecting on the King's known Debauchery. Yet notwithstanding the
Provocation given by this personal Reflection on the King, the Parliament
thought this barbarous Assault such a flagrant Violation of all the Rules of
Justice and Humanity, that they immediately prepared a Bill to render the
Perpetrators of it incapable of receiving the King's Pardon, and to make all
future Offenders in the like Kind liable to be punished with Death; and to this
Bill the King gave the Royal Assent. And it must be observed, that the
Parliament that did this was not a factious ill-disposed Parliament, that took
a Pleasure in proposing Things that might be disgustful to the Court; but it
was that Parliament which, of all that ever sat in England, was most devoted to
the Crown, and disposed to concur in almost every Motion and Proposition that
came from it -- which had repeatedly supplied that King with large Sums of
Money, notwithstanding the continual Waste and Misapplication of them, and
which, to gratify the Pride and Revenge of his first Minister, the Earl of
Clarendon, and the rest of the vindictive Royalists that had returned from
Exile, had passed several penal Laws (which still subsist) to prosecute the
Protestant Dissenters, had repealed the excellent Act obtained with so much
Difficulty from CHARLES the I. for securing to the Nation a Meeting of
Parliament at least once in three Years, and had almost established passive
Obedience by a Law. Yet even this compliant Parliament thought this a necessary
Law -- so necessary as to insist upon the passing it in Opposition to the
Wishes of the Court. And ever since that Time it has met with the universal
Approbation of all the English Nation, and has received so much Countenance
from the Judges, and been deemed so highly remedial and beneficial to the
Subject, that in the only two Cases that have happened upon it (one of which
happened about a Year and a Half ago, and the other was the well known Case of
Cook and Woodburn) it has met with a large and liberal Construction. This I am
sure of, that neither of those Cases comes so clearly within the Spirit and
Meaning of the Coventry-Act as the Case now before you does, which seems indeed
to be the very Sort of Outrage that Act was designed to guard against: And it
seems likewise to come within the Letter of it by giving the Word Member used
in the Statute, that, I will not say, liberal, but natural Interpretation that
has been already mentioned. But these Considerations will, as I apprehend,
become of little Consequence by the strong Proofs by which, I doubt not, you
will be convinced that at the Time of committing the Assault the Ruffians who
committing it had an Intention to murder Mr. Walker. I will now, Gentlemen,
call the Witnesses for the Crown in Support of this Indictment, without
trespassing any longer on your Patience.

WITNESSES for the CROWN.
Thomas Walker Esquire
ON the sixth Day of December, about Half after Eight or near Nine of the Clock
Mrs. Walker looked at her Watch, and in about fifteen Minutes after were called
out to Supper; as we were sitting at Supper, I with my Back to the Street Door,
heard a Noise at the Latch, like somebody wanting to come in in a Hurry, on
which Mrs. Walker being at the Head of the Table, said, entrez; the outward
Door was thrown open, and through the inner Glass Door I saw a great Number of
People disguised, their Heads appeared one above another as they stood on the
Steps (such as those in Court, pointing to a Number of People) They were
disguised many different Ways, some of them little round Hats, others black
Faces, others with Crapes, and one with a Tuck of the Hair over the Cap and
turned in at Top; they burst the inner Door coming in, and broke the Glass,
forcing the Bolts of the Door; I turned my Head round on Mrs. Walker's saying,
Good God, what is this, This is Murder! I took so much Notice of two Faces that
were black'd that I should know them if I was to see them again; but they were
not any of those Gentlemen in Custody; have the Idea of them as of a Face drawn
with a Pencil; had a distinct View of them. Many of them surrounded as if they
would cut off the Communication of the Parlour. On turning round. I received a
Stroke on my Head. At that Time I could not tell whether it was a Broad Sword
or Bludgeon. When I had received this Stroke I rose up and passed through them
to get into the Parlour, in order to pass through it into my Bed-Room, where my
Sword and Pistols were, in order to make some Defense. I then received many
Blows (but cannot tell how many) Passing through the Parlour Door, they
following me in such a Hurry, burst open the Standing-door (they were
Folding-doors) being so many of them. Coming to the further End of the Room,
and striving to get into my Bed-Room, two Men stood at the Chamber Door, and
fore-closing me, prevented my opening it; beat me so much, and with such a
Number of Strokes. They closed me round with a Curtain, which I suppose
prevented their Dashing my Brains out. Was some Time in the Corner, but how
many Blows I received there, cannot tell. But there was Fifty-two Contusions or
Bruises. I was swelled from the Shoulders to the Fingers End, there was not a
free Part all over my Body. I received a Wound on my Leg, but don't know when.
Whilst in the Corner I had no Remembrance of being off my Feet; but seeing the
Marks of my bloody Head against the Wall imagine I had lost my Senses; but
remember hearing a Person say, let me come to him, I will dispatch the Villain
with my Sword; this was the first Thing I heard; and that roused me, and then
was determined to sell my Life as dear as possible. Having seen Major Disney,
not knowing that I had ever disobliged him, I expected Life, till I heard those
Words. Major Disney had a Crape on his Face, and I discovered his Face through
the Crape. Believe by the Figure that it was he that made use of those Words,
having seen him in the Room before I received so many Blows, but I cannot say
positively that I knew his Voice, and do not recollect particularly what Dress
he was in. Before I received any Blows, or any Thing in the outward Room, I was
fully convinced that was Major Disney. A Person made at me and I parried the
Blow with my left Hand and struck at him. At the Instant the Words were
pronounced two or three People came up to me with Swords levelled, but do not
know whether any Body made a Pass at me or not, but upon my taking Courage they
retreated back: My Eyes were then full of Blood. They then closed; one collared
me; I seized and held him, till another took me by the right Thigh, and strove
to lift me and set me on the Fire, I then turned myself round setting my Hands
against the Chimney (the Marks of my five bloody Fingers are on the Jambs of
the Chimney) and tore the Side of my Shoe with the Force, and in turning round
I received a Stroke (which the Doctor said was that of a Tomahawk) which felled
me to the Ground, senseless; how long I laid there cannot tell. The first
Remembrance after that Stroke was a severe Blow on my Loins, whether by a
Tomahawke or Bludgeon, I do not know, but feel it to this Day in bad weather.
After that Blow a Man kneeled, or sat on my right Side, and I felt as if he was
attempting to cut my Throat; I then moved my Head and Shoulders and put any
Hand up, thinking it was his Thumb, but found a sharp Instrument. And he cut
the little Finger of my left Hand to the Bone; and it was a Fortnight before I
knew that I had lost my Ear. I thought they had aimed to cut my Throat, and
thought (at the Time) they had done it. After receiving that Wound I heard a
Voice from one of those People present say, the Villain's dead; another said,
damn him, we have done for him. A third Person spoke, but I could not rightly
understand what he said, but heard some Words; then having lost my Senses can
give no further Account; but when I did recollect found myself in the Arms of
William Fontaine my Servant, and one Mr. Pistolet.

The bloody Clothes, Shirt, and the Ear in Spirits were then brought into Court
and exposed.

CROSS EXAMINATION. Council for the Prisoner. Morrison.
Q. Who was at Table? Walker.

A. Mrs. Walker at the Head, Miss Hurd, now Mrs. Wade, and my Clerk.

Q. Did you see Major Disney enter?

A. Yes.

Q. What Part or when did he enter?

A. I don't know exactly.

Q. Did you get up when they entered?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you look at the People in getting up?

A. I had looked before.

Q. Do you know whether Major Disney struck?

A. I don't know. He knows best.

Q. How came you to know him?

A. By looking at him.

A Crape was then produced, and Mr. Walker put it on his Face.

Q. After you had received the Blow what became of Mrs. Walker?

A. Let them answer.

Q. Why could you not tell what became of them, did you not speak to your Wife,
or any other Person?

A. No.

Q. Did not your Clerk or any other Person assist you?

A. No.

Q. Did not you think to protect your Wife?

A. No.

Q. Then you was stopped at the Corner by three or more, and they kept you for
some Time, you don't know what Time?

A. I don't know.

Q. There was two of the Figures you would know?

A. Yes.

Q. Had you never any Opportunity of seeing them?

A. No, and perhaps may never see them again here.

Q. Pray did you see Major Disney in that Room, did he offer to strike?

A. No. Unless it was him that advanced with his Sword, On seeing that I jumped
and parried it, my Eyes being at that Time full of Blood.

Q. What were the others doing?

A. They were all striking. The first Thing I recollect were those Words which
re-animated me.

Q Cannot you guess how long you was in the Corner?

A. No, I cannot say, I lost my Senses.

Q. But cannot you tell how long you was in the Corner without your Senses;
methinks it is very odd?

A. Had you received the same Number of Blows that I did you would not have
been very bright I believe.

Q. You heard the Prisoner say, let me come to him and I will dispatch him?

A. I believe that to be Major Disney, but am not sure.

Q. You said those Words were spoke before the Sword was pointed?

A. I heard them. It was such a Figure as Major Disney; but my Eyes were full
of Blood.

Q. Do you know who spoke those Words?

A. I do not know who spoke those Words, but heard the Voice from that Part of
the Room, imagining it to be a Person that was directing.

Q. You said it was about three Minutes?

A. I do not ascertain the Time.

Q. Do you remember the Person that gave you the Blow on your Loins?

A. I do not.

Q. Did Major Disney give any Blows?

A. There were enough to do that Work besides Major Disney, and fitter for the
Purpose.

Q. After the Struggling by the Fire I think you said you heard a Voice say,
damn him, we have done for him; do you think that was Major Disney?

A. No.

Q. There was a third Person, what did he say?

A. Do not know. I believe I then lost my Senses.

Q. You recovered next Morning a little, did you recollect any Thing about
Major Disney?

A. Yes I recollected Major Disney very well.

Q. Did you mention Major Disney?

A. No I don't recollect I did.

Q. You put the Sword by with your Hand?

A. I parried it.

Q. After you parried the Sword what became of him?

A. I struck at him and he retreated.

Q. You struck him?

A. Ask him, he knows if I struck him.

Major Disney answered, No Sir you did not.

Major Disney asked.

Q. Did you particularize any Person next Morning?

A. I did not know any other Person.

Q. But whether next Morning did you particularize him or another Person?

A. Yes! I recollected one that looked like Lieutenant Hamilton and a little
Man like Lieutenant Graham, but did not mention (...) to any Person but to Mrs.
Walker and a Friend.

The Court then put:

Q. If Mr. Walker was acquainted with Major Disney?

A. Yes, he used to visit at my House, and I used to be on Terms of Friendship,
was very well acquainted with him, particularly on my first Tour to Canada, he
being one of Mr. Gage's Family.

COUNCIL.
Q. When you saw Major Disney first it was surprising you could not tell his
Dress?

A. I could not.

Q. Had he any Thing at all on his Head, or in what Manner was the Crape
fastened?

A. I do not know, but think he had a Hat on.

The Council for the Crown then thought proper to call some Evidences, to prove
that the Fact was really committed, fearing the Length of Time might have
eradicated so base an Action out of the Minds of the Public, as they rather
seemed to stifle and make it appear as an unpopular Prosecution, etc. etc. etc.

Mr. Boon, Evidence for the Crown.
Having been at Major Walbrun's, a Tavern on the Parade, I met a Parcel of Men
running, amongst which was a Musician, I asked him what was the Matter, the
Musician answered, Mr. Walker was murdered: I then went to Mr. Walbrun's* and
told it, and then went to Mr. Walker's, with other Company. I thought his
Wounds very bad: I did not think him likely to live; saw his Wound on the Ear
and Cheek very bad, and thought that the Wind Pipe was really cut. The Doctor
thought it was dangerous. Being asked on what Account? Answered, He did not
know, but the Doctor thought it dangerous, and the one on the Crown of the Head
he thought was most dangerous.

Q. With What Instrument do you think the Wound was done?

A. I thought it must have been with a Broad Sword.

Q. Did you think they were all done with a Broad Sword?

A. They were to the best of my Knowledge.

Q. What length did you think?

A. Some appeared to be about three Inches and an Half, one very deep.

Q. Did you meet any People in the Street running away disguised?

A. Coming out of Walbrun's, I saw some People running very fast; but did not
see whether they were disguised. They were running from Mr. Walker's toward
the Parade.

Q. Do you know any Thing further of that business?

A. No.

Q. Did you ever hear any Person, or Major Disney, confess any Thing previous
to that Affair?

A. No.

CROSS EXAMINATION.
Q You went in with some other Gentlemen and saw him sitting in a Chair: do you
recollect what Day, Year, etc.

A. I recollect the Year, not the Day.

Q. What Year?

A. About two Years ago.

Q. What Time of the Night?

A. About Nine of the Clock.

Major Disney then asked him, if he had ever heard him speak in Mr. Walker's
Favor or against him?

A. No, never.

Monsr. Pistolet for the Crown.

Q. Did you see Mr. Walker the Night he was atacked, and what Hour?

A. Between Eight and Nine O'Clock I heard a great Noise. Mr. Walker's Servant,
after climbing over the Wall, knocked at our Backdoor, the Kitchen.

Q. What did you do?

A. My Father opened the Door for the Servant, and was much surprised at his
crying Mr. Walker was assassinated; on which I and my Father went to Mr.
Walker's House to see what was the Matter; but my Father did not enter Mr.
Walker's House, but I entered with the Servant, and found Mr. Walker stretched
on the Floor.

Q. Had Mr. Walker his Senses when you entered?

A. He had not Time to answer. I heard some Cries in the Street, and feared
that some of them were in or about the House, and finding myself alone, took a
Resolution to go out of the House.

Q. Did you meet any of the Ruffians coming out of the House.

A. No.

Q. None that was disguised?

A. No.

Q. Did you find the House empty, only Mr. Walker's Family?

A. I only saw Mr. Walker. Mrs. Walker was out in some of the back Houses, as I
heard some Cries.

Q. Who told you that the Assassins were about the House?

A. I was in the House and heard it said in the Street.

Q. What did they say?

A. They thought that some of the Persons might still be hid in some Part of
the House

Q. When you left the House did you return a second Time?

A. I would have entered, but Mr. Lamb at the Door hindered the People going in.

Q. What did you observe in that little Time when you saw Mr. Walker?

A. Nothing.

Q. Was there a great Quantity of Blood?

A. I saw Mr. Walker almost covered with Blood.

CROSS EXAMINATION.
Q. Your Father's House join^^ Mr. Walker's?

A. Only a Wall.

Q. Did you come into the House with Mr. Walker's Servant*

A. Found him lying on the Floor weltering in his Blood* came back a second
Time but was prevented.

Q. Do you know what Day, Month and Year?

A. The sixth Day of December, 1764.

Q. Was there any Body with Mr. Walker in the Room when you entered?

A. No.

Q. Did you see Mr. Boon?

A. Yes, the second Time I think I saw Mr. Boon with Mr. Lamb.

Q. What Hour of the Night do you think it was when you entered the first Time
in the House?

A. About Nine o'Clock; but I do not remember particularly.

Q. Do you think it was half after Nine that Time?

A. About that Time.

Monsr. St. Anges, for the Crown.

Q. Did you see any Person coming out from Mr. Walker's about the Time he was
assassinated?

A. No. I saw Soldiers going from one End of the Street to the other.

Q. Were they diguised?

A. No, not in the Day, but in the Night. They had flapt Hats.

Q. Were they disguised in any other Manner?

A. They had long Blanket Coats.

Q. Did those Hats seem intended to cover their Faces?

A. Yes.

Q. At what Time of the Night did they pass?

A. About Seven and Eight for two or three Days.

Q. Whether on the sixth Day of December did you see any Persons going to or
coming from Mr. Walker's?

A. Yes, about seven o'Clock.

Q. Did you see any Person about the Time the Affair happened?

A. No.

Q. Did you hear any Person speak about Mr. Walker that Evening?

A. No.

CROSS EXAMINATION.
Q. At seven o'Clock in the Evening have you seen any People with Crapes on
their Faces?

A. Yes. I saw them after their coming out from Mr. Walker's.

Discharged.

William M'Carty, for the Crown.

Q. On the sixth Day of December, 1764, did you see, before the Assault on Mr.
Walker, any Persons armed or disguised?

A. About half after eight of the Clock that Evening (...) saw six People turn
round (...) Howard's Corner going to (...) Mr. Walker's.

Q. How were they dressed?

A. In Blanket Coats and Bonnets, or Handkerchiefs tied round their Heads. The
first was a very tall Man, and had a Broad-Sword in his Hand that glistened;
this was about half after eight o'Clock.

Q. Did you hear them say any thing?

A. I heard them talk, but could not hear any thing. They marched two and two,
and were about six or eight in Number.

CROSS EXAMINATION.
Q. Did they go toward Mr. Walker's?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you see any of their Faces black'd?

A. No. I saw their Backs.

Q. You say it was on the sixth of December. Pray what Kind of Weather was it
at that Time? Was it not the usual Weather for that Time of the Year? Were they
dressed in any other Manner than the Time of the Year required?

A. I took them to be Panies, it was light Moonlight Nights.

Mrs. Martha Walker, for the Crown.
Q. What did you observe?

A. I observed first the Rattling at the Door; heard a Number of Footsteps,
and supposing it to be People, coming on Affairs of Justice, I cried out,
Entrez, and seeing a Number of People one above another on the Steps without,
cried, Good God, what is this? They rushed in all together, and I cried out,
this is Murder! And the first Person I could see to know was Major Disney, and
another, that seemed to enter first, I took for Lieutenant Hamilton, as he had
been at the House before about a little Business

Q. Did you see Major Disney?

A. Yes, I saw him one of the Hindmost, with red Breeches and Waistcoat, a
Canadian Gown, and a Crape over his Face.

Q. You say that Major Disney had a Crape over his Face?

A. It was close to his Face, and I discovered the Features of his Face.

Q. He was one of the Hind most; did you see him do any Thing?

A. No. Knowing Major Disney by Sight, and seeing the others dressed in red
Breeches, and knowing another Person or two, I thought they were the Army
coming to revenge themselves. Then Miss Hurd took hold of my Arm and dragged me
out through the Kitchen, etc.

CROSS EXAMINATIONS.
Q. What time of the Night was it?

A. About half an Hour before that Affair, one Mr. M'Lean, an intimate Friend
of Captain Fraser's, came in without having any Business, at least as appeared
to me, and not having any particular Intimacy at the House, it seemed something
remarkable, He told a Story of some Person toward or below Quebec, having been
very ill used and abused, by a Parcel of Canadians, his Cariole taken away,
etc. which surprised me much, as the Canadians were generally a very quiet
People. After he had finished his Story he went out and the Servant came and
told us Supper was ready, and I looked at my Watch, and it was not the usual
Hour: I told Mr, Walker he had better sup in the Parlour, being the Room we
were then in, he not being well, and I would keep him Company; however we went
out to Supper, and he was eating a Bit of Toast when he received the Blows: It
was then about three quarters after eight o'Clock.

Q. Can you recollect what Number?

A. Cannot recollect the exact Number.

Q. Did you see Major Disney the first?

A. No! Lieutenant Hamilton; but as he has never been accused by others I might
be mistaken.

Q. How long did you remember remaining in the Yard?

A. About three Minutes; but cannot remember positively.

Q. What Situation was Mr. Walker in?

A. He was in a terrible Situation: I embraced him, and he seemed to know me.

Q. About what Time did you come in?

A. About three Minutes. I sent a Servant to see what Situation Mr. Walker was
in; being impatient met him; he cried, Oh! my Master is all in Blood.

Q. Can you recollect any Person that was in the Room.

A. No, not particularly.

Q. Can you ascertain the Time from the first Entrance of the People to the
Time you came into the Parlour to Mr. Walker?

A. No: It might be three or four Minutes.

Q. Could it be more?

A. (...) know; it seemed very (...) me.

Q. You observed the Waistcoat and Breeches, did you observe the Manner the
Crape was tied round his Face

A. No.

Q. Had he a Hat on?

A. I do not know.

Q. Had he any Thing in his Hand?

A. He had a drawn Sword.

Q. You are sure it was drawn?

A. Yes, it glittered.

John Lilly, for the Crown.
Q. Was you present at Mr. Walker's Table when the Assault was made?

A. Yes.

Q. What did you observe then, or how many Men?

A. Five or six.

Q. Did you know any of them by Resemblance?

A No, I cannot say that I could.

Q. Did you hear them say any thing?

A. No.

Q. Did you see any of them strike Mr. Walker?

A Yes.

Q. With what?

A A Broad Sword.

Q. How many Blows?

A. One. When I saw Mr. Walker struck I went to help him, then being attacked
myself by a Man I drove him on a Trunk, and thinking Murder intended run out.
The first Blow was given with a Broad-Sword.

Q. What became of you after you pushed the Man on the Trunk?

A. After that I received two Blows on my Head.

Q. What became of you afterward?

A. I got out at the Street Door?

Q. What did you see at the Street Door?

A. Five or six Persons standing at the Door, and five or six in the House.

Q. Their Dress?

A. Blanket Coats, cropped Hair and black Faces, their Hats disfigured, that is,
those in the House. As soon as I got out I cried Murder, and one of them
cried, fire at him, don't let him escape, and two of them pursued me, and I
said nothing, but run on, and went to the Foot of the Lane; they immediately
returned again, and so did I, and went to one Mr. Prevost, a Cooper, almost
opposite Mr. Walker's House, and desired they would come, and said I believed
that Mr. Walker's Family were all murdered: There was Monsr. Prevost,
ano-Person, and a Soldier of the 28th Regiment; they would not go, but took me
by the Arm and pulled me into the House; they would hardly let me go out again;
but I got out, and then saw People coming out from Mr. Walker's, and took them
to be the People that committed the Affair, and observed them going toward Mr.
Murray's: I followed them and went into Mr. Murray's.

Q. When did you go back to Mr. Walker's?

A. I was pushed out of Murray's House by one M'Killip, who told me to go away
as I kept bad Company; then Murray spoke to me, and I returned in about ten
Minutes to Mr. Walker's, and found him lying on the Floor, about a Foot and
Half from the Fire, speechless.

Q. They exhorted each other to shoot you: Could you guess at any of them by
Size or Shape?

A. I was all over Blood.

Q. Did you observe what kind of Dress?

A. Some Blanket-coats, others Coats, white Sleeves, Faces blackt and Cropped
Hats. No Body spoke within the House except Mr. Walker, crying Murder.

Q. How long was it from the Time of the Beginning of the Action to the Time
you went to Mr. Feltz's? (A French Surgeon.)

A. About a Quarter of an Hour.

Q. In what Time after did Mr. Feltz arrive at the House?

A. It was upwards of twenty Minutes before he arrived.

Q. How long did you take the Action to have lasted?

A. About seven or eight Minutes.

CROSS EXAMINATION.
Q. Had they Crapes or black Faces?

A. I do not know.

Q. Had any of them Canadian. Gowns?

A. I did not observe.

Q. You was very particular in observing the Hats: Do you think it is possible
that they could have Gowns without your Knowledge?

A. They might have, the People being in a Huddle together.

Q. Was you bye when Mr. Walker received the first Blow?

A. Yes.

Q. Were they not all in when Mr. Walker received the first Blow?

A. Yes. They were all one behind another, but within the Door.

Q. You run away into several Houses, and all that; saw several People coming
out, which you imagine to be the People; and that it was about seven or eight
Minutes, the whole Transaction?

A. Yes, I imagine them to be the same People.

Q. Did you go to Dr. Feltz?

A. Yes.

Q. Who was with him?

A. Mrs. Feltz and Mr. St. Luke.

Q. When you came back to the House again, and entered the Room, and found Mr.
Walker in the Condition he was in, was there any Body there?

A. Yes.

Q. Who?

A. William Fontaine Mr Walker's Servant; but do not recollect any other Person.

Q. How long did you stay in the Room. Had you any Conversation with the
Servant?

A. No, I found him in the same Situation as he had not moved.

Q. How long was it since you quitted the House first to the Time you found Mr.
Walker lying weltering in his Blood, with his Servant?

A. It might be perhaps about twenty Minutes.

Jury. Q. Do you think it is possible that you could have known your most
intimate Friend thus disguised?

A. I could not for the short Time I had, in the Situation I was in; but having
longer Time I might.

Q. Pray was Mrs. Walker carried out before you left the Room?

A. I cannot tell.

Counsel for the Crown.
Q. Pray did you mean you could not have known your Friend thus disguised on
Account of the Confusion?

A. A Person unconcerned, or one that had not received the Blows, might have
known them if he had known them before.

Q. Did you speak to Mr. Walker?

A. No, I did not speak to him.

Q. What Time did Mrs. Walker return after you returned?

A. In a little Space of time she came up to Mr. Walker.

Jury. Q. Did you know those three Gentlemen before the Affair happened?

A. Yes.

Court -- Q. Did you know Major Disney before the Affair happened?

A. Yes.

William Fountain, Servant to Mr. Walker, for the Crown.
Q. Was you present when Mr. Walker was assaulted, the sixth December, 1764.

A. I was.

Q. What Number of Men did you see enter the House?

A. Five or six.

Q. What Manner were they dressed?

A. Their Faces and their Hands blackt, different Dresses and different Sizes.

Q. What were their Hands and Faces blackt with?

A. I cannot tell if they were blackt with Crapes or blacking.

Q. What had they on their Heads?

A. Small round Hats that had been cut.

Q. What Coats had they on?

A. Could not say for Coats: Their outward Garments where white.

Q. What Arms?

A. Arms, Blanches, or cutting Weapons: I can not tell if they were Swords or
Cutlasses. but know they were cutting Weapons.

Q. Had they any other Arms?

A. When the came in I saw no other.

Q. Were they drawn?

A. Yes.

Q. Did they enter with drawn Arms?

A. As soon as they entered I saw their arms drawn.

Q. In what manner did they come in; how was the Door fastened?

A The outside and inside Doors were shut with Latches; they opened the outside
one, and forced the Second, breaking a pane of Glass.

Q. Did you see them strike Mr. Walker?

A. Yes, I saw him struck.

Q. Was the Stroke sufficient in your opinion to kill Mr. Walker?

A. Yes I thought the Stroke would have caused his Death.

Q. How many did you see strike him, Mr. Walker.

A. One or two.

Q. Did you know any of the Persons that entered?

A. I think I knew one of them.

Q. Who was he that you knew?

A. I thought it was Capt. Frazer, by his Size, Corpulence, Manner of
Behavior, Shape of Body.

Q. By any other Marks did you know any other Person?

A. No.

Q. Had that Person that you believed you knew, had he a Crape over his face?

A. He was black in the same Manner as the others

Q. Were his Hands blackt?

A. The Hands and Faces were black all of them.

Q. How long did you stay in the Room after the first Stroke given?

A. I Saw Mr. Walker receive seven or eight Strokes.

Q. How long did you stay in the Room?

A. I cannot tell exactly the Time, I saw them strike Mr. Walker and Mr. Lilly,
and saw Mr. Lilly engaged with one of them against the Window, and at the same
Time one of them would strike me, at which I run away, and the Man pursued me
into the Gallery; being pursued so fast, I threw myself through the Rails of
the Gallery. I saw a Stroke made with the Cutlass next Morning, and found my
Coat cut, but do not say that the Sabre cut it, but thought it to be the same
Man that made a Stroke at me in the Room.

Q. Did you hear them say any Thing during the whole Time?

A. No, not one of them.

CROSS EXAMINATION.
Q. You saw Mr. Walker receive some Blows, and some aimed at Mr. Lilly: Pray
where was Mrs. Walker?

A. Mrs. Walker made her Escape through the Kitchen.

Q. Did Mrs. Walker quit the Room before you?

A. Yes.

Q. How long?

A. I cannot directly tell, I went out in a very little Time.

Q. Was it one Minute?

A. I cannot tell.

Q. How long was it from the first Time the Men burst the Street-door to that
Time?

A. I cannot fix any Time.

Q. Could you fix it to a Minute?

A. No.

Q. How long from the Time you threw yourself over the Rails till you returned
again to your Master?

A. About five or six Minutes; perhaps more or less.

Q. What Situation did you find Mr. Walker in?

A. Spread before the Fire on a Carpet, stretched with his Hands on his Wounds
(as described in Court) and had I not come, he would have been suffocated in
his Blood.

Q. Was there any Body in the Room when you returned?

A. No, all alone.

Q. Did you know how long they had been gone before you returned?

A. No, not seeing any of them.

Q. Was Mrs. Walker in the Room before you came in.

A. No.

Q. Was you the first Person that found your Master?

A. I was the first that took him up as he was on the Carpet.

Q. Could he speak?

A. No, He was not in Situation to speak, for he could not support himself;
when I let him go he fell down again.

Q. Did you see your Mistress come into the room?

A. Yes, a little Time after.

Q. About what Time.

A. I cannot say what Time.

Q. Was it in two or three Minutes?

A. I do not know

Q. What Hour of the Night was it when these People first came into the House?

A. Between Eight and Nine; I cannot fix the Time.

Q. Was not your Master at Supper?

A. Yes, just set down to Supper.

Q. Was it the usual Time?

A. No fixed Time, within a Quarter or Half an Hour, some times sooner or later.

Q. You don't know any of those People but one?

A. No.

Q. Did you see any of the Waistcoats or Breeches of these People?

A. No, they having the Table and Stove between me and them when they came in.

Q. What Part of the Room was you in; by your Master or Mistress?

A. I was on the left Side of by Mistress.

Q. When Mrs. Walker came (...), how did she behave?

A. Came in crying out aloud.

Q. Did she speak to him?

A. Yes, she spoke to him, but do not know whether Mr. Walker answered or not.

Jury, Q. Did Mr. Walker receive any Wounds before Mrs. Walker went out?

A. He did receive one or more before she was gone out.

Mrs. Wiggans for the Crown.
Q. Do you remember the Assult made on Mr. Walker the 6th December, 1764?

A. I remember to have heard it.

Q. Do you recollect any Per^^^s diguised come into your House about eight
o'Clock?

A. Do not. I never heard by it till Mr. Crofton told me of it about a eleven
or twelve of the clock at Night.

Q. You never heard it mentioned that such a Thing was designed?

A. No, never heard a word of it: Indeed I never did.

Q Did you not speak to Mrs. Mees, and advise her to go and lay the whole
Affair open?

A. I did not see her the next Day.

Q. When you did see her, did you ever say that you advised her to go and
reveal the whole affair?

A. I say I never did say any such Thing.

Mrs. Case for the Crown.
Q. We are informed that you know a great deal of the Affair of Mr. Walker's
Assault?

A. Yes, have heard of it.

Q. Did you see any Persons go into his House or coming from his House?

A. No.

Q. Did you hear any Persons declare that they would take Revenge of Mr. Walker
for imaginary Insults before the Affair happened?

A No! I am come here to answer relative to Mr. Disney, and no other Person.

Q. Did you never hear Mr. Disney, make Use of any Expressions?

A. No.

Q. Do you know Mr. Disney.

A. Yes, like a Child, living in Mr. Burton's Family.

Q. Did you never hear of any Expression made Use of against Mr. Walker?

A. No.

GEORGE MAGOVOCK for the Crown.
You are now called upon to give Testimony on this Occasion.

Q. Do you remember that Assault on Mr. Walker?

A. Yes.

Q. Was you present.

A. Yes.

Q. Was Major Disney the Prisoner present at it?

A. Yes.

Q. Was you a Soldier in the 28th Regiment?

A. Yes.

Q. Was there any Plan laid to to disfigure Mr. Walker?

A. There was.

Q. When and where did you first hear of such a Design?

A. At Lieutenant Tottenham's.

Q. How long before the Action?

A. About six or seven Days.

Q. Did you hear any Thing of it before, and how long?

A. About six or seven Days I say.

Q. But had you heard any thing of it before that Time?

A. Yes, amongst the Soldiers and Sergeant Mees.

Q. What did they say was intended to be done?

A. They had a Mind to cut and disfigure Mr. Walker on Account of his Treatment
to Capt Pain.

Q. When you went to Mr. Tottenham's who took you there?

A. Sergeant Mees.

Q. Did he say there were some Gentlemen not belonging to 28th Regiment, and
not be surprised at seeing them, as they were Friends to the 28th, etc. for the
disfiguring of Mr. Walker?

A. Yes, he did.

Q. What was the Purpose of his carrying you to Tottenham's?

A. He knocked at the Door, and Mr. Evans, Major Disney, and Mr. Tottenham,
came out into the Passage.

Q. Did they speak to you?

A. Yes.

Q. What did they say, and who spoke to you?

A. Mr. Tottenham, who said there was some Gentlemen that I might see in there,
Friends to the 28th, and not to be surprised, as there was one of the 27th
Regiment that would be concerned in disfiguring Mr. Walker.

Q. Did any of them require you to be secret?

A. Yes, Mr. Tottenham told me I must take an Oath not to discover any of those
Gentlemen (...) should see in the Parlour.

Q. Was any Day fixed at that Time.

A. No.

Q. Did any Body swear you?

A. Yes.

Q. Did they make you kiss the Book.

A. Yes.

Q. Who administered the Oath?

A. Major Disney (looking at the Prisoner.

Q. What was you to keep secret?

A. Not to be surprised, or discover any of those Gentlemes that I should see:
If I should find them difiguring Mr. Walker before the 28th Regiment had done
it.

Q. When you had taken the Oath did they introduce you in (...) the other Room?

A. Yes

Q. Did Major Disney go in the Room?

A. Yes.

Q. What was the Subject (...) Conversation?

A. The chief was cutting (...) Walker.

Q. In what Manner did (...) mention it?

A. They said they might meet him in the Street; but did not mention cutting
his Ear.

Q. How many Minutes did you stay with them?

A. Not very long.

Q. Where did you go after?

A. Into Mr. Tottenham's Kitchen.

Q. Did any Thing pass in Mr. Tottenham's Kitchen?

A. No.

Q. Where did you go next?

A. To Sergeant Mees's House.

Q. Was you ever sent for to Mr. Tottenham's again?

A. No.

Q. Was you ever sent for to Mr Tottenham's before that Time, about that
Business?

A. I was there several Times.

Q. Do you know any Thing of an Attempt made on Tuesday to disfigure Mr. Walker?

A. I know three Men that stood on the Parade, intending to meet Mr. Walker
going or coming from his Store, saying, if they could see him they would lose
their Lives but they would cut or disfigure him.

Q. Did you hear them speak of that affair on Tuesday?

A. Yes, they said they had missed him, but if they could they would meet him
next Night.

Q. Did any of them go?

A. Yes, two of them went next night.

Q. Who were they?

A. Coleman and James Rogers.

Q. Where did they go?

A. To the Street leading to Mr. Walker's below, between that and Mr Lamb's.

Q. How came they to place themselves there?

A. Because they had looked about the Store and could not find him.

Q. Did they expect to meet him at Mr. Lamb's?

A. I suppose so.

Q. They were only waiting; were they armed?

A. Yes, with Swords, and one Pistol.

Q. What Dresses?

A. Blanket Coats.

Q. Had they any Crapes or any Thing on their Faces?

A. No.

Q. Did you not see them on their Stand?

A. Yes.

Q. At what time did you see them standing to wait for Mr. Walker?

A. Before Eight o'Clock.

Q. Did you hear them speak of it next Morning?

A. Yes, they said they had seen him, but could do nothing, as another Man was
coming behind him; shortly after I had parted with them, they told me they did
not attack him.

Q. Where did those People make ready to go on this Expedition?

A. At Sergeant Mees's.

Q. Who?

A. Sergeant Rogers, Sergeant Mees, Coleman, M'Laughlin, Phillips, Castles,
Rosburne, Daniel Ashman, Thomas Donelly, etc.

Q. These People all set out from Mr. Mees's; at what Time?

A. A little before eight of the Clock.

Q. What Dresses were they in?

A. Blanket Coats, Faces covered with Black, Coleman with a Crape over his Face.

Q. Did you see these People go into Mr. Walker's House?

A. Yes.

Q. Who went in first?

A. Coleman.

Q. Did you see him strike Mr. Walker?

A. Yes, he was the Man that gave the first Blow.

Q. You saw Major Disney there?

A. Yes.

Q. How was Major Disney dressed?

A. In a long Blanket Coat, a Crape over his Face.

Q. What Arms?

A. A Sword and a Stick.

Q. How many more Persons was there, besides those that went to Sergeant Mees?

A. About seven or eight.

Q. And do you know from whence they set out?

A. No.

Q. You did not hear it said?

A. Do not know.

Jury. Q. Did Major Disney speak; how did you know him.

A. By his Make and every Thing else; have known him many Years.

Q. Did you see Major Disney strike Mr. Walker?

A. I saw him draw out his Sword and run.

Q. How did he carry his Sword?

A. Under his Blanket-coat under his left Breast.

Q. Did you see him draw it?

A. I saw no Scabbard.

Q. Did you see him in the outward Room in the Hall?

A. Yes.

Jury. Q. Did you know that he was to be there?

A. No.

Q. Who gave the Wounds to Mr. Walker?

A. Coleman, then Rogers.

Q. What Resistance did Mr. Walker make?

A. He endeavored to make through them, Coleman, Rogers, and Ashman.

Q. What Time did Major Disney advance with his Sword?

A. Before he fell; that is before I took Notice he was fallen.

Q. Where did Mr. Walker go after the first Blow?

A. He went into the next Room, and went into the Corner of the Parlour close
to the Door of the other Room.

Q. Did you see him there?

A. Yes.

A. I saw him engaged, that he could not make any Resistance, having received
so many Blows.

Q At that Time did you see Major Disney?

A. No

Q. What did Mr. Walker then do?

A. He moved from thence to the Fireplace.

Q. What made him move to the Fireplace?

A. I suppose they jostled him in struggling.

Q. When he was near the Fireplace did you see him engaged with any Body?

A. I saw John Clark, a Blacksmith, strike him on the Leg with a piece of Iron.

Q. Did that make him fall?

A. I suppose so,

Q. You said you saw Major Disney advance with with his Sword, did he say any
Thing?

A. He might perhaps say something, but I did not take Notice of him as others
spoke; I did not positively hear him say any Thing.

Q. You saw Major Disney advance with his Sword, did he make a Thrust at him?

A. No,

Q. You say you went out of the Room; how long did you stay?

A. A short Time,

Q. Did you return, and what did you see?

A. I saw Rogers on him, and engaged in cutting off his Ear,

Q, Did you see him cut off his Ear?

A, Yes, I did,

Q. Did you hear him say any Thing?

A, Nothing particular,

Q, Did you imagine Mr. Walker was killed when you quitted the House?

A, Yes we thought so,

Q, What made you and them think so?

A, Sergeant Rogers said he thought he was dead, that he thought he had cut his
throat, but however he had his Ear,

Q. Did you hear any one say they were sorry he was not dead?

A, Yes,

Q, Who said so?

A, Philip Castles and Ashman; they were sorry as there would have been no more
said of the Affair,

Q, Did the Blow seem intended to kill?

A, Yes, and the Party thought they had killed him: I heard them say, he is
dead, the Rascal was not liked,

Q. Which way did they go after quitting the House?

A, They went in three Parties, one toward the Parade, another toward the
Recollets Street, and one toward the Marketplace,

Q, In which Party did Major Disney go?

A, I cannot say which of the three.

CROSS EXAMINATION.
Q. Was you one of the Consultation?

A. Yes I was,

Q. You agreed on a Plan to be sure?

A. Yes,

Q. I should be glad to know that Plan; was it to strive to cut and disfigure
Mr. Walker; was it agreed at that Plan that his Ear was to be cut off?

A. No, not at that Time,

Q. I suppose you will give us an Account of the different Stations you were to
act in?

A. There was no particular Thing mentioned at that Time to strive to cut and
disfigure Mr, Walker.

Q. What particular part was every one to have?

A. No particular Part to each, every one to do his best,

Q. Pray what Part was you to act?

A. Was to let Capt. Pain and Tottenham know if any of the Party were taken or
wounded in the House.

Q. Did you execute that?

A. Yes.

Q. You mentioned something about something previous to be executed, what was
that?

A. James Rogers, Coleman, Sergeant Mees and Daniel Ashman, were to go on the
Parade, in Order to way-lay Mr. Walker coming from his Store.

Q. How do you know?

A. I was on the Parade, but not with those People.

Q. Did you stay on the Parade all the Time they were there?

A. No, I did not, but I went to the House where they came when they returned,
and could not find him.

Q. The next Day was there not another Plan laid; were the same Men there?

A No, only two that I saw, Sergeant Rogers and John Coleman, one in one Corner
and another in another.

Q. How long did they stay there?

A. Perhaps Half an Hour. I was at a House they came to, and they said they had
seen him, but could not attack him as some Person was coming after. They did
not stay three Quarters of an Hour.

Q. How do you know that?

A. Because they came to a House where I was.

Q. You said you was employed to carry Messages from Mr. Walker's House to
Pain and Tottenham; and who appointed you?

A. Rogers and Mees.

Q. What Time of the Night was it when you saw Capt. Pain?

A. A little before Eight.

Q. What Day of the Month, Year, etc.

A. No Answer.

Q. What Year?

A. About two Years ago, but do not recollect the Particulars, as I made no
Memorandum.

Q. What Hour of the Night was it?

A. Little before Eight I think.

Q. When you carried the first Intelligence to Capt. Pain, Had you seen those
People in Mr. Walker's House?

A. Yes.

Q. Pray what Part of this Tragedy had been acted before you gave this
Information to Capt. Pain?

A. They were in the Parlour.

Q. Had Mrs. Walker fled out of the House before you returned, and the others?

A. They had all fled.

Q. Did you go into the Parlour

A. Yes.

Q. Had Mr. Walker gone in?

A. Yes.

Q Had he received any Wounds before you went?

A. Yes.

Q Had he been knocked down?

A. Yes.

Q. Then it was you went out?

A. Yes.

Q Before he fell?

A. Yes, When he fell.

Q. What did you say to Pain and Tottenham?

A. I told them that I had gone into the other Room, and that none of the Party
was hurt or taken.

Q. What distance of Time was it before you returned to Mr. Walker's?

A. A few Minutes, not two.

Q. Did you speak to him, and are you positive he was there?

A. Yes.

Q. When you returned again what was become of Mr. Walker?

A. He was close by the Fireplace, quite overcome.

Q. In what position were the rest of the People?

A. A good many about him, and some at a Distance.

Q. What were they doing?

A. I saw Rogers cut his Ear off and the Blood run.

Q. Did he get any Blows?

A. I saw several strike him.

Q. What manner did he lay?

A. He was not quite down, but lying on his Side.

Q. You say when you returned that People were about him, and saw Sergeant
Rogers cut off his Ear?

A. He was not quite stretched out.

Q, Pray in what position was Sergeant Rogers?

A. He was standing over him, and took a Knife out of his Breast and cut off
his Ear,

Q. After you had seen this, according to your Description, after the Ear was
put off, did you see him receive any more Blows?

A. I did not see any Person strike him after that; it might be.

Q. How long did you stay there?

A. It was only a short Time.

Q. What did you do then?

A. I went off as well as the rest.

Q. Did you all go away.

A. Yes.

Q. And pray how often did you go backwards and forwards between Mr. Walker's
and Capt. Payne's?

A. Twice; the second Time I told him that Rogers had cut off Mr. Walker's Ear.

Jury. -- Q. What was your dress?

A. A Blanket Coat, Cap and Stick.

Q. Was your Face black'd?

A. No.

Q. Nor Crape over it.

A. No.

Q. Were your Hands black'd?

A. No.

Q. Were any of the Company's Hands black'd.

A. Yes.

Q. Were they all?

A. No.

Q. Whose Hands were black'd?

A. Thomas Donnally and Rosburne, etc. I am sure there were fix that had their
Hands black'd, but do not recollect the rest.

Q. In what Manner were these People black'd?

A. With Grime and Grease.

Court -- Q. If after the Ear was cut off he returned after coming from Captain
Payne's.?

A. I did return.

Q. What Posture was Mr. Walker in when you returned?

A. He was lying on the Floor.

Q. How long did you stay after that, and the rest of the People; was at a
Minute?

A. Yes, it was.

Q. What was the Account you gave Capt. Pain, etc.?

A. I said I had seen Rogers take his Ear off.

Q. What Reply did Pain make.

A. Go and get the Party off as soon as possible.

Q Did you all go away together?

A. As fast as we could get out.

Q. Did Major Disney stay all the Time?

A. I don't know whether Major Disney staid all the while.

Q. Was he there when you came in the first Time?

A. Yes, I am sure of that.

Q. Was he there the second time, after your giving an account?

A. I did not take notice of him at that time.

Q. Before you went out the first Time you told me that Mr. Walker had gone
into the Room, and that Mr. Walker had received several Blows, and that Mr.
Walker had received a Blow from a Man with an Iron Bar?

A. Yes, to be sure he did at that Time and after.

Q. That you went out after that Affair to tell Capt. Pain?

A. Yes.

Q. Did Mr. Walker receive any more Blows after receiving the Stroke with the
Bar of Iron?

A. Yes.

Court. -- Q. Was the Blow given by Clark before or after Major Disney advanced
with his Sword?

A. Yes, it was before.

Q. Pray how were the People dressed?

A. All dressed in Blanket Coats, only Philip Castles.

Q. How many Canadian Gowns were there. Did you see?

A. There might be others under their Blankets; I took no particular Notice of
any but Philip Castles.

Q. You did not observe any others with Canadian Gowns but Philip Castles?

A. No.

Q. What had Major Disney on?

A. A long Blanket Coat.

Q. You spoke particularly about Rogers, Coleman, and other black'd Faces, pray
was Major Disney's black or White?

A. A Crape over it and FurCap.

Q. Pray how was it fastened?

A. Tucked under his Cap.

Q. Did it hang loose about his Head?

A. No, pretty close to his Skin: I do not say positively.

Q. Did you hear him speak to any body else?

A. No, I did not hear him.

Jury. -- Q. Did you hear one of them speak; you named one, who was it?

A. Lieutenant Scott.

Q. What did he say?

A. I know what. Let me come up and I will teach him.

Q. When did that Speech happen?

A. It was before his Ear was cut off.

Q. Was it before he received the blow with the Iron Bar or not?

A. Before.

Q. Did Mr. Scott advance with his Sword in his Hand?

A. He held it up; it was a Broad sword.

Q. At the Time that Major Disney advanced how near was you to him?

A. Not above four Feet from him.

Q. Did you hear him make use of any Expressions?

A. He might, but I did not hear him.

Q. After the whole Affair was over, and all these were retiring, pray what
o'Clock was it?

A. I cannot be exact, but am sure it was before nine o'Clock. Have no Watch.

Court. -- Q. Do you know how long it was from the Beginning of the Affair
until they all quitted the House?

A. It might be a Quarter of an Hour more or less: I think it could not be
more: I think it was.

Q. You said it was before eight of the Clock?

A. It was before eight o'Clock we quitted Sergeant Mees's House.

Q. You could not be long a going to Mr. Walker's House?

A. No. not very long; but I am sure it was not nine before the Affair was over,

Q. You say Major Disney had a long Blanket Coat, and pulled his Sword from out
of his Breast; you saw him?

A. Yes, I saw him.

Q. Pray what Waistcoat had he under it?

A. I could not see, his Blanket Coat doubling over.

Court -- Q. You set out from Sergeant Mee's with the Party?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you see them dressing themselves?

A. Yes.

Q. Why was you the only Man not disguised?

A. Because I was to have no Hand in the Cutting, but to go backwards and
forwards.

Q. Do you say all that left Sergeant Mees's were blackt?

A. All but two and myself.

Q. After the whole Affair was over you say you divided into three Parties?

A. Yes.

Q. Where did you go?

A. I went across the Parade and through St. Lawrence Gate.

Q. What became of your Party?

A. They went out of St. Lawrence Gate some of them.

A. Where did the rest go?

A. Some went one Way, some another, some staid about Tottenham's.

Q. What became of the other Parties that went toward Mr. Fraser's, did you
know where they went?

A. Only that one went one Way and another the other.

Q. Pray what became of you?

A. I went to Sergeant Mee's: They came in at the Quebec Gate, then went out at
the King's Store, and over the Wall, and then returned at a Sally-port

Q, Was the Quebec Gate left open?

A, Yes it was.

Q. At this Transaction of the sixth December, were you at Sergeant Mees's
before Roll-calling?

A. Yes, I was there an Hour before Roll-calling, and returned from
Roll-calling to Sergeant Mees's, staid there a little, and then went to Case's.

Q. Did you stay ten Minutes?

A. Yes, between six and seven o'Clock.

Q. At Case's, was that the exact Time; answer?

A. I did not regard exactly the Time; I will not be positive; It might want a
Quarter perhaps.

Q. After leaving Case's where did you go?

A. To Sergeant Mees's I say.

Q. What Road did you take?

A. Down by the great Church and so to Mees's.

Q. So you went no where else?

A. No.

Q. Did you see Capt. Pain at Sergeant Mees's?

A. Yes, a little before that Affair.

Q. How long had he been in Town?

A. I do not know; he did not tell us, nor did I ask.

Q. Did you drink together?

A. There was Rum.

Q. Who paid for it?

A. I did not pay for it.

Q. Was he disguised, was his Face blackt?

A. No.

Q. What Time did you see Capt. Pain?

A. (...) came out much the sa^^ Time, and Capt. Pain staid opposite the House
of one Bellair with a Party.

Note, Bellair 's opposite the End of Mr. Walker 's House,

Q. The second Time you went out to give Intelligence, was there any Person
with them?

A. No, not any body.

Q When you crossed the Parade did you meet any body?

A Yes, one Grubb a Soldier; I did not take any Notice of any Person but that
Solder.

Q. Did you see one Falconer?

A. I did.

Q. Who was with him?

A. Lieutenant Keough.

Q. Were there any Soldiers with him?

A. I did not see any.

Q. What was he doing there?

A. Looking about as a Guard.

Q. Was he one of the Party, did he know of the Fact?

A. I suppose they did.

Q. How was he dressed?

A. In Blanket Coats.

Q. How armed?

A. Mr. Keough a Sword and long Stick, Capt. Falconer a Dagger and Pistol.

Q. How did he carry the Pistol?

A. In his Breast, Dagger by his Side.

Q. After you quitted Mr. Walker's House, going over the Parade, did not you
run fast; was you walking or running?

A. I was walking at first, then I went pretty smartly.

Q. How near were you to Capt. Falconer?

A. I Went close to him.

Jury.) Q. What Waistcoat had he on?

Oaks) A. A red one.

Jury.) Q. Had he Stock or Neckcloth?

Oaks) A. I do not know.

Court Q. Where did Capt. Pain keep the Guard?

A. At Bellair's.

Q. Did you see him before you went in to Mr. Walker's?

A. He came out with us from Sergeant Mees's.

Court. Did Capt. Pain come out with you?

A. Yes.

Q. Did he take Guard there at that Time?

A. Yes he did.

Jury, Q. Where did you carry the Message to Pain and Tottenham?

A. Just at Bellair's House.

Gregory. Q. Why you said just now that you carried it to Capt. Pain at
Sergeant Mees's.

A. No, I did not; you mistook me.

Jury. Q. Was Major Disney one that had his Hands blackt.

A. No, I did not observe.

Q. You must have observed when he came to present his Sword?

A. No, I did not.

This Witness being dismissed the Counsel for the Crown desired that Mr, Walker
might relate a Circumstance corroborative of Part of Magovock 's Testimony,

THOMAS WALKER.
I drank Tea at Thomas Lamb's, Esquire then a Magistrate, on Wednesday Evening, and
about eight o'Clock Mrs. Walker sent a Servant after me; coming from Mr. Lamb's
in the narrow Part that leads to my House, I met two Men in Blanket Coats, with
Clubs, who seemed very menacing. Mr. Lamb wanted to borrow two? Volumes of
Shakespeare, and sent his man after me, so that nothing happened from these
People that Night.

James Case, of the 27th Regiment, for the Crown,
Q. Did you see People coming from Mr. Walker's House the 6th of December, 1764?

A. Yes.

Q. The same Night.

A. Yes.

Q. Which way did they seem to be going?

A. From Mr. Walker's House; between eight and nine.

Q. Was it before or after Roll-calling?

A. There is Roll-calling at Retreat-beating and eight o'Clock, but there was
not that Day to my Knowledge.

Q. You guess the Time between eight and nine?

A. Yes.

Q. You say they were running as if they were running from Mr. Walker's House?

A. Yes.

Q. How many did you see?

A. Five.

Q. Did any body go in pursuit of them?

A. Yes, one Grubb.

Q. Did you know any of them?

A. Simon Evans, Capt. Pain and Rogers.

Q. Did Pain say any thing to you?

A. Yes, he said go back again, but he did not, and Rogers cut him on the Head
with something like a Broad-sword. I watched Pain and Tottenham into
Tottenham's House.

Q. Did you see Magovock?

A. Yes, that Night I parted with him at seven or eight o'Clock at my House.

Q. Where did he go?

A. I cannot tell.

Q. Did he say any thing about his Business?

A. Yes.

Q. What did he say?

A. You will hear something remarkable between this and next Morning.

Q. Did he say any Thing about Mr. Walker?

A. No, only that a great Event would happen.

Q. What Time he come?

A. Between six and seven o'Clock; and was with me about an Hour.

Q. Did you see Major Disney that Evening?

A. No, I cannot say it is him; two People crossed the Parade, one tall, the
other a little Man, about half after Eight.

Q. who were those People; do you know them?

A. Neither was Major Disney. One a tall Man, the other a little Man.

CROSS EXAMINATION.
Q. Pray what Condition was Magovock in when he came to your House, was he
drunk?

A. He was not very drunk.

Q. What do you call drunk; was he able to stand?

A. Yes.

Q. To walk?

A. Yes.

Q. Was he able to go about Business?

A. Yes.

Q. What Time was it that he left your House?

A. About half after seven o'Clock, Magovock asked me if he might lie in my
House. I told him no.

Q. Why?

A. Because it was improper for a Soldier to lie out of his Quarters.

Q. How near together was it that you left the House?

A. About a Minute.

Q. Where did Magovock go?

A. Intending to go for his Quarters.

Q. What Street did you live in, was it in the Street Colonel Christie lived?

A. Yes.

Q When he left your House did he go down that Street toward the River?

A. Yes.

Q. Where did you go when you parted with Magovock?

A. To the Recollet's Street; but stopped to talk with one Johnson in the Way,
then went down directly to the Parade.

Q. When you came to the Parade what did you see?

A. I met them crying, stop them, stop them, they have killed a Merchant: And
met Pain, Evans, and Rogers.

Q. How long was you coming from your Quarters to the Parade?

A. About three quarters of an Hour.

Court. -- Q. How do you know the Time; in what Manner did you divide your Time?

A. By Guess.

Q. When Magovock asked to lie in your House, do you think if you had consented
he would have gone to Bed immediately?

A. No! the Man was sensible enough.

Henty Mertz, Soldier of the Royal Americans, for the Crown.
Q. Did you see any Person the Night of the Assault going to or coming from Mr.
Walker's?

A. The Evening about Eight or Nine, I met a Number of disguised Persons, some
blackt, some in Blanket Coats; but thought they were going on some Frolic: Did
not much mind them.

Q. Were they going toward Mr. Walker's.?

A. Yes, toward.

Q. Did you know them?

A. I did not know them all, but some of them.

Q. Who did you know?

A. John Mees, Coleman, and Daniel Ashman.

Q. Where did you meet them?

A. Just in the main Street at the End of a little Street that leads to Mr.
Walker's near to a Tavern that Mr. Murray keeps.

Q. Did you know any body else?

A. No.

Q. Was Major Disney there of that Party?

A. No.

Q. Did you see Magovock there?

A. I did see a Man like Magovock, with a Blanket Coat, and a Stick his Hand.

Q. You had known Magovock before this?

A. Yes.

Q. How long?

A. Three or four Years.

Q. You was well acquainted with his Person?

A. Yes, and to the best of my Opinion he was one of the Party.

Q. Those Persons that you knew again had they disguises on their Heads?

A. Daniel Ashman had not.

Q. Did you speak to them?

A. Yes, I spoke to Ashman.

Q. What did he say?

A. Never you mind it.

Q. Did nothing else pass between you and Ashman?

A. Not at that Time.

Q. Did you see him again?

A. Yes, I saw him after.

Q. Where did you see him?

A. At a little Sally-port by the Governor's House.

Q. Was that Sally-port open?

A. Yes, it was open at a little after nine o'Clock.

Q. Who did you see with Daniel Ashman?

A. Sergeant Mees. Then I asked Ashman what they had been about, having heard
something of the Affair; he said I believe we have done for Mr. Walker.

Q. You did not see Major Disney in that Group of fourteen or fifteen?

A. No, not to my Knowledge.

CROSS EXAMINATION.
Q. You did not speak to Magovock?

A. No.

Q. How did you know it was he?

A. Having drank with him very often, according to his Size, etc. so knew it
was him.

Jury. -- Q. Had he any Thing remarkable to the rest?

A. No.

Q. You did not see his Face?

A. No.

Q. Nor hear him speak?

A. No.

Counsel for the Crown.
Q. Some of them had Crapes over their Faces?

A. Yes some of them; Ashman had not, Coleman had something black, or a Crape
over his Face.

Q. How near was you to them?

A. Half the Breadth of the Street.

Q. Could you know their Features notwithstanding their Faces being blackt and
disguised?

A. No, being Moonlight.

The Counsel for the Crown not thinking any more Evidence necessary, rested the
Matter here, and the Council for the Prisoner opened his Defense as follows:

N. B. There were three Gentlemen of Counsel for the Prisoner, Mr. GREGORY, Mr.
MORRISON, and Mt. ANTILL.

The Prisoner's DEFENSE. Counsel for the Prisoner.
After the long Evidence laid before the Court, and from the vast
Contradictions of Things that interfere with each other, I think that nothing
ought to be rested on that Evidence, But as it is a Crime so below a Soldier,
and for fear the least Sully should remain on my Client, I will take up a
little Time, and hope I shall be able to take that away, that he had the least
Hand in it. I believe no Man can look on such a Crime with more Contempt than I
do, etc.

We shall call a few Evidences. Madam Landrieves for the Prisoner, as
interpreted by sworn Interpreter.

Q. Do you remember some Time in the month of December, the sixth, being at a
Ball at Doctor Robertson's?

A. Yes.

Q. What Time of the Day did you go?

A. At four o'Clock.

Q. Did you see Major Disney?

A. Yes.

Q. What Time did he come there?

A. At five or h^^^ after five.

Q. What Time did Major Disney stay there?

A. All the Evening.

Q. What Time did he go away?

A. Between three quarters after nine and Ten.

Q. Did Major Disney go out of the Room from the Time he came in, till he went
away?

A. No.

Q. Could he go out without your Knowledge?

A. No.

Q. How did you pass you Time?

A. At Half after four we began to boil Melasses, or make Tire.

Q. Major Disney, was he there?

A. Yes! and played a great many Pranks with me.

Q. What did you next?

A. We drank Tea.

Q. How long did the boiling of the Melasses last?

A. About three Quarters of an Hour.

Q. Did Major Disney drink Tea?

A. Yes.

Q. After having drank Tea what did you do?

A. We played at Blindman's-Buff.

Q. How long did that last?

A. Perhaps Half an Hour.

Q. After that did you dance?

A. Yes.

Q. Did Major Disney dance?

A. Yes! with me.

Q. How long did you dance?

A. Till Supper.

Q. What Hour?

A. Half after Eight or three Quarters.

Q. Did Major Disney dance all the Time till Supper?

A. Yes.

Q. Did Major Disney sit down to Supper?

A. Yes, next to me.

Q. How long did you sit at Supper?

A. Till we heard the News that some People had ill-treated Mr. Walker at his
House.

Q. Did Major Disney stay at Table till that Time?

A. Yes.

Q. What Time did he go away from thence?

A. A Man came from General Burton for Major Disney; because the Officers were
called on that Occasion.

Q. About what Time was that?

A. About ten and half after.

Q. What became of Major Disney?

A. He went away.

CROSS EXAMINATION.
Q. Madam were your Eyes fixed on Major Disney from six o'Clock to half after
Nine?

A. No. I had them not more fixed on Major Disney than any other Person.

Q. Did you play at Cards?

A. No.

Q. Did you go out at any Time?

A. Yes, I was absent about five Minutes; I left Major Disney in the House, and
found him there on Return, at three Quarters after Eight.

Q. Did you look at your Watch when you went out and returned, to know five
Minutes?

A. No. But I said five Minutes thinking that was more than the Time I took,

Q. Was you never absent but that one Time?

A. No.

Q. You are very sure you left him and found him on return?

A Yes, very sure.

Q. Was there any alteration in Major Disney's Dress or Appearance from the
Time you went, when you returned?

A. No, be seemed just as fresh, and seemed to be as composed.

Q. How were the Company employed in the Time of your Absence?

N. B. A. They were fitting round the Stove till the Table was laid, etc. etc.

Mrs. Campbell, for the Prisoner.
Q. Do you remember where you spent the Evening the Night the Attack was made
on Mr. Walker?

A. Yes.

Q. Where?

A. At Mr. Robertson's.

Q What Time did you go?

A. Half after three, or four o'Clock.

Q. Did you see Major Disney?

A. Yes.

Q. What Time did he come?

A. Between half after four and five.

Q. When did he leave it?

A. Between three quarters after nine, and ten.

Q. Did he stay there during the whole Time?

A. Yes.

Q. Without going out?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you think it possible that Major Disney could be absent without your
Knowledge?

A. No: It is not possible.

Q. Who did Major Disney dance with?

A. Madam Landrieves.

Q. What was the Reason Major Disney left the House?

A. For the Affair of Mr. Walker; there came a Soldier to fetch him.

Q. From whom?

A. General Burton.

Q. At what Time were they informed of that Affair?

A. By the Soldier that came on the Part of General Burton, at nine o'Clock.

Q. Before or after Supper?

A We were just at Table.

Q. Was it before or after Supper?

A. We were at Supper.

Q. Did you know it before Supper?

A. Yes.

Q. Who informed you?

A. Mr. Howard.

Q. Was Major Disney at Supper at that Time when Howard informed you?

A. He was.

Q. Had Major Disney been absent at all during the whole of coming in and going
away?

A. No.

Q. Was you absent during the Time?

A. No.

Q. How did you pass the Time that Evening?

A. First, making Tire, then Blind-man's buff, after that danced.

Q. How long?

A. Just till half after eight; till Supper.

Q. Who danced with you?

A. Mr. Robertson.

CROSS EXAMINATION.
Q. What Reason did you regard Major (...) that he could not go out without
your Knowledge?

A. There were (...) few in Company that Major Disney could not be absent
without my Knowledge.

Q. Did you never leave the Room to go into another?

A. Yes.

Q. About what Time?

A. About half after four or five.

Q. The only Time?

A. Yes.

Q. How many Couple were there dancing;

A. Five Couple.

Q Was the whole Company employed?

A. No, one Lady did not dance.

Q. Did you dance till Supper?

A. Yes.

Q. Did Major Disney dance the whole Time?

A. Yes.

Q. Whether in the Dances the whole Company were employed in dancing all the
whole Time?

A. Yes.

Q. Did any of them sit down sometimes?

A. They were too few.

Q. What Dances?

A. English Country-dances.

Q. Were they all employed?

A. Yes.

Q. At what Time did you begin.

A. Half after seven.

Mr. Robertson, for the Prisoner.
Q. Do you recollect where you spent your Evening 6th December, 1764?

A. Yes! at my own House.

Q. What Company had you with you?

A. Captain Campbell and his Lady, Capt. Evans and his Lady, Mrs. Landrieves,
Mrs. Howard, Mrs. White, Major Disney, my Wife and myself.

Q Was Major Disney there?

A. Yes.

Q. What Time did he come?

A. About five o'Clock.

Q. What Hour did he leave your House?

A. About three quarters after nine o'Clock.

Q. Was he absent from your House from the Time he came to your House to that
Time?

A. He was not absent but two or three Minutes, from five o'Clock till that
Time.

Q. How did you spend your Time?

A. Making Tire, then played Blind-man's buff, then danced, then eat a little
Supper.

Q. If after you began those Things Major Disney was of your Party?

A. Yes.

Q. Who did Major Disney dance with?

A. Madam Landrieves.

Q. Who did you dance with?

A. Mrs. Campbell.

Q. Pray do you know the Reason of his going away when he did?

A. An orderly Sergeant or Soldier, from General Burton, came.

Q. Did he mention the Reason?

A. I don't recollect.

Q. Did you hear before then, of any Accident happening to Mr. Walker?

A. Yes I did, about half an Hour before that Time.

Q. From the Time Major Disney came to your House, till the Time he left it,
did you quit your House?

A. No: I staid there all the Time.

Q. Do you recollect any Lady being absent for about four or five Minutes?

A. Yes, Mrs. Howard, Mrs. Landrieves, and Mrs. White.

Q. Was Major Disney absent from that Time?

A. No, he was not absent during the whole Time.

CROSS EXAMINATION.
Q. Major Disney was in Company at your House for four or five Hours together?

A. From half after five till ten.

Q. He did not go out of your House till that Affair?

A. No. The Person that came told him that General Burton wanted him.

Q. You did not observe whether he was absent for a small space of Time?

A. I did not observe; but he might be absent for a Minute.

Q. Whether you have a Memory that he was absent, or only mean to say that you
think he was?

A. I don't know that he was.

Q. Did you ever miss him from the Company?

A. No.

Q. But he might be?

A. No.

Q. You was there the whole Time?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you go out of the Room into any other (...) of the House?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you ever leave the Company any Part of the Time?

A. No never, but the Company changed Rooms.

Q. Is it usual for you to take such particular Notice of the Company?

A. There was so small a Company that none of them could be absent without my
Knowledge.

Q. What Hour did you begin to dance?

A. About seven o'Clock.

Q. How long did you continue dancing?

A. Till Supper. I am positive from the Time, that Major Disney or any one
else, could not quit the Room till Supper, without my Knowledge.

Mrs. Howard for the Prisoner.
Where did you spend the Evening, Thursday, sixth December, 1764?

A. At Mr. Robertson's.

Q. What Time did you go there?

A. About five o'Clock, or sooner?

Q. What Company was there?

A. Madam Robertson, Madam Campbell, Madam Evans, Madam Landrieves, etc.

Q. Major Disney, was he there?

A. Yes.

Q. How long did he continue?

A. I saw him there as long as I staid.

Q. How long did you stay?

A. Till a quarter after eight, then went out to my own House, then returned in
about four or five Minutes.

Q. Major Disney he there when you returned?

A. Yes.

Q Who went with you?

A. Madam Landrieves and Mrs. White.

Q. Did you see any Alteration in his Dress or Manner when you returned?

A. No, none,

Q. Pray do you remember how Major Disney was dressed?

A. Plain Scarlet Coat with yellow Lapels.

Q. Have you seen that Major Disney quitted the House after your return till he
went away?

A. No.

Q. Was it possible that Major Disney could quit the House from your return,
till he was sent for?

A. No, it was not possible.

Q. How did you pass the Evening?

A. Making Tire.

Q. Who danced with you?

A. Capt. Evans.

Q. Who with Major Disney?

A. Madam Landrieves.

JOSEPH CASE.
Q. Was you sent by General Burton to fetch Major Disney?

A. I was sent by General Burton. A Number of Merchants came to General Burton
and told him such an Affair had happened. The General comes to me and said,
Case, put on your Hat, and run to Major Disney, give my Compliments to him, and
tell him I want to speak to him. Not to come without him. I went to his House,
not at Home; the Servant told me he believed he was gone to a Dance, and
believed to Mr. Robertson's, made the Man take his Hat and go with me: Then
went to Madam Landrieve's; he was not there; then went to Mr. Robertson's,
three Servants were standing at the Door, I asked if Major Disney was there,
the Servants said he had been there all the Evening.

Q. What Time was it you was there?

A. I believe about half after nine of the Clock. I told the Major, who did not
stand to ask any Questions, but took his Hat and walked all the Way before,
with a plain Suit of Clothes and a laced Hat, his Hair frized, not the least
disordered.

Q. Was you a Soldier at that Time?

A. Yes, in the 27th Regiment.

Mrs. Ermatinger, for the Prisoner.
Q. Do you recollect being at Mr. Walker's after the Affair?

A. Yes.

Q. Had you any Coversation at that Time with Mr. Walker, touching the
Knowledge of those that committed the Affair?

A. Somebody asked Mr. Walker if he knew any Person; his Answer was, That he
did not; but believed that he knew Lieutenant Scott, by the Figure and Manner
of his Clothes; but only presumed.

Mr. Samuel Ma Kay, of the Royal Americans, to the Character of Magovock.
Q. Do you know George Magovock?

A. Yes.

Q, Pray how long did you know him?

A. Ever since he came over; think it was in 1756. He was drafted. He was in
the same Company I Commanded.

Q. What is his general Character: Do you think he is a Man that can be taken
for his Oath?

A. He has been flogged several Times for stealing: Well known by several
Merchants when he was draughted. Mr. Duncan mentioned particularly Magovock as
a good for nothing Fellow.

Jacob Moran, Sergeant-Major, to the Character of Magovock.
I have known him since the Beginning of 1758.

Q. What was his Character?

A. A Man of a very bad Character; has been flogged for several Crimes; have
heard that he deserted once; that he used to steal sometimes: I can give none
but a bad Character of him.

Farrel, to his Character.
Q. Pray do you know George Magovock?

A. Yes.

Q. How long?

A. Since the Year 1754: Well acquainted in Ireland.

Q. What is his general Character.

A. I never knew a good one, always a bad one: He was always a forsworn Man and
Thief in the Royal Regiment; a Man not to be credited, and told a Story of his
listing, and swearing he was an English although an Irish Man, etc.

The End of the Prisoner's Evidence.
After the Prisoner's Council had closed the Evidence in his Defense, the
Attorney General made a Reply, to nearly the following Purport, but less fully
and with less Warmth.
'May it please your Honor, and you Gentlemen of the Jury,
"I Beg leave to trouble you with a few Observations upon the Evidence that has
been produced in the Prisoner's Defense. This Defense seems to consists of two
Parts, The one is an Attempt to prove that the Prisoner was engaged in Company
at Dr. Robertson's House, during the Time of the Assault upon Mr. Walker, and
consequently that he could not be present at it; the other is an Endeavor to
discredit the Witness Magovock, by suggesting that there are Contradictions in
his Evidence, and making him pass for a Man of a bad general Character. --
This, I think, is the Plan and Substance of the Defense.

"As to the first Part of this Defense, the Presence of the Prisoner, (...)
another Place, I must begin by observing, that it is always looked ^^on as the
worst and weakest Kind of Evidence that can be made use (...) in the Defense of
an accused Person, and is seldom allowed to (...) any Weight in Opposition to a
positive Charge, supported by witnesses of Credit: And this for a very obvious
Reason, because it the easiest of any Sort of Evidence to be contrived by the
Friends of the Prisoner in order to save him, if they are Persons, as too often
is the Case, whose Attachment to his Welfare will lead them to transgress the
Bounds of Truth in his Behalf. To make this Kind of Evidence in any Degree
satisfactory, it is necessary that several strong Circumstances should concur.
The Witnesses, who testify the Presence of the Prisoner at another Place at the
Time of the Commission of the Crime, ought to be Persons of undoubted Credit,
free from any Connections with the Prisoner (whether of Kindred, or Friendship,
or Interest of any Kind) that may in the lead tend to biass them in his Favor;
the Place at which they saw him ought to be far distant from that where the
Crime was committed, so far distant that it should be impossible, or next to
impossible, for a Man to go from the one Place to the other in the Time between
the Commission of the Crime and his being seen at the other place: This Place
ought likewise to be a public Place, where People who have no personal
Acquaintance with each other meet by Accident, and the Persons who attest the
having seen him there should be Persons unconnected and unacquainted with each
other, as well as with the Prisoner. This would be a Proof of an Alibi that
would deserve considerable Regard. Thus, if Captain Disney had been proved to
be at Quebec, which is 180 Miles distant from Montreal, at the Time of
committing this Assault, or within a few Hours, or half a Day, of that Time --
and this, not by one or two Friends, who should say that they saw him there
that Day in private, but by Witnesses that had no particular Acquaintance with
him, and who should testify that they saw him at some public Place there, as,
for Example, on the Parade exercising the Soldiers, or on the Marketplace, or
at Dinner with a numerous Company at the Governor's Table; and if the Witnesses
who had sworn this should likewise tell you to what Cause or particular
Circumstances it was owing that they could remember their having seen him there
on the Day of this Assault, when they, probably, are not able to recollect on
what Day they saw him immediately before, or immediately after, it -- Such a
Testimony would really be important, and might perhaps deserve to be set in
Opposition to the positive Evidence of the Witnesses in Support of the Charge.
-- But how different from this is the Alibi Evidence that you have heard! Three
Ladies, and Dr. Robertson, have told you that Captain Disney spent the
Afternoon and Evening with them a Dr. Robertson's House in Montreal, not two
Hundred Yards distant from Mr. Walker's House. Two of those Ladies Mrs. Howard
and Mrs. Campbell, are the Wives of two of the Prisoners now in Custody for
this Affair; and the latter is likewise the Daughter of another of those
Prisoners. The other Lady, Mrs. Landrieves, is a very intimate Acquaintance and
Friend of Capt. Disney's. And Dr. Robertson has given strong Proofs of his
eager Desire to get both this and all the other Prisoners for this Affair
discharged, and has gone much greater Lengths for this Purpose than the mere
Love of Justice and a Concern for accused Persons, apprehended to be innocent,
usually carries Men to: He has, since the Chief Justice has been in the Town
holding the Sessions of the Supreme-Court, been busily exercising his Office of
a Justice of Peace with Respect to this Affair, by taking Depositions relating
to it. I leave it to him to explain, or to you to conjecture, whether he could
have any other Design in doing so, than to influence, in a clandestine Manner,
the Minds of Men in Favor of these Prisoners, by setting up a Parcel of
private Evidences taken thus before him, in Opposition both to that which
should be offered to the Grand Jury, and to that which should be given here
publicly in Court before you, Gentlemen, in Support of the Prosecution. One of
the Persons whom he has thus examined, has since made Oath before the
Chief Justice, in my Presence, that he had been thus examined, upon Oath, by
this very Zealous Magistrate. Such, Gentlemen, are the Witnesses that are
brought to support this Alibi.

'Gentlemen, these Witnesses have not told to you to what particular
Circumstance it is owing that they remember so exactly the Manner in which they
spent their Time on the 6th of December, 1764; without which it must needs
appear strange that they should remember it so exactly. Can they tell where and
in what Company, and in what Manner they spent their Time on the 6th of
December, 1765, or even on the 6th of last December, though only three Months
past? -- Or can you, Gentlemen, those of you that were then in Montreal,
remember distinctly where and how you spent your Afternoon and Evening on that
very same 6th of December, 1764? If you cannot, is it not somewhat surprising
that these Witnesses should be able to do it so exactly, without some
particular Circumstance to induce them to take Notice at the Time, or soon
after, of the Manner in which they spent that Day? This Circumstance I should
have been glad to be informed of. -- Was it that they suspected that Captain
Disney or Mr. Howard, or Captain Campbell, or Mr. Simon Evans, or any other
Person in that Company at Dr. Robertson's, would ever be accused or questioned
about this Assault upon Mr. Walker? -- Such an early Suspicion, Gentlemen,
would, in my Opinion, have been no small Presumption that some of that Company
were guilty of it. -- What other Conjecture to form concerning the Cause of
their remembering so well the Manner and Company in which they spent that Day I
know not. -- It Is certain they have helped us to no other.

'But Gentlemen, other Things in their Evidence afford Matter of Surprise. They
not only remember of what Persons the Company consisted, and how they spent
their Time, but declare that they are confident that Captain Disney was present
in the Company during the whole Time that each of themselves was present there,
though that Time was near five Hours.

'Gentlemen, this bold Assertion deserves to be examined, in order that you may
fully understand it, and assign to it its proper Degree of Credit, which I
believe you will judge to be but little. It may be understood in two different
Senses: It may mean either that these Witnesses in their Eyes continually fixed
upon Captain Disney, so that he never was out of their Sight and Observation
during the whole five hours, which would indeed be a positive Assertion
absolutely inconsistent with the Charge; or it may mean that they did not
indeed keep the Prisoner continually in their Sight during that whole Time, but
only that they saw him there at several different Times during their being
together, and that they did not miss him or observe that he quitted the Company
during that whole Time; and therefore that they, by Inference, conclude that he
did not quit it, because, if he had done so, they think it highly probable that
they must have taken Notice of it. -- It Is in this latter Sense the Evidence of
these Witnesses, must be taken: The other is too bold, or rather desperate, a
Kind of Evidence for any People to deliver in a Court of Justice with any
Expectation of being believed: And accordingly you must have observed,
Gentlemen, that when the first Witness was asked whether she had her Eyes fixed
continually upon Captain Disney during the whole Time (which she must have said
if she had meant positively to affirm that he was there the whole Time) she
readily answered that she did not keep her Eyes thus continually fixed upon
him, but that she saw him there very often, and never observed that he left the
Company, which she says she could not but have done if he had ever left them,
because the Company was but small: And the other Witnesses answered in the same
Manner. Now this is not a positive Assertion that Captain Disney was there all
the Time: It is only a negative Proposition, or a Declaration that they did not
observe him to leave the Company in all that Time, which is a very different
Thing. For, Gentlemen. This Declaration, that they never observed him leave the
Company, may be true, and yet the Inference they would draw from it, that he
never left it, may not be so: He may have left the Company more than once, and
they not have observed it, especially for so small a Time as five or six
Minutes, which is sufficient for his attending a Transaction that happened only
at the Distance of Two Hundred Yards from the Place where the Company was
assembled, And therefore, Gentlemen, the Evidence of these Witnesses, supposing
it to be strictly true, does not positively prove the Prisoner's Alibi, but
only gives Room for a probable Inference in Support of it, which being but a
Presumption, ought not to be set in Opposition to the positive Testimony of
three Witnesses in Support of the Charge against him.

'But, Gentlemen, we may go still further. This Evidence of the Prisoner's
Alibi is not even a very strong Presumption. For where is the great
Improbability of a Person's absenting himself once or twice from a Company of
eleven Persons (which was the Number assembled at Dr. Robertson's) for a short
space of Time, such as five or ten Minutes, without being observed by the other
Persons in the Company, and that too with such particular Attention that they
shall be able to recollect it a long Time after? -- Such a Want of Observation
of the Motions of the rest of the Company, as not to recollect such little
Absences of some one of them, is surely by no Means uncommon. Gentlemen, I
appeal to yourselves, whether when you happen to be in a Company of a Dozen
People for five Hours together, who are met together for the Sake of Mirth and
Amusement, you are apt to watch each Person in the Company so very carefully
that you can falsely declare afterward, upon Oath, which of them absented
himself from the Company for a little While, and which did not, and can be sure
that during the whole Time such or such a particular Person of the Company
never left it, even for the Space of five or ten Minutes? Gentlemen, is it your
Custom to watch your Company so narrowly: I believe I may say that it is not.
-- And in (...) present Case is not the Difficulty of observing and remembering
(...) Particulars increased by the Variety of Pastimes with which this Company
amused themselves? -- They were not all the while engaged in Parties at Cards,
or in dancing, in which Case they might perhaps observe what became of their
Partners and the others engaged at play with them: But they spent Part of the
Time in making Syrup, Part of it in dancing, Part of it drinking Tea, and Part
of it, Gentlemen (which is worthy your Attention) in playing at
Blind-man's-buff. Can they be supposed, during all those different Amusements
to have been so very watchful of each other? They should at least have excepted
those parts of the Time they were playing at Blind-man's-buff, during which
they acted the part of the blind-Man.

'Gentlemen, I could not but admire the Rapidity and the Positiveness with
which some of these Witnesses delivered their Evidence, particularly the first
Witness. The Answer was ready almost before the Question was pronounced. I
believe she never repeated her Creed or her Catechism more readily or nimbly.
She told you the exact Times at which each different Amusement began, as
readily and precisely as if she had been reading an Account of them from
Minutes of that Afternoon's Entertainment taken down at the Time. One Thing
only escaped her uncommon Memory, till she was induced to reccollect it, by a
positive Question put to her concerning it. This was that she herself was
absent from the Company for Part of the Time this Company has been said to
continue together. Gentlemen, this Circumstance she forgot to tell you in her
original Account: it was drawn from her in the Cross-examination. But when she
did declare it, I make no Doubt, Gentlemen, that you observed the great
Importance of it. Gentlemen, it tends to nothing less than to make her Evidence
and that of Mrs. Howard (who was absent with her for that little Time) I say,
it tends to nothing less than to make the Evidence of both these Witnesses
(admitting it all to be strictly true) of little or no Effect in supporting the
Prisoner's Alibi. For observe only the Time of this Absence. This Witness and
Mrs. Howard have both of them told you that it happend about three Quarters of
an Hour after Eight o'Clock, that is, as near as can be judged, at the very
Time of the Assault committed upon Mr. Walker. Just at this critical Time they
left the Company and went to Mrs. Howard's House for a Table-Cloth, leaving the
Company employed in no common Amusement, such as Cards or Dancing, that might
require the Presence of them all, but fitting round the Stove till the Supper
should be ready: They staid away some little Time, which they think was about
five Minutes, and then returned to Dr. Robertson's. Gentlemen, this Time of
their Absence may not improbably be a good deal more than five Minutes --
perhaps a Quarter of an Hour, or twenty Minutes. Such Mistakes in the Measure
of Time happen every Day, where People judge of it without looking at a Watch,
as these Ladies have declared that they did.

'In this small Space of Time it was possible, for aught that is contained in
the Evidence of these two Ladies, for Captain Disney to have have quitted the
Company and stepped Home to his Lodging, and, there making the little Alteration
in his Dress which was necessary to disguise him, to have gone into Mr.
Walker's House, and been present for two or three Minutes during the Assault
upon him, to overlook and encourage the Persons employed in it. The change of
Dress for this Purpose would take up a very short Time. It was only throwing
off his Coat, and flipping on a Canadian Gown instead of it, and putting a
Crape over his Face and a cut-round Hat upon his Head with the Crape tucked in
under it. This was the only Change made in his Dress from that in which he
appeared at Dr, Robertson's: For the Prisoner's Witnesses have told you that he
was that Day dressed in Scarlet and Mrs. Walker observed that he had a red
Waistcoat and red Breeches under his Canadian Gown.

'This slight Change of his Dress he might easily make, and be present at Mr.
Walker's House, for a few Minutes, then change his Dress again and return to
Dr. Robertson's, in the Compass of a very small Time. We may therefore consider
the Evidence of those two Ladies as contributing very little to support the
Prisoner's Alibi. It it must therefore rest principally upon the Testimony of
Mrs. Campbell, a Lady that is the Wife of one, and the Daughter of another of
the Prisoner's now in Custody for this Assault, and that of the very friendly
Dr. Robertson, whose Zeal in the Defense of these Gentlemen has been so great
as to lead him to take Depositions concerning this Affair, even since the
Chief Justice has been here in Town to hold this Session.

'Such, Gentlemen, is the Alibi to which you are desired to give Credit: An
Alibi declaring the Prisoner to have been at a Place not Two Hundred Yards
distant from the Scene of the Offense. Pretended to be proved by four
Witnesses, but in Truth not positively proved by any one of them, (none of them
swearing that they had the Prisoner continually in Sight during the whole Time
they were together) but grounded upon a Presumption only, and not a very strong
one, that, if he had quitted the Room, though for a very small Space of Time,
as five or ten Minutes, during any Part of the five Fours they were together,
they must have taken Notice of it. -- And even this poor Presumption is found,
upon a Cross-Examination, to be supported by only two of these Witnesses, the
other two having confessed that they themselves were absent from the Company
for a little Time, just at the critical Juncture of the Commission of the Crime
-- And this Proof, imperfect as it is, made by Witnesses under a strong and
evident Biass in the Prisoner's Favor. This wretched Alibi you are required to
believe in opposition to the positive Testimony of three Witnesses, two of whom
are Persons of unblemished Character, and perfectly free from Prejudice against
the Prisoner, and the third was an Accomplice in the Fact. You cannot,
Gentlemen, remain long in Doubt which of these two Testimonies to prefer.

'Gentlemen, I have said that Mr. and Mrs. Walker are perfectly free from
Prejudice against the Prisoner. I will explain what I mean by that Assertion.
It cannot be pretended that they are free from Resentment against the Prisoner:
They must be exempt from human Passions if they were: But their Resentment
arises merely from this very Injury with which he is now charged, and from
their own certain Knowledge of his concern in it. That, and the Prisoner's
Declaration beforehand, That he would be revenged upon Mr. Walker, for his
Ill-treatment of Captain Pain, are the only Grounds that Mr. Walker has for
any Resentment against Captain Disney. And such a Resentment cannot be called a
Prejudice against Captain Disney, or in any Degree affect the Credibility of
Mr. Walker's Evidence or this Occasion, because the very Existence of such a
Resentment supposes necessarily that of the Crime with which the Prisoner
stands charged as the Cause and Ground of it. It might indeed affect Mr.
Walker's Evidence on any other Prosecution against Captain Disney, either for
an Injury done to another Man, or for another Injury done to himself: But in
the present Case it cannot have any such Effect. Till this unhappy Violence, or
a very little Time before it, Captain Disney and Mr. Walker had lived upon good
Terms with each other. Captain Disney himself has informed you that he did so:
He has declared that he always entertained a Respect for Mr. Walker (that, I
think, was his Expression) and expressed it in Coversation whenever he had
Occasion to speak of him: And he has called a Witness to prove that he did so.
And Mr. Walker has told you that he trusted so much to the Professions of
Regard that Captain Disney had often made him, and was so conscious in his own
Mind of his never having given him any Cause of Offense, that, when he
distinguished him among the disguised Ruffians that were come to assaut him, he
was encouraged by the Sight of him to hope that his Life was not in Danger, and
that the Mischief intended him was only a severe Beating, or Wounding, or
something short of Death, in Revenge for the imaginary Insult upon Captain
Pain, till he was forced to think otherwise by those dreadful and murderous
Words, pronounced from the opposite Corner of the Room by the Man who advanced
against him with a drawn Sword, Damn him, let me come to him, and I Will dispatch
him with my Sword.

'Gentlemen, this Evidence of Mr. and Mrs. Walker, appears to me to be so
weighty, that' if the Alibi Defense of the Prisoner had been supported by
positive Evidence absolutely inconsistent with the Charge -- if not two only,
but all the four Witnesses had positively sworn, that at eight o'Clock exactly
they had sat down to play at Whi^^ with the Prisoner, and that they had never
left the Table till the Messenger came from General Burton with the News of the
Outrage committed upon Mr. Walker, but had been all the While either at the
Table playing themselves, or near it, looking on upon those who did play, and
that the Prisoner had never cut out, but had been one of the Players during the
whole of that Time, so that he must have been continually before their Eyes. --
and if the Persons who testified this had not been the intimate Friends of the
Prisoner, or the Wives and Daughters of the other Prisoners, but Persons
entirely unconnected, and very little acquainted, with them -- I say,
Gentlemen, that is the alibi Defense of the Prisoner had been supported by such
a positive Testimony instead of the imperfect and precarious Evidence which you
have heard, yet still the Evidence in Support of the Charge would deserve to be
preferred to it. -- This may, at first Sight, seem a harsh Position: But it
will be found upon Examination to be built upon a Principle of Candor and
Charity, which directs us to think as favorable of human Nature as the
Circumstances of the Case will permit us. Gentlemen, it would be a bad Dilemma
for you to be reduced to, if you were really under a Necessity of disbelieving
the Witnesses on one Side or other, and consequently of supposing those on one
of the Sides to be guilty of wilful Perjury. But if you were reduced to this
Dilemma, to which Side would a moderately good Opinion of human induce you to
impute the Perjury? To those who give Evidence to take away the Prisoner's life
or to those who give Evidence to save it? Is it not more natural that Men
should commit Perjury to rescue a Man from Danger than in order to effect his
Destruction? In the former Case they may think perhaps that the Benevolence of
the Intention with which they commit this Crime may somewhat extenuate the
Guilt of it; in the latter Case they must feel that the Guilt of the Perjury is
aggravated an Hundredfold by the Wickedness of the Intention with with it is
committed. The former is a Crime which Men of loose Principles may be supposed
capable of committing, and which indeed is very frequently committed; the
latter is a Crime too black for even wicked Men, and seldom or never known to
have been practiced. -- But, Gentlemen, you are fortunately not reduced to this
Dilemma, since the Evidence advanced in the Prisoner's Favor has been shown to
be not irreconcilable with the Evidence in support of the Charge. The Prisoner
may have spent that Evening in the Company of his three fair Witnesses, and yet
have been absent for a short Time to partake in the Revenge taken against Mr.
Walker, without being missed by them.

'Gentlemen, that the Prisoner spent that Evening either in the Company at Dr.
Robertson's, or in some other numerous Company. I think is highly probable. I
should have imagined he had done so if he had produced no Witnesses to prove
it: For it is but a reasonable Precaution for any Man to take, who intends to
be concerned in any dangerous Transaction, for which he may afterward come to
be questioned. He thereby furnishes himself with a ready Defense against any
Accusation of having been engaged in it that happens to be made in a loose and
general Manner, without narrowly enquiring into Circumstances. How can it be
supposed, will he say, that I was present at such a Transaction, when such and
such Persons can testify that much about the Time at which it happened, or at
least not above half an Hour or an Hour, before or after it, I was in their
Company, employed in Dancing or some other such innocent Amusement." such a
Defense will do very well to answer the Suspicions and Hints thrown out against
him in common Conversation, and will pass with many People for a full
Justification; and, perhaps, with a little Improvement (if the Witnesses are
well disposed toward the Prisoner) by varying the Time and other Circumstances
in the Manner requisite, it may meet with Credit even in a Court of Justice;
whereas, if he had spent his Time at Home in a solitary Manner till the Time of
committing the Crime, he could have nothing of this Kind to set up in
Opposition to the Testimony in support of the Charge against him.

'These, Gentlemen, are the Observations I thought it necessary to offer to you
concerning this boasted Evidence of the Prisoner's Alibi, which makes the
principal Part of his Defense. I am sensible they have taken up too much of
your Time; but I knew not how to make them shorter. I hope therefore you will
excuse this Prolixity, and at the same Time will further indulge me with leave
to make a few Remarks on the second Part of the Prisoner's Defense, which
consists in an Endeavor to discredit the Witness Magovock.

'Gentlemen, it is of no great Consequence in the present Prosecution what
Degree of Credit this Witness deserves, as the Change is supported by two
Witnesses of indisputable Credit without him. However, I can see no Reason for
treating his Evidence with the Contempt which the Gentlemen of Council with the
Prisoner have affected to show for it. He certainly is not a good Man: No Body
has pretended that he was so. He owns that he was an Accomplice in this wicked
Action, which no good Man could be concerned in: And Lieutenant Ma Kay has
said, that, when he knew him in the Army, he was sometimes guilty of Theft, and
has been punished for it by a Court Martial. I readily believe this. But does
this render what he says as a Witness in a Court Justice of no Weight or
Consequence? Does it follow, because a Soldier has been guilty of Theft, a
Crime too common amongst them, that therefore he will be guilty of the great
and deliberate Crime (one of the most heinous that can be committed) of
swearing falsely in a Court of Justice to take away another Man's Life? Surely
it does not: And the Law, Gentlemen, in the Case of Accomplices determines that
it does not: For it allows their Evidence to be received against their
Fellow-criminals, nay, to be alone the Ground of a Conviction, without any
other positive Testimony, provided there is some concomitant Evidence arising
from Circumstances to make it probable. Numbers of People have been condemned
upon such Evidence, and with the general Approbation of all the World: And
there are now in Quebec Goal two Soldier under Sentence of Death, for breaking
open Mr Woolsey's Cellar in the Night Time, and stealing a Cask of Wine from
it, who were convicted upon the single Testimony of an Accomplice with them in
the Fact, together with a Proof by Mr. Woolsey and his Clerk that the Cellar
had been broke open by somebody or other and the Wine taken away. How much more
then does such a Testimony deserve to be regarded when it does not stand
single, but is made use of only to confirm the positive Testimony of two other
Witnesses of indisputable Credit, which is the Case with the Evidence of this
Witness on the present Prosecution.

'Gentlemen, the Credibility of a Witnesses Testimony does not depend merely
upon the Goodness of his Character. The Probility of the Story he relates, the
Agreement of it with other well-known Facts, the Minuteness and Particularity
of the Circumstances he mentions; and his Illiterateness and Ignorance and
utter Incapacity to invent them, if he was wicked enough to endeavor to do so,
may make his Evidence deserve to be believed by those who have no Oppinion of
his Virtue. These, I presume, are some of the Grounds upon which the Law admits
the Evidence of Accomplices, and allows it to have considerable Weight: And
these are the Grounds upon which the Evidence of this Witness Magovock deserves
to be regarded. Gentlemen, can you suppose this Witness, who can neither write
nor read, -- I say, can you suppose him capable of inventing so long and
particular a Story as he has related to you, and which is attended with some
Circumstances so uncommon and surprising? Is it likely that he should think of
so remarkable a Circumstance as that of the Consultation at Lieutenant
Tottenham's House on the Monday preceding the Assault, in which the Prisoner at
the Bar administered to him the Oath of Secrecy, unless these Things had really
happened? Would he have refused to deliver his whole Evidence about this Matter
at once in his first Deposition, if he had not been under the Restraint of such
an Oath? Is there any Reason to suppose that he is so refined and ingenious a
Villain, as to able to invent such a Story about an Oath of Secrecy, merely to
make himself pass for a Man of some Conscience, and give Credit to the rest of
his Evidence? I cannot, for my Part, have either so bad an Opinion of his
Heart, or so good an one of his Understanding, as to suppose this: His
Testimony therefore deserves the same Degree of Credit as is usually given to
the Evidence of Accomplices, notwithstanding the Endeavors that have been used
to asperse his general Character. It remains that I make a few Remarks upon the
Evidence he has delivered at this Trial, and the Inconsistencies which the
Gentlemen of Counsel for the Prisoner have observed between the different Parts
of it, and between some Parts of it and the Evidence of some of the other
Witnesses.

'One of these Contradictions is, that he said in his Cross-Examination that he
carried the Intelligence concerning the Progress of the Assault upon Mr. Walker
to Captain Pain and Lieutenant Tottenham at Sergeant Mees's House, whereas he
had before said that Captain Pain and Lieutenant Tottenham were, during that
Assault, standing in the Street in which Mr. Walker's House is situated, near
the House of one Bellair, a Baker, which is almost directly over against Mr.
Walker's House. Gentlemen, I doubt not you must have observed that this Mistake
was never made by the Witness, but by the Counsel that cross-examined him, who,
throughout the whole Cross-examination, endeavored to confound the Witness and
bewilder his Understanding, by asking him a Variety of Questions unconnected
with each other and without any Method or Regard to the Order of Time, with a
View to draw him in to make sudden Answers that might not be confident with
each other. But in this he was disappointed by the Steadiness and Clearness
with which the Witness gave his Answers to all the Questions that were put to
him. With Respect to the pretended Contradiction now under Consideration, the
Witness's Evidence was really as follows: The Prisoner's Counsel had asked him
whether he had seen Captain Pain before he went into Mr. Walker's House, to
commit the Assault; to which the Witness answered that he had seen him before
at Sergeant Mees's House, and that they had come out from thence at the same
Time. After another Question or two, the Counsel asks him where it was he
carried the Intelligence concerning the Progress of the Assault to Captain
Pain and Lieutenant Tottenham; and the Witness answers, in the Street near Mr.
Bellair's House, which is almost over against Mr. Walker's. Thereupon the
Counsel pretends that this is inconsistent with his former Answer; for that in
that he had declared that he had carried the Intelligence concerning the
Assault to Captain Pain at Sergeant Mees's House. But the Witness immediately
answered, that the Counsel had greatly mistaken him; for that he had never said
any such Thing, but only that he had seen Captain Pain before at Sergeant
Mees's House, and that Captain Pain had set out with them from that House: And
this, Gentlemen, I dare say you observed to have been really his Evidence.
Indeed this is a Mi^take which it is absurd to suppose he could have made,
unless he had been quite a Stranger to Montreal; because otherwise he could
(...) know that Sergeant Mees's House was at too great a Distance from Mr
Walker's for a man to have gone thither twice with this Intelligence in the
short Space of Time the Assault was carrying on in the Manner he had related;
so that, if he had invented the whole Story, he would have assigned some nearer
Spot of Ground for the Place (...) which Captain Pain and Lieutenant Tottenham
waited to superintend and cover the Assault, and to receive the Intelligence he
carried the^ concerning its Progress. In Truth that Part of Mr. Waelker's
Street which was near Mr. Bellair's House, and, within a Dozen Yards of Mr.
Walker's, was the Spot he all along mentioned as the Place (...) which he
delivered his Intelligence to Captain Pain and Lieutenant Tottenham, both in
his Answers to the Questions put to him by the Court and in his
Cross-Examination by the Prisoner's Counsel.

'The next Contradiction imputed to him is, a Mistake in Point of Time. He said
it was about eight o'Clock, or a little before* when the Ruffians left Sergeant
Mees's House to go to Mr. Walker's to make the Assault, and that it was near
nine o'Clock, but not quite nine when the whole Affair was over: And yet he
says in another Part of his Evidence that he believes the Assault did not take
up above a Quarter of an Hour. Gentlemen, I confess there is this Inaccuracy in
the Witness's Evidence, and am desirous that it should have its due Weight with
you in the Prisoner's Favor. But can this much avail him (...) -- Can the
Mistake of a poor common Soldier concerning the precise Time of a Transaction
he relates, when he judged of it only by guess and without either Watch or
Clock, impeach the Credibility of his Testimony concerning the Transaction
itself, when that Testimony is rational and consistent with itself in every
other Particular? Certainly Gentlemen, it cannot. Mistakes of half an Hour, or
even a whole Hour, are frequently made by Men who observe Time much more
carefully than such Persons as the Witness can be supposed to do; and indeed
they hardly deserve to be called Mistakes, because the Difference of Clocks is
sufficient to account for them. This seems to me to so usual and natural, that,
in my Apprehension, no Evidence whatsoever concerning the precise Time of any
Action deserves to be much regarded, though delivered by the most respectable
Witness, unless the Person who delivers it declares at the same Time that he
looked at a Clock or a Watch at the Time the Action happened, or immediately
before or after, or else took particular Notice that it happened at the Time
with some other regular Transaction that is always carried on at a fixed Hour,
such as the ringing of the Bell of a Church or Convent for Morning or Evening
Prayers, or some other such remarkable Circumstance. Without some such
Circumstance I can easily imagine that the most honest and judicious Person in
the World may mistake a full Hour in the Time of any Transaction he was present
at, and should think it a mere chance if he was exact. In the present Case the
Witness said he believed it was a little before eight when they set out from
Sergeant Mees's House to commit the Assault: in which, I am persuaded he
mistook the Time by more than half an Hour, for that it must really have been
more than half an Hour after eight; at least by Mr. Walker's Clock; because Mr.
and Mrs. Walker, and the Clerk and Servant, who have been examined in support
of the Prosecution, fix the Time of the Assault pretty exactly. And where now
is the great Wonder that a common Soldier, who had no Watch, and whose Mind was
flurried with the thoughts of a dangerous Expedition he was going to be
concerned in, and with some strong Liquor he had taken to prepare himself for
it should think it was only eight o'Clock when in Truth it was half an Hour or
forty Minutes after? -- I say, what is there to be surprised at in such a
Mistake? More especially when we consider that possibly the Clock at Sergeant
Mees's House, if there was one there, or, if there was not, the Clocks in his
Neighborhood, by which he and his Family had judged of the Course of Time
during that Day, might very well be forty Minutes flower than Mr. Walkers's.
Surely it deserves very little Consideration. Those triffling Inaccuracies,
which may be so easily accounted for, seem to me on the Contrary to add
Strength to the Evidence of a Witness rather than to render it less credible,
since they show that the Witness answers fairly and honestly what his Memory
suggests to him, without having artfully framed a regular Story with every
Circumstance in exact and perfect Order, that he might guard against the
Possibility of a Surprise.

'The next Contradiction insisted on by the Counsel for the Prisoner is that
concerning the Prisoner's Dress. Mrs. Walker has said that he was dressed in a
Canadian Gown, and the Witness Magovock has said that he was dressed in a
Blanket Coat. Gentlemen, there is a real inconsistency between these
Testimonies. But, I believe, you will hardly think it of much Importance. It is
easy for Magovock to have mistaken the Dress of Major Disney amongst the Number
of Persons he saw on that Occasion, and yet to be very certain of his Person;
as the Person of a Man makes a much stronger Impression upon the Mind and
Memory of a Spectator than his Dress. And it must be remembered that Macgovoek
has told you that Major Disney was not one of the Party that dressed themselves
at Sergeant Mees's House, and set out from thence to go to Mr. Walker's (in
which Case it might perhaps be expected that Macgovock should remember his
Dress exactly) but was one of the additional Party that came in to assist and
protect the former, whose several Dresses it can hardly be supposed that he can
recollect with perfect Exactness.

'But, Gentlemen, the main Foundation of this Objection to Macgovock's
Testimony is by no Means favorable to the Prisoner, as will appear if we
consider it a little further. The Objection I take to be as follows:
Macgovock's Evidence concerning Major Disney 's Dress is cntrary to Mrs. Walker
's, and therefore false; and consequently the rest of his Evidence is likewise
either false or doubtful. What then, is it admitted that Mrs. Walker's Evidence
concerning the Prisoner's Dress on that Occasion is true? Nothing More is
wanted on the Part of the Prosecution. The Prisoner was present at the Assault
in a Canadian Gown according to Mrs. Walker's Evidence; and Macgovock has been
Mistaken in his Dress, and deserves therefore no Credit in any other Part of
his Testimony. Let then his whole Evidence be set aside as doubtful and good
for nothing, since Mrs. Walker's Evidence is thus admitted to be true. -- But
if Mrs. Walker's Evidence is not allowed to be true -- if the Person she saw
there in a Canadian Gown was not Major Disney, but some other Person -- then
where is the Inconsistency of her Testimony with that of Magovock's? She may
have been mistaken in the Person she took for the Major, and yet the Major may
have been there in a different Dress, that is, in a Blanket-Coat, accord to
Macgovock's Evidence. The most that can be made of this Objection, if a mistake
about the Prisoner's Dress can be thought to be of such high Importance, is to
get rid of the Evidence of one of these two Witnesses; in which Case the
Prosecution will rest upon the Evidence of the other of them, and of Mr. Walker.

'These are, far as I can recollect, the principal Contradictions in the
Witness Magovock's Evidence on which the Gentlemen of Counsel with the Prisoner
have insisted: And, I presume, Gentlemen, after what has been offered to your
Consideration by way of Reply to the Consequences that have been attempted to
be drawn from them, that you will be clearly of Opinion that they do not
materially affect the Credit of the other Parts of this Witness's Testimony.
But, as has been before observed, the whole Evidence of this Witness might very
well be set aside, if there was Reason for it, and yet the remaining Proof in
support of the Prosecution would be more than sufficient to be the Ground of a
Conviction, being the positive Testimony of two Witnesses of indisputable
Credit. Mr. and Mrs. Walker, who have sworn that they saw the Prisoner in Mr.
Walker's House at the Time of the Assault. This is a solid and substantial
Proof in support of the Prosecution, which neither the imperfect presumptive
Evidence of the Prisoner's Alibi, given by Witnesses strongly byssed in his
Favor, and by the Wives and Daughters of Fellow Prisoners, nor the Mistakes of
a third Witness (though they had been as important as they have been shown to
be inconsiderable) can impeach. One Thing only can be alleged to diminish the
Weight of it and plead somewhat in the Prisoner's Favor, which I doubt not,
Gentlemen, has already occured to you: I mean the Circumstance of the
Prisoner's being said to have been disguised by a Crape that covered his Face.
This, it might be thought, must have made it difficult for Mr. and Mrs. Walker
to descern the Features of his Face; without which it is possible, and, in
Favor of Innocence, might perhaps be presumed, that they had mistaken some
other Man that resembled the Prisoner in Size and Shape to be the Prisoner
himself; and that the Hurry of their Spirits on such an alarming Occasion had
strengthed the Impression made by such a Resemblance and contributed to confirm
them in this Mistake. This is, in my Opinion, the most important Consideration
that can be offered in the Prisoner's Favor* But, Gentlemen, in answer to it I
must observe, that both Mr. and Mrs. Walker have sworn that they distinguished
the Features of his Face which takes away all Room for such a Mistake. And that
it is by no Means difficult to discern a Man's Features through a Crape you
will easily be convinced upon trial. Mrs. Walker has brought here into Court a
Piece of Crape of the same Kind with that which was drawn over the Face of the
Man she took to be the Prisoner (and which is of the same Kind that Officers
wear upon their Arms for mourning in Order to enable you to make this necessary
Trial. Take this with you, Gentlemen, when you withdraw to consider of your
Verdict of this important Occasion, and try yourselves how far it is capable of
concealing a Person's Features. I believe you will find it to be but a poor
Disguise, and will soon be of Opinion that Mrs. Walker, at the Distance of
about ten Feet, and Mr. Walker at that of only four Feet might very well have
been able to discern the Features of the Person upon whom they fixed their Eyes
to have been those of the Prisoner at the Bar.'

The Attorney General having ended his Reply, the Chief Justice summed up the
Evidence to the Jury, who, after withdrawing for about half an Hour, brought in
their Verdict that the Prisoner was Not Guilty: And the Prisoner was thereupon
discharged.

THIS Day personally appeared before me Isaac Todd, Esquire one of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace, Mr, John Wells, Merchant and made Oath on the Holy
Evangelists, That the annexed is an exact of Copy of the Evidence on the Part
of the Crown, and also on the Part of Daniel Disney, Esquire as taken down by him
in shorthand the Day of Trial, at the Courthouse in the City of Montreal, on
Wednesday the Eleventh Day of March; and that here is not, to the best of his
Knowledge and Belief, any Thing either added or diminished; and that what
^^^dence was delivered in French, was taken down as interpreted by Mr ^allwey,
sworn Interpreter.

(Signed) JOHN WELLS.
Sworn before me, this 23d March, 1767. (Signed) ISAAC TODD.

FINIS.

