THE GROUND AND NATURE OF Christian Redemption.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by JOHN DUNLAP, at the Newest Printing-Office,
on the South Side of the Jersey Market, the third Door below Second-street,
1768.

THE GROUND AND NATURE OF Christian Redemption.
THE Fall of man into the life and state of This World, is the Whole Ground of
his Redemption; and a Real Birth of CHRIST in the soul, is the Whole Nature of
it. To convince man of his Fall as the Ground of his Redemption, it is not
necessary to appeal to the history which Moses has given of it; because Moses's
history of the Fall is not the proof of it, and because a mere historical
knowledge of the Fall would not do man any real good. Moses has recorded the
death of the first man, and of many of his descendents; but the proof that man
is Mortal, lies not in Moses's history, but in the known nature of man, and the
world from which he has his life. Thus, though Moses has recorded the time and
manner of the Fall, yet there is no more occasion to have recourse to his
history to prove it, than to prove that man is a poor weak, vain, distressed,
corrupt, depraved, selfish, self-tormenting, perishing creature; and that the
world is a sad mixture of imaginary good, and real evil, a mere scene of
vanity, vexation, and misery. This is the known nature and condition both of
man and the world; and every man is in himself an irresistible proof that he is
in a fallen state. An attempt therefore, to convince man of his Fall, as the
Ground of his Redemption, must be an attempt to do that which misfortunes,
sickness, pain, and the approach of death, have a natural tendency to do, to
convince him of the Vanity, Poverty, and Misery of his Life and Condition in
this World; and how impossible it is, that a GOD, Who has nothing in Himself
but Infinite Goodness and Infinite Happiness, should bring forth a race of
intelligent creatures, that have neither Natural Goodness, nor Natural
Happinesfs.

Man, in his First State, as he came forth from GOD, must have been absolutely
free from all Vanity, Want or Distress, of any kind, from any thing either
within or without him: a God-like perfection of Nature, and a painful
Distressed Nature, stand in the utmost Contrariety to one another. But man has
lost his First Divine Life in GOD: every thing that we know of God, and every
thing that we know of man, of his birth, his life, and death, is a continual
irresistible proof that man is in a fallen state. The human infant just come
out of the womb, is a picture of such deformity, nakedness, weakness, and
helpless distress, as is not to be found amongst the home-born animals of this
world. The chicken has its birth from no sin, and, therefore, comes torth in
beauty; it runs and pecks, as soon as its shell is broken: the calf and the
lamb go both to play as foon as the dam is delivered of them; they are pleased
with themselves, and please the eye that beholds their frolic state, and
beauteous clothing: whilst the newborn babe of a woman, that is to have an
upright form; that is to view the heavens, and worship the GOD that made them;
lies, for months, in gross ignorance, weakness, and impurity; as sad a
spectacle when he first breathes the life of this world, as when in the agonies
of death he breathes his last. What is all this, but the strongst proof, that
man is the only creature that belongs not to this world, but is fallen into it
through sin, and that, therefore, his birth, in such distress, bears all these
marks of shame and weakness? Had he been originally of this world, this world
would have done the highest honor to its highest creature; and he must have
begun his life in greater perfection than any other animal, and brought with
him a more beautiful clothing than the finest lillies of the field. But when
the human infant has at length acquired strength, and begins to act for
himself, he soon becomes a more pitiable object than when crying in the cradle.
The strength of his life, is a mere strength of wild passions; his reason is
craft and selfish subtilty; he loves and hates only as flesh and blood prompt
him; and jails and gibbets cannot keep him from theft and murder. If he is
rich, he is tormented with pride and ambition; if poor with want and
discontent: be he which he will, sooner or later, disordered passions,
disappointed lusts, fruitless labor, pains and sickness, will tear him from
this world, in such travail as his mother felt, when she brought forth the
sinful animal. Now all this evil and misery are the natural and necessary
effect of his birth in the bestial flesh and blood of this world; and there is
nothing in his natural state, that can put a stop to it; he must be evil and
miserable as long as he has only the life of this world in him. Therefore, the
absolute certainty of man's Fall, and the absolute Necessity of a New Birth to
redeem him, are truths, independently of Scripture, plain to a demonstration.

No creature can come from the hands of GOD, into a State of any Ignorance of
any thing that is proper to be known by it: this is as impossible, as for GOD
to have an envious or evil will. Now all Right and Natural Knowledge, in
whatever creature it is, is Sensible, Intuitive, and its own Evidence; and
Opinion Reasoning, or Doubting, can only then begin, when the creature has lost
its First Right and Natural State, and is got somewhere, and become somewhat,
that it cannot tell what to make of. Reasoning, Doubt and Perplexity, in any
creature, are the effect of some Fall or Departure from its First State of
Nature; and show, that it wants, and is seeking, something that belongs to its
Nature, but knows how to come at it. The beasts seek not after Truth; a plain
proof that it has no Relation to them, no Suitableness to their Nature, nor
ever belonged to them. Man is in quest of it, in perplexity about it, cannot
come at it; takes lies to be Truth, and Truth to be lies: a plain proof, both
that he has it not, and yet has had it; was created in it, and for it: for no
creature can feek for any thing, but that which has been lost, and is wanted;
nor could man form the least idea of it, but because it has belonged to him and
ought to be his.

Now suppose man to come into the world, with this Chief difference from other
creatures, that he is at a loss to find out what he is, how he is to live, and
what he is to seek as his Chief Happiness; what he is to own of a GOD, of
Providence, Religion, and c.; suppose him to have Faculties that put him upon
this Search, and no Faculties that can satisfy his Inquiry; and what can we
suppose more miserable in himself, and more unworthy of a GOOD CREATOR?
Therefore, if we will not suppose, that GOD has been good to all creatures, and
given every animal its Proper Light of Nature, except Man; we must be forced to
own, that man has lost the True Light and Perfection of his Nature which GOD at
first gave him.

GOD is in Himfelf, Infinite Truth, Infinite Goodness, and Infinite Happiness;
but man, in his present earthly birth and life, has neither Truth, Goodness,
nor Happiness: therefore, his Present State of Life could not be brought, forth
by that GOD, Who is all Truth, Goodness, and Happiness. Thus every man, that
believes in a Creator Infinitely Perfect, is under a Necessity of believing the
Whole Ground of CHRISTIAN REDEMPTION, namely, that man has lost that Perfection
of life which he had at first from his Creator.

Had not a Divine Life at first been in man, he would be now at the fame
distance from Truth and Goodness, and as incapable of forming the least Thought
or Desire of them, as the beasts of the field; and would have nothing to do,
but to look to himself, live to his earthly nature, and make the most of this
world; for this is all the Wisdom and Goodness that an Earthly nature is
capable of, whether it be a man, or a fox. The certainty of the fact, of man's
First Divine Life is all; nothing more need be enquired after: for on This
Ground stands all his Comfort; hence it is, that in Faith and Hope he can look
up to GOD as his Father, to Heaven as his Native Country, and on himself as a
stranger and a pilgrim upon earth.

For it is a certain truth, that fallen earthly, and corrupt, as human nature
is, there is, in the soul of every man, the Fire, and Light, and Love of GOD,
though lodged in a state of hiddenness and inactivity, till something human or
Divine, Distress, or Grace, or both, discover its life vithin us.

We were no more created to be in the Sorrows, Burdens, and Anguish of this
earthly Life, than the Angels were created to be in the Wrath and Darkness of
Hell. It is as contrary to the Will and Goodness of GOD toward us, that we are
out of Paradise, as it is contrary to The Designs and Goodness of GOD toward
the Angels, that some of them are out of Heaven prisoners of darkness. How
absurd and even blasphemous would it be, to say, with the Church and the
Scriptures, that we are Children of Wrath, and Born in Sin if we had That
Nature, which GOD at first gave us? What a reproach upon GOD, to say, that this
world is a valley of misery, a shadow of death, full of disorders, sorrows, and
temptations, if This was an Original Creation, or That State of things for
which God created us? It is not as consistent with the Goodness of GOD, to
speak of the misery and disorder that Holy Angels find above, and of the
Sorrows and Vanity of their Heavenly State, as to speak of the misery of men
and the sorrows and vanities of this world, if men and the world were in That
Order, in which GOD at first had placed them? If GOD could make any place Poor
and Vain, and create any beings into a State of Vanity and Vexation of Spirit,
he might do so in all Places, and to All Beings.

The Fall of man, therefore, into the life of this earthly World, is the Sole
Ground of his wanting the Redemption which the Gospel offers. Hence it is, that
The Gospel has only One simple proposal of Certain Life, or Certain Death, to
Man: of Life, if he will take the means of entering into The Kingdom of GOD; of
Death, if he chooses to take up his Rest in The Kingdom of this World. This is
the Simple Nature and Sole Drift of The Gospel: it means no more, than making
known to man, that this World, and the Life of it, is his Fall and Separation
from God and Happiness both here and hereafter; and that to be saved, or
restored to GOD and Happiness, can only be obtained, by renouncing all Love and
Adherence to the Things of This World. All the Precepts, Threatenings and
Doctrines of the Gospel, mean nothing, but to drive All Earthlymindedness and
Carnal Affections out of the soul; to call man from the Life, Spirit, and Goods
of This World, to a Life of Faith and Hope, and Love, and Defire, of a New
Birth from Heaven.

To embrace The Gospel, is to enter, with all our hearts, into its terms of
dying to All that is Earthly, both within us and without us: and, on the other
hand, to place our Faith, and Hope, and Trust, and Satisfaction, in the Things
of this World; is to reject the Gospel with our whole heart, spirit, and
strength, as much as any Infidel can do, notwithstanding we make ever so many
verbal assents to every thing that is recorded in the New Testament.

This, therefore, is the one, true essential Distinction, between the Christian
and the Infidel. The Infidel is a man of This World; wholly devoted to it; his
hope and Faith are set upon it; for where our Heart is, there, and there only,
are our hope and Faith: he has only such a Virtue, such a Goodness, and such a
Religion, as entirely suits with the interests of flesh and blood, and keeps
the soul happy in the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of
life. This, and this alone, is Infidelity; a Total Separation from GOD, and a
Removal of all Faith and Hope from HIM, into the Life of This World. It matters
not, whether this Infidel be a Professor of the Gospel, a Disciple of
Zoroaster, a Follower of Plato, a Jew, a Turk, or an Opposer of the Gospel
History: this Difference of Opinions or Professions alters not the matter; it
is the Love of the World instead of GOD, that constitutes the Whole Nature of
the Infidel.

On the other hand, the Christian renounces the world as his Horrid Prison; he
dies to the will of flesh and blood, because it is Darkness, Corruption and
Separation from GOD; he turns from all that is earthly, animal, and temporal,
and stands in a continual Tendency of Faith, and Hope, and Prayer to GOD, to
have a better Nature, a better Life and Spirit, born again into him from above.

Where this Faith is, there is the Christian, The New Creature in CHRIST, born
of the Word and Spirit of GOD: neither time nor place, nor any outward
condition of birth and life, can hinder his Entrance into the Kingdom of GOD.
But where this Faith is not, there is the True Complete Infidel, " The Man of
Earth," the Unredeemed, the Rejecter of the Gospel, " the Son of Perdition,"
that is dead in Trespasses and Sins, without CHRIST, an Alien from the
Commonwealth of Israel, a Stranger to the Covenants of promise, having no Hope,
and without God in the World.

Men are apt to consider a Worldly Spirit only as an infirmity, or pardonable
failure; but it is, indeed, The Great Apostasy from GOD and the Divine Life: it
is not a Single Sin, but the Whole Nature of All Sin; that leaves no
possibility of coming out of our fallen state, till it be totally renounced
with all the strength of our hearts.

Our LORD says, there is but One that is Good and that is GOD. In the same
strictness of expression it must be said, "There is but One Life that is Good,
and that is THE LIFE OF GOD AND HEAVEN:" Depart, in the least degree, from the
Goodness of GOD, and you depart into evil; because nothing is good, but His
Goodness. Choose any life, but THE LIFE OF GOD AND HEAVEN, and you choose
Death; for Death is nothing else but the Loss of THE LIFE OF GOD. The creatures
of this world, have but one life, and one good; and that is the life of this
world; eternal beings have but one life, and one good; and that is THE LIFE OF
GOD The spirit of the soul is in itself nothing else but a Spirit breathed
forth from GOD, that The Life of GOD, the Nature of GOD, The Working of GOD,
The Tempers of GOD, might be manifested in it. GOD could not create man to have
a will of his own, and a life of his own, different from the Life and Will that
is in Himself: this is more impossible than for a good tree to bring forth
corrupt fruit. GOD can only delight in His Own Life, His Own Goodness, and His
Own Perfections; and, therefore, cannot love, or delight, or dwell, in any
Creatures, but where His Own Goodness and Perfections are to be found: like can
only unite with like, heaven with heaven, and hell with hell; and, therefore,
THE LIFE OF GOO must be the Life of the soul, if the soul is to unite with GOD.
Hence it is, that All the Religion of fallen man, All the Methods of our
Redemption, have only this One End, to take from us That Strange and Earthly
Life we have gotten by the Fall, and to kindle again THE LIFE OF GOD AND HEAVEN
in our souls: not to deliver us from that gross and fordid vice called
Covetousness, which Heathens can condemn; but to take The Spirit of This World
entirely from us.

This Spirit is the Whole Nature and Misery of our Fall; it keeps our souls in
a state of Death; and, as long as it governs, makes it impossible for us to be
" Bom again from Above." It is the greatest Blindness and Darkness of our
nature, and keeps us in the grossest Ignorance both of heaven and hell; for
though they are both of them within us, yet we feel neither, while the Spirit of
this World reigns in us. Light, and Truth, and the Gospel, so far as they
concern Eternity, are all empty founds to the Worldly Spirit: his own good, and
his own evil, govern all his hopes and fears; and, therefore, he can have no
religion, or be farther concerned in it, than so far as it can be made
serviceable to the Life of This World: he can know nothing of GOD; for he can
know nothing, feel nothing, taste nothing, delight in nothing, but with earthly
senses, and after an earthly manner. The Natural Man, faith the Apostle,
receives not the Things of THE SPIRIT OF GOD; they are foolishness unto him:
he cannot know them, because they are Spiritually discerned, that is, they can
only be discerned by That Spirit which he has not: he can only contemplate
them, as things foreign to himself; as so many changeable ideas, which he
receives from books, or hearsay, and which become a bad nourishment of all his
natural tempers: he is proud of his ability to discourse about them, and loses
all Humility, all Love of GOD and man, through a vain and haughty contention for
them. He stands at the same distance from a living perception of the Truth, as
the man, that is born blind, does from a living perception of Light; Light must
first be the birth of his own life, before he can enter into a real knowledge
of it.

The measure of our Life, is the measure of our knowledge; and as the Spirit of
our Life works, so the spirit of our understanding conceives. If our Will
works with GOD, though our natural capacity be ever so mean and narrow, we get
a real knowledge of GOD, and Heavenly Truths; for every thing must feel that,
in which it lives. But if our Will works with Satan, and The Spirit of This
World, let our parts be ever so bright, our imaginations ever so soaring; yet
all our Living Knowledge can go no higher or deeper, than the mysteries or
iniquity, and the lusts of flesh and blood. For nothing feels, or tastes, or
understands, or likes, or dislikes, but The Life that is in us: The Spirit that
leads our Life, is The Spirit that forms our understanding. The mind is our
eye, and all the faculties of the mind fee every thing according to The State
the mind is in. If Selfish Pride is The Spirit of our Life, every thing is only
seen, and known, through this glass; every thing is dark, senseless, and
absurd, to the Proud Man, but that which brings food to This Spirit: he
understands nothing, feels nothing, tastes nothing, but as his Pride is made
sensible of it, or capable of being affected with it. His Working Will, which
is The Life of his soul lives and works only in the Element of Pride; and,
therefore, what suits his Pride, is his only good; and what contradicts his
Pride, is all the evil that he can feel or know: his wit, his parts, his
learning, his advancement, his friends, his admirers, his successes, his
conquests, all these are the Only God and Heaven, that he has any Living
Perception of: he indeed can talk of a Scripture God, a Scripture Christ, and
Heaven; but these are only the ornamental furniture of his brain, whilst Pride
is the God of his heart. We are told that GOD resists the Proud, and gives
Grace to the Humble. This is not to be understood, as if GOD by an arbitrary
will, only chose to deal thus with the Proud and Humble man. But the true
ground is this: The Resistance is on the Part of man. Pride resists GOD, it
rejects Him, it turns from Him, and chooses to worship and adore something
else instead of Him: whereas Humility leaves all for GOD., falls down before
him, and opens the whole heart to receive Him. This is the only sense, in which
GOD resists the proud and gives Grace to the Humble. And thus it is in the
true ground of every Good and Evil that rises up in us; we have neither Good
nor Evil, but as it is the Natural Effect of the working of our Own Will,
either with, or against God. Consider the state of him, whose Working Will is
under the Power of Wrath; he fees and hears, and feels, and understands, and
talks, wholly from the Light and Sense of Wrath. All his faculties are only so
many faculties of Wrath; and he has no sense or knowledge, but what his
enlightened Wrath discovers to him. These instances are sufficient to show,
that The State of our Life governs the state of our mind, and forms the degree
and manner of our understanding and knowledge; and that, therefore, there is no
possibility of knowing GOD and Divine Truths, till our Life is Divine, and
wholly dead to The Life and Sprit of This World.

The philosophers of old began all their Virtue, in a total Renunciation of the
Spirit of this World. They saw, with the eyes of Heaven, that darkness was not
more contrary to light, than The Wisdom of This World was contrary to the
Spirit of Virtue: therefore, they allowed of no Progress in Virtue, but so far
as a man had overcome himself, and The Spirit of This World. This gave a Divine
solidity to all their instructions, and proved them to be masters of True
Wisdom. But the doctrine of THE CROSS OF CHRIST, the laft, the highest, the
finishing stroke given to the Spirit of This World, that speaks more in One
Word than all the philosophy of voluminous writers; is yet professed by those,
who are in more friendship with The World, than was allowed to the disciples of
Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, or Epidetus.

Nay, if those ancient sages were to start up amongst us with their Divine
Wisdom, they would bid fair to be treated by the Sons of the Gospel, if not by
foam Fathers of the Church, as dreaming enthusiasts. But it is a standing
truth, that The World can only love its own, and Wisdom can only be justified
of her Children. The Heaven-born Epictetus told one of his scholars, that then
he might first look upon himself, as having made some true proficiency in
Virtue, when the World took him for a fool; an oracle like that, which said,
The Wisdom of This World is Foolishness with GOD.

If it be asked, what is the Apostasy of these last times, or whence is the
Degeneracy of the present Christian Church, it is all the progeny of a Worldly
Spirit. If here we see open wickedness, there only forms of godliness; if here
superficial holiness, political piety, crafty prudence; there haughty fancity,
partial zeal, envious orthodoxy: if almost every where we find a Jewish
blindness, and hardness of heart; and the Church trading with the Gospel as
visibly as the old Jews bought and fold beasts in their Temple: all this is
only so many forms and proper fruits, of the Worldly Spirit. This is the great
chain with which the Devil enslaves mankind; and every son of man is held
captive in it, till through, and by, THE SPIRIT OF CHRIST he breaks from it.
Nothing else can deliver him from it: nothing leaves the World, nothing
renounces it, nothing can possibly overcome it, but THE SPIRIT OF CHRIST. Hence
it is, that many learned men, with all the rich furniture of their brain, live
and die slaves to The Spirit of This World; and can only differ from gross
worldlings, as the Scribes and Pharisees differed from publicans and sinners:
it is because THE SPIRIT OF CHRIST is not the One Only Thing that is the Desire
of their hearts; and, therefore, their learning only works in and with The
Spirit of This World, and becomes itself no small part of the Vanity of
vanities.

Nothing does, or can, keep GOD out of the soul, or hinder His Holy Union with
it, but its desire turned from him: for with whatever the Will works, with
that only the soulliveth, whether it be GOD or the creature. Whatever the soul
desires, that is the fuel of its fire; and as its fuel is, so is the flame
of its Life. A will given up to earthly enjoyments is at grass with
Nebuchadnezzar, and has One Life with the beasts of the field; for Earthly
Desires keep up the Same Life in a man and an ox. For the one only reason, why
the animals of this world have no sense or knowledge of GOD, is because they
cannot form any other than Earthly Desires, and so can only have an Earthly
Life: when, therefore, a man wholly turns his Will to Earthly Desires, he
dies to the excellency of his natural state, and may be said only to live, and
move, and have his being in The Life of This World, as the beasts have. Earthly
food, and c. only desired, and used, for the support of the earthly body, is
suitable to man's present condition, and the order of nature: but when the
Desire and Delight of the soul are set upon Earthly Things, the humanity is
degraded, is fallen from GOD, and The Life of the Soul is made as earthly and
bestial, as the Life of the body, for the creature can be neither higher or
lower, neither better nor worse than as its Will works. What it desires,
that it takes; and of that it eats and lives: wherever, and in whatever,
the Will choseth to dwell and delight, that becomes the soul's Food, its
Condition, its Body, its Clothing, and Habitation. Nothing does, or can, go
with a man into heaven, nothing follows him into hell, but that in which the
Will dwelt, with which it was fed, nourished, and clothed, in This Life. Death
can make no Alteration of This State of the Will: it only takes off the
outward, worldly, covering of flesh and blood, and forces the soul to fee, and
feel, and know, what a Life, what a State, Food, Body, and Habitation, its own
Working Will has brought forth for it. Is there, therefore, any thing in Life
that deserves a thought, but how to keep this Working of our Will in a Right
State; and to get that Purity of Heart, which alone can fee, and know, and
find, and possess GOD? Is there any thing so frightful as This Worldly Spirit,
which turns the soul from GOD; makes it a House of Darkness; and feeds it with
the Food of Time, at the Expense of All the Riches of Eternity?

Now as the Whole Nature of the Gospel Redemption means nothing, but the one,
true and only possible Way, of delivering man from All the Evil of his Fall --
a Fall demonstrable to the senses and understanding of every man, by every
height and depth of nature, by every kind of evil sin and misery in this world,
by every thing he knows of GOD, himself, and the world he lives in;
Christianity is not only the most desirable thing that the heart of man can
think of, but the most intelligible, and even self-evident. It requires not the
aid of learning for its support; it stands upon a Foundation superior to Human
Learning, and may be the Sure Possession of every Plain Man, who has sense
enough to know, whether he is happy or unhappy, good or evil. For this natural
knowledge, is adhered to, is every man's Sure Guide to that One Salvation
preached by the Gospel; which Gospel stands in no more need or Learning and
Critical Art now, than it did when CHRIsT was preaching it upon earth. How
absurd would it have been for any Critics in Greek and Hebrew, to have followed
Christ and his Apostles, as necessary explainers of their Words, which called
for nothing in the hearers, but Penitent Hearts turned to GOD; and declared,
that " They only who, were of GOD, could bear the Word of GOD!" If none but
Learned men have the True Fitness to understand the Word of Scripture, and the
Plain man is to receive it from them; how must he know, which are the Scholars
that have the Right Knowledge? Whence is he to have his information? For no one
need be told, that, ever since Learning has born rule in the church, Learned
Doctors have contradicted and condemned each other, in every Essential Point of
the Christian Doctrine: thousands of Learned men tell the illiterate, they are
lost in this or that Church; and thousands or Learned men tell them, they are
lost if they leave it. If, therefore, Christianity is in the Hands of Scholars,
how must the Plain man come at it? Must he, though unable to understand
Scripture for want of Learning, tell which Learned man is in the right, and
which is not? If so, the Unlearned man must have far the greatest Ability,
since he is to do That for Scholars, which they cannot do for Themselves.

But Christian Redemption is GOD's Mercy to All mankind: and every Fallen man,
as such, has a Fitness of Capacity to lay hold of it. It has no dependence upon
times and places, or the ages and several conditions of the world, or any
outward circumstance of life; as the First man partook of it, so must the Last:
the Learned Linguist, the blind, the deaf and dumb, have but One and the Same
Common Way of finding Life in it; and he that writes large commentaries upon
the Bible, must be faved by Something full as different from book knowledge, as
he who can neither write nor read.

For This Salvation, which is GOD's mercy to the Fallen Soul of man, merely as
Fallen, must be Something that meets every man; and to which every man, as
Fallen, has Something that directs him to turn. For as the Fall of man is the
Reason of his mercy, so the Fall must be the Guide to it: the Want must show
the Thing that is wanted. And, therefore, The Manifestation of this One
Salvation, of Mercy to man, must have a Nature suitable, not to this or that
great Reader of History, or able Critic in Hebrew Roots or Greek Phrases, but
suitable to the Common State and Condition of every Son of Adam. It must be
Something as grounded in human nature, as the Fall itfelf is; which wants no
Art to make it known, but to which the Common Nature of man is the Sure and
Only Guide, in one man as well as another. Now this Something, which is thus
obvious to every man, and which opens The Way to Christian Redemption in every
soul, is A Sense of the Vanity and Misery of this World; and a Prayer of Faith
and Hope to GOD, to be raised to a Better State.

In this Sense, to which every man's own Nature leads him, lies the Whole of
man's Salvation; here the Mercy of GOD, and the Misery of man, are met
together; here the Fall and the Redemption kiss each other. This is the
Christianity which is as old as the Fall; which alone faved the First man, and
can alone save the Last. This is it, on which hang all the Law and the
Prophets, and which fulfils them both; for they have only this End, to turn man
from the Lusts of this Life, to a Desire and Faith, and Hope of a better. Thus
does the Whole of Christian Redemption, considered on the part of man, stand in
the same Degree of Nearness and Plainness to All Mankind: it is as simple and
plain, as the Feeling our Own Evil and Misery and as natural, as the Desire of
being saved and delivered from it.

This Desire and Faith and Hope of A NEW LIFE BORN OF GOD, as our only possible
Redemption and Salvation, is The Spirit of Prayer, that is as opposite to the
Spirit of This World as Heaven is to hell: the one goes upwards with the Same
Strength as the other goes downwards; the one espouses and unites us to CHRIST
and GOD, with the Same Certainty, as the other betrothsand weds us to an
Earthly Nature. The Spirit of Prayer is a pressing forth of this soul out of
this Earthly Life; it is a stretching, with all its Desire, after THE LIFE OF
GOD; it is a leaving, as far as it can, All its Own Spirit, to receive a Spirit
from above, to be One Life, One Love, One Spirit, with CHRIST IN GOD. This
Prayer, which is an emptying itself of all its Own lusts and natural tempers,
and an opening itself for The Light and Love of GOD to enter into it, is the
Prayer in " The Name of CHRIST," to which nothing is denied: for The Love which
GOD bears to the soul, His Eternal Never-ceasing Desire to enter into it, to
dwell in it, and open The Birth of His Holy WORD and SPIRIT in it, stays no
longer, than till the heart opens to receive Him. For nothing does, or can,
keep GOD out of the soul, or hinder His Holy Union with it, but the Desire of
the Heart turned from him.

What, therefore, is so necessary for man, as, with all his Strength, to turn
from every thing is not GOD, and His Holy Will; and with All the Desire,
Delight, and Longing of the Heart, to give up himself wholly to The Life,
Light, and Spirit of God; pleased with nothing in This World, but as it gives
time, and place and occasions of doing and being That, which his Heavenly
Father would have him to do, and be; seeking for no Happiness from this earthly
fallen Life, but That of Overcoming All its Spirit and Tempers?

To conclude: In the full and true knowledge of The Greatness of our Fall, and
The Greatness of our Redemption, lie all the reasons of a deep Humility,
Penitence and Self-denial; and also all the motives and incitements to a most
hearty, sincere, and total Conversion to GOD: and every one is necessarily more
or less a True Penitent, and more or less Truly Converted to GOD, according as
he is more or less deeply or inwardly Sensible of these Truths. And till these
two great Truths have both awakened and enlightened our minds, all Reformation
and pretense to Amendment, is but a dead and superficial thing, a mere garment
of hypocrisy, to hide us from ourselves and others.

Nothing can truly awaken a sinner, but a True Sense of the Deep Possession and
Power that Sin has in him. When he sees, that Sin begins with his Being, that
it rises up in the Essences of his Nature, and lives in the First Forms of his
Life; and that he lies thus chained and barred up in the very jaws of death and
hell, as unable to alter his own State as to create another creature: when,
with this knowledge, he sees that the Free Grace of GOD has provided him a
Remedy equal to his Distress; that he has given him the Holy Blood and Life of
JESUS CHRIST, the True Son of GOD, to enter as deep into his Soul as Sin has
entered, to change the First Forms and Essences of his Life, and bring forth in
them a New Birth of a Divine Nature, that is to be an Immortal Image of THE
HOLY TRINITY, everlastingly safe, enriched, and blessed, in the Bosom of
FATHER, SON, AND HOLY GHOST; when a man once feels these two Truths, there
seems to be no more that you need do for him. You can tell him of no Humility
and Penitence, and Self-abasement, but what is less than his own heart suggests
to him: Humility can only be feigned or false, before this Conviction: he can
now no more take any degree of Good to himself, than assume any Share in the
creation of Angels; and all Pride or Self-esteem of any kind, seems to him to
contain as great a Lie in it, as if he was to say, that he helped to create
himself.

You need not tell him, that he must turn unto GOD with all his Strength, all
his Heart, all his Soul, and all his Spirit; for all that he can offer unto
GOD, seems to him already less than the least of His Mercies toward him. He
has so seen The Exceeding Love of GOD in the Manner and (...) of his
Redemption, that it would be the greatest pain to him, to do any thing but upon
a motive of Divine Love: as his soul has found GOD to be All Love; so it has
but one Desire, and that is, to be itself All Love of GOD.

This is the Conviction and Conversion that necessarily arises from a right
understanding of these Truths: the soul is thereby wholly Consecrated to GOD;
and can like, or love, or do nothing, but what it can, some way or other, turn
into a Service of love toward Him: but where these Truths are not known, or
not acknowledged; there it is not to be wondered at, if Religion has no Root,
that is able to bring forth its proper Fruits. And if the Generality of
Christians are a number of dead, superficial, Consenters to the History of
Scripture doctrines; as unwilling to have the Spirit, as to part with the Form
of their Religion, loath to hear of any kind of Self-denial, fond of Worldly
Ease, Indulgence and Riches; unwilling to be called to The Perfection of the
Gospel, professing and practicing Religion merely as the Fashion and Custom of
the place they are in requires; if some rest in outward Forms, others in a
certain Orthodoxy of opinions; if some expect to be saved by the goodness of
the Sect they are of, others by a certain change of their outward Behavior; if
some content themselves with a Lukewarm Spirit, and others depend upon Their
Own Works; these are Delusions that must happen to all, who do not know, in
some good degree, the true nature of their own Fallen Soul, and what Kind of
Regeneration alone can save them.

But all these errors, delusions, and false rests, are cut up by the Root, as
soon as a man knows the True Reason and Necessity of his wanting so Great a
Savior. For he that knows the Essences of his Soul to be so many Essences of
Sin, which form Sin as they form his Life; entirely incapable of producing Any
Good, till a Birth from GOD has arisen in them; can neither place his
Redemption where it is not, nor seek it cooly and negligently where it is.

For knowing that it is the Hell within his own nature, that only wants to be
destroyed, he is intent only upon bringing Destruction upon That; and this
secures him from False Religion.

And knowing that this Inward Hell cannot be destroyed, unless GOD becomes his
REDEEMER, or REGENERATOR, in the Essences of his soul; this makes him believe
all, expect all, and hope all, from his Savior JESUS CHRIST alone.

And knowing, that All this Redemption, or Salvation, is to be brought about in
the Inmost Ground and Depth of his Heart; this makes him always apply to GOD,
as the GOD of his Heart; and, therefore, what he offers to GOD is his own
Heart; and this keeps him always Spiritually alive, wholly employed and intent
upon the True Work of Religion, the fitting and preparing his Heart for all the
Operations of GOD's HOLY SPIRIT upon it. And so he is a True Inward Christian,
who, as our Blessed LORD speaks has, "The Kingdom of GOD within him," where the
State and Habit of his Heart continually, thankfully WORSHIPS THE FATHER IN
SPIRIT AND IN TRUTH.

FINIS

