THE CHRISTIAN INDEED; Explained, in TWO SERMONS, OF HUMILITY AND CHARITY.
Preached at NEW HAVEN, June 28, 1767. And published at the Desire of Some that
heard them.

By SAMUEL JOHNSON, D. D. Late President of King's-College, at New York, now
Missionary from the Society for propagating the Gospel, and Rector of
CHRIST'S-CHURCH, at Stratford.

NEW HAVEN; Printed by Thomas and Samuel Green. M,DCC,LXVIII.

A Premonition to the Two following Discourses.
AS Humility and Charity are connected together in their own Nature, as well as
in Life and Practice; and as they are the Foundation of all other Virtues, and
consequently of vast Extent and Influence in the Christian Life, in which they
can never be asunder: It is therefore most convenient and advantageous, that
they should go Side by Side in the Two following plain Discourses.

A SERMON on the Nature and Exertions of Humility, and Motives thereunto.
Is It. Epistle of St. PETER, v. 5. -- And be clothed with Humility, for GOD
resists the Proud, but gives Grace to the Humble.
ST. Peter having given a strict Charge to the Presbyters of the Church, to be
faithful in the Discharge of their great and important Function, exhorts the
Younger to submit themselves to the Elder; and adds, yea, all of you be subject
one to another, and be clothed with Humility. -- Implying that Humility is a
Virtue of such large Extent and vast Importance, that it is not only a Duty
incumbent upon the younger and lower Sort, with regard to those that are their
Seniors and Superiors; but even upon every one with Regard to every one; and
should so influence us in all our Deportment, that it should obviously appear
in all our Language and Behavior; so that, by a very apposite and expressive
Metaphor, we may be said to be even clothed with it; and he enforces his
Exhortation with this Reason, that God resists the Proud, but gives Grace to
the Humble. -- Let us then from these Words consider the Nature and Operations
of Humility, and the Reasons that should induce us to the practice of it.

As to the Nature of it, it consists as St. Paul accurately defines it, in not
thinking of ourselves more highly than we ought to think; but in thinking
soberly, according to what we really are, and what God has given us to be;
according to the Measure of Faith; i. e. in Proportion to the Talent God has
committed to our Trust; and this we should do, without Partiality and without
Hypocrisy. So that it consists in thinking, affecting and acting with Regard to
ourselves, and every Thing that concerns us, according to the Truth; and is
therefore the Ground and Foundation of all other Virtues, and does, in Effect,
comprehend them all. For if we think seriously of ourselves, as being what we
really are, we shall be deeply sensible, that we are of ourselves poor, blind,
ignorant and unthinking Creatures, and this will make us earnestly desirous of
spiritual Knowledge, especially of what concerns our best Good and Happiness;
and this will dispose us to study the Holy Scriptures, which are the Word of
God, and give an eager and strong Attention to the Divine Instructions, and
embrace the Truth as it is in Jesus in the Love of it; and like new born Babes
desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that we may grow thereby. -- We shall
moreover, be deeply sensible of our great Weakness, and extreme Impotence, and
Inability to help ourselves, being exceeding irresolute and unstable, and
easily and frequently borne down by Temptations, into sinful Compliances, and
this will make us sensible how much we need the constant Presence and
Assistance of God's Holy Spirit, and be frequently looking up to him, and
crying earnestly to him for his Help upon all Occasions.

Furthermore, if we are truly humble, and think rightly of ourselves, as being
what we really are, we shall have a mortifying Sense of the Plague of our own
Hearts; the Prevalence of Pride and Passion; of our base Lusts and corrupt
Affections; and this will make us watch as well as pray that we enter not into
Temptation, that they may not have Dominion over us; and whereinsoever we have
been misled by them, into any wicked Practices; as in many, many Things we
offend all; we shall have a deep and sorrowful Sense of the vast Load of Guilt
that we have contracted, which will make us walk in deep Abasement every Day,
and we shall find no Rest to the Sole of our Foot, 'til we turn about and
amend, and obtain some good Hopes of Pardon and Reconciliation with God, on
whose Favor (if we have any Sense at all) we must be sensible that all our
Happiness, and all our Hopes entirely depend. -- But then, alas! if we duly
consider, and rightly think of this Affair, what Hopes can we conceive of his
Favor to such guilty, poluted Wretches, merely from the Consideration of his
Goodness and Mercy, while at the same Time, we are in the Hands of his Justice,
and actually under the Sentence of Death for our past Rebellion, and there is
nothing we can do for the future, however so penitent and obedient we may
propose to be, that can ever atone for what is past, or cancel the Debt we
have contracted, or satisfy the divine Justice, whose sacred Laws we have
outrageously violated, and whose most high Authority we have trampled under our
Feet!

What unspeakable Comfort must it then be, under these abasing Convictions, to
hear, that God has laid Help upon One, who is mighty to save, and that his own
blessed Son has taken upon himself the Iniquities of us all, and made an
Atonement for our crying Sins, by the Sacrifice of himself? And with how much
Gratitude and Devotion will a truly humble and contrite Sense of our Sinfulness
bring us to lie prostrate at the Foot of Jesus Christ, looking for Pardon and
Mercy only through his all-sufficient Merits and Mediation?

Thus will true Humility dispose us to give all the Glory to God's free Grace
in Jesus Christ, who alone has redeemed us out of the Hands of Justice, and
put us into a Capacity of obtaining Mercy; a deep Sense of which must engage us
with the most ardent Love and Gratitude to devote ourselves to be his faithful
and obedient Disciples as long as we have a Being.

Moreover, if we rightly think of ourselves, and our Condition in this World,
as being what it really is, we shall have, and constantly carry about us, a
weighty and humbling Sense of our Mortality and Misery; of the many Sicknesses
and Infirmities, and the many Casualties, Losses, Croses, and Disappointments
to which we are daily and hourly exposed -- the great Uncertainty of our Lives
and Health of our dearest Friends and Relatives, and all our Enjoyments, and
the Certainty of our Death to which we are every Moment liable.

If we had a piercing Sense of these Things, it would be sufficient to take
down all the Pride of our Hearts, all our Conceitedness and Self-sufficiency,
and all our towering Thoughts of ourselves, and we should have little Heart to
pride ourselves in fine Clothes, and gay Apparel, and running into every
foolish extravagant Fashion, that this silly Age is continually inventing, and
we should literally be clothed with Humility*

How would a humble Sense of these Things wean us from this uncertain World,
and these dying Bodies? How would it engage us to redeem the Time, and make the
best of every Moment, since we know not what a Day may bring forth? -- How
would it engage us amidst so much Uncertainty to make sure of some Thing? And
since we can be sure of Nothing on this Side the Grave, how would it put us
upon securing that durable Riches and Righteousness which alone will stand us
in Stead, when this vain Word, with all its empty Toys shall be at an End with
us? We should then consider the Interests of our immortal Souls, which are
truly Ourselves, and the Cause of Christ, which is Truth and Righteousness, to
be of infinitely more Weight and Importance than any of the Gratifications of
our bodily Appetites, or any of the little Interests or Concerns of this vain
and transitory World, and this would make us meek and patient under all its
Frowns. -- Such would be the Operations and Effects of true Humility, with
Regard to ourselves, if our Hearts were thoroughly seasoned with it.

Let us now go on and consider how this blessed Temper of Humility would
operate with Regard to God. If we truly knew ourselves, and had moreover a just
and piercing Sense of his infinite Excellency, and inconceivable Greatness,
Majesty and Glory, and of our own Nothingness and Vileness; of his infinite
Purity and Holiness, and of our own Polution and Sinfulness, and at the same
Time were deeply sensible of our entire Dependence upon him, so that we cannot
subsist a Moment without him, and have no Sufficiency of ourselves, so much as
to think any Thing as of ourselves, and of his infinite Fullness and All
sufficiency to all the Purposes of our Subsistence and Happiness. I say, if we
rightly considered what God is, and what we are, and how we stand related to
him, and dependent upon him, how would it lay us prostrate before Him, and make
us Nothing in our own Eyes, and content and rejoice to acknowledge Him to be
all in all? How would it astonish us to think, that ever we should venture to
contemn his most high Authority, and violate his most holy, his most righteous
and reasonable Laws, and inspire us with true Contrition for our past Offenses,
and a most filial and dutiful Disposition and Resolution to be in all Things
entirely devoted, to be conformed and obedient to him for the future, as far as
possible? How would it fill us with Love and Gratitude to Him as our great
Benefactor, and our chief Good, and with Trust and Dependence upon Him as our
only Stay and Support? How would it make us contented with all his Allotments,
and acquiesce in all his Dispensations, and be all Submission and Resignation
to his holy and blessed Will, both in his Commands and Providence, as well as
patient under his Chastisements? How careful should we be not to do any Thing
displeasing to the pure Eyes of his Glory, or to harbor the least Stubbornness
or Untowardness of Temper, or any Thing inconsistent with our Duty to Him; but
willingly resign up every Imagination to be captivated to the Obedience of the
Gospel? we should then take Care above all Things not only, to do justly and
love Mercy, but to walk humbly with our God, and in all our Ways to acknowledge
him, and confide in Him to direct us in all our Steps, and live in the daily
exercise of Prayer and Praise, with the lowest Prostration of Soul, which would
properly express and exercise, as well as improve and cultivate this blessed
Temper of Humility.

And lastly, let us consider how true Humility will operate with Regard to
others, as well as to God and ourselves. And as to this, if we truly know
ourselves, and do not think of ourselves more highly than we ought to think, we
shall consider all Men, and especially all Christians, as our Brethren, as
Children of the same common Parent, however low and mean they may be in outward
Circumstances; and this will dispose us to look on every One with a Brother's
Tenderness and Benevolence. We shall be so far from Haughtiness and
Superciliousness, or despising any One for the Poverty or Meanness of his
Condition, that we shall rather pity and compassionate him, and treat him with
the greater Tenderness and Condescension, considering who it is that made us to
differ, and what we have that we did not receive, and do not hold from his
distinguishing Bounty and Goodness, and that we have nothing to glory in, as
though we received it not. And indeed there is nothing that betrays so much
Ignorance both of God and ourselves, nothing that discovers so much Meanness,
Baseness and Narrowness of Spirit, as Haughtiness of Carriage toward those
that are below us, and Contempt of the Ignorant and Needy, and of the Poor, the
Friendless and Forlorn; as on the other Hand, true Humility is true Greatness
of Spirit, there being nothing more God-like than a kind, condescending
Tenderness and Fellow-feeling with our poor Neighbors in all their
Difficulties and Distresses, joined with a Readiness to do all that we can for
their Comfort and Relief. Hereby we also most resemble Christ, when like him,
we tenderly compassionate the most abject Misery, and submit to the lowest
Offices for the Sake of doing the greatest Good. Let us therefore take his Yoke
upon us, and learn of him to be meek and lowly of Heart as he was; and let the
same Mind be in us which was in Christ Jesus, who though he was in the Form of
God, yet condescended to take upon him the Form of a Servant, in order to
recover a lost and undone World, and so far humbled himself as to become
obedient to Death, even the Death of the Cross, that we might be rescued from
eternal Death, and live forever.

And lastly, a truly humble Spirit is ever a peaceable and forgiving Spirit.
Humility and Charity are truly Sister-Graces, closely connected in the
strictest Harmony and Friendship; so that where the one is, you are sure to
find the other. For, whence come Wars and Fightings, Quarrels and Contentions,
but from our base Lusts and Passions; from Pride and Stubborness, and from an
uncondescending Spirit? And did Men with true Humility and Contrition of Heart,
consider their own Guilt and Pollution, and duly reflect on their own many,
great and heinous Offenses against God, and in how great Need they stand of his
Forgiveness, how ready and glad would they be to forgive and be reconciled one
to another. Thus you see how Humility operates, and how many Ways it exerts and
discovers itself, and that it is indeed the Ground and Foundation of Charity,
and of all other Graces and Virtues, which derive from them both.

And this alone would be Reason sufficient, if there was nothing else, to
induce us to cultivate it, which was to be the last Head of my Discourse. For
since all our Happiness, and all our Hopes, in Time and to all Eternity depend
entirely, next to God, upon the uniform Practice of every Grace and Virtue, it
must especially depend on Humility as the Ground and Foundation of them all.
But let us particularly consider the Motive St. Peter suggests in my Text, that
God resists the Proud, and gives Grace to the Humble. The Proud, the
Conceited and Self-sufficient, as being the most unreasonable and inconsiderate
Set of Men, are God's peculiar Aversion; he beholds them afar off, as they do
especially bear the Image of the Devil, whose Pride occasioned his Fall. And as
Pride begun the Rebellion in Heaven, so it is Pride that has carried it on
upon Earth, ever since Man joined with the Devil in his Apostasy. For as
Humility is the Root and enters into the Nature of every Virtue; so Pride is
the Root, and its hellish Nature operates in every Vice, and indeed renders all
that are tainted with it utterly unqualified for the Grace and Favor of God.
Whereas the Humble are his Delight: For thus says the High and Lofty One who
inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy Place;
with him also who is of a contrite and humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of
the Humble, and to revive the Heart of the contrite Ones. And to this Man will
I look, says he, even to him that is poor, or lowly in his own Eyes; to him
that is poor and of a contrite Spirit and who trembles at my Word. Such a
blessed Thing is Humility that so directly qualifieth us for the peculiar
Favor and gracious Regards of Almighty God! and Blessed are the poor in
Spirit, for their's is the Kingdom of Heaven.

And indeed such is the amiable Nature of Humility that there is nothing like
it to recommend us to the Favor and Esteem, and the good Will and Friendship
of all Men, as well as of God himself. The Man that is clothed with Humility,
discovering it self in all his Words, Actions and Deportment, who can behold
him and not love him and confide in him; Whereas the Proud, the Conceited and
Vain, are ever contemptible, and despised and hated of all Mankind; none can
endure them, or be easy in their Company, but every One shuns and avoids them.
Just in Proportion as they extol or make a vain Show of themselves, they are
despised and derided of others. And no Wonder, for they are considered (which
indeed they are) as poor deluded Wretches. What a contemptible Character is
that of Laodicea? Thou say I am rich and increased in Goods, and stand in
need of Nothing, and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked; contemptible in the Sight of God, and even so in
the Sight of Men; but God knows the Heart. So that if Men had no other View
than their own Interest and Reputation, they would abhor, and guard against
Pride, and cultivate Humility; how much more if they had with all, any Concern
to recommend themselves to the Favor of God?

And lastly, let us consider the different and contrary Fates of them, the one
and the other. Solomon, tells us, Pride goes before Destruction, and a haughty
Spirit before a Fall. This is what is often observed in this World, that by how
much the more any have indulged this hateful Spirit, and made a vain Show of
themselves, by so much the nearer were they to some sad Catastrophe; some fatal
Downfall, which proved so much the more disastrous and conspicuous, by how much
the higher they had got upon the Pinnacle of Pride: But if they never fell
before, they will have a most dreadful Downfall indeed, when they go off the
Stage; having been lifted up to Heaven, they shall be brought down to Hell. On
the other Hand, the same wise Man observes, before Honor is Humility. Humility
is the surest Way we can take to advance ourselves, and our Advancement shall
be the greater, by how much the more we abased ourselves; for a greater and
wiser than he has assured us, That every one that exalts himself shall be
abased, but he that humbles himself shall be exalted. Let us therefore, my
Brethren, be advised by St. Peter, every Day that we live, to humble ourselves
under the mighty Hand of God, that he may exalt us in due Time: for in this
Case, however depressed our Condition may be in this World, to the very last,
we may depend upon it, that at length, from the lowest State on Earth, God will
exalt us to the transcendant Glories of Heaven.

A SERMON on the Nature, Importance, and Grounds of Charity.
The following Discourse was preached and printed at the Desire of the
FREE-MASONS at Stratford, on St. John's Day, June 24, 1767. And introduced with
these Words, after the Text,

My Friends and Brethren,

I Observe from your History and Constitutions, that you profess to be a
Fraternity of Charity, as your great Aim. I cannot therefore do better than
entertain you on that important Subject, which will teach you what it is to be
Masons indeed; to build up that glorious and heavenly Building, the Christian
Church, which is the Body of Christ, (of which Solomon's Temple was the Type)
which Church of Christ, St. Paul tells us is built upon the Foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone.

Is It. Epistle of St. PAUL to TIMOTHY, i. 5. Now the End of the Commandment is
Charity, out of a pure Heart, and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned.
CHARITY is a Thing, in the full Extent of it, of that vast Importance, that it
is necessary to consider it in every Light, and to give the strongest Attention
to it in every View. I shall now consider it, as the Aim and End of the Gospel,
and with Regard to those Principles in the Heart from whence its genuine Fruits
and Emanations must flow.

The Apostle here tells Timothy that he had desired him to take up his
Residence at Ephesus, i. e. as the Bishop of that Church (as all Antiquity
witnesses) it being a City of large Extent and great Importance, that he might
build on the Foundation he had laid; and particularly that he might guard them
against the Insinuations of corrupt Teachers, and charge or denounce to them
that they should not teach any other Doctrine, than the pure Doctrine of the
Gospel, which he had taught them; that they should not turn aside to endless
Genealogies and Fables which were apt to create Disputes and Contentions, and
so to occasion Divisions, and Separations, and so frustrate the very Intention
of the Gospel, which was to promote universal Love and Charity; for, says he,
the very End of the Gospel, and consequently of the Charge Timothy was to give
them, was Charity out of a pure Heart and a good Conscience and Faith unfeigned.

The Commandment then which the Apostle here means is the whole gospel
Dispensation, implying that entire System of Christian Doctrine, which St. Paul
had preached during the two Years that he had resided there, and which Timothy
was to charge them to adhere to, and the End of this he tells us is Charity,
and this is the same as to say, that Charity is the Perfection of Christianity,
for a Thing is then perfected, when its End or Intention is answered. This
therefore teaches us that Christianity without Charity is but an empty Name,
and an unmeaning Thing. Hence it is, that he says in the 13th of the 1st to the
Corinthians, Though I have the Tongue of Men and Angels, and have not Charity, I
am but as sounding Brass, and a tinkling Cymbal, and though I have all Faith so
that I could remove Mountains, and have not Charity, I am Nothing. Nay, says
he, though I give all my Goods to feed the Poor, and even my Body to be burnt,
and have not Charity, it profits me nothing. It is therefore of the utmost
Importance that we consider carefully what this Charity really is, that he lays
so much Stress upon; for it is plain from these Words, that it would be a
miserable Thing indeed to be deceived about it.

Now it is plain from this Text, that the Apostle means something more than
giving our Goods to feed the Poor; nay, something of greater Importance than
preaching the Gospel ever so eloquently; nay, something of greater Weight and
Worth, than even dying in the Cause of it, by giving our Bodies to be burnt;
and something that a Man may do all these Things, and yet be destitute of it.
What then can it be? -- I answer, it means an entire Habit of Benevolence, or
good Will exerted, not in some few Instances only, however so splendid, but
universally in all its Branches toward God and Man, and attended with all its
blessed Fruits. It is not, now and then a few transient Acts, but it is a
settled Habit or Frame of the Soul; a Soul that has no other than an entire
well-meaning, and is of such a disinterested and unbiased Love and Good Will,
that it honestly aims at the Truth and Right of the Case in every Thing that it
thinks, speaks and does; a Soul that is entirely devoted, as far as human
Frailty can go, to be governed by that Wisdom which is from above, which is
first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and
good Fruits, without Partiality and without Hypocrisy: so St. James describe^
it. It is not therefore so properly any particular Virtue, as an habitual
Temper or Frame of the Soul, from whence as from a Fountain, every Virtue
flows; or a steady fixed Principle from whence every Thing that is truly pious,
virtuous and amiable in Life perpetually derives; Whatsoever Things are true;
whatsoever Things are honest, whatsoever Things are just, whatsoever Things are
pure, whatsoever Things are lovely, whatsoever Things are of good Report, if
there be any Virtue, if there be any Praise; all these Things continually flow
from it, as their living and never failing Source. Hence St. Paul describes
this most amiable Principle of Charity in the following most beautiful Manner;
Charity suffers long and is kind, says he. Charity envieth not; Charity
vaunteth not itself; is not puffed up; does not behave itself unseemly, seeks
not her own; is not easily provoked; thinks no Evil; rejoiceth not in
Iniquity, but rejoiceth in the Truth: bears all Things; believes all Things;
hops all Things; endures all Things, and Charity never fails. Such are the
admirable and most delightful Properties of this divine Principle of Charity!

But alas! if this be Charity, where is she fled? where shall we seek to find
her? Time was when she dwelt on Earth, when Christianity was in its greatest
Vigor and Purity, and in its primitive Glory and Simplicity. But if we look on
the present Condition of Things, one would be apt to think, she is long since
fled to Heaven! She is hardly now to be found on Earth, unless in a few humble
and holy Men of Heart. Certainly the very best of us are extremely deficient,
and fall sadly short of coming up to this amiable Character, wherein the true
Beauty, and Glory of Christianity consists. Were we but animated with this
divine Principle, as above described, we should abhor every Thing that is evil,
and cleave to every Thing that is good: we should not only do justly, but love
Mercy, and walk humbly with our God. -- The least Thing that Charity would put
us upon, would be to do no Injury; to be entirely inoffensive in all our
Behavior; to avoid every Thing that might any Way disoblige one another, and
much more whatsoever could be any Way hurtful to our Neighbors, whether in
Soul, Body or Estate. I say these are the lowest Offices of Charity. So far
from all that is wrong, that we should be very careful to say and do always
what is right, just and honest, true and faithful. But still Charity in all
this would have got but a little Way. It not only does justly, but moreover, it
loves Mercy: it delights in every Thing that is tender and friendly, kind and
obliging, compassionate and merciful; and is ready to every good Office,
whereby we may render ourselves either amiable or useful to our Brethren,
especially such as are in Necessity or Distress, and in every Thing that
promotes the public Peace and Weal, and the Glory of God. Such are the blessed
Fruits of Charity; for it looks on every One with a Brother's Eye, as standing
in a very near and tender Relation, as having all one heavenly Father, one
blessed Redeemer, and one holy Sanctifier. Hence Charity rises higher and
embraces the whole Family in Heaven and Earth, and from the Children it rises
yet higher and higher, and loves and delights in the great Father and Lord of
all Things, as our chief and sovereign Good, above every Thing in the World
beside, whose Interest is one and the same with that of all his Creatures,
saying, Whom is there in Heaven but Thee, and there is nothing on Earth that I
desire in Comparison of Thee. Thus Charity rises from Earth to Heaven, from
the Creature to the Creator, and devotes itself entirely to Him, who is all in
all! And when it has engaged us to be thus devoted without Reserve to him, we
at once fall prostrate before him, and make it the grand Care and Business of
our Lives to walk humbly with our God, in a lowly Sense of our entire
Dependence upon Him for all our Enjoyments, and all our Hopes; which will
engage us to do all our Duties both toward God and Man, from a Sense of Duty
to Him, and a solicitous Concern to serve and please him in all that we do.

Thus you see the vast Extent and Influence of this noble Principle of Charity,
which St. Paul tells us in my Text, is the End of the Commandment; the End of
the whole System of Christianity, for Love, he says, is the fulfilling of the
Law; this Law of Grace. For this End, that we may be thus devoted to the Love
of God and Man; this divine Religion teaches us, both our single and joint
entire Dependence upon him our common heavenly Parent, and our Accountableness
to him for all our Behavior, who searches the Hearts, and tries the Reins of
the Children of Men. For this End it teaches us a most wonderful and
mysterious Scene of Love in the Condescension of the blessed Jesus, to die a
bitter Death that we might live forever; to be made Sin for us, who knew no
Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him: and when he was
rich, to become poor, that we through his Poverty might be made rich. And for
this End it requires us to rely on the heavenly Assistance of the holy Spirit;
the Spirit of Love and Peace, (whose Aid it promises to our sincere Prayers
and Endeavors) to inspire us with this divine Principle, that we may be
followers of God as dear Children, and walk in Love, as Christ also has loved
us and given himself for us; and forgive one another as God for Christ's Sake
forgiveth us. For this End are we by our Baptism admitted into the Family of
God, which is the Family of Love, and made his Children by Adoption and Grace,
and thereby obliged to consider all Christians as our Brethern and Sisters, and
to treat them accordingly, to be pitiful and courteous, kind and obliging in
all our Deportment one toward another; to avoid all harsh Constructions, and
to put the kindest Constructions we can upon what every One says and does. And
for this End are we required once every Week to join together in the same
public Worship, in paying our common Homage and Adoration as Children to our
one common heavenly Father, lifting up holy Hands, without Wrath and doubting,
and to delight in his Worship and Service: and as often as may be, to partake
together at his holy Table, the common heavenly Banquet; the holy Feast of
Love, where we have set before us a lively Representation of the most
astonishing Instance of Love that ever the Sun beheld, in the Death of Christ,
who spilt his precious Blood alike for us all; than which surely nothing can be
imagined more effectual to unite us to God, and to knit our Hearts together in
the holy Bands of universal Love and Charity. Thus you see how every Thing in
Christianity drives at this single Point! So that it abundantly appears, that
the End of the Commandment is indeed Charity; and that, out of a pure Heart,
and a good Conscience and Faith unfeigned.

It is Charity out of a pure Heart. From whence it is plain, that Charity must
be seated and rooted in the Heart, for it is out of the Abundance of the Heart
that the Mouth speaks, and the Hands act. The Heart is the Fountain, by which
is meant, according to the Nature of Scripture Language, a Principle of
Sincerity and Integrity, or an entire well-meaning, that aims at nothing but
Truth and Right, and abhors all Disguise and double Dealing, and disdains all
Deceit and Hypocrisy. My Son, give me thy Heart, is the Command of God to every
One of us; for as a Man thinks in his Heart, so is he: i. e. he is good or
bad according to the real Intention and Disposition of his Heart. Charity
therefore is not to be estimated by ever so devout an Appearance, or so
courteous a Carriage or fair Professions; it consists not in Word and in
Tongue only, but in Deed and in Truth: It must proceed out of a pure Heart, if
it would be genuine; i. e. a Heart that is pure and free from any corrupt
Mixture of Insincerity or Ill Will. But this Phrase, a pure Heart, does also
imply a Heart free from all impure, unchaste or debauched Tempers or base
Lusts. True Charity is a holy Principle that abhors all Filthiness and
superfluity of Naughtiness. So that if we love our Neighbor ever so heartily,
yet if at the same Time we aim at gratifying any base Lust, or suffer any
sinful Disposition or Design to harbor in our Breast, this will utterly
destroy it, as being inconsistent with the very Nature of it. Would we then be
possessed of this holy Principle, we must cleanse our selves from all
Filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God,
and beg of God to create in us clean Hearts and renew in us right Spirits, that
out of the Abundance of the Heart, devoted to God, and all that is good, our
Months may speak, and our Hands act upon all Occasions such Things as are good,
and well pleasing in the Sight both of God and Man.

For then would Charity also proceed from a good Conscience; i. e. a Conscience
that is well instructed in the Knowledge of our Duty upon all Occasions, and in
all its Branches, and has a serious and conscientious Concern to do it. This is
the Account St. Paul gives of his own Conduct, which speaks him to be
solicitous above all Things, as we should all be, to think and do always such
Things as be rightful. And herein, says he, do I exercise myself to have always
a Conscience void of Offense, both toward God and toward Men. And this is our
Rejoicing, says he again, the Testimony of our Consciences, that in Simplicity,
and godly Sincerity, not by fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have
our Conversation in the World: than which Words, none can be devised more
apposite to express what he here means by such a good Conscience as must be the
Foundation on which true Charity is built, and the Root from which alone it can
spring. Vain therefore are all the Pretenses to Charity, unless we live in all
good Conscience in the whole of our Conduct, unless we study sincerely to know
it in all its Branches and Exertions, and the Rules by which it must be
regulated; and unless we honestly and diligently endeavor to frame the Temper
of our Hearts, and the Conduct of our whole Lives, as exactly conformable to
them, as ever we can.

For lastly this true Charity whereof the Apostle speaks, must also spring from
a Principle of Faith unfeigned, which is nearly connected with a pure Heart,
and a good Conscience; for it is Faith which purifies the Heart and works by
Love; the Principles of which, are of so pure and heavenly a Nature, as to be
utterly inconsistent with all Impurity and Insincerity; and therefore if they
be unfeignedly believed and embraced, they will not fail to banish every
filthy, polluted and ill-designing Imagination out of the Heart, and then the
pure Love both of God and Man will of Course take Place. Moreover, these divine
Principles of our most holy Faith are the Foundations of all those Rules of
Action with which a good Conscience is informed, and the great Motives by which
it is governed, in all the Exertions of Charity; so that where our Faith or
Belief of the Principles of Christianity is unfeigned, it cannot fail but true
Charity will assuredly obtain; every Principle of Christian Belief, implying in
it a Rule or a Motive to Charity. Let us then unfeignedly and without any Doubt
or Hesitation, and from the very Bottom of our Hearts, believe every Doctrine
or Instruction which our blessed Lord has taught us; for it will ever be found
that our Charity will rise or subside, improve or abate, in exact Proportion to
the Sincerity of our Faith. But let it be also remembered, that Faith many
Times signifies an unfeigned Persuasion, concerning the Lawfulness and Goodness
of our Actions, as well as the Truth of our Principles. This therefore must
make us always wary and considerate, and careful that we be never warped or
biassed by any Prejudice or Partiality. And lastly, as true saving Faith does
always imply in it a practical Faithfulness to God and Christ, and to one
another, in all our Deportment, it must therefore ever be our Resolution in all
the Exertions of Charity to act the truly faithful, honest, and upright Part,
that so neither our Faith nor Charity may ever be reproved.

Thus I have explained to you the amiable Nature and genuine Principles of true
Christian Charity, and shown you how this is the End of the Commandment, and
the Perfection of Christianity. Let it therefore be the great Concern of our
Lives to prove ourselves Christians indeed, by abounding in all the Fruits of
Charity, out of a pure Heart a good Conscience and Faith unfeigned; for this is
the blessed Disposition that will in the Nature of it directly qualify us for
Heaven, and make us meet to be Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light, where nothing but Truth and Charity will for ever prevail. For now
abides Faith, Hope, and Charity, these Three, but the greatest of these is
Charity; because Charity never fails, but will still remain beyond the Grave,
our Duty and Delight, our Perfection and Happiness as long as Eternity itself
shall endure! In Order to which, let us continually mortify and guard ourselves
against all those base Lusts and untoward Tempers which are so contrary to
Charity, that this divine Principle may ever reign and prevail in our Hearts
and govern our Lives. And to our Endeavors, let us add our daily and earnest
Prayers (in the Words of our excellent Church) to that God who has taught us
that all our Doings without Charity are nothing worth, that he would send his
Holy Ghost, and pour into our Hearts this most excellent Gift of Charity, the
very Bond of Peace and of all Virtues, without which, whosoever lives is
counted dead before him; that being dead unto Sin, we may be alive unto God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord; and so be qualified for that blessed World before
us, where God and Truth and Charity shall forever reign: Which God our heavenly
Father, of his infinite Mercy grant, through his free Grace and the Merits and
Intercession of his blessed Son Jesus Christ, and by the gracious and renewing
Influences of his holy Spirit. To which one eternal God, in Three Persons, be
ascribed, as is most due, all Honor and Glory, Dominion and Power, World
without End. AMEN.


