LETTERS FROM A FARMER.

LETTERS FROM A FARMER in Pennsylvania.

To the INHABITANTS OF THE BRITISH COLONIES.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY MEIN AND FLEEMING, AND TO BE SOLD BY JOHN MEIN, AT THE
LONDON BOOK-STORE, NORTHSIDE OF KING STREET. M DCC LXVIII.

LETTERS FROM A FARMER.
LETTER I.
My Dear Countrymen,
I AM a FARMER, settled after a variety of fortunes, near the banks, of the
river Delaware, in the province of Pennsylvania. I received a liberal
education, and have been engaged in the busy scenes of life: But am now
convinced, that a man may be as happy without bustle, as with it. My farm is
small, my servants are few, and good; I have a little money at interest; I wish
for no more: my employment in my own affairs is easy; and with a contented
grateful mind, I am completing the number of days allotted to be my divine
goodness.

Being master of my time, I spend a good deal of it in a library, which I think
the most valuable part of my small estate; and being acquainted with two or
three gentlemen of abilities and learning, who honor me with their friendship,
I believe I have acquired a greater share of knowledge in history, and the laws
and constitution of my country, than is generally attained by men of my class,
many of them not being so fortunate as I have been in the opportunities of
getting information.

From infancy I was taught to love humanity and liberty. Inquiry and experience
have since confirmed my reverence for the lessons then given me, by convincing
me more fully of their truth and excellence. Benevolence toward mankind
excites wishes for their welfare, and such wishes endear the means of
fulfilling them. Those can be found in liberty alone, and therefore her sacred
cause ought to be espoused by every man, on every occasion, to the utmost of
his power: as a charitable but poor person does not withold his mite, because
he cannot relieve all the distresses of the miserable, so let not any honest
man suppress his sentiments concerning freedom, however small their influence
is likely to be. Perhaps he may " POPE.
touch some wheel" that will have an effect greater that he expects.

These being my sentiments, I am encouraged to offer to you, my countrymen, my
thoughts on some late transactions, that in my opinion are of the utmost
importance to you. Conscious of my defects, I have waited some time, in
expectation of seeing the subject treated by persons much better qualified for
the task; but being therein disappointed, and apprehensive that longer delays
will be injurious, I venture at length to request the attention of the public,
praying only for one thing, -- that is, that these lines may be read with the
same zeal for the happiness of British America, with which they were wrote.

With a good deal of surprise I have observed, that little notice has been
taken of an act of parliament, as injurious in its principle to the liberties
of these colonies, as the STAMP ACT was: I mean the act for suspending the
legislation of New York.

The assembly of that government complied with a former act of parliament,
requiring certain provisions to be made for the troops in America, in every
particular, I think, except the articles of salt, pepper, and vinegar. In my
opinion they acted imprudently, considering all circumstances, in not complying
so far, as would have given satisfaction, as several colonies did: but my
dislike of their conduct in that instance, has not blinded me so much, th^^ I
cannot plainly perceive, that they have been punished in a manner pernicious to
American freedom, and justly alarming to all the colonies.

If the BRITISH PARLIAMENT has a legal authority to order, that we shall
furnish a single article for the troops here, and to compel obedience to that
order; they have the same right to order us to supply those troops with arms,
clothes, and every necessary, and to compel obedience to that order also; in
short, to lay any burdens they please upon us. What is this but taxing us at a
certain sum, and leaving to us only the manner of raising it? How is this mode
more tolerable than the STAMP ACT? Would that act have appeared more pleasing
to AMERICANS, if being ordered thereby to raise the sum total of the taxes, the
mighty privilege had been left to them, of saying how much should be paid for
an instrument of writing on paper, and how much for another on parchment?

An act of parliament commanding us to do a certain thing, if it has any
validity, is a tax upon us for the expense that accrues in complying with it,
and for this reason, I believe, every colony on the continent, that chose to
give a mark of their respect for GREAT BRITAIN, in complying with the act
relating to the troops, cautiously avoided the mention of that act, lest their
conduct should be attributed to its supposed obligation.

The matter being thus stated, the assembly of New York either had, or had not
a right to refuse submission to that act. If they had, and I imagine no
AMERICAN will say, they had not, then the parliament had no right to compel
them to execute it. -- If they had not that right, they had no right to punish
them for not executing it; and therefore had no right to suspend their
legislation, which is a punishment. In fact, if the people of New York cannot
be legally taxed but by their own representatives, they cannot be legally
deprived of the privileges of making laws, only for insisting on that exclusive
privilege of taxation. If they may be legally deprived in such a case of the
privilege of making laws, why may they not, with equal reason, be deprived of
every other privilege? Or why may not every colony be treated in the same
manner, when any of them shall dare to deny their assent to any impositions
that shall be directed? Or what signifies the repeal of the STAMP ACT, if these
colonies are to lose their other privileges, by not tamely surrendering that of
taxation?

There is one consideration arising from this suspicion, which is not generally
attended to, but shows it is importance very clearly. It was not necessary that
this suspension should be caused by an act of parliament. The crown might have
restrained the governor of New York, even from calling the assembly together,
by its prerogative in the royal governments. This step, I suppose, would have
been taken, if the conduct of the assembly of New York, had been regarded as an
act of disobedience to the crown alone: but it is regarded as an act of
disobedience to the authority of the BRITISH LEGISLATURE. This gives the
suspension a consequence vastly more affecting. It is a parliamentary assertion
of the supreme authority of the British legislature over these colonies in the
part of taxation; and is intended to COMPEL New York unto a submission to that
authority. It seems therefore to me as much a violation of the liberty of the
people of that province, and consequently of all these colonies, as if the
parliament had sent a number of regiments to be quartered upon them till they
should comply. For it is evident, that the suspension is meant as a compulsion;
and the method of compelling is totally indifferent. It is indeed probable,
that the sight of red coats, and the beating of drums would have been most
alarming, because people are generally more influenced by their eyes and ears
than by their reason: But whoever seriously considers the matter, must
perceive, that a dreadful stroke is aimed at the liberty of these colonies: For
the cause of one is the cause of all. If the parliament may lawfully deprive
New York of any of its rights, it may deprive any, or all the other colonies of
their rights; and nothing can possibly so much encourage such attempts, as a
mutual inattention to the interst of eath other. To divide, and thus to
destroy, is the first political maxim in attacking those who are powerful by
their union. He certainly is not a wise man, who folds his arms and reposeth
himself at home, seeing with unconcern the flames that have invaded his
neighbor's house, without any endeavors to extinguish them. When Mr.
Hampden's ship money cause, for three shillings and four-pence, was tried, all
the people of England, with anxious expectation, interested themselves in the
important decision; and when the slightest point touching the freedom of a
single colony is agitated, I earnestly wish, that all the rest may with equal
ardour support their sister. Very much may be said on this subject, but I hope,
more at present is unnecessary.

With concern I have observed that two assemblies of this province have sat and
adjourned, without taking any notice of this act. It may perhaps be asked, what
would have been proper for them to do? I am by no means fond of inflammatory
measures. I detest them. -- I should be sorry that any thing should be done
which might justly displease our sovereign or our mother country. But a firm,
modest exertion of a free spirit, should never be wanting on public occasions.
It appears to me, that it would have been sufficient for the assembly, to have
ordered our agents to represent to the King's ministers, their sense of the
suspending act, and to pray for its repeal. Thus we should have borne our
testimony against it; and might therefore reasonably expect that on a like
occasion, we might rec^ive the same assistance from the other colonies.

"Concordia res parvae crescunt.
Small things grow great by concord. --
A FARMER.

LETTER II.
Beloved Countrymen,
THERE is another late act of parliament, which seems to me to be as
destructive to the liberty of these colonies, as that inserted in my last
letter; that is, the act for granting the duties on paper, glass, etc. It
appears to me to be unconstitutional.

The parliament unquestionably possesses a legal authority to regulate the
trade of Great Britain, and all its colonies. Such an authority is essential to
the relation between a mother country and its colonies; and necessary for the
common good of all. He, who considers these provinces as states distinct from
the British Empire, has very slender notions of justice, or of their interests.
We are but parts of a whole; and therefore there must exist a power somewhere,
to preside, and preserve the connection in due order. This power is lodged in
the parliament; and we are as much dependant on Great Britain, as a perfectly
free people can be on another.

I have looked over every statute relating to these colonies, from their first
settlement to this time; and I find every one of them founded on this
principle, till the STAMP ACT administration. All before are calculated to
preserve or promote a mutually beneficial intercourse between the several
constituent parts of the empire; For the satisfaction of the reader, recitals
from former acts of parliament relating to these colonies are added. By
comparing these with the modern acts, he will perceive their great difference
in expression and intention.

The 12th Cha. II Chap. 18, which forms the foundation of the laws relating to
our trade, by enacting that certain productions of the colonies shall be
carried to England only, and that no goods shall be imported from the
plantations but in ships belonging to England, Ireland, Wales, Berwick, or the
Plantations, etc. begins thus: "For the increase of shipping, and encouragement
of the navigation of this nation, wherein, under the good providence and
protection of God, the wealth, safety, and strength of this kingdom is so much
concerned," etc.

The 15th Cha. II. Chap. 7. enforcing the same regulation, assigns these
reasons for it. "In regard his Majesty's plantations, beyond the seas, are
inhabited and peopled by his subjects of this his kingdom of England; for the
maintaining a greater correspondence and kindness between them, and keeping
them in a firmer dependence upon it, and rendering them yet more beneficial and
advantageous unto it, in the further employment and increase of English
shipping and seamen, vent of English woolen, and other manufactures and
commodities, rendering the navigation to and from the same more safe and cheap,
and making this kingdom a staple, not only of the commodities of those
plantations, but also of the commodities of other countries and places for the
supplying of them; and it being the usage of other nations to keep their
plantations trade to themselves," etc.

The 25th Cha. II. Chap. 7, made expressly "for the better securing the
plantation trade," which imposes duties on certain commodities exported from
one colony to another, mentions this last for imposing them: "Whereas by one
act passed in the 12th year of your Majesty's reign, entitled, an act for
encouragement of shipping and navigation, and by several other laws, passed
since that time, it is permitted to ship, etc. sugars, tobacco, etc. of the
growth, etc. of any of your Majesty's plantations in America etc. from the
places of their growth, etc. to any other of your Majesty's plantations in
those parts, etc. and that without paying of custom for the same, either at the
lading or unlanding the said commodities, by means whereof the trade and
navigation in those commodities from one plantation to another is greatly
increased, and the inhabitants of diverse of those colonies, not contenting
themselves with being supplied with those commodities for their own use, free
from all customs (while the subjects of this your kingdom of England have paid
great customs and impositions for wh^t of them has been spent here) but,
contrary to the express letter of the aforesaid laws, have brought into diverse
parts of Europe great quantities thereof, and do also vend great quantities
thereof to the shipping of other nations, who bring them into diverse parts of
Europe, to the great hurt and diminution of your Majesty's customs, and of the
trade and navigation of this your kingdom; for the prevention thereof, etc.

The 7th and 8th Will. III. Chap. 21, entitled, "An act for preventing frauds,
and regulating abuses in the plantation trade," recites that, "notwithstanding
diverse acts, etc. great abuses are daily committed, to the prejudice of the
English navigation, and the loss of a great part of the plantation trade to
this kingdom, by the artifice and cunning of ill disposed persons: for remedy
whereof, etc. And whereas in some of his Majesty's American plantations, a
doubt or misconstruction has arisen upon the before mentioned acts, made in the
25th year of the reign of Charles II. whereby certain duties are laid upon the
commodities therein enumerated (which by law may be transported from one
plantation to another, for the supplying of each others wants) as if the same
were, by the payment of those duties in one plantation, discharged from giving
the securities intended by the aforesaid acts, made in the 12th 22d and 23d
years of the reign of King Charles II. and consequently be at liberty to go to
any foreign market in Europe," etc.

The 6th Anne, Chap. 37, reciting the advancement of trade, etc. and
encouragement of ships of war, etc. grants to the captors the property of all
prizes carried into America, subject to such customs and duties, etc. as if the
same had been first imported into any part of Great Britain, and from thence
exported, etc.

This was a gift to persons acting under commissions from the crown, and
therefore it was reasonable that the terms prescribed should be complied with
-- more especially as the payment of such duties was intended to give a
preference to the productions of the British colonies, over those of other
colonies. However, being found inconvenient to the colonies, about four years
afterward, this act was, for that reason, so far repealed, by another act all
prize goods, imported into any part of Great Britain, from any of the
plantations, were liable to such duties only in Great Britain, as in case they
had been of the growth and produce of the plantations. etc.

The 6th Geo. II. Chap. 13, which imposes duties on foreign rum, sugar and
molasses, imported into the colonies, shows the reason thus. -- "Whereas the
welfare and prosperity of your Majesty's sugar colonies in America, are of the
greatest consequence and importance to the trade, n^vigation and strength of
this kingdom; and whereas the planters of the said sugar colonies, have of late
years fallen under such great discouragements that they are unable to improve
or carry on the sugar trade, upon an equal footing with the foreign sugar
colonies, without some advantage and relief be given to them from
Great Britain: For remedy whereof, and for the good and welfare of your
Majesty's subjects." etc.

The 29th Geo. II. Chap. 26. and the 1st Geo. III. Chap. 9. which contains 6th
Geo. II. Chap. 13, declare, that the said act has, by experience, been found
useful and beneficial. etc. These are all the most considerable statutes
relating to the commerce of the colonies; and it is thought to be utterly
unnecessary to add any observations to these extracts, to prove that they were
all intended solely as regulations of trade.


and though many of them imposed duties on trade, yet those duties were always
imposed with design to restrain the commerce of one part, that was injurious to
another, and thus to promote the general welfare. The raising a revenue thereby
was never intended. Thus, the king by his judges in his courts of justice,
imposes fines, which all together amount to a considerable sum, and contribute
to the support of government: but this is merely a consequence arising from
restrictions, which only meant to keep peace, and prevent confusion; and surely
a man would argue very loosely, who should (...) from hence, that the King has
a (...) to levy money in general upon his subjects: Never did the British
parliament, till the period abovementioned, think of imposing duties in
America, FOR THE PURPOSE OF RASING A REVENUE. Mr. Greenville's sagacity first
introduced this language, in the preamble to the 4th of Geo. III. Chapter 15, which
has these words -- "And whereas it is just and necessary that A REVENUE BE
RAISED IN YOUR MAJESTY'S SAID DOMIONS IN AMERICA, for defraying the expenses of
defending, protecting, and securing the same: We your Majesty's most dutiful
and loyal subjects, THE COMMONS OF GREAT BRITAIN, in parliament assembled,
being desirous to make some provision in the present session of parliament,
toward raising the said revenue in America, have resolved to give and grant
unto your Majesty the several rates and duties herein after mentioned," etc.

A few months after came the Stamp Act, which reciting this, proceeds in the
same strange mode of expression, thus -- "And whereas it is just and necessary,
that provision be made FOR RAISING A FURTHER REVENUE WITHIN YOUR MAJESTY's
DOMINIONS IN AMERICA, toward defraying the said expenses, we your Majesty's
most dutiful and loyal subjects, the COMMONS OF GREAT BRITAIN, etc. GIVE and
GRANT," etc. as before.

The last act, granting duties upon paper, etc. carefully pursues these modern
precedents. The preamble is, "Whereas it is expedient that a revenue should be
raised in your Majesty's dominions in America, for making a more certain and
adequate provision for the defraying the charge of the administration of
justice, and the support of civil government in such provinces, where it shall
be found necessary; and toward the further defraying the expenses of
defending, protecting and securing the said dominions, we your Majesty's most
dutiful and loyal subjects, the COMMONS OF GREAT BRITAIN, etc. give and grant,"
etc. as before.

Here we may observe an authority expressly claimed to impose duties on these
colonies; not for the regulation of trade; not for the preservation or
promotion of a mutually beneficial intercourse between the several constituent
parts of the empire, heretofore the sole objects of parliamentary institutions;
but for the single purpose of levying money upon us.

This I call an It is worthy observation how quickly subsidies, granted in
forms usual and accustomable (though heavy) are borne; such a power has use and
custom. On the other side, what coffeehouse and disturbances subsidies
formed on new moulds do raise (such an inbred hatred novelty does hatch) is
evident by examples of former times. Lord Cock's 2d institute, p. 33.
innovation; and a most dangerous innovation. It may perhaps be objected, that
Great Britain has a right to lay what duties she pleases upon her Some people,
whose minds seem incapable of uniting two ideas, think that Great Britain has
the same right to impose duties on the exports to these colonies, as on those
to Spain and Portugal, etc. Such persons attend so much to the idea of
exportation, that they entirely drop that of the connection between the mother
country and her colonies. If Great Britain had always claimed, and exercised an
authority to compel Spain and Portugal to import manufactures from her only,
the cases would be parallel: But as she never pretended to such a right, they
are at liberty to get them where they please; and if they choose to take them
from her, rather than from other nations, they voluntary consent to pay the
duties imposed on them.
exports, and it makes no difference to us, whether they are paid here or there.

To this I answer. These colonies require many things for their use, which the
laws of Great Britain prohibit them from getting any where but from her. Such
are paper and glass.

That we ^ay be legally bound to pay any general duties on these commodities,
relative to the regulation of trade, is granted; but we being obliged by her
laws to take them from Great Britain, any special duties imposed on their
exportation to us only, with intention to raise a revenue from us only, are as
much taxes upon us, as those imposed by the Stamp Act.

What is the difference in substance and right, whether the same sum is raised
upon us by the rates mentioned in the Stamp Act, on the use of the paper, or by
these duties, on the importation of it. It is nothing but the edition of a
former book, with a new title page.

Suppose the duties were made payable in Great Britain?

It signifies nothing to us, whether they are to be paid here or there. Had the
Stamp Act directed, that all the paper should be landed in Florida, and the
duties paid there, before it was brought to the British Colonies, would the act
have raised less money upon us, or have been less destructive of our rights? By
no means: For as we were under a necessity of using the paper, we should have
been under the necessity of paying the duties. Thus, in the present case, a
like necessity will subject us, if this act continues in force, to the payment
of the duties now imposed.

Why was the Stamp Act then so pernicious to freedom? It did not enact, that
every man in the colonies should buy a certain quantity of paper -- No: It only
directed, that no instrument of writing should be valid in law, if not made on
stamp paper, etc.

The makers of that act knew full well, that the confusions that would arise
upon the disuse of writings would COMPEL the colonies to use the stamp paper,
and therefore to pay the taxes imposed. For this reason the Stamp Act was said
to be a law THAT WOULD EXECUTE ITSELF. For the very same reason, the last act
of parliament, if it is granted to have any force here, will execute itself,
and will be attended with the very same consequences to American Liberty.

Some persons perhaps may say, that this act lays us under no necessity to pay
the duties imposed, because we may ourselves manufacture the articles on which
they are laid; whereas by the Stamp Act no instrument of writing could be good,
unless made on British paper, and that too stamped.

Such an objection amounts to no more than this, that the injury resulting to
these colonies, from the total disuse of British paper and glass, will not be
so afflicting as that which would have resulted from the total disuse of
writing among them; for by that means even the stamp act might have been
eluded. Why then was it universally detested by them as slavery itself? Because
it presented to these devoted provinces nothing but a choice of calamities,
imbittered by indignities, each of which it was unworthy of freemen to bear.
But is no injury a violation of right but the greatest injury? If the eluding
the payment of the duties imposed by the stamp act, would have subjected us to
a more dreadful inconvenience, than the eluding the payment of those imposed by
the late act; does it therefore follow, that the last is no violation of our
rights, though it is calculated for the same purpose that the other was, that
is, to raise money upon us, WITHOUT OUR CONSENT?

This would be making right to consist, not in an exemption from injury, but
from a certain degree of injury.

But the objectors may further say, that we shall sustain no injury at all by
the disuse of British paper and glass. We might not, if we could make as much
as we want. But can any man, acquainted with America, believe this possible? I
am told there are but two or three glass-houses on this continent, and but very
few paper-mills; and suppose more should be erected, a long course of years
must elapse, before they can be brought to perfection. This continent is a
country of planters, farmers, and fishermen; not of manufacturers. The
difficulty of establishing particular manufactures in such a country, is almost
insuperable* for one manufacture is connected with others in such a manner,
that it may be said to be impossible to establish one or two, without
establishing several others. The experience of many nations may convince us of
this truth.

Inexpressible therefore must be our distresses in evading the late acts, by
the disuse of British paper and glass. Nor will this be the extent of our
misfortunes, if we admit the legality of that act.

Great Britain has prohibited the manufacturing iron and steel in these
colonies, without any objection being made to her right of doing it. The like
right she must have to prohibit any other manufacture among us. Thus she is
possessed of an undisputed precedent on that point. This authority, she will
say, is founded on the original intention of settling these colonies; that is,
that she should manufacture for them, and that they should supply her with
materials. The equity of this policy, she will also say, has been universally
acknowledged by the colonies, who never have made the least objection to
statutes for that purpose; and will further appear by the mutual benefits
flowing from this usage, ever since the settlement of these colonies.

Our great advocate, Mr. PIT, in his speeches on the debate concerning the
repeal of the Stamp Act, acknowledged, that Great Britain could restrain our
manufactures. His words are these -- "This kingdom, as the supreme governing
and legislative power, has always bound the colonies by her regulations and
restrictions in trade, in navigation, in manufactures -- in every thing, except
that of taking their money out of their pockets, WITHOUT THEIR CONSENT." Again
he says, "We may bind their trade, CONFINE THEIR MANUFACTURES, and exercise
every power whatever, except that of taking money out of their pockets, WITHOUT
THEIR CONSENT.

Here then, let my countrymen, ROUSE yourselves, and behold the ruin hanging
over their heads. If they ONCE admit, that Great Britain may lay duties upon
her exportations to us, for the purpose of levying money on us only, she then
will have nothing to do, but to lay those duties on the articles which she
prohibits us to manufacture -- and the tragedy of American liberty is finished.
We have been prohibited from procuring manufactures, in all cases, any where
but from Great Britain, (excepting linens, which we are permitted to import
directly from Ireland). We have been prohibited, in some cases, from
manufacturing for ourselves; We are therefore exactly in the situation of a
city besieged, which is surrounded by the works of the besiegers in every part
but one. If that is closed up, no step can be taken, but to sur^^nder at
discretion. If Great-Briatain can order us to come to her for necessaries we
want, and can order us to pay what taxes she pleases before we take them away,
or when we have them here, we are as abject slaves, as France and Poland can
show in wooden shoes, and with uncombed hair. The peasants of ^rance wear
wooden shoes; and the vassals of Poland ^re remarkable for matted hair, which
never can be combed.


Perhaps the nature of the necessities of the dependant states, caused by the
policy of a governing one, for her own benefit, may be elucidated by a fact
mentioned in history. When the Carthaginians were possessed of the island of
Sardinia, they made a decree, that the Sardinians should not get corn, any
other way than from the Carthaginians. Then, by imposing any duties they would,
they drained from the miserable Sardinians any sums they pleased; and whenever
that oppressed people made the least movement to assert their liberty, their
tyrants starved them to death or submission. This may be called the most
perfect kind of political necessity.

From what has been said, I think this uncontrovertible conclusion may be
deduced, that when a ruling state obliges a dependant state to take certain
commodities from her alone, it is implied in the nature of that obligation; and
is essentially requisite to give it the least degree of justice; and is
inseparably united with it, in order to preserve any share of freedom to the
dependant state; that those commodities should never be loaded with duties for
the sole purpose of levying money on the dependant state.

The place of paying the duties imposed by the late act, appears to me
therefore to be tot^lly immaterial. The single question is, whether the
parliament can legally impose duties to be paid by the people of these colonies
only FOR THE SOLE PURPOSE OF RAISING A REVENUE, on commodities which she
obliges us to take from her alone; or, in other words, whether the parliament
can legally take money out of our pockets, without our consent. If they can,
our boasted liberty is but

Vox et praeterea nihil.
A sound, and nothing else.
A FARMER.

LETTER III.
Beloved Countrymen,
I REJOICE to find, that my two former letters to you, have been generally
received with so much favor by such of you whose sentiments I have had an
opportunity of knowing. Could you look into my heart, you would instantly
perceive an ardent affection for your persons, a zealous attachment to your
interests, a lively resentment of every insult and injury offered to your
honor or happiness, and an inflexible resolution to assert your rights, to the
utmost of my weak power, to be the only motives that have engaged me to address
you.

I am no further concerned in any thing affecting America, than any one of you,
and when liberty leaves it I can quit it much more conveniently than most of
you: but while divine providence, that gave me existence in a land of freedom,
permits my head to think, my lips to speak, and my hand to move, I shall so
highly and gratefully value the blessing received, as to take care that my
silence and inactivity shall not give my implied assent to any act degrading my
brethren and myself from the birthright wherewith heaven itself " has made us
free. Gal. v.1.
"

Sorry I am to learn, that there are some few persons, shake their heads with
solemn motion, and pretend to wonder what can be the meaning of these letters.
"Great Britain, they say, is too powerful to contend with; she is determined to
oppress us; it is in vain to speak of right on one side, when there is power on
the other; when we are strong enough to resist, we shall attempt it; but now we
are not strong enough, and therefore we had better be quiet; it signifies
nothing to convince us that our rights are invaded, when we cannot defend them,
and if we should get into riots and tumults about the late act, it will only
draw down heavier displeasure upon us."

What can such men design? What do their grave observations amount to, but this
-- "that these colonies, totally regardless of their liberties, should commit
them, with humble resignation, to chance, time, and the tender mercies of
ministers."

Are these men ignorant, that usurpations, which might have been successfully
opposed at first, acquire strength by continuance, and thus become
irresistible? Do they condemn the conduct of these colonies, concerning the
Stamp Act? Or have they forgot its successful issue? Ought the colonies at that
time, instead of acting as they did, to have trusted for relief, to the
fortuitous events of futurity? If it is needless "to speak of rights" now, it
was as needless then. If the behavior of the colonies was prudent and glorious
then, and successful too; it will be equally prudent and glorious to act in the
same manner now, if our rights are equally invaded, and may be as successful.
Therefore it becomes necessary to enquire, whether "our rights are invaded." To
talk of "defending" them, as if they could be no otherwise "defended" than by
arms, is as much out of the way, as if a man having a choice of several roads
to reach his journey's end, should prefer the worst, for no other reason, than
because it is the worst.

As to "riots and tumults," the gentlemen who are so apprehensive of them, are
much mistaken, if they think, that grievances cannot be redressed without such
assistance.

I will now tell the gentlemen, what is "the meaning of these letters." (...)
of them is, to convince the peop^^ these colonies, that they are at this moment
exposed to the most imminent dangers; and to persuade them immediately,
vigourously, and unanimously, to exert themselves, in the most firm, but most
peaceable manner for obtaining relief.

The cause of liberty is a cause of too much dignity, to be sullied by
turbulence and tumult. It ought to be maintained in a manner suitable to her
nature. Those who engage in it, should breathe a sedate, yet fervent spirit,
animating them to actions of prudence, justice, modesty, bravery, humanity, and
magnanimity.

To such a wonderful degree were the ancient Spartans, as brave and as free a
people as ever existed, inspired by this happy temperature of soul, that
rejecting even in their battles the use of trumpets, and other instruments for
exciting heat and rage, they marched up to scenes of havoc and horror, with
the sound of flutes, to the tunes of which their steps kept pace -- exhibiting,
as Plutarch says, at once a terrible and delightful sight, and proceeding with
a deliberate valor, full of hope and good assurance, as if some divinity had
insensibly assisted them.

I hope, my dear countrymen, that you will in every colony be upon your guard
against those who may at any time endeavor to stir you up, under pretenses of
patriotism, to any measures disrespectful to our sovereign and our mother
country. Hot, rash, disorderly proceedings, injure the reputation of a people
as to wisdom, valor and virtue, without procuring them the least benefit. I
pray God, that he may be pleased to inspire you and your posterity to the
latest ages with that spirit, of which I have an idea, but find a difficulty to
express: to express in the best manner I can, I mean a spirit that shall so
guide you, that it will be impossible to determine, whether an American's
character is most distinguishable for his loyalty to his sovereign, his duty to
his mother country, his love of freedom, or his affection for his native soil.

Every government, at some time or other, falls into wrong measures; these may
proceed from mistake or passion. -- But every such measure does not dissolve
the obligation between the governors and the governed; the mistake may be
corrected; the passion may pass over.

It is the duty of the governed, to endeavor to rectify the mistake, and
appease the passion. They have not at first any other right, than to represent
their grievances, and to pray for redress, unless an emergence is so pressing,
as not to allow time for receiving an answer to their applications which rarely
happens. If their applications are disregarded, then that kind of opposition
becomes justifiable, which can be made without breaking the laws, or disturbing
the public peace. This consists in the prevention of the oppressors reaping
advantage from their oppressions, and not in their punishment. For experience
may teach them what reason did not; and harsh methods, cannot be proper, till
milder ones have failed.

If at length it becomes undoubted, that an inveterate resolution is formed to
annihilate the liberties of the governed, the English history affords frequent
examples of resistance by force. What particular circumstances will in any
future case justify such resistance, can never be ascertained till they happen.
Perhaps it may be allowable to say, generally, that it never can be
justifiable, until the people are FULLY CONVINCED, that any further submission
will be destructive to their happiness.

When the appeal is made to the sword, highly probable it is, that the
punishment will exceed the offense; and the calamities attending on war out
weigh those preceding it. These considerations of justice and prudence, will
always have great influence with good and wise men.

To these reflections on this subject, it remains to be added, and ought for
ever to be remembered; that resistance in the case of colonies against their
mother country, is extremely different from the resistance of a people against
their prince. A nation may change their King or race of Kings, and retain their
ancient form of government, be gainers by changing. Thus Great Britain, under
the illustrious house of Brunswick, a house that seems to flourish for the
happiness of mankind, has found a felicity, unknown in the reigns of the
Stuarts. But if once we are separated from our mother country, what new form of
government shall we accept, or when shall we find another Britain to supply our
loss? Torn from the body to which we are united by religion, liberty, laws,
affections, relations, language, and commerce, we must bleed at every vein.

In truth, the prosperity of these provinces is founded in their dependence on
Great Britain; and when she returns to "her old "good humor, and old good
nature," as Lord Clerendon expresses it, I hope they will always esteem it
their duty and interest, as it most certainly will be, to promote her welfare
by all the means in their power.

We cannot act with too much caution in our disputes. Anger produces anger; and
differences that might be accommodated by kind and respectful behavior, may by
imprudence be changed to an incurable rage.

In quarrels between countries, as well as in those between individuals, when
they have risen to a certain height, the first cause of dissension is no
longer remembered, the minds of the parties being wholly engaged in recollecting
and resenting the mutual expressions of their dislike. When feuds have reached
that fatal point, all considerations of reason and equity vanish; and a blind
fury governs, or rather confounds all things. A people no longer regards their
interest, but the gratification of their wrath. The sway of the Cleon's, Cleon
was a popular firebrand of Athens and Clodius of Rome; each of them plunged his
country into the deepest calamities.
and Clodius's, the designing and ^etestable flatters of the prevailing
passion, becomes confirmed.

Wise and good men in vain oppose the storm, and may think themselves
fortunat^* if, endeavoring to preserve their ungrateful fellow citizens, they
do not ruin themselves. Their prudence will be called baseness; their
moderation, guilt; and if their virtue does not lead them to destruction, as
that of many other great and excellent persons has done, they may survive, to
receive from their expiring country, the mournful glory of her acknowledgment,
that their councils, if regarded, would have saved her.

The constitutional modes of obtaining relief, are those which I would wish to
see pursued on the present occasion, that is, by petitioning of our assemblies,
or, where they are not permitted to meet, o^ the people to the powers that can
afford us relief.

We have an excellent prince, in whose good dispositions toward us we may
confide. We have a generous, sensible, and humane nation, to whom we may apply.
They may be deceived: they may, by artful men, be provoked to anger against us;
but I cannot yet believe they will be cruel or unjust; or that their anger will
be implacable. Let us behave like dutiful children, who have received unmerited
blows from a beloved parent. Let us complain to our parents; but let our
complaints speak at the same time, the language of affliction and veneration.

If, however, it shall happen by an unfortunate course of affairs, that our
applications to his Majesty and the parliament for the redress, prove
ineffectual, let us then take another step, by witholding from Great Britain,
all the advantages she has been used to receive from us. Then let us try, if
our ingenuity, industry, and frugality, will not give weight to our
remonstrances. Let us all be united with one spirit in one cause. Let us
invent; let us work; let us save; let us at the same time, keep up our claims,
and unceasingly repeat our complaints; but above all, let us implore the
protection of that infinite good and gracious Being, by whom kings reign and
princes decree justice.

"Nil desperandum."
Nothing is to be despaired of.
A FARMER.

LETTER IV.
Beloved Countrymen,
AN objection, I hear, has been been made against what I offer in my second
letter, which I would willingly clear up before I proceed. There is, say these
objectors a material difference between the Stamp Act and the late act for
laying a duty on paper, etc. that justifies the conduct of those who opposed
the former, and yet are willing to submit to the latter. The duties imposed by
the Stamp Act, were internal taxes, but the present are external, which
therefore the parliament may have a right to impose. -- To this I answer, with
a total denial of the power of parliament to lay upon these colonies any tax
whatever.

This point being so important to this and to all succeeding generations, I
wish to be clearly understood.

To the word "Tax," I annex that meaning which the constitution and history of
England require to be annexed to it; that it is, an imposition on the subject
for the sole purpose of levying money.

In the early ages of our monarchy, the services rendered to the crown, for the
general good, were personal; It is very worthy of remark, how watchful our wise
ancestors were, least these services should be extended beyond the limits of
the law. No man was bound to go out of the realm to serve, and therefore even
in the conquering reign of Henry V. when the martial spirit of the nation was
inflamed by success to a great degree, they still carefully guarded against the
establishment of illegal services. Lord Chief Justice Coke's words are these,
"When this point concerning maintenance of wars out of England came in
question, the Commons did make their continual claim of their ancient freedom
and birthright, as in the first of Henry V. and 7th of Henry V etc. the
Commons made protest that they were not bound to the maintenance of war in
Scotland, Ireland, Calais, France, Normandy, or other foreign parts, and caused
their protests to be entered into the parliament roll, where they yet remain;
which, in effect, agrees with that, which upon the like occasion was made in
the parliament of 25. E. 1." 2d Inst. p. 528.
but in progress of time, such institutions being found inconvenient, certain
gifts and grants of their own property were made by the people, under the
several names of aids, tallages, talks, taxes, subsidies, etc. These were made
as may be collected even from the names for public service, "upon need and
necessity," 4. Inst. p. 28.
all these sums were levied upon the people by virtue of their voluntary gift.
Rege Angli^ nihil tale, nisi convocatis primis ordinibus et assentiente populo,
suscipiunt. Phil. Comines.

These gifts entirely depending on the pleasure of the donors, were
proportioned to the abilities of the several ranks of people, who gave, and
were regulated by their opinion of the public necessities. Thus Edward I. had
in his 11th year a thirteenth from the laity, a twentieth from the clergy; in
his 22d year, a tenth from the laity, a sixth from London, and other corporate
towns, half of their benefices from the clergy; in his 23d year, an eleventh
from the barons and others, a tenth from the clergy, and a seventh from the
burgesses, etc.

Hume's History of England. The same difference in the grants of the several
ranks, is observable in other reigns. In the famous statute de tallagio non
concedendo, the King enumerates the several classes, without whose consent he
and his heirs should never set or levy any tax. Nullum tallagium vel auxilium,
per nos, vel haeredes nostros, in regno nostro ponatur seu levetur, sine
voluntare et assensu archiepiscoporum, episcoporum, comitum, baronum, militum,
burgensium, et aliorum liberorum de regno nostro.

34 E. 1. Lord Chief Justice Coke in his comment on these words, says, "for the
quieting of the Commons, and for a perpetual and constant law for ever after,
both in this and other like cases, thi^ act was made." "These words are plain
without scruple; absolute without any saving."

2 Cocke's Inst. p. 522, 523. Little did the venerable judge imagine, that
"other like cases" would happen, in which the spirit of this law would be
despised by Englishmen, the posterity of those who made it.


The design of them was to support the national honor and interest. Some of
those grants comprehended duties arising from trade, being imports on
merchandises. These Chief Justice Coke classes "under "subsides" 4. Inst. p. 28.
and "parliamentary aids." They are also called "customs." But whatever the
name was, they were always considered as gifts of the people to the crown, to
be employed for public uses.

Commerce was at a low ebb, and most surprising instances may be produced, how
little it was attended to, for a succession of ages. The terms that have been
mentioned, and among the rest that of "tax," had obtained a national,
parliamentary meaning, drawn from the principles of the constitution, long
before any Englishmen thought of regulations of trade "by imposing duties."

Whenever we speak of taxes among Englishmen, let us therefore speak of them
with reference to the intentions with which, and the principles on which they
have been established. This will give certainty to our expression, and safety
to our conduct: but if when we have in view the liberty of these colonies, and
the influence of "taxes" laid without our consent, we proceed in any other
course, we pursue a Juno The goddess of empire, in the heathen mythology.
According to an ancient fable, Ixion pursued her, but she escaped by a cloud
which she threw in his way.
indeed, but shall only catch a cloud.

In the national parliamentary sense insisted on, the word "tax" In this sense
Montesquieu uses the word "tax", in his 13th book of Spirit of Laws.
was certainly understood by the congress at New York, whose resolves may be
said to form the American "bill of rights." I am satisfied that the congress
was of opinion, that no impositions could be legally laid on the people of
these colonies for the purpose of levying money, but by themselves or their
representatives.

The third, fourth, fifth, and sixth resolves are thus expressed.

III. "That it is inseperably essential to the freedom of a people and the
undoubted right of Englishmen, that no tax be imposed on them, but with their
own consent, given personally or by their representatives."

IV. "That the people of the colonies are not, and from their local
circumstances cannot be represented in the House of Commons, in Great Britain."

V. "That the only representatives of the people of the colonies, are the
persons chosen therein by themselves; and that no taxes ever have been, or can
be constitutionally imposed on them, but by their respective legislatures."

VI. "That all supplies to the crown being free gifts of the people, it is
unreasonable and inconsistent with the principles and spirit of the British
constitution, for the people of Great Britain to grant to his Majesty the
property of the colonies."

Here is no distinction made, between internal and external taxes. It is
evident from the short reasoning thrown into these resolves that every
imposition to grant to his Majesty the property of the colonies, was thought a
"tax;" and that every such imposition if laid any other way "but with their
consent, given personally, or by their representatives," was not only
unreasonable, and inconsistent with the principles and spirit of the British
constitution, but destructive to the freedom of a people.

This language is clear and important. A "tax" means an imposition to raise
money. Such persons therefore as speak of internal and external "taxes," I pray
may pardon me, if I object to that expression as applied to the privileges and
interests of these colonies. There may be external and internal impositions,
founded on different principles, and having different tendencies; every "tax"
being an imposition, though every imposition is not a "tax." But all "taxes" are
founded on the same principle, and have the same tendency.

"External impositions for the regulation of our trade, do not grant to his
Majesty the property of the colonies." They only prevent the colonies acquiring
property in things not necessary, and in a manner judged to b ^^jurious to the
welfare of the whole empire. But the last statute respecting us, grants to his
Majesty the property of these colonies, by laying duties on manufactures of
Great Britain, which they must take, and which he settled them, in order that
they should take.

What It seems to be evident, that Mr. Pit, in his defense of America, during
the debate concerning the repeal of the Stamp Act, by " internal taxes," meant
any duties " for the purpose of raising a revenue;" and by " external "taxes,"
meant " duties imposed for the regulation of trade." His expressions are these.
-- "If the gentleman does not understand the difference between internal and
external taxes, I cannot help it; but there is a plain distinction between
taxes levied for the purposes of raising a revenue, and duties imposed for the
regulation of trade, for the accommodation of the subject; although in the
consequences, some revenue might incidentally arise from the letter."

These words were in Mr. Pitt's reply to Mr. Grenville, who said he could not
understand the difference between external and internal taxes. But Mr. Pit in
his first speech, had made no such distinction; and hi^ meaning, when he
mentions the distinction, appears to be -- that by " external taxes," he
intended impositions, for the purpose of regulating the intercourse of the
colonies with others; and by " internal taxes," he intended impositions, for
the purpose of taking money from them.

In every other part of his speeches on that occasion, his words confirm this
construction of his expressions. The following extracts will show how positive
and gene^^^ were his assertions of our right.

"IT IS MY OPINION THAT THIS KINGDOM HAS NO RIGHT TO LAY A TAX UPON THE
COLONIES." "THE AMERICANS ARE THE SONS NOT THE BASTARDS OF ENGLAND. TAXATION IS
NO PA^^ OF THE GOVERNING OR LEGISLATIVE POWER." "The taxes are a voluntary gift
and grant of the Commons alone. In legislation the three estates of the realm
are alike concerned, but the concurrence of the peers and the crown to a tax,
is only necessary to close with the form of a law. The gift and grant is of the
Commons alone." "The distinction between legislation and taxation is
essentially necessary to liberty." "The^ ^^mmons of America represented in
their several assemblie^ (...) ever been in possession of the exercise of this,
their (...) right, of giving and granting their own money. They would have been
slaves, if they had not enjoyed it." "The idea of a virtual representation of
America in this house, is the most contemptible idea that ever entered into the
head of man. I^ does not deserve a serious refutation."

He afterward shows the unreasonableness of Great Britain taxing America, thus
-- "When I had the honor of serving his Majesty, I availed myself of the means
of information, which I derived from my office: I speak therefore from
knowledge. My materials were good, I was at pains to collect, to digest, to
consider them: and I will be bold to affirm, that the profit to Great Britain
from the trade of the colonies, through all its branches, is two millions a year.
This is the fund that carried you triumphantly through the last war. The estates
that were rented at two thousand pounds a year, threescore years ago, are at
three thousand pounds at present. Those estates sold then from fifteen to
eighteen years purchase; the same may now be sold for thirty. YOU OWE THIS TO
AMERICA. THIS IS THE PRICE THAT AMERICA PAYS YOU FOR HER PROTECTION." -- "I
dare not say how much higher these profits may be augmented." -- "Upon the
whole, I will beg leave to tell the house what is really my opinion: it is,
THAT THE STAMP ACT BE REPEALED ABSOLUTELY, TOTALLY, AND IMMEDIATELY. That the
reason for the repeal be assigned, because it was founded on an erroneous
principle."


"tax" can be more "internal" than this? Here is money drawn without their
consent from a society, who have constantly enjoyed a constitutional mode of
raising all money among themselves. The payment of this tax they have no
possible method of avoiding, as they cannot do without the commodities on which
it is laid, and they cannot manufacture these commodities themselves; besides,
if this unhappy country should be so lucky as to elude this act, by getting
parchment enough to use in the place of paper, or reviving the ancient method
of writing on wax and bark, and by inventing something to serve instead of
glass, her ingenuity would stand her in little stead; for then the parliament
would have nothing to do, but to prohibit manufactures, or to lay a tax on hats
and woollen cloths, which they have already prohibited the colonies from
supplying each other with; or on instruments and tools of steel and iron, which
they have prohibited the provincials from manufacturing at all "And that pig
and bar iron made in his Majesty's colonies in America may be further
manufactured in this kingdom, be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that from and after the twenty fourth day of June, 1750, no mill or other
engine for ^litting or rolling of iron, or any plaiting forge to work with a
til^ hammer, or any furnace for making steel, shall be erected, or after such
erection continued, in any of his Majesty's colonies in America."

3 Geo. II. chap. 29. sect. 9,
And then what little gol^ (...) they have, must be torn ^^om their hands, or
they will not be able in a short time, to get an ax Though these particulars
are mentioned as being so absolutely necessary, yet perhaps they are not more
so than glass, in our severe winters, to keep out the cold, from our houses; or
than paper, without which (...) inexpressible confusion must ensue.
for cutting their firewood, nor a plough for raising their food. -- In what
respect therefore, I beg leave to ask, is the late act preferable to the
Stamp Act, or more consistent with the liberties of the colonies? I regard them
both with equal apprehension, and think they ought to be in the same manner
opposed.

"Habemus quidem senatus consultum -- tanquam gladium in vagina repositum"

We have a statute like a sword in the scabbard.

A FARMER.

LETTER V.
Beloved Countrymen,
PERHAPS the objection to the late act, imposing duties upon paper, etc. might
have been safely rested on the arguments drawn from the universal conduct of
parliaments and ministers, from the first existence of these colonies, to the
administration of Mr. Grenville.

What but the indisputable, the acknowledged exclusive right of the colonies to
tax themselves, could be the reason, that in this long period of more than one
hundred and fifty years, no statute was ever passed for the sole purpose of
raising a revenue on the colonies? And how clear, how cogent must that reason
be, to which every parliament and every minister, for so long a time submitted,
without a single attempt to innovate?

England in part of that course of years, and Great Britain, in other parts,
was engaged in fierce and expensive wars; troubled with some tumultuous and
bold parliaments; governed by many daring and wicked ministers; yet none of
them ever ventured to to touch the PALLADIUM OF AMERICAN LIBERTY, Ambition,
avarice, faction, tyranny, all revered it. Whenever it was necessary to raise
money on the colonies, the requisitions of the crown were made, and dutifully
complied with. The parliament from time to time regulated their trade, and that
of the rest of the empire, to preserve their dependencies, and the connection
of the whole in good order.

The people of Great Britain in support of their privileges, boast much of
their antiquity. Yet it may well be questioned, if there is a single privilege
of a British subject, supported by longer, more solemn, or more uninterupted
testimony, than the exclusive right of taxation in these colonies. The people
of Great Britain consider that kingdom as the sovereign of these colonies, and
would now annex to that sovereignty a prerogative never heard of before. How
would they bear this, was the case their own? What would they think of a new
prerogative claimed by the crown? We may guess what their conduct would be from
the transports of passion into which they fell about the late embargo, laid to
relieve the most emergent necessities of state, admitting of no delay; and for
which there were numerous precedents. Let our liberties be treated with the
same tenderness, and it is all we desire.

Explicit as the conduct of parliaments, for so many ages, is, to prove that no
money can be levied on these colonies, by parliament for the purpose of raising
a revenue; yet it is not the only evidence in our favor.

Every one of the most material arguments against the legality of the Stamp Act
operates with equal force against the act now objected to; but as they are well
known, it seems unnecessary to repeat them ^ere.

This general one only shall be considered at present. That though these colonies
are dependant on Great Britain; and though she has a legal power to make laws for
preserving that dependence; yet it is not necessary for this purpose, nor
essential to the relation between a mother country and her colonies, as was
eagerly contended by the advocates for the Stamp Act, that she should raise
money upon them without their consent.

Colonies were formerly planted by warlike nations, to keep their enemies in
awe; to relieve their country overburthened with inhabitants; or to discharge a
number of discontented and troublesome citizens. But in more modern ages, the
spirit of violence being in some measure, if the expression may be allowed,
sheathed in commerce, colonies have been settled by the nations of Europe for
the purposes of trade. These purposes were to be attained by the colonies
raising for their mother country those things which she did not produce
herself; and by supplying themselves from her with things they wanted. These
were the national objects in the commencement of our colonies, and have been
uniformly so in their promotion.

To answer these grand purposes, perfect liberty was known to be necessary; all
history pro^^ng, that trade and freedom are nearly rel^ted to each other. By a
due regard to this wise and just plan, the infant colonies exposed in the
unknown climates, and unexplored wildernesses of this new world, lived, grew,
and flourished.

The parent country with undeviating prudence and virtue, attentive to the
first principles of colonization, drew to herself the benefits she might
reasonably expect, and preserved to her children the blessings, on which those
benefits were founded. She made laws obliging her colonies to carry to her all
those products which she wanted for her own use; and all those raw materials
which she chose herself to work up. Besides this restriction, she forbad them
to procure manufactures from any other part of the globe; or even the products
of European countries, which alone could rival her, without being first brought
to her. In short, by a variety of laws, she regulated their trade in such a
manner, as she thought most conducive to their mutual advantage, and her own
welfare. A power was reserved to the crown of repealing any laws that should be
enacted. The executive authority of government was all lodged in the crown and
its representatives; and an appeal was secured to the crown from all judgments
in the administration of justice.

For all these powers established by the mother country over the colo^ies; for
all these immense emoluments derived by her from them; for all their
difficulties and distresses in fixing themselves, what was the recompense made
them? A communication of her rights in general, and particularly of that ^reat
one, the foundation of all the rest -- that their property, acquired with so
much pain and hazard, should not be disposed of by The power of taxing
themselves, was the privileges of which the English were, with reason,
particularly jealous.

Hume's hist. of England.
any one but themselves -- or to use the beautiful and emphatic language of the
sacred scriptures, "that they should sit every man under his vine, and under
his fig tree, and none should make them afraid." Mic. iv.4.


Can any man of candor and knowledge deny, that these institutions, from an
affinity between Great Britain and her colonies, that sufficiently secures
their dependence upon her? or that for her to levy taxes upon them, is to
reverse the nature of things? or that she can pursue such a measure, without
reducing them to a state of vassalage?

If any person cannot conceive the supremacy of Great Britain to exist, without
the power of laying taxes to levy money upon us, the history of the colonies
and of Great Britain since their settlement will prove the contrary. He will
there find the amazing advantages arising to her from them -- the constant
exercise of her supremacy -- and their filial submission to it, without a
single rebellion, or even the thought of one, from the first emigration to this
moment -- and all these things have happened, without an instance of
Great Britain laying taxes to levy money upon them.

How many British authors It has been said in the house of commons, when
complaints have been made of the decay of trade to any part of Europe, "That
such things were not worth regard, as Great Britain was possessed of colonies
that could consume more of her manufactures than she was able to supply them
with."

"As the case now stands, we shall show that the plantations are a spring of
wealth to this nation, that they work for us, that their treasure centers all
here, and that the laws have tied them fast enough to us; so that it must be
through our own fault and mismanagement, if they become independent of England."

Davenant on the plantat. trade. "It is better that the islands should be
supplied from the Northern Colonies than from England, for this reason; the
provisions we might send to Barbados, Jamaica, etc. would be unimproved product
of the earth, as grain of all kinds, or such product where there is little got
by the improvement, as malt, salt, beef, and pork; indeed the exportation of
salt fis^ thither would be more advantageous, but the goods which we send to
the nothern colonies, are such, whose improvement may be justly said, one with
another to be near four fifths of the value of the whole commodity, as apparel,
household furniture, and many other things."

Idem. "New England is the most prejudicial plantation to the kingdom of
England; and yet, to do right to that most industrious English colony, I must
confess, that though we lose by their unlimited ^rade with other foreign
plantations, yet we are very great gainers by their direct trade to and from
Old England. Our yearly exportations of English manufactures, malt and other
goods, from hence thither, amounting, in my opinion, to ten times the value of
what is imported from thence; which calculation I do not make at random, but
upon mature consideration, and peradventure, upon as much experience in this
very trade, as any other person will pretend to; and therefore, whenever
reformation of our correspondency in trade with that people shall be thought
on, it will, in my poor judgment* require great tenderness, and very serious
circumspection."

Sir Josiah Child's discourse on trade. "Our plantations spend mostly our
English manufactures, and those of all sorts almost imaginable, in egregious
quantities, and employ near two thirds of all our English shipping; so that we
have more people in England, by reason of our plantations in America."

Idem. Sir Josiah Child says, in another part of his work, "that not more than
fifty families are maintained in England by the refining of sugar." From
whence, and from what Davenant says, it is plain, that the advantages here said
to be derived from the plantations by England, must be meant chiefly of the
continental colonies.

"I shall sum up my whole remarks on our American colonies, with this
observation, that as they are a certain annual revenue of several millions
sterling to their mother country, they ought carefully to be protected, duly
encouraged, and every opportunity that presents, improved for their increasment
and advantage, as every one they can possibly reap, must at least return to us
with interest."

Beawes's Lex merc. red. "We may safely advance, that our trade and navigation
are greatly increased by our colonies, and that they really are a source of
treasure and naval power to this kingdom, since they work for us, and their
treasure centers here. Before their settlement, our manufactures were few, and
those but indifferent; the number of English merchants very small, and the
whole shipping of the nation much inferior to what now belongs to the nothern
colonies only. These are certain facts. But since their establishment, our
condition has altered for the better, almost to a degree beyond credibility,
Our manufactures are prodigiously increased, chiefly by the demand for them in
the plantations, where they at least take off one half, and supply us with many
valuable commodities for exportation, which is as great an emolument to the
mother kingdom, as to the plantations themselves."

Postlethwait's universal dict. of trade and commerce. "Most of the nations of
Europe have interfered with us more or less, in diverse of our staple
manufactures, within half a century, not only in our woollen, but in our lead
and tin manufactures, as well as our fisheries."

Idem. "The inhabitants of our colonies, by carrying on a trade with their
foreign neighbors, do not only occasion a greater quantity of the goods and
merchandises of Europe being sent from hence to them, and a greater quantity of
the product of America to be sent from them thither, which would otherways be
carried from, and brought to Europe by foreigners, but an increase of the
seamen and navigation in those parts, which is of great strength and security,
as well as of great advantage to our plantations in general. And though some of
our colonies are not only for preventing the importations of all goods of the
same species they produce, but suffer particular planters to keep great runs o^
land in their possession uncultivated with design to prevent new settlements,
whereby they imagine the prices of their commodities may be affected; yet if it
be considered, that the markets of Great Britain depend on the markets of all
Europe in general, and that the European markets in general depend on the
proportion between the annual consumption and the whole quantity of each
species annually produced by all nations; it must follow, that whether we or
foreigners, are the producers, carriers, importers and exporters of American
produce, yet their respective prices in each colony (the difference of freight,
customs and importations considered) will always bear proportion to the general
consumption of the whole quantity of each sort, produced in all colonies, and
in all parts, allowing only for the usual contingencies, that trade and
commerce, agriculture and manufactures are liable to in all countries."

Idem. "It is certain, that from the very time Sir Walter Raleigh the father of
our English colonies, and his associates, first projected these establishments,
there have been persons who have found an interest, in misrepresenting, or
lessening the value of them, -- The attempts were called chimerical and
dangerous. Afterward many malignant suggestions were made, about sacrificing
so many Englishmen to the obstinate desire of settling colonies in countries
which then produced very little advantage. But as these difficulties were
gradually surmo^nted, those complaints vanished. No sooner were these
lamentations over, but others arose in their stead* when it could be no longer
said, that the colonies were useless, it was alleged that they were not useful
enough to their mother country; that while we were loaded with taxes, they were
absolutely free; that the planters lived like princes, when the inhabitants of
England labored hard for a tolerable subsistence."

Idem "Before the settlement of these colonies," says Postlethwayt, "our
manufactures were few, and those but indifferent. In those days we had not only
our naval stores, but our ships from our neighbors. Germany furnished us with
all things made of metal, even to nails. Wine, paper, linens, and a thousand
other things came from France. Portugal supplied us with sugar; all the
products of America were poured into us from Spain; and the Venetians and
Genoese retailed to us the commodities of the East Indies, at their own price."

"If it be asked, whether foreigners for what goods they take of us, do not pay
on that consumption a great portion of our taxes? It is admitted they do."

Postlethwayt's Great-Britain's true system. "If we are afraid that one day or
other the colonies will revolt, and set up for themselves, as some seem to
apprehend, let us not drive them to a necessity to feel themselves independent
of us; as they will do, the moment they perceive that they can be supplied with
all things from within themselves, and do not need our assistance. If we would
keep them still dependant upon their mother country, and in some respects
subservient to their views and welfare, let us make it their interest always to
be so."

Tucker on trade. "Our colonies, while they have English blood in their veins,
and have relations in England, and while they can get by trading with us, the
stronger and greater they grow, the more this crown and kingdom will get by
them; and nothing but such an arbitrary power as shall make them desperate can
bring them to rebel."

Davenant on the plantation trade. "The nothern colonies are not upon the same
footing as those of the south; and having a worse soil to improve, they must
find the recompense some other way, which only can be in property and dominion
Upon which score, any innovations in the form of government there, should be
cautiously examined, for fear of entering upon measures, by which the industry
of the inhabitants may be quite discouraged. It Is always unfortunate for a
people, either by consent or upon compulsion, to depart from their primitive
institutions, and those fundamentals, by which they were first united together.

Idem. "All wise states will well consider how to preserve the advantages
arising from colonies, and avoid the evils. And I conceive that there can be
but two ways in nature to hinder them from throwing off their dependence; one
to keep it out of their power, and the other, out of their will. The first must
be by force; and the latter by using them well, and keeping them employed in
such productions, and making such manufactures, as will support themselves and
families comfortably, and procure them wealth too, and at least not prejudice
their mother country.

Force can never be used effectually to answer the end, without destroying the
colonies themselves. Liberty and encouragement are necessary to carry people
thither, and to keep the^ together when they are there; and violence will
hinder both. Any body of troops considerable enough to awe them, and keep them
in subjection, under the direction too of a needy governor, often sent thither
to make his fortune, and at such a distance from any application for redress,
will soon put an end to all planting, and leave the country to the soldiers
alone, and if it did not, woul eat up all the profit of the colony. For this
reason, arbitrary countries have not been equally successful in planting
colonies with free ones; and what they have d^ne in that kind, has either been
by force at a vast expense, or by departing from the nature of their
government, and giving such privileges to planters as were denied to their
other subjects. And I dare say, that a few prudent laws, and a little prudent
conduct, would soon give us far the greatest share of the riches of all
America, perhaps drive many of other nations out of it, or into our colonies
for shelter.

There are so many exigencies in all states, so many foreign wars and domestic
disturbances, that these colonies can never want opportunities, if they watch
for them, to do what they shall find their interest to do; and therefore we
ought to take all the precautions in our power, that it shall never be their
interest to act against that of their native country; an evil which can no
otherways be averted, than by keeping them fully employed in such trad^s as
will increase their own, as we^l as our wealth; for it is much to be feared, if
we do not find employment for them, they may find it for us. The interest of
the mother country is always to keep them dependant, and so employed; and it
requires all her address to do it; and it is certainly more easily and
effectually done by gentle and insensible methods, than by power alone.

Cato's letters.
have remonstrated that the present wealth, power and glory of their country
are founded on these colonies? As constantly as streams tend to the ocean, have
they been pouring the fruits of all their labors into their mother's lap. Good
Heaven! And shall a total oblivion of former tendernesses and blessings be
spread over the minds of a wise people, by the sordid acts of intriguing men,
who covering their sel^i^h projects under pretenses of public good, first
enrage their countrymen into a frenzy of passion, and then advance their own
influence and interest, by gratifying that passion, which they themselves have
barely excited?

Hitherto Great Britain has been contented with her prosperity. Moderation has
been the rule of her conduct. But now a generous and humane people that so
often has protected the liberty of strangers, is inflamed into an attempt to
tear a privilege from her own children, which, if executed, must in their
opinion, sink them into slaves: And for what? For a pernicious power, not
necessary to her, as her own experience may convince her; but horribly dreadful
and detestable to them.

It seems extremely probable, that when cool, dispassionate posterity shall
consider the affectionate intercourse, the reciprocal benefits, and the
unsuspecting confidence, that have subsisted between these colonies and their
parent country, for such a length of time, they will execrate with the
bitterest curses ^he infamous memory of those men, whose pestilential ambition,
unnecessarily, wantonly, first opened the sources of civil discord, between
them; first turned their love into jealousy* and first taught these provinces,
filled with grief and anxiety, to enquire,

"Men's ubi materna est?" Where is maternal affection.

A FARMER.

LETTER VI.
Beloved Countrymen,
IT may perhaps be objected against the arguments that have been offered to the
public concerning the legal power of the parliament, that it has always
exercised the power of imposing duties for the purposes of raising a revenue on
the productions of these colonies carried to Great Britain, which may be called
a tax on them. To this I I answer; that is no more a violation of the rights of
the colonies, than their being ordered to carry certain of their productions to
Great Britain, which is no violation at all; it being implied in the relation
between them, that the colonies should not carry such commodities to other
nations, as should enable them to interfere with the mother country. The duties
imposed on these commodities when brought to her, are only a consequence of her
paternal right; and if the point is thoroughly examined, will be found to be
laid on the people of the mother country, and not at all dangerous to the
liberties of the colonies. Whatever these duties are, they must proportionably
raise the price of the goods, and consequently the duties must be paid by the
consumers. In this light they were considered by the parliament in the 25 Char.
II. Chap. 7. sec. 2. which says, that the productions of the plantations were
carried from one to another free from all customs, while the subjects of this
your kingdom of England have paid great customs and impositions for what of
them have been spent here etc. Such duties therefore can never be injurious to
the liberties of the colonies.

Besides, if Great Britain exports these commodities again, the duties will
injure her own trade, so that she cannot hurt us without plainly and
immediately hurting herself; and this is our check against her acting
arbitarily in this respect,

It If any one should observe, that no opposition has been made to the legality
of the 4th Geo. III. chapter 15, which is the first act of parliam ^t that ever
imposed duties on the importations in America, for the express purpose of
raising a revenue there, I answer, first, that though that act expressly mentions
the raising a revenue in America, yet it seems that it had as much in view,
"the improving and securing the trade between the same and Great Britain,"
which words are part of its title, and the preamble says, "Whereas it is
expedient that new pro^^sions and regulations should be established for
improving the revenue of this kingdom, and for extending and securing the
navigation and commerce between Great Britain and your Majesty's dominions in
America, which, by the peace, have been so happily extended and enlarged, etc."
Secondly, all the duties mentioned in that act, are imposed solely on the
productions and manufactures of foreign countries, and not a single duty laid
on any production or manufacture of our mother country. Thirdly, the authority
of the provincial assemblies is not therein so plainly attacked, as by the last
act, which makes provision for defraying the charges of the administration of
justice, and the support of civil government. 4thly, That it being doubtful
whether the intention of the 4th Geo. III. chapter 15, was not as much to regulate
trade as to raise a revenue, the minds of the people here were wholly engrossed
by the terror of the Stamp Act, then impending over them, about the intention
of which they could be in no doubt.

These reasons so far distinguish 4th Geo. III. chapter 15, from the last act, that
it is not to be wondered at, that the first should have been submitted to,
though the last should excite the most universal and spirited opposition. For
this will be found on the strictest examination to be, in the principle on
which it is founded, and in the consequences that must attend it, if possible,
more destructive than the Stamp Act. It is, to spe^k plainly, a prodigy in ou^
laws, not having one British feature.


may, perhaps, be further objected, that it being granted that statutes made
for regulating trade are binding upon us, it will be difficult for any persons
but the makers of the laws to determine, which of them are made for the
regulating of trade, and which for raising a revenue; and that from hence may
arise confusion.

To this I answer, that the objection is of no force in the present case, or
such as resemble it, because the act now in question is formed expressly for
the sole purpose of raising a revenue.

However, supposing the design of the parliament had not been expressed, the
objection seems to me of no weight, with regard to the influence, which those
who may make it, might expect it ought to have on the conduct of the colonies.

It is true, that impositions for raising a revenue, may be hereafter called
regulations of trade, but names will not change the nature of things. Indeed we
ought firmly to believe, what is an undoubted truth, confirmed by the unhappy
experience of many states heretofore free, that unless the most watchful
attention be exerted, a new servitude may be slipped upon us under the sanction
of usual and respectable terms.

Thus the Caesar's ruined Roman liberty, under the titles of tribunical and
dictatorial authorities, -- old and venerable dignities, known in the most
flourishing times of freedom. In imitation of the same policy, James II. when
he meant to establish popery, talked of liberty of conscicence, the most sacred
of all liberties; and had thereby almost deceived the dissenters into
destruction.

All artful rulers, who strive to extend their own power beyond its just
limits, endeavor to give to their attempts, as much semblance of legality as
possible. Those who succeed them may venture to go a little farther; for each
new encroachment will be strengthened by a former, Tacitus.
That which is now supported by examples, growing old, will become an example
itself, and thus support fresh usurpations.

A free people, therefore, can never be too quick in observing, nor too firm in
opposing the beginnings of alterations, either in form or reality, respecting
institutions formed for their security. The first leads to the last; on the
other hand nothing is more certain, than that forms of liberty may be retained,
when the substance is gone. In government as well as in religion, the letter
kills, but the spirit gives life. 2 Cor. iii.6.


I will beg leave to enforce this remark by a few instances. The crown, by the
constitution, has the prerogative of creating peers; the existence of that
order in due number and dignity, is essential to the constitution; and if the
crown did not exercise that prerogative, the peerage must have long since
decreased so much, as to have lost its proper influence. Suppose a prince for
some unjust purposes, should from time to time advance many needy pro^igate
wretches, to that rank, that all the independance of the house of Lords should
be destroyed, there would then be a manifest violation of the constitution,
under the appearance of using legal prerogative.

The house of Commons claim the privilege of forming all money-bills, and will
not suffer either of the other branches of the legislature to add to or alter
them; contending that their power, simply extends to an acceptance or rejection
of them. This privilege appears to be just; but under pretense of this just
privilege, the house of Commons has claimed a license of tacking to money
bills, clauses relating many things of a totally different kind, and have thus
forced them, in a manner, on the crown and lords. This seems to be an abuse of
that privilege, and it may be vastly more abused. Suppose a future house;
influenced by some displaced discontented demagogues, in a time of danger,
should tack to a money bill something so injurious to the king and peers, that
they would not assent to it and yet the Commons should obstinately insist on
it; the whole kingdom would be exposed to ruin, under the appearance of
maintaining a valuable privilege.

In these cases it might be difficult for a while to determine, whether the
King intended to exercise his prerogative in a constitutional manner or not; or
whether the Commons insisted on the demand factitiously, or for the public
good: But surely the conduct of the crown, or of the house, would in time
sufficiently explain itself.

Ought not the people therefore to watch to observe facts? to search into
causes? to investigate designs? and have they not a right of judging from the
evidence before them, on no slighter points than their liberty and happiness?
It would be less than trifling, wherever a British government is established,
to make use of any other arguments to prove such a right. It is sufficient to
remind the reader of the day on which King William landed at Torbay. November
5, 1688.


I will now apply what has been said to the present question The nature of any
impositions laid by parliament on the colonies, must determine the design in
laying them. It may not be easy in every instance to discover that design.
Whenever it is doubtful, I think submission cannot be dangerou^; nay, it must
be right: for, in my opinion, there is no privilege the colonies claim, which
they ought, in duty and prudence, more earnestly to maintain and defend, than
the authority of the British parliament to regulate the trade of all her
dominions. Without this authority, the benefits she enjoys from our commerce,
must be lost to her: The blessings we enjoy from our dependence upon her, must
be lost to us; her strength must decay; her glory vanish; and she cannot
suffer, without our partaking in her misfortune. -- Let us therefore cherish
her interest as our own, and give her every thing that it becomes FREEMEN to
give or to receive.

The nature of any impositions she may lay upon us, may in general be known,
considering how far they relate to the preserving, in due order, the connection
between the several parts of the British empire. One thing we may be assured
of, which is this; whenever a statute imposes duties on commodities, to be paid
only upon their exportation from Great Britain to these colonies, it is not a
regulation of trade, but a design to raise revenue upon us. Other instances may
happen, which it may not be necessary to dwell on. I hope these colonies will
never, to their latest existence, want understanding sufficient to discover the
intentions of those who rule over them, nor the resolution necessary for
asserting their interests. They will always have the same right that all free
states have, of judging when their privileges are invaded, and of using all
prudent measures for preserving them.

"Quocirca vivite fortes"
"Fortiaque a^versis opponite pectora rebus,"
Wherefore keep up your spirits, and gallantly oppose t^is ^^^erse course of
affairs.

A FARMER.

LETTER VII.
Beloved Countrymen,
THIS letter is intended more particularly for such of you, whose employment in
life may have prevented your attending to the ^^^^^deration of some points that
are of (...) and public importance. For many such persons there must be even in
these colonies, where the inhabitants in general are more intelligent than any
other people, as has been remarked by strangers, and it seems with reason.

Some of you perhaps, filled as I know your breasts are with loyalty to our
most excellent prince, and with love to our dear mother country, may feel
yourselves inclined by the affections of your hearts, to approve every action
of those whom you so much venerate and esteem.

A prejudice thus flowing from goodness of disposition is amiable indeed. I
wish it could be indulged without danger. Did I think this possible, the error
should have been adopted, not opposed by me. But in truth, all men are subject
to the passions and frailties of nature; and therefore whatever regard we
entertain for the persons of those who govern us, we should always remember
that their conduct as rulers may be influenced by human infirmities.

When any laws injurious to these colonies are passed, we cannot, with the
least propriety, suppose that any injury was intended us by his Majesty or the
Lords. For the assent of the crown and peers to law seems, as far as I am able
to judge, to have been vested in them, more for their own security than for any
other purpose. On the other hand, it is the particular business of the people
to enquire and discover what regulations are useful for themselves, and to
digest and present them in the form of bills to the other orders, to have them
enacted into laws -- Where these laws are to bind themselves, it may be
expected that the house of Commons will very carefully consider them: But when
they are making laws, that are not designed to bind themselves, we cannot
imagine that their deliberations will be as cautious and scrupulous as in their
own case. Many remarkable instances might be produced of the extraordinary
inattention with which bills of great importance, concerning these colonies,
have passed in parliament; which is owing, as it is supposed, to the bills
being brought in by the persons who have points to carry, so artfully framed,
that it is not easy for the memb^rs in general, in the haste of business, to
discover their tendency.

The following instances show the truth of this remark. When M. Grenville, in
the violence of reformation and innovation, formed the 4th Geo. III. chap 15th,
for regulating the American trade, the word "Ireland" was d^opt in the clause
relating to our iron and lumber, so that we could not send these articles to no
other part of Europe, but to Great Britain. This was so unreasonable a
restriction, and so contrary to the sentiments of the legislature, for many
years before, that it is surprising it should not have been taken notice of in
the house. However the bill passed into a law. But when the matter was
explained, this restriction was taken off in a subsequent act.

I cannot positively say, how long after the taking off this restriction, as I
have not the acts; but I think in less than eighteen months, another act of
parliament passed, in which the word "Ireland," was left out as it had been
before. The matter being a second time explained, was a second time regulated.

Now if it be considered, that the omission mentioned struck off, with one
word, so very great a part of our trade, it must appear remarkable: and equally
so is the method by which rice became an enumerated commodity, and therefore
could be carried to Great Britain only.

"The enumeration was obtained, (says Mr. Gee Gee on trade, p. 32.
) by one Cole, a Captain of a ship, employed by a company then trading to
Carolina; for several ships going from England thither and purchasing rice for
Portugal, prevented the aforesaid Captain of a loading. Upon his coming home,
he possessed one Mr. Lowndes, a member of parliament, (who was very frequently
employed to prepare bills) with an opinion, that carrying rice directly to
Portugal was a prejudice to the trade of England, and privately got a clause
into an act to make it an enumerated commodity; by which means he secured a
freight to himself. But the consequence proved a vast loss to the nation."

I find that this clause "privately got into an act*" for the benefit of Capt.
Cole, to the vast loss of the nation," is foisted into the 3d Anne, chap. 5.
entitled, An act for granting to her Majesty a further subsidy on wines and
merchandises imported, with which it has no more connection, than with 34th Edw.
I. 34th and 35th of Henry VIII. or the 25th of Car. II. which provide that no
person shall be taxed but by himself or his representative.




I am told that there is a wonderful address frequently used in carrying points
in the house of commons, by persons experienced in these affairs -- that
opportunities are watched -- and sometimes votes are past, that if all the
members had been present, would have been rejected by a great majority. Certain
it is, that when a powerful and artful man has determined on any measure
against these colonies, he has always succeeded in his attempt. Perhaps
therefore it will be proper for us, whenever any oppressive act affecting us is
past, to attribute it to the inattention of the members of the house of
commons, and to the malevolence or ambition of some factious great man, rather
than to any other cause.

Now I do verily believe, that the late act of parliament imposing duties on
paper, etc. was formed by Mr. Grenville and his party, because it is evidently
a part of that plan, by which be endeavored to render himself popular at home;
and I do also believe that not one half of the members of the house of commons,
even of those who heard it read, did perceive how destructive it was to
American freedom.

For this reason, as it is usual in Great Britain, to consider the King's
speech, as the speech of the ministry, it may be right here to consider this
act as the act of a party. -- Perhaps I should speak more properly if I was to
use another term. --

There are two ways of laying taxes. -- One is by imposing a certain sum on
particular kinds of property, to be paid by the user or consumer, or by taxing
the person at a certain sum; the other is, by imposing a certain sum on
particular kinds of property to be paid by the seller.

When a man pays the first sort of tax, he knows with certainty that he pays so
much money for a tax. The confideration for which he pays it is remote, and it
may be does not occur to him. He is sensible too that he is commanded and
obliged to pay it as a tax; and therefore people are apt to be displeased with
this sort of tax.

The other sort of tax is submitted to in a very different manner. The
purchaser of any article very seldom reflects that the seller raises his price
so as to indemnify him for the tax he has paid. He knows the prices of things
are continually fluctuating, and if he thinks about the tax, he thinks at the
same time in all probability, that he might have paid as much, if the article
he buys had not been taxed. He gets something visible and agreeable for his
money, and tax and price are so confounded together, that he cannot separate,
or does not choose to take the trouble of seperating them.

This mode of taxation therefore is the mode suited to arbitrary and oppressive
governments. The love of liberty is so natural to the human heart, that
unfeeling tyrants think themselves obliged to accommodate their schemes as much
as they can to the appearance of justice and reason, and to deceive those whom
they resolve to destroy or oppress, by presenting to them a miserable picture
of freedom, when the inestimable original is lost.

This policy did not escape the cruel and rapacious Nero. That monster,
apprehensive that his crimes might endanger his authority and life, thought
proper to do some popular acts to secure the obedience of his subjects. Among
other things, says Tacitus's An. b. 13. s. 31.
Tacitus, he remitted the twenty-fifth part of the price on the sale of slaves,
but rather in show than reality; for the seller being ordered to pay it, it
became a part of the price to the buyer.

This is the reflection of the judicious historian: but the deluded people gave
their infamous emperor full credit for his false generosity. Other nations have
been treated in the same manner the Romans were. The honest industrious Germans
who are settled in different parts of this continent can inform us, that it was
this sort of tax that drove them from their native land to our woods, at that
time the seats of perfect and undisturbed freedom.

Their princes inflamed by the lust of power and the lust of avarice, two
furies, that the more hungery they grow, transgressed the bounds they ought in
regard to themselves to have observed. To keep up the deception in the minds of
subjects "there must be," says a very learned author Montesquieu's spirit of
laws, b. 13. chap. 8.
"some proportion between the impost and the value of the commodity; wherefore
there ought not to be an excessive duty upon merchandises of little value.
There are countries in which the duty exceeds seventeen or eighteen times the
value of the commodity. In this case the prince removes the illusion. His
subjects plainly see they are dealt with in an unreasonable manner, which
renders them most exquisitely sensible of their slavi^h situation."

From hence it appears that subjects may be ground down into misery by this
sort of taxation as well as the other. They may be as much impoverished if
their money is taken from them in this way, as in the other; and that it will
be taken, may be more evident, by attending to a few more considerations.

The merchant, or importer who pays the duty at first, will not consent to be
so much money out of pocket. He, therefore, proportionably raises the price of
his goods. It may then be s^id to be a contest between him and the person
offering to buy, who shall lose the duty. This must be decided by the nature of
the commodities and the purchasers demand for them. If they are mere luxuries,
he is at liberty to do as he pleases, and if he buys, he does it voluntarily:
But if they are absolute necessaries, or conveniences which use and custom
have made requisite for the comfort of life, and which he is not permitted, by
the power imposing the duty, to get elsewhere, there the seller has a plain
advantage, and the buyer must pay the duty. In fact, the seller is nothing less
than the collector of the tax for the power that imposed it. If these duties
then are extended to necessaries and conveniences of life in general, and
enormously increased, the people must at length become indeed "most exquisitely
sensible of their slavish situation."

Their happiness, therefore, entirely depends on the moderation of those who
have authority to impose the duties.

I shall now apply these observation to the late act of parliament. Certain
duties are thereby imposed on paper and glass, etc. imported into these
colonies. By the laws of Great Britain we are prohibited to get these articles
from any other part of the world. We cannot at present, nor for many years to
come, though we should apply ourselves to these manufactures with the utmost
industry, make enough ourselves for our own use. That paper and glass are not
only convenient, but absolutely necessary for us, I imagine very few will
contend. Some, perhaps, who think mankind grew wicked and luxurious as soon as
they found out another way of communicating their sentiments than by speech,
and another way of dwelling than in caves, may advance so whimsical an opinion.
But I presume nobody will take the unnecessary trouble of refuting them.

From these remarks I think it evident, that we must use paper and glass, that
what we use must be British, and that we must pay the duties imposed, unless
those who sell these articles are so generous as to make us presents of the
duties they pay, which is not to be expected.

Some persons may think this act of no consequence, because the duties are so
small. A fatal error. That is the very circumstance most alarming to me. For I
am convinced that the authors of this law, would never have obtained an act to
raise so tri^ling a sum, as it must do, had they not intended by it to
establish a precedent for future use. To console ourselves with the smallness
of the duties, is to walk deliberately into the s^are that is set for us,
praising the neatness of the workmanship. Suppose the duties, imposed by the
late act, could be paid by these dissressed colonies, with the utmost ease, and
that the purposes, to which they are to be applied, were the most reasonable
and equitable that could be conceived, the contrary of which I hope to
demonstrate before these letters are concluded, yet even in such a supposed
case, these colonies ought to regard the act with abhorrence. For who are a
free people? not those over whom government is reasonably and equitably
exercised but those who live under a government, so constitutionally checked
and controuled, that proper provision is made against its being otherwise
exercised. The late act is founded on the destruction of this constitutional
security.

If the parliament have a right to lay a duty of four shillings and eight pence
on a hundred weight of gl^ss, or a ream of paper, they have a right to lay a
duty of any other sum on either. They may raise the duty as the author before
qoted says, has been done in some countries, till it exceeds seventeen or
eighteen times the value of the commodity. In short, if they have a right to
levy a tax of one penny upon us, they have a right to levy a million upon us.
For where does their right stop? At any given number of pence, shillings, or
pounds? To attempt to limit their right, after granting it to exist at all, is
as contrary to reason, as granting it to exist at all is contrary to justice.
If they have any right to tax us, then, whether our own money shall continue in
our own pockets, or not, depends no longer on us, but on them. There is nothing
which we can call our own, or to use the words of Mr. Lock, What property have
we in that, which another may, by right, take, when he pleases, to himself.
Speech Lord Cambden lately published.


These duties, which will inevitably be levied upon us, and which are now
levying upon us, are expressly laid for the sole purpose of taking money. This
is the true definition of taxes. They are therefore taxes. This money is to be
taken from us. We are therefore taxed. Those who are taxed without their own
consent, given by themselves, or their representatives, are slaves. This is the
opinion of Mr. Pit, in his speech on the Stamp Act.

It is my opinion, that this kingdom has no right to lay a tax upon the
colonies. The AMERICANS are the SONS, not the BASTARDS of ENGLAND. The
distinction between legislation and taxation is essentially necessary to
liberty. The Commons of America represented in their several assemblies, have
ever been in possession of this their constitutional right of giving and
granting their own money. They would have been slaves if they had not enjoyed
it* The idea of a virtual representation of America, in this house, is the most
contemptible idea that ever entered into the head of man. It does not deserve a
serious refutation.

That great and excellent man Lord Cambden, maintains the same opinion in his
speech, in the house of peers, on the declaratory bill of the sovereignty of
Great Britain over the colonies. The following extracts so perfectly agree
with, and confirm the sentiments avowed in these letters, that it is hoped the
inserting them in this note will be excused.

As the affair is of the utmost importance, and in its consequences may involve
the fate of kingdoms, I took the strictest review of my arguments* I
re-examined all my authorities; fully determined, if I found myself mistaken,
publicly to own my mistake, and give up my opinion, but my searches have more
and more convinced me, that the British parliament have no right to tax the
Americans. Nor is the doctrine new; it is as old as the constitution; it grew
up with it, indeed it is its support. Taxation and representation are
inseparably united. God has joined them; no British parliament can separate
them; to endeavor to do it is to stab our vitals.

My position is this -- I repeat it -- I will maintain it to my last hour --
Taxation and representation are inseparable. This position is founded on the
laws of nature; it is more, it is itself an eternal law of nature; for whatever
is a man's own, is absolutely his own; and no man has a right to take it from
him without his consent, either expressed by himself or representative; whoever
attempts to do it, attempts an injury* whoever does it, commits a robbery; he
throws down the distinction between liberty and slavery. There is not a blade
of grass, in the most obscure corner of the kingdom, which is not, which was
not, represented since the constitution began: there is not a blade of grass,
which when taxed, was not taxed by the consent of the proprietor. The
forefathers of the Americans did not leave their native country, and subject
themselves to every danger and distress, to be reduced to the state of slavery.
They did not give up their rights; they looked for protection, and not for
chains, from their mother country. By her they expected to be defended in the
possession of their property; and not to be deprived of it: For should the
present power continue, there is nothing which they can call their own, or, to
use the words of Mr. Lock, what property have they in that, which another may,
by right, take, when he pleases, to himself.

It is impossible to read this speech and Mr. Pitt's, and not be charmed with
the generous zeal for the rights of mankind, that glows in every sentence.
These great and good men, animated by the subject they speak upon, seem to rise
above all the former glorious exertions of their abilities. A foreigner might
be tempted to think they are Americans, asserting with all the ardour of
patriotism, and all the anxiety of apprehension, the cause of their native
land, and not Britons striving to stop their mistaken countrymen from
oppressing others. There reasoning is not only just; it is "vehement," as Mr.
Hume says of the eloquence of Demonsthenes, It Is disdain, anger, boldness,
freedom, involved in a continual stream of argument. Hume's Essay on Eloquence.


We are taxed without our own consent given by ourselves, or our
representatives. We are therefore -- I speak it with grief -- I speak it with
indignation -- we are slaves.

"Miserabile vulgus.
A miserable tribe.
A FARMER.

LETTER VIII.
Beloved Countrymen,
IN my opinion, a dangerous example is set in the last act relating to these
colonies. The power of parliament to levy money upon us for raising a revenue,
is therein avowed and exerted. Regarding the act on this single principle, I
must again repeat, and I think it my duty to repeat, that to me it appears to
be unconstitutional.

No man, who considers the conduct of parliament since the repeal of the
Stamp Act, and the disposition of many people at home, can doubt, that the
chief object of attention there, is, to use Mr. Grenville's expression,
"providing that the dependence and obedience of the colonies be asserted and
maintained."

Under the influence of this notion, instantly on repealing the Stamp Act, an
act passed, declaring the power of parliament to bind these colonies in all
cases whatever. This, however, was only planting a barren tree, that cast a
shade indeed over the colonies, but yielded no fruit. It being determined to
enforce the authority on which the Stamp Act was founded, the parliament having
never renounced the right, as Mr. Pit advised them to do; and it being thought
proper to disguise that authority in such a manner, as not again to alarm the
colonies; some little time was required to find a method, by which both these
points should be united. At la the ingenuity of Mr. Greenville and his party
accomplished the matter, as it was thought, in "An act for granting certain
duties in the British colonies and plantations in America, for allowing
drawbacks, etc. which is the title of the act laying duties on paper, etc.

The parliament having several times before imposed duties to be paid in
America, it was expected no doubt, that the repetition of such a measure would
be passed over as an usual thing. But to have done this, without expressly
asserting and maintaining "the power of parliament to take our money without
our consent," and to apply it as they please, would not have been sufficiently
declarative of its supremacy, nor sufficiently depressive of American freedom.

Therefore it is, that in this memorable act we find it expressly "provided"
that money shall be levied upon us without our consent, for purposes, that
render it, if possible, more dreadful than the Stamp Act.

That act, alarming as it was, declared, the money thereby to be raised, should
be applied toward defraying the expenses of defending, protecting and securing
the British colonies and plantations in America: And it is evident from the
whole act, that by the word "British" were intended colonies and plantations
settled by British people, and not generally, those subject to the British
crown. That act therefore seemed to have something gentle and kind in its
intention, and to aim only at our own welfare: But the act now objected to,
imposes duties upon the British colonies, "to defray the expenses of defending,
protecting and securing his Majesty's dominions in America."

What a change of words! What an incomputable addition to the expenses intended
by the Stamp Act! "His Majesty's dominions" comprehend not only the British
colonies; but also the conquered provinces of Canada and Florida, and the
British garrisons of Nova Scotia; for these do not deserve the name of colonies.

What justice is there in making us pay for "defending, protecting and
securing" these places? What benefit can we, or have we ever derived from them?
None of them was conquered for us; nor will "be defended, protected and
secured" for us.

In fact, however advantageous the subduing or keeping any of these countries
may be to Great Britain, the acquisition is greatly injurious to these
colonies. Our chief property consists in lands. These would have been of a much
greater value, if such prodigious additions had not been made to the British
territories on this continent. The natural increase of our own people, if
confined within the colonies, would have raised the value still higher and
higher, every fifteen or twenty years. Besides, we should have lived more
compactly together, and have been therefore more able to resist any enemy,

But now the inhabitants will be thinly scattered over an immense region, as
those who want settlements, will choose to make new ones, rather than pay great
prices for old ones.

These are the consequences to the colonies of the hearty assistance they gave
to Great Britain in the late war. -- A war, undertaken solely for her own
benefit. The objects of it were, the securing to herself the rich tracts of
land on the back of these colonies, with the Indian trade, and Nova Scotia with
the fishery. These, and much more has that kingdom gained; but the inferior
animals that hunted with the Lion, have been amply rewarded for all the sweat
and blood their loyalty cost them, by the honor of having sweated and bled in
such company.

I will not go so far as to say, that Canada and Nova Scotia are curbs on
New England; the chain of forts through the back woods, on the middle
provinces; and Florida, on the rest: but I will venture to say, that if the
products of Canada, Nova Scotia and ^lorida, deserve any consideration, the two
first of them are only rivals of our northern colonies, and the other of our
southern.

It has been said, that without the conquest of these countries, the colonies
could not have been "protected, defended, and secured;" If that is true, it may
with as much propriety be said, that Great Britain could not have been
"defended, protected, and secured" without that conquest: for the colonies are
parts of her empire, which it is as much concerns her as them to keep out of
the hands of any other power.

But these colonies when they were much weaker, defended themselves, before
this conquest was made; and could again do it, against any that might properly
be called their enemies. If France and Spain indeed should attack them, as
members of the British empire perhaps they might be distressed; but it would be
in a British quarrel.

The largest account I have seen of the number of people in Canada, does not
make them exceed 90,000. Florida can hardly be said to have any inhabitants --
It is computed that there are in our colonies, 3,000,000. -- Our force
therefore must increase with a disproportion to the growth of their strength,
that would render us very safe.

This being the state of the case, I cannot think it just, that these colonies,
laboring under so many misfortunes, should be loaded with taxes, to maintain
countries not only not useful, but hurtful to them. The support of Canada and
Florida cost yearly, it is said, half a million sterling. From hence we may
make some guess of the load that is to be laid upon us: for we are not only to
"defend, protect, and secure" them, but also to make an adequate provision for
defraying the charge of the administration of justice and the support of civil
government, in such provinces where it shall be found necessary.

Not one of the provinces of Canada, Nova Scotia, or Florida, has ever defrayed
these expenses within itself: And if the duties imposed by the last statute are
collected, all of them together, according to the best information I can get,
will not pay one quarter as much as Pennsylvania alone. So that the British
colonies are to be drained of the rewards of their labor, to cherish the
scorching sands of Florida, and the icy rocks of Canada and Nova Scotia, which
never will return to us one farthing that we send to them.

Great Britain -- I mean the ministry in Great Britain, has cantoned Canada and
Florida out into five or six governments, and may form as many more. She now
has fourteen or fifteen regiments on this continent; and may send over as many
more. To make "an adequate provision" for all these expenses, is, no doubt, to
be the inheritance of the colonies.

Can any man believe that the duties upon paper, etc. are the last that will be
laid for these purposes? It is in vain to hope, that because it is imprudent to
lay duties on the exportation of manufactures from a mother country to
colonies, as it may promote manufactures among them, that this consideration
will prevent them.

Ambitious, artful men have made the measure popular, and whatever injustice or
destruction will attend it in the opinion of the colonists, at home it will be
thought just and salutary. "So credulous, as well as obstinate, are the people
in believing every thing, which flatters their prevailing passion."

Hume's Hist. of England.


The people of Great Britain will be told, and they have been told, that they
are sinking under an immense debt -- that great part of this debt has been
contracted in defending the colonies -- that these are so ungrateful and
undutiful, that they will not contribute one mite to its payment -- nor even to
the support of the army now kept up for their "protection and security" -- that
they are rolling in wealth, and are of so bold and republican a spirit, that
they are aiming at independance -- that the only way to retain them in
"obedience" is to keep a strict watch over them, and to draw off part of their
riches in taxes -- and that every burden laid upon them is taking off so much
from Great Britain -- These assertions will be generally believed, and the
people will be persuaded that they cannot be too angry with their colonies, as
that anger will be profitable to themselves.

In truth, Great Britain alone receives any benefit from Canada, Nova Scotia,
and Florida; and therefore she alone ought to maintain them. -- The old maxim
of the law is drawn from reason and justice, and never could be more properly
applied, than in this case.

"Qui sentit, commodum, sentire debet et onus."

They who feel the benefit, ought to feel the burden.

A FARMER.

LETTER IX.
Beloved Countrymen,
I HAVE made some observations on the purposes for which money is to be levied
upon us by the late act of parliament. I shall now offer to your consideration
some further reflections on that subject; and, unless I am greatly mistaken, if
these purposes are accomplished, according to the expressed intention of the act,
they will be found effectually to supersede that authority in our respective
assemblies, which is most essential to liberty. The question is not whether
some branches shall be lopt off -- The ax is laid to the root of the tree; and
the whole body must infallibly perish, if we remain idle spectators of the work.

No free people ever existed, or ever can exist, without, keeping, to use a
common but strong expression, "the purse strings" in their own hands. Where
this is the case, they have a constitutional check upon the administration,
which may thereby be brought into order without violence: but where such a
power is not lodged in the people, oppression proceeds uncontrouled in its
career, till the governed, transported into rage, seeks redress in the midst of
blood and confusion.

The elegant and ingenious Mr. Hume, speaking of the Anglo-Norman government,
says princes and ministers were too ignorant to be themselves sensible of the
advantages attending an equitable administration; and there was no established
council or assembly which could protect the people, and, by withdrawing
supplies, regularly and peaceably admonish the King of his duty, and ensure the
execution of the laws

Thus this great man, whose political reflections are so much admired, makes
this power one of the foundations of liberty.

The English history abounds with instances, proving that this is the proper
and successful way to obtain redress of grievances. How often have Kings and
ministers endeavored to throw off this legal curb upon them, by attempting to
raise money by a variety of inventions, under pretense of law, without having
recourse to parliament? And how often have they been brought to reason, and
peaceably obliged to do justice, by the exertion of this constitutional
authority of the people, vested in their representatives?

The inhabitants of these colonies have on inumberless occasions, reaped the
benefits of this authority lodged in their assemblies.

It has been for a long time, and now is, a constant instruction to all
governors, to obtain a permanent support for the offices of government. But as
the author of the administration of the colonies says, this order of the crown
is generally, if not universally, rejected by the legislatures of the colonies.

They perfectly know how much their grievances would be regarded, if they had
no other method of engaging attention, than by complaining. Those who rule, are
extremely apt to think well of the constructions made by themselves, in support
of their own power. These are frequently erroneous and pernicious to those they
govern -- Dry remonstrances, to show that such constructions are wrong and
oppressive, carry very little weight with them, in the opinion of persons, who
gratify their own inclinations in making these constructions. They cannot
understand the reasoning that opposes their power and desire: but let it be
made their interest to understand such reasoning -- and a wonderful light is
instantly thrown on the matter; and then rejected remonstrances become as clear
as "proof of holy "writ." Shakespeare.


The three most important articles, that our assemblies, or any legislatures
can provide for, are, first the defense of the society: secondly -- the
administration of justice: and, thirdly, the support of civil government.

Nothing can properly regulate the expense of making provision for these
occasions, but the necessities of the society; its abilities; the convenience
of the modes of levying money among them; the manner in which the laws have
been executed; and the conduct of the officers of government; all which are
circumstances that cannot possibly be properly known, but by the society
itself; or, if they should be known, will not, probably, be properly
considered, but by that society.

If money may be raised upon us, by others, without our consent, for our
"defense," those who are the judges in levying it, must also be the judges in
applying it. Of consequence, the money said to be taken from us for our
defense, may be employed to our injury. We may be chained in by a line of
fortifications: obliged to pay for building and maintaining them; and be told
that they are for our defense. With what face can we dispute the fact, after
having granted, that those who apply the money, had a right to levy it; for,
surely, it is much easier for their wisdom to understand how to apply it in the
best manner, than how to levy it in the best manner. Besides, the right of
levying is of infinitely more consequence, than that of applying. The people of
England, that would burst out into fury, if the crown should attempt to levy
money by its own authority, have assigned to the crown the application of money.

As to "the administration of justice" -- the judges ought, in a well regulated
state, to be equally independent of the legislative powers. Thus, in England,
judges hold their commissions from the crown "during good behavior;" and have
salaries, suitable to their dignity, settled on them by parliament. The purity
of the courts of law, since this establishment, is a proof of the wisdom with
which it was made.

But, in these colonies, how fruitless has been every attempt to have the
judges appointed during good behavior; yet whoever considers the matter will
soon perceive, that such commissions are beyond all comparison more necessary
in these colonies, than they are in England.

The chief danger to the subject there, arose from the arbitrary designs of the
crown; but here, the time may come, when we may have to contend with the
designs of the crown, and of a mighty kingdom. What then will be our chance,
when the laws of life and death, are to be spoken by judges, totally dependant
on that crown and kingdom -- sent over, perhaps, from thence -- filled with
British prejudice -- and backed by a standing army, supported out of our own
pockets, to "assert and maintain" our own "dependence and obedience?

But supposing, that through the extreme lenity that will prevail in the
government, through all future ages, these colonies never will bohold any thing
like the campaign of chief justice Jeffereys, yet what innumerable acts of
injustice may be committed, and how fatally may the principles of liberty be
s^pped by a succession of judges uterly independent of the people? Before such
judges, the supple wretches, who cheerfully join in avowing sentiments
inconsistent with freedom, will always meet with smiles: while the honest and
brave men, who disdain to sacrifice their native land to their own advantage,
but on every occasion, boldly vindicate her cause, will constantly be regarded
with frowns.

There are two other considerations, relating to this head, that deserve the
^ost serious attention.

By the late act the officers of the customs are empowered to enter into any
house, warehouse, shop, cellar, or other place in the British colonies or
plantations in America, to search for, or seize prohibited or unaccustomed
goods, etc. on writs granted by the inferior or supreme court of justice,
having jurisdiction within such colony or plantation respectively.

If we only reflect that the judges of these courts are to be during pleasure
-- that they are to have " adequate provision" (...) for them, which is to
continue during their complisant behavior -- that they may be strangers to
these colonies -- what an engine of oppression may this authority be in such
hands?

I am well aware that writs of this kind may be granted at home, under the seal
of the court of exchequer: But I know also that the greatest asserters of the
rights of Englishmen, have always strenuously contended, that such a power was
dangerous to freedom, and expressly contrary to the common law, which ever
regarded a man's house, as his castle, or a place of perfect security.

If such a power is in the least degree dangerous there, it must be utterly
destructive to liberty here. -- For the people there have two securities
against the undue exercise of this power by the crown, which are wanting with
us, if the late act takes place. In the first place, if any injustice is done
there, the person injured may bring his action against the offender, and have
it tried by independent judges, who are The writs for searching houses in
England are to be granted under the seal of the court of ex^hequer, according
to the statute -- and that seal is kept by the chancellor of the exchequer. 4
inst.
no parties in committing the injury. Here he must have it tried before
dependant judges, being the men who granted the writ.

To say that the cause is to be tried by a jury can never reconcile men, who
have any idea of freedom to such a power. -- For we know, that sheriffs in
almost every colony on this continent, are totally dependant on the crown; and
packing of juries has been frequently practiced even in the capital of of the
British empire. Even if juries are well inclined, we have too many instances of
the influence of overbearing unjust judges upon them. The brave and wise men
who accomplished the revolution, thought the independency of judges essential
to freedom.

The other security which the people have at home, but which we shall want
here, is this. -- If this power is abused there, the parliament, the grand
resource of the oppressed people, is ready to afford relief. Redress of
grievances must precede grants of money. But what regard can we expect to have
paid to our assemblies, when they will not hold even the puny privilege of
French parliaments -- that of regestering the edicts, that take away our money,
before they are put in execution.

The second consideration above hinted at, is this -- There is a confusion in
our laws that is quite unknown in Great Britain. As this cannot be described in
a more clear or exact manne^* than has been done by the ingenious author of the
history of New York, I beg leave to use his words. "The state of our laws opens
a door to much controversy. The uncertainty which respect them, renders
property precarious, and greatly exposes us to the arbitary decision of unjust
judges. The common law of England is generally received, together with such
statutes, as were enacted before we had a legislature of our own; but our
courts exercise a sovereign authority, in determining what parts of the common
and statute law ought to be extended: For it must be admitted, that the
difference of circumstances necessarily requires us, in some cases, to reject
the determination of both. In many instances they have also extended even acts
of parliament, passed since we had a distinct legislature, which is greatly
adding to our confusion. The practice of our courts is no less uncertain than
the law. Some of the English rules are adopted, others rejected. Two things
therefore seem to be absolutely necessary for the public security. First the
passing an act for settling the extent of the English laws. Secondly, that the
courts ordain a general set of rules for the regulation of the practice."

How easy will it be under this "state of our laws" for an artful judge to act
in the most arbitary manner, and yet cover his conduct under specious
pretenses, and how difficult will it be for the injured people to obtain
redress, may be readily perceived. We may take a voyage of three thousand miles
to complain; and after the trouble and hazard we have undergone, we may be
told, that the collection of the revenue and maintenance of the prerogative,
must not be discouraged. -- And if the misbehaviour is so gross as to admit of
no justification, it may be said that it was an error in judgment only, arising
from the confusion of our laws, and the zeal of the King's servants to do their
duty.

If the commissions of judges are during the pleasure of the crown, yet if
their salaries are during the pleasure of the people, there will be some check
upon their conduct. Few men will consent to draw on themselves the hatred and
contempt of those among whom they live, for the empty honor of being judges.
It is the sordid love of gain that tempts men to turn their backs on virtue,
and pay their homage where they ought not.

As to the third particular, the "support "of civil government," few words will
be sufficient. Every man of the least understanding must know, that the
executive power may be exercised in a manner so disagreeable and harassing to
the people, that it is absolutely requisite, they should be enabled by the
gentlest method which human policy has yet been ingenious enough to invent,
that is by the shutting their hands, to "admonish" (as Mr. Hume says) certain
persons "of "their duty,"

What shall we now think, when, upon looking into the late act, we find the
assemblies of these ^^ovinces thereby stripped of their authority on ^hes^
s^v^ral heads? The declared intention of that ac^ i^, "that a revenue should be
raised in his M^jesty's dominions in America, for making a more certain and
adequ^te provision for defraying the charge of the administration of ju^tice,
and the support of civil government, in such provinces where it shall be found
necessary; and toward further defraying the expenses of defending, protecting,
and securing the said dominions," etc.

Let the reader pause here one moment, and reflect -- whether the colony in
which he lives, has not made such "certain and adequate "provisions" for these
purposes, as is by the colony judged suitable to its abilities, and all other
circumstances. Then let him reflect -- whether, if this act takes place, money
is not to be raised on that colony without its consent to make provision for
these purposes, which it does not judge to be suitable to its abilities, and
all other circumstances. Lastly, let him reflect -- whether the people of that
country are not in a state of the most abject, slavery, whose property may be
taken from them under the notion of right, when they have refused to give it.
For my part, I think I have good reason for vindicating the honor of the
assemblies on this continent, by publicly asserting, that they have made as
"certain and "adequate provsion" for the purposes abovementioned, as they
^ught to have made; and that it should not be ^^esume^, that they will not do
it hereaft^r. Why then should these most important truths be wrested out of
their hands? Why should they not now be permitted to enjoy that authority,
which they have exercised from the first settlement of these colonies? Why
should they be scandalized by this innovation, when their respective provinces
are now, and will be for several years, laboring under load^ of debts imposed
on them for the very purposes now spoken of? Why should the inhabitants of all
these colonies be with the utmost indignity treated, as a herd of despicable
wretches, so utterly void of common sense, that they will not even make
"adequate provision" for the "administration "of justice" and "the support of
"civil government" among them, for their "own defense" -- though without such
"provision" every people must inevitably be overwhelmed with anarchy and
destruction? Is it possible to form an idea of slavery more complete, more
miserable, more disgraceful, than that of a people, where justice is
administered, government exercised, and a standing army maintained, at the
expense of the people, and yet without the least dependence upon them? If we
can find no relief from this infamous situation, let Mr. Grenville set his
fertile fancy again to work, and as by one exertion of it, he has stripped us
of our property and liberty, let him by another deprive us of our understanding
too, that unconscious of what we have been or are, and ungoaded by tormenting
reflections, we may tamely bow down our necks with all the stupid serenity of
servitude, to any drudgery, which our lords and masters may please to command.
--

When the "charges of the administration of justice," -- "the support of civil
government;" -- and "the expenses of defending protecting and securing" us, are
provided for, I should be glad to know upon what occasion the crown will ever
call our assemblies together. Some few of them may meet of their own accord, by
virtue of their charters: But what will they have to do when they are met? To
what shadows will they be reduced? The men, whose deliberations heretofore had
an influence on every matter relating to the liberty and happiness of
themselves and their constituents, and whose authority in domestic affairs, at
least, might well be compared to that of Roman senators, will now find their
deliberations of no more consequence than those of constables. -- They may
perhaps be allowed to make laws for yoking of hogs, or pounding of stray
cattle. Their influence will hardly be permitted to extend so high as the
keeping roads in repair, as that business may more properly be executed by
those who receive the public cash.

One most memorable example in history is so applicable to the point now
insisted on, that it will form a just conclusion of the obs^rvations that have
been made.

Spain was once free. Their Cortes resembled our parliament. No money could be
raised on the subject, without their consent. One of their Kings having
received a grant from them to maintain a war against the Moors, desired, that
if the sum which they ^ad given, should not be suff^cient, he might be allowed
for that emergency only, to have more money, without assembling the Cortes. The
request was violently opposed by the best and wisest men in the as^^mbly. It
was however, complied with by the votes of a majority; and this single
concession was a precedent for other concessions of the like kinds, until, at
last, the crown obtained a general power for raising money in cases of
necessity. From that period the Cortes ceased to be useful, and the people
ceased to be free.

Venienti occurrite morbo.
Oppose a disease at its beginning. --
A FARMER.

LETTER X.
Beloved Countrymen,
THE consequences, mentioned in the last letter, will not be the utmost limits
of our misery and infamy. We feel too sensibly that any The gentleman must not
wonder he was not contradicted, when, as the minister, he asserted the right of
parliament to tax America. I know not how it is, but there is a modesty in this
house, which does not choose to contradict a minister. I wish gentlemen would
get the better of that modesty. If they do not, perhaps the collective body may
begin to abate of its respect for the representative.

Mr. Pitt's speech.
ministerial measures, relating to these colonies, are soon carried
successfully through the parliament. Certain prejudices operate there so strongly
against us, that it might justly be questioned, whether all the provinces
united, will ever be able affectually to call to an account, before the
parliament, any minister who shall abuse the power by the late act given to the
crown in America. He may divide the spoils torn from us, in what manner he
pleases; and we shall have no way of making him responsible. If he should
order, that every Governor, should have a yearly salary of 5000 l, sterling,
every chief justice of 3000 l. every inferior officer in proportion; and should
then reward the most profligate, ignorant, or needy dependants on himself, or
his friends with places of the greatest trust because they were of the greatest
profit, this would be called an arangement in consequence of the adequate
provision for defraying the charge of the administration of justice, and the
support of the civil government. And if the taxes should prove at any time
insufficient to answer all the expenses of the numberless offices, which
ministers may please to create, surely the house of Commons would be too
"modest" to contradict a minister who should tell them, it was become necessary
to lay a new tax upon the colonies, for the laudable purpose of defraying the
charges of the administration of justice, and the support of civil government
among them. Thus in fact we shall be taxed by ministers. "Within this act, (
statute de tallagio non concedendo) are all new offices erected with new fees,
or old offices with new fees, for that is a tallage put upon the subject, which
cannot be done without common assent by act of parliament."

2 Inst. 533.


We may perceive, from the example of Ireland, how eager ministers are to seize
upon any settled revenue, and apply it in supporting their own power. -- Happy
are the men, and happy are the people, who grow wise by the misfortune of
others. Earnestly, my dear countrymen, do I beseech the author of all good
gifts, that you may grow wise in this manner: And, if I may be allowed to take
the liberty, I beg leave to recommend to you in general, as the best method of
obtaining wisdom, diligently to study the histories of other countries. You
will there find all the arts, that can possibly be practiced by cunning rulers,
or false patriots among yourselves, so fully delienated, that changing names,
the account would serve for your own times.

It is pretty well known on this continent, that Ireland has, with a regular
consistence of injustice, been cruelly treated by ministers, in the article of
pensions; but there are some alarming circumstances relating to that subject,
which I wish to have better known among us.

"An enquiry into the legality of the pensions on the Irish e^ta^li^hment, by
Alexander M'Auley, Esquire one of the King's Council, etc.
The revenue of the crown there, arises principally from the excise granted for
pay of the army, and defraying other public charges in defense and preservation
of the kingdom -- from the tonnage and additional poundage granted for
protecting the trade of the kingdom at sea, and augmenting the public revenue
from the hearth-money granted, as a public revenue for public charges and
expenses. There are some other branches of the revenue, concerning which there
is not any express appropriation of them for public service, but which were
plainly so intended.

Of these branches of the revenue, the crown is only a trustee for the public.
They are unalienable; ^hey are inapplicable to any other purposes, but those
for which they were established; and therefore are not legally chargeable with
pensions.

There is another kind of revenue, which is a private revenue. This is not
limited to any public uses; but the crown has the same property in it, that any
person has in his estate. This does not amount at the most to fifteen thousand
pounds a year, probably not to seven; and it is the only revenue that can
legally be charged with pensions. If ministers were accustomed to regard the
rights or happiness of the people, the pensions in Ireland would not exceed the
sum just mentioned: but long since have they exceeded that limit, and in
December, 1765, a motion was made in the House of Commons in that kingdom, to
address his Majesty, on the great increase of pensions on the Irish
establishment, amounting to the sum of L. 158, 685 in the last two years.

Attempts have been made to gloss over these gross encroachments, by this
specious argument, -- That expending a competent part of the public revenue in
pensions, from a principle of charity or generosity, adds to the dignity of the
crown, and is, therefore, useful to the public. To give this argument any
weight, it must appear that the pensions proceed from "charity "or generosity"
only -- And that it "adds "to the dignity of the crown" to act directly
contrary to law.

From this conduct toward Ireland, in open violation of law, we may easily
^oresee what we may expect, when a minister will have the whole revenue of
America, in his own hands, to be disposed of at his own pleasure. For all the
moneys raised by the late act are to be applied, by virtue of warrants under
the sign manual, countersigned by the high treasurer, or any three of the
commissioners of the treasury. The "residue" indeed, is to be paid into the
receipt of the exchequer, and to be disposed of by parliament. So that a
minister will have nothing to do but to take care that there shall be no
"residue," and he is superior to all control.

Besides the burden of pensions in Ireland, which have enormously increased
within these few years, almost all the offices, in that poor kingdom, have,
since the commencement of the present century, and now are bestowed upon
strangers. For though the merit of those born there justly raises them to
places of high trust, when they go abroad, as all Europe can witness, yet he is
an uncommonly lucky Irishman, who can get a good post in his native country.

When I consider the In Charles II's time, the House of Commons, influenc^d by
some factious demagogues, were resolved to prohibit the importation of Irish
cattle into England. Among other arguments in favor of Ireland, it was
insisted "That by cutting off almost entirely the trade between the kingdoms,
all the natural bands of union were dissolved, and nothing remained to keep the
Irish in their duty, but force and violence,

The King (says Mr. Hume in his History of England) was so covinced of the
justice of these reasons, that he used all his interest to oppose the bill, and
he openly declared, that he could not give his assent to it with a safe
conscience. But the Commons were resolute in their purpose. And the spirit of
tyrany, of which nations are as susceptible as individuals, had animated the
English extremely to exert their superiority over their dependant state. No
affair could be conducted with greater violence than this, by the Commons. They
even went so far in the preamble of the bill, as to declare the importation of
Irish cattle to be a nuisance. By this expression they gave scope to their
passion, and at the same time, barred the King's prerogative, by which he might
think himself entitled to dispense with a law so full of injustice and bad
policy. The lords expunged the word, but as the King was sensible that no
supply would be given by the Commons, unless they were gratified in all their
prejudices, he was obliged both to employ his interest with the Peers to make
the bill pass, and to give the Royal assent to it. He could not however forbear
expressing his displeasure, at the jealousy entertained against him, and at the
intention which the Commons discovered of retrenching his prerogative.

This law brought great distress for sometime upon Ireland, but it occasioned
their applying with great industry to manufactures, and has proved, in the
issue, beneficial to that kingdom.

Perhaps the same reason occasioned the "barring the "King's prerogative" in
the late act suspending the legislation of New York.

This we may be assured of, that we are as dear to his Majesty, as the people
of Great Britain are. We are his subjects as well as they, and as faithful
subjects; and his Majesty has given too many, too constant proofs of his piety
and virtue, for any man, to think it possible, that such a Prince can make any
unjust distinction between such subjects. It makes no difference to his
Majesty, whether supplies are raised in Great Britain, or America: but it makes
some difference, to the Commons of that kingdom.

To speak plainly, as becomes an honest man on such important occasions, all
our misfortunes are owing to a lust of power in men of abilities and influence.
This prompts them to seek popularity, by expedients profitable to themselves,
though ever so destructive to their country.

Such is the accursed nature of lawless ambition, and yet -- what heart but
melts at the thought? -- Such false detestable patriots in every nation have
led their blind confiding country, shouting their applauses, into the jaws of
shame and ruin. May the wisdom and goodness of the people of Great Britain,
save them from the usual fate of nations.


manner in which that island has been uniformly depressed for so many years
past, with this pernicious particu^arity of their parliament continuing The
last Irish parliament continued thirty three years, that is during all the late
reign. The present parliament there, has continued from the beginning of this
reign; and probably will continue to the end.
as long as the crown pleases, I am astonished to observe such a love of
liberty still animating that loyal and generous nation; and nothing can raise
higher my idea of the integrity and public spirit of the people I am informed,
that within these few years, a petition was presented to the House of Commons
in Great Britain, setting forth, that herrings were imported into Ireland, from
some foreign parts of the north so cheap, as to discourage the British herring
fi^^ery, and therefore praying, that some remedy might be applied in that
behalf by p^rliament -- That, upon this petition, the House res^lved to impose
a duty of two shillings sterling on every barrel of foreign herrings imported
into Ireland, but afterward dropped the affair, for fear of engaging in a
dispute with Ireland about the right of taxing her.

So much higher was the opinion, which the House entertained of the spirit of
Ireland, than of that of these colonies.

I find in the last English papers, that the resolution and firmness with which
the people of that kingdom have lately asserted their freedom, have been so
alarming in Grea^-Britain, that the Lord Lieutenant in his sp^ech on the 20th
of last October, "recommended" to the pa^l^ament, that such provision may be
made for securing the judges in the enjoyment of their offices and appointments
during their good behavior, as shall be thought most expedient.

What an important concession is thus obtained by making demands becoming
freemen, with a courage and perseverance becoming freemen.


who have preserved the sacred fire of freedom from being extinguished though
the altar, on which it burned, has been thrown down.

In the same manner shall we unquestionably be treated, as soon as the late
taxes, l^id upon us, shall make posts in the "government," and the
"administration of "justice, here, worth the attention of persons of influence
in Great Britain. We know enough already to satisfy us of this truth. But this
will not be the worst part of our case.

The principals in all great offices will reside in England, make some paltry
allowance to deputies for doing the business here. Let any man consider what an
exhausting drain this must be upon us, when ministers are possessed of the
power of affixing what salaries they please to posts, and he must be convinced
how destructive the late act must be. The injured kingdom, lately mentioned,
can tell us the mischiefs of absenters; and we may perceive already the same
disposition taking place with us. The government of New York has been exercised
by a deputy. That of Virginia is now held so; and we know of a number of
secretaryships, collectorships, and other officers held in the same manner.

True it is, that if the people of Great Britain were not too much blinded by
the passions, that have been artfully excited in their breasts, against their
dutiful children, the colonists, these considerations would be nearly as
alarming to them as to us. The influence of the crown was thought, by wise men
many years ago, too great, by reason of the multitude of pensions and places
bestowed by it; these have vastly increased since One of the reasons urged by
that great and honest statesman, Sir William Temple, to Charles II. In his
famous remonstrance to dissuade him from aiming at arbitrary power, was, the
King had few offices to bestow.

Hume's Hist. of England. Though the wings of prerogative have been ^lipt, the
influence of the crown is greater than ever it was in any period of our
history. For when we consider, in how many buroughs the government has the
vot^rs at command, when we consider the vast body of persons employed in the
collection of the revenue in every part of the kingdom, the inconceivable
number of placemen, and candidates for places in the customs, in the excise, in
the post office, in the dock-yards, in the ordnance, in the salt-office, in the
stamps, in the navy and victualling offices, and in a variety of other
departments; when we consider again the extensive influence of the money
corporations, subscription jobers, and contractors: the endless dependence
created by the obligations confer^d on the bulk of the gentlemen's families
throughout the kingdom, who have relations prefered in our navy and numerous
standing army; when, I say, we consider how wide, how binding, a dependence on
the crown is created by the above enumerated particulars; and the great, the
enormous weight and influence which the crown derives from this extensive
dependence upon its favor and power; any lord in waiting, any lord of the
bedchamber, any man may be appointed minister.

A doctrine to this effect is said to have been the advice of L -- H --

Late News papers.
and perhaps it would be no difficult matter to prove that the people have
decreased.

Surely, therefore, those who wish the welfare of their country, ought
seriously to reflect what may be the consequence of such a new creation of
offices, in the disposal of the crown. The army, the administration of justice,
and the civil government here, with such salaries as the crown shall please to
annex, will extend ministerial influence, as much beyond its former bounds, as
the late war did the British dominions.

But whatever the people of Great Britain may think on this occasion, I hope
the people of these colonies will unanimously join in this sentiment, that the
late act of parliament is injurious to their liberty; and that this sentiment
will unite them in a firm opposition to it, in the same manner as the dread of
the Stamp Act did.

Some persons may imagine the sums to be raised by it, are but small, and
therefore may be inclined to acquiesce under it. A conduct more dangerous to
freedom, as before has been observed, can never be adopted. Nothing is wanted
at home but a precedent, the force of which shall be established, by the tacit
submission of the colonies. With what zeal was the statute erecting the
post office, and another relating to the recovery of debts in America, urged
and tortured, as precedents in the support of the Stamp Act, though wholly
inapplicable. If the parliament succeeds in this attempt, other statutes will
impose other duties. Instead of taxing ourselves as we have been accustomed to
do from the first settlement of these provinces; all our useful taxes will be
converted into parliamentary taxes on our importations; and thus the parliament
will levy upon us such sums of money as they choose to take, without any other
limitation than their pleasure.

We know how much labor and care have been bestowed by these colonies, in
laying taxes in such a manner, that they should be most easy to the people, by
being laid on the proper articles; most equal, by being proportioned to every
man's circumstances; and cheapest by the method directed for collecting them.

But parliamentary taxes will be laid on u^ without any consideration, whether
there is any easier mode. The only point regarded will be, the certainty of
levying the taxes, and not the convenience of the people, on whom they are to
be levied, and therefore all statutes on this head will be such as will be most
likely, according to the favorite phrase, "to execute themselves."

Taxes in every free state have been, and ought to be as exactly proportioned,
as is possible, to the abilities of those who are to pay them. They cannot
otherwise be just. Even a Hottentot could comprehend the unreasonableness, of
making a poor man pay as much for defending the property of a rich man, as the
rich man pays himself.

Let any person look into the late act of parliament, and he will immediately
perceive, that the immense estates of Lord Fairfax, Lord Baltimore, and our
proprietors, which are amongst "his Majesty's other dominions" to be "defended,
protected and secured" by that act will not pay a single farthing of the duties
thereby imposed, except Lord Fairfax wants some of his windows glazed. Lord
Baltimore, and our proprietors The people of Maryland and Pennsylvania have
been engaged in the warmest disputes, in order to obtain an equal and just
taxation of their proprietors est^tes; but the late act does more for these
proprietors than they themselves would venture to demand. It totally exempts
them from taxation.
are quite secure, as they live in England.

I mention these particular cases as striking instances, how far the late act
is a deviation from that principle of justice, which has so constantly
distingui^^ed our own laws on this continent.

The third consideration with our continental assemblies in laying taxes has
been the method of collecting them. This has been done by a few officers under
the inspection of the respective assemblies, with mo^erate allowances. No more
was raised from the subject, than was used for the intended purposes. But by
the late act, a minister may appoint as many officers as he pleases for
collecting the taxes; may assign them what salaries he thinks "adequate" and
they are to be subject to no inspection but his own.

In short, if the late act of parliament takes effect, these colonies must
dwindle down into "common corporations," as their enemies in the debates
concerning the repeal of the Stamp Act, strenuously insisted they were: and it
is not improbable, that some future historians will thus record our fall.

"The eighth year of this reign was distinguished by a very memorable event,
the American colonies then submitting for the first time, to be taxed by the
Briti^h parli^ment. An attempt of this kind had be^n made two years before, but
was de^eated by ^he vigorous (...) of the several provinces in defense of their
liberties. Their behaviviour on that occasion rendered their name very
celebrated for a short time all over Europe; all states being extremely
attentive to a dispute between Great Britain and so considerable a part of her
dominions. For as she was thought to be grown too powerful by the successful
conclusion of the late war she had been engaged in, it was hoped by many, that
as it had h^^^ened before to other kingdoms, civil discords would afford
opportunities of revenging all the injuries supposed to be received from her.
However the cause of dissension was removed by a repeal of the statute, that
had given offense. This affair rendered the submissive conduct of the colonies
so soon after, the more extraordinary; there being no difference between the
modes of taxation which they opposed, and that to which they submitted, but
this, that by the first, they were to be continually reminded that they were
taxed, by certain marks stamped on every piece of paper or parchment, they used.
The authors of that statute triumphed greatly on this conduct of the colonies,
and insisted that if the people of Great Britain, had persisted in enforcing
it, the Americans would have been in a few months so fatigued with the efforts
of patriotism, that they would quickly have yielded obedience.

"Certain it is, that though they had before their eyes so many illustrious
examples in their mother country, of the constant success attending firmness
and perseverance in opposition to dangerous encroachments on liberty, yet they
quietly gave up a point of the last importance. From thence the decline of
their freedom began, and its decay was extremely rapid; for as money was always
raised upon them by the parliament, their assemblies grew immediately useless
and in a short time contemptible; and in less than one hundred years, the
people sunk down into that tameness and supineness of spirit by which they
still continue to be distinguished."

Et majores vestros et posteros cogitate. Remember your ancestors and your
posterity, A FARMER.

LETTER XI.
Beloved Countrymen,
I HAVE several times, in the course of these letters, mentioned the late act
of parliament, as being the foundation of future measures injurious to these
colonies; and the belief of this truth I wish to prevail, because I think it
necessary to our safety.

A perpetual jealousy respecting liberty, is absolutely requisite in all free
states. The very texture of their constitution, in mixed governments, demands
it. For the cautions with which power is distributed among the several orders,
imply, that each has that share which is proper for the general welfare, and
therefore, that any further imposition must be pernicious. Machiavel's
discourses. Book 3, chap. 1.
Machiavel employs a whole chapter in his discourses, to prove that a state, to
be long lived, must be frequently corrected, and reduced to its first
principles. But of all states that have existed, there never was any, in which
this jealousy could be more proper than in these colonies. For the government
here is not only mixed, but dependant, which circumstance occasions a
peculiarity in its form, of a very delicate nature.

Two reasons induce me to desire, that this spirit of apprehension may be
always keept up among us, in its utmost vigilance. The first is this, that as
the happiness of these provinces indubitably consists in their connection with
Great Britain, any separation between them is less likely to be occasioned by
civil discords, if every disgusting measure is opposed singly, and while it is
new: for in this manner of proceeding, every such measure is most likely to be
rectified. On the other hand, oppressions and dissatisfactions being permitted
to accumulate -- if ever the governed throw off the load, they will do more. A
people does not reform with moderation. The rights of the subject therefore
cannot be too often considered, explained, or asserted: and whoever attempts to
do this, shows himself, whatever may be the rash and peevish reflections of
pretended wisdom, and pretended duty, a friend to those who injudiciously
exercise their power, as well as to them, over whom it is so exercised.

Had all the points of prerogative claimed by Charles I. been separately
contested and settled in preceding reigns, his fate would in all probability
have been very different, and the people would have been content with that
liberty which is compatible with regal authority. But The author is sensible
that this is putting the gentlest construction on Charles' conduct; and that is
one reason why he chooses it. Allowance ought to be made for the errors of those
men, who are acknowledged to have been possessed of many virtues. The education
of that unhappy Prince, and his confidence in men not so good and wise as
himself, had probably filled him with mistaken notions of his own authority,
and of the consequences that would attend concessions of any kind to a people,
who were represented to him as aiming at too much power.
he thought, it would be as dangerous for him to give up the powers which at
any time had been by usurpation exercised by the crown, as those that were
legally vested in it. This produced an equal excess on the part of the people.
For when their passions were excited by multiplied grievances, they thought it
would be as dangerous for them, to allow the powers that were legally vested in
the crown, as those which at any time had been by usurpation exercised by it.
Acts, that might by themselves have been upon many considerations excused or
extenuated, derived a contagious malignancy and odium from other acts, with
which they were connected. They were not regarded according to the simple force
of each, but as parts of a system of oppression. Every one therefore, however
small in itself, being alarming, as an additional evidence of tyrannical
designs. It was in vain for prudent and moderate men to insist, that there was
no necessity to abolish royalty. Nothing less than the utter destruction of
monarchy, could satisfy those who had suffered, and thought they had reason to
believe, they always should suffer under it.

The consequences of these mutual distrusts are well known: But there is no
other people mentioned in history, that I recollect, who have been so
constantly watchful of their liberty, and so successful in their struggles for
it, as the English. This consideration leads me to the second reason, why I
"desire that the spirit of apprehension may be always kept up among us in its
utmost vigilance."

The first principles of government are to be looked for in human nature. Some
of the best writers have asserted, and it seems with good reason, that
"government is founded on "Opinion is of two kinds, viz. opinion of interest,
and opinion of right. By opinion of interest, I chiefly understand, the sense
of public advantage which is reaped from government; together with the
persuasion, that the particular government which is established, is equally
advantageous with any other, that could be easily settled."

"Right is of two kinds, right to power, and right to property. What prevalence
opinion of the first kind has over mankind may easily be understood, by
observing the attachment which all nations have to their ancient government,
and even to those names which have had the sanction of antiquity. Antiquity
always begets the opinion of right." "It is sufficiently understood, that the
opinion of right to property, is of the greatest moment in all matters of
government."

Hume's Essays.
opinion.

Custom undoubtedly has a mighty force in producing opinion, and reigns in
nothing more arbitrarily than in public affairs. It gradually reconciles us to
objects even of dread and detestation; and I cannot but think these lines of
Mr. Pope, as applicable to vice in politics, as to vice in ethics.

'Vice is a monster of so horrid mien,
'As to be hated, needs but to be seen;
'Yet seen too often, familiar with her face,
'We first endure, then pity, then embrace.'
When an act injurious to freedom has been once done, and the people bear it,
the repetition of it is most likely to meet with submission. For as the
mischief of the one was found to be tolerable, they will hope that of the
second will prove so too; and they will not regard the infamy of the last,
because they are stained with that of the first.

Indeed, nations in general, are not apt to think until they feel; and
therefore nations in general have lost their lib^rty: For as violations of the
rights of the governed, are commonly not only specious, Omnia mala exampla ex
bonis initiis orta sunt.

Sallust. Bell. Cat. S. 50.
but small at the beginning, they spread over the multitude in such a manner,
as to touch individuals but slightly. Thus they are disregarded. The Republic
is always attacked with greater vigor than it is defend; for the audacious and
prof^igate, prompted by their natural enmity to it, are easily impelled to act
upon the least nod of their leaders; whereas the honest, I know not why, are
generally slow and unwilling to stir; and neglecting always the beginnings of
t^ings, are never roused to exert themselves, but by the last necessity; so
that through irresolution and delay, when they would be glad to compound at
last for their quiet, at the expense even of their honor, they commonly lose
them both."

Cicero's Orat. for Sex^ius.

Such were the sentiments of this great and excellent man whose vast abilities,
and the calamities of the time in which he lived, enabled him, by m^u^nful
^xperience, to form a just judgem^nt on the conduct of the friends and enemies
of liberty.


The power or profit that arises from these violations, centering in few
persons, is to them considerable. For this reason the governors having in view
their particular purposes, succes^^vely preserve an uniformity of conduct for
attaining them. They regularly increase and ^ultiply the first injuries, till
at length the inattentive people are compelled to perceive the heaviness of
their burdens. -- They begin to complain and enquire -- but too late. -- They
find their oppressors so strengthened by success, and themselves so entangled
in examples of express authority on the part of their rulers, and of tacit
recognition on their own part, that they are quite confounded: For millions
entertain no other idea of the legality of power, than that it is founded on
the exercise of power. They voluntarily fasten their chains, by adopting a
pusillanimous opinion, "that there will be too much danger in attempting a
remedy," or another opinion no l^ss fatal, "that the government has a right to
treat them as it does." They then seek a wretched relief for their minds, by
persuading themselves, that to yield their obedience is to discharge their
duty. The deplorable poverty of spirit, that prostrates all the dignity
bestowed by divine providence on our nature -- of course succeeds.

From these reflections I conclude, that every free state should incessantly
watch, and instantly take alarm on any addition being made to the power
exercised over them, innumerable instances might be produced to show, from what
slight beginnings the most extensive consequences have flowed: but I shall
select two only from the history of England.

Henry the seventh was the first monarch of that kingdom, who established a
standing body of armed men. This was a band of 50 archers, called yeomen of the
guard: And this institution, notwithstanding the smallness of the number, was,
to prevent discontent, Rapin's History of England.
"disguised under the pretense of majesty and grandeur." In 1684, the standing
forces were so much augmented, that Rapin says -- "The King, in order to make
his people fully sensible of their new slavery, affected to muster his troops,
which amounted to 4000 well armed and disciplined men." I think our army, at
this time, consists of more than seventy regiments.

The method of taxing by excise was first introduced amidst the convulsions of
civil wars. Extreme necessity was pretended, and its short continuance
promised. After the restoration, an excise upon beer, ale and other liquors,
was granted to the 12 Car. II. Chap. 23, and 24.
King, one half in fee, the other for life, as an equivalent for the court of
wards. Upon James the second's accession, the parliament James II. Chap. 1. and
4.
gave him the first excise, with an additional duty on wine, tobacco, and some
other things. Since the revolution it has been extended to salt, candles,
leather, hides, hops, soap, paper, paste-board, mill-boards* scaleboards,
vellum, parchm^^t, ^^arch, silks, calicoes, linens, stuffs, printed, stained,
etc. wire, wrought plate, coffee, tea, chocolate, etc.

Thus a standing army and excise have, from the first slender origins, though
always hated, always feared, always opposed, at length swelled up to their vast
present bulk.

These facts are sufficient to support what I have said. It Is true that all the
mischiefs apprehended by our ancestors from a standing army and excise, have
not yet happened: but it does not follow from thence, that they will not
happen. The inside of a house may catch fire, and the most valuable apartments
be ruined, before the flames burst out. The question in these cases is not,
what evil has actually attended particular measures -- but what evil, in the
nature of things, is likely to attend them. Certain circumstances may for some
time delay effects, that were reasonably expected, and that must ensue. There
was a long period, after the Romans had prorogued the command to In the year of
the city 428, "Duo singularia haec ^i viro primum contigere; prorogatio imperii
non ame in ullo fucto et acto honor triumphus."

Live. B. 8. Chap. 23.26. "Had the rest of the Roman citizens imitated the
example of L Quintus, who refused to have his consulship continued to him, they
had never admitted that custom of proroguing magistrates, and then the
prolongation of their commands, the army had never been introduced, which very
thing was at length the ruin of that commonwealth.

Machiavel's discourses, B. 3. Chap. 24.
Q Publilius Philo, before that example destroyed their liberty. All our kings,
from the revolution to the present reign have been foreigners. Their ministers
generally continued but a short time in authority; I don't know but it may be
said with a good deal of reason, that a quick rotation of ministers is very
desirable in Great Britain. A minister there has a vast store of materials to
work with. Long administrations are rather favorable to the reputation of a
people abroad, than to their liberty.
and they themselves were mild and virtuous princes.

A bold, ambititious Prince, possessed of great abilities, firmly fixed in the
throne by descent, served by ministers like himself, and rendered either
venerable or terrible by the glory of his successes, may execute what his
predecessors did not dare to attempt. Henry IV. tottered in his seat during his
whole reign. Henry V. drew the strength of the kingdom into France, to carry on
his wars there, and left the Commons at home, protesting, that the people were
not bound to serve out of the realm.

It is true, that a strong spirit of liberty subsists at present in
Great Britain, but what reliance is to be placed in the temper of a people,
when the prince is possessed of an unconstitutional power, our own history can
sufficiently inform us. When Charles II. had strengthened himself by the return
of the garrison of Tangier, "England (says Rapin) saw on a sudden an amazing
revolution; saw herself stripped of all her rights and privileges, excepting
such as the King should vouchsafe to grant her; and what is more astoni^hing,
the English themselves delivered up these very rights, and privileges to
Charles II. which they had so passionately, and, if I may say it, furiously
defended against the designs of Charles I." This happened only thirty six years
after this last prince had been beheaded.

Some persons are of opinion, that liberty is not violated, but by such open
acts of force; but they seem to be greatly mistaken. I could mention a period
within these forty years, when almost as great a change of disposition was
produced by the secret measures of a long administration, as by Charles's
violence, Liberty, perhaps, is never exposed to so much danger, as when the
people believe there is the le^^t; for it may be subverted, and yet they not
think so.

Pu^lic disgusting acts are seldom practiced by the ambitious, at the beginning
of their designs. Such conduct silences and discourages the weak, and the
wicked, who would otherways have been their advocates or accomplices, It is of
great consequence, to allow those, who, upon any account, are inclined to
favor them, something specious to say in their defense. The power may be fully
establi^hed, though it would not be safe for them to do whatever they please.
For there are things, which, at some times, even slaves will not bear. Julius
Caesar and Oliver Cromwell, did not dare to assume the title of King. The grand
Seignior dares not lay a new tax. The King of France dares not be a protestant.
Certain popular points may be left untouched, and yet freedom be extinguished.
The commonality of Venice imagine themselves free, because they are permitted
to do, what they ought not. But I quit a subject, that would lead me too far
from my purpose.

By the late act of parliament, taxes are to be levied upon us, for "defraying
the charge of the administration of justice the support of civil government --
and the expenses of defending his Majesty's dominions in America."

If any man doubts what ought to be the conduct of these colonies on this
occasion, I would ask them these questions.

Has not the parliament expressly avowed their intention of raising money from
us for certain purposes? Is not this scheme popular in Great Britain? Will the
taxes, imposed by the late act, answer those purposes? If it will, must it not
take an immense sum from us? If it will not, is it to be expected, that the
parliament will not fully execute their intention, when it is pleasing at home,
and not opposed here? Must not this be done by imposing new taxes? Will not
every addition, thus made to our taxes, be an addition to the power of the
British legislature, by increasing the number of officers employed in the
collection? Will not every additional tax therefore render it more difficult to
abrogate any of them? When a branch of revenue is once established, does it not
appear to many people invidious and undutiful, to attempt to abolish it? If
taxes, sufficient to accomplish the intention of the Parliament, are imposed by
the Parliament, what taxes will remain to be imposed by our assemblies? If no
material taxes remain to be imposed by them, what must become of them, and the
people they represent?

Demonsthenes's ad Philipic.
"If any person considers, these things, and yet not thinks our liberties are
in danger, I wonder at that person's security."

One other argument is to be added, which, by itself, I hope, will be
suffici^nt to convince the most incredulous man on this continent, that the
late act of Parliament is only designed to be a precedent, whereon the future
vassalage of these colonies may be established.

Every duty thereby laid on articles of British manufacture, is laid on some
commodity upon the exportation of which from Great Britain, a drawback i^
payable. Those drawbacks in most of the articles, are exactly double to the
duties given by the late act. The Parliament therefore might in half a dozen
lines have raised much more money only by stopping the drawbacks in the hands
of the officers at home, on exportation to these colonies, than by this solemn
imposition of taxes upon us, to be collected here. Probably, the artful
contrivers of this act formed it in this manner, in order to reserve to
themselves, in c^se of any objections being made to it, this specious pretense
-- That the drawbacks are gifts to the colonies; and that the act only lessens
those gifts. But the truth is, that the drawbacks are intended for the
encouragement and promotion of Briti^h manufactures and commerce, and are
allowed on exportation to any foreign parts, as well as on exportation to these
provinces. Besides, care has been taken to slide into the act Though duties by
the late act are laid on some articles* on which no drawbacks are allowed, yet
the duties imposed by the act, are so small, in comparison with the drawbacks
that are allowed, that all the duties together will not amount to so much as
the drawbacks.
some articles on which there are no drawbacks. However, the whole duties laid
by the late (...) on all the articles therein specified, are so small, that
they will not amount to as much as the drawbacks which are allowed on part of
them only. If, therefore, the sum to be obtained by the late act had been the
sole object in forming it, there would not have been any occasion for the
Commons of Great Britain to give and grant to his Majesty, rates and duties for
raising a revenue in his Majesty's dominions in America, for making a more
certain and adequate provision for defraying the charge of the administration
of justice, the support of civil government, and the expenses of defending the
said dominions -- Nor would there have been any occasion for an The expense of
this board, I am informed, is between four and five ^housand pounds sterling a
year. The establishment of officers, for collecting the revenue of America,
amounted before to seven thousand six hundred pounds per annum: and yet, says
the author of "The regulation of the colonies." the whole remittance from all
the taxes in the colonies, at an average of thirty years, has not amounted to
one thousand nine hundred pounds a year, and in that time, seven or eight
hundred pounds per annum only, have been remitted from North America.

The smallness of the revenue arising from the duties in America, demonstrated
that they were intended only as regulations of trade; and can any person be so
blind to truth, so dull of apprehension in a matter of unspeakable importance
to his country, as to imagine, that the board of commissioners lately
established at such a charge, is instituted to assist in collecting one
thousand nine hundred pounds a year, or the trifling duties imposed by the late
act? Surely every man on this continent must perceive, that they are
established for the care of a new system of revenue, which is but now begun.


expensive board of commissioners, and all the other new charges to which we
are made liable.

Upon the whole, for my part, I regard the late act as an experiment made of
our disposition. It is a bird sent over the waters, to discover, whether the
waves, that lately agitated this part of the world with such violence, are yet
subsided. If this adventurer gets footing here, we shall quickly be convinced,
that it is not a phoenix; for we shall soon see it followed by others of the
same kind. We shall find it rather to be of of the Dira caelaeno, Virgil,
Aeneid 2.
breed described by the poet --

"Infelix vates"

A FARMER.

LETTER XII.
Beloved Countrymen,
SOME states have lost their liberty by particular accidents; but this calamity
is generally owing to the decay of virtue. A people is traveling fast to
destruction, when individuals consider their interests as distinct from those
of the public. Such notions are fatal to their country, and to themselves. Yet
how many are there so weak, and sordid as to think they perform all the offices
of life, if they earnestly endeavor to increase their own wealth, power, and
credit, without the least regard for the society, under the protection of which
they live; who, if they can make an immediate profit to themselves, by lending
their assistance to those, whose projects plainly tend to the injury of their
country, rejoice in their dexterity, and believe themselves entitled to the
character of able politicians. Miserable men! of whom it is hard to say,
whether they ought to be most the objects of pity or contempt, but whose
opinions are certainly as detestable as their practices are destructive.

Though I always reflect with a high pleasure on the integrity and
understanding of my countrymen, which, joined with a pure and humble devotion
to the great and gracious author of every blessing they enjoy, will, I hope,
ensure to them, and their posterity, all temporal and eternal happiness; yet
when I consider, that in every age and country there have been bad men, my
heart, at this threatening period, is so full of ^pprehension, as not to permit
me to (...), but that there may be some on this continent, against whom you
ought to be upon your guard. Men, who either It is not intended by these words
to throw any reflection upon gentlemen, because they are possessed of offices;
for many of them are certainly men of virtue, and lovers of their country. But
supposed obligations of gratitude and honor may induce them to be silent.
Whether these obligations ought to be regarded or not, is not so much to be
considered by others, in the judgment they form of these gentlemen, as whether
they think they ought to be regarded. Perhaps, therefore we shall act in the
properest manner toward them, if we neither reproach nor imitate there. The
persons meant in this letter, are the base spirited wretches, who may endeavor
to distinguish themselves, by their sordid zeal, in defending and promoting
measures, which they know, beyond all question, to be destructive to the just
rights and true interests of their country. It is scarcely possible, to speak
of these men with any degree of patience. It is scarcely possible to speak of
them with any degree of propriety. For no words can truly describe their guilt,
and meanness. But every honest man, on their being mentioned, will feel what
cannot be expressed. If their wickedness did not blind them, they might
perceive, along the coast of these colonies, many skeletons of wretched
ambition; who after distinguishing themselves, in support of the Stamp Act, by
a courageous contempt of their country, and of justice, have been left to
linger out their miserable existence, without a government, collectorship,
secretaryship, or any other commission to console them, as well as it could for
loss of virtue and reputation -- while numberless offices have been bestowed in
these colonies, on people from Great Britain, and new ones are continually
invented to be thus bestowed. As a few great prizes are put into a lottery to
tempt multitudes to lose, so here and there an American has been raised to a
good post -- "Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto."

Mr. Grenville, indeed, in order to recommend the Stamp Act, had the unequalled
generosity, to power down a golden shower of offices upon Americans; and yet
these ungrateful colonies did not thank Mr. Grenville for showing his kindness
to their countrymen, nor them for excepting it. How must that great statesman
have been surprised to find, that the unpolished colonists could not be
reconciled to infamy, by treachery? Such a bountiful disposition toward us
never appeared in any minister before him, and probably never will appear
again. For it is evident that such a system of policy is to be established on
this continent, as, in a short time, is to render it utterly unnecessary to use
the least art in order to conciliate our approbation of any measures. Some of
our countrymen may be employed to six chains upon us; but they will never be
permitted to hold them afterward. So that the utmost that any of them can
expect, is only a temporary provision, that may expire in their own time; but
which, they may be assured, will prec^ude their children from having any
consideration paid to them. The natives of America, will sink into total
neglect and contempt, the moment that their country loses the constitutional
powers she now possesses. Most sincerely do I wish and pray, that every one of
us may be convinced of this great truth, that industry and integrity are the
"(...) of pleasantness, which lead to happiness."


hold or expect to hold certain advantages by setting examples of servility to
their countrymen -- Men who trained to the employment, or self-taught by a
natural versatility of genius, serve as decoys for drawing the innocent and
unwary into snares. It is not to be doubted but that such men will diligently
bestir themselves, on this and every like occasion, to spread the infection of
their meanness as far as they can. On the plans they have adopted, this is
their course. This is the method to recommend themselves to their patrons.

They act consistently, in a bad cause.

They run well in a mean race.

From them we shall learn, how pleasant and profitable a thing it is, to be,
for our submissive behavior, well spoken of in St. James's, or St. Stephen's;
at Guildhall, or the Royal Exchange. Specious fallacies will be dressed up with
all the arts of delusion, to persuade one colony to distinguish herself from
another, by unbecoming condescensions, which will serve the ambitious purpose
of great men at home, and therefore will be thought by them to entitle their
assistants in obtaining them, to considerable rewards*

Our fears will be excited; our hopes will be awakened. It will be insinuated
to us with a plausible affectation of wisdom and concern, how prudent it is to
please the powerful -- how dangerous to provoke them -- and then comes in the
perpetual incantation, that freezes up every generous purpose of the soul, in
cold -- inactive -- expectation that if there is any request to be made,
compliance will obtain a favorable attention.

Our vigilance and our union are success and safety. Our negligence and our
division are distress and death. They are worse -- they are shame and slavery.

Let us equally shun the benumbing stillness of overweening sloth, and the
feveri^h activity of that ill-informed zeal, which busies itself in maintaining
little, mean, and narrow opinions. Let us, with a truly wise generosity and
charity, bani^h and discourage all illiberal distinctions, which may arise from
differences in situation, forms o^ government, or modes of religion. Let us
consider ourselves as men -- Freemen -- Christian men -- separated from the
rest of the world, and firmly bound together by the same rights, interests, and
dangers. Let these keep our attention inflexibly fixed on the great objects,
which we must continually regard, in order to preserve those rights, to promote
those interests, and to avert those dangers.

Let these truths be indelibly impressed on our minds -- that we cannot be
happy without being free -- that we cannot be free without being secure in our
property -- that we cannot be secure in our property, if, without our consent,
others may, as by right, take it away -- that taxes imposed on us by
parliament, do thus take it away -- that duties laid for the sole purposes of
raising money, are taxes -- that attempts to lay such duties should be
instantly and firmly oppos^^ -- that this oppo^^tion can nev^r be ^^^ectu^l,
unl^ss it is the united e^^ort of these p^ovi^c^s -- that, therefore*
ben^vol^nce of t^mp^r toward each other, and unanimity o^ counsels are
es^ential to the welfare of the whol^ -- and lastly, that, for this reason,
every man amongst us, who, in any manner, would encourage either dissension,
di^^idence, ^r in^i^^erence between these colonies, is an enemy to himself and
to his country.

The belief of these truths, I verily think, my countrymen, is indispens bly
nece^^ary to your happiness I beseech you, therefore, Teach them diligently
unto your children, and talk of them when you sit in your houses, and when you
walk by the way, and when you lie down, and when you rise up.

What have these colonies to ask, while they continue free? Or what have they
to dread, but insi^ious attempts to subvert their freedom? Their prosperity
does not depend on ministerial favors doled out to particular provinces. They
form one polit^^^l body, of which each colony is a member. Their happiness is
founded on their constitution; and is to be promoted by preserving that
constitution in unabated vigor throughout every part. A spot, a speck of
decay, however small the limb on Deuteronomy. vi.7.
which it appears, and however remote it may seem from the vitals, should be
alarming. We have all the rights requisite for our prosperity. The legal
authority of Great Britain may indeed lay hard restrictions upon us; but, like
the spear of Telephus, it will cure as well as wound. Her unkindness will
instruct and compel us, after some time, to discover, in our indus^ry and
frugality, surprising remedies -- if our rights continue inviolated. For as
long as the products of our labors and the rewards of our care, can properly
be called our own, so long will it be worth our while to be industrious and
frugal. ^ut if when we plow -- sow -- reap -- gather -- and thresh, we find,
that we plow -- sow -- re^p -- gather -- and thresh for others, whose ple^sure
is to be the sole limitation, how much they shall take, and how much they shall
leave, why should we repeat the unprofitable to^l? Horses and oxen are content
with that portion of the fruits of their work, which their owners assign to
them, in order to keeep them strong enough to raise successive crops; but even
these beasts will not submit to draw for their masters, until they are subdued
with whips and goads. Let us take care of our rights, and we therein take care
of our property. "Slavery is ever preceded by sleep." Individuals may be
dependant on ministers, if Montesquieu's Spirit of Laws, B. 14. C. 13.
they please. States should scorn it -- And, if you are not wanting to
yourselves, you will have a proper regard paid you by those, to whom if you are
not respectable, you will infallibly be contemptible. But if we have already
forgot the reasons that urge us, with unexampled unanimity, to exert ourselves
two years ago; if our zeal for the public good is worn out before the homespun
clothes which it caused us to have made -- if our resolutions are so faint, as
by our present conduct to condemn our own late successful example -- if we are
not affected by any reverence for the memory of our ancestors, who transmitted
to us that freedom in which they had been bles^ -- if we are not animated by
any regard for posterity, to whom, by the most sacred obligations, we are bound
to deliver down the the invaluable inheritance -- Then* indeed, any minister --
or any tool of a minister -- or any creature of a tool of a minister -- or any
lower "Instrumenta regni" Tacitus An. b. 12. s. 66.

If any person shall imagine that he discovers in these letters the least
disaffection toward our most excellent Sovereign, and the parliament of
Great Britain; or the least dislike to the dependence of these colonies on that
kingdom, I beg that such person will not form any judgment on particular
expressions, but will consider the tenor of all the letters taken together. In
that case, I ^latter myself that every unprejudiced reader will be convinced,
that the true interests of Great Britain are as dear to me as they ought to be
to every good subject.

If I am an Enthusiast in any thing, it is in my zeal for the pe^petual
dependence of these colonies on their mother country. -- A dependence founded
on mutual benefits, the continuance of which can be secured only by mutual
affections. Therefore it is, that with extreme apprehension I view the smallest
seeds of discontent, which are unwarily scattered abroad. Fifty or sixty years
will make astonishing alterations in these colonies; and this consideration
should render it the business of Great Britain more and more to cultivate our
good dispositions toward her: but the misfortune is, that those great men, who
are wrestling for power at home, think themselves very slightly interested in
the prosperity of their country fifty or sixty years hence; but are deeply
concerned in blowing up a popular clamor for supposed immediate advantages.

For my part, I regard Great-Bitain as a bulwark happily fixed between these
colonies and the powerful nations of Europe. That kingdom is our advanced post
or fortification, which remaining safe, we under its protection enjoying peace,
may diffuse the blessings of religion, science, and liberty, throw remote
wildernesses. It is, therefore, incontestibly our duty and our interest, to
support the strength of Great Britain. When, confiding in that strength, she
begins to forget from whence it arose, it will be an easy thing to show the
source. She may readily be reminded of the loud alarm spread among her
merchants and tradesmen, by the universal association of these colonies, at the
time of the Stamp Act, not to import any of her manufactures. -- In the year
1718, the Russians and Swedes entered into an agreement, not to suffer
Great Britain to export any naval stores from their dominions, but in Russian
or Swedish ships, and at their own prices. Great Britain was distressed. Pitch
and tar rose to three pounds a barrel. At length she thought of getting these
articles from the colonies; and the attempt suc^^^ding, they fell down to
fifteen shillings. In the year 1756, Great Britain was threatened with an
invasion. An easterly wind blowing for six weeks, she could not man he^ fleet,
and the whole nation was thro^n into the utmost con^ternation. The wind
changed. The American ships arrived. The fleet sailed in ten or fifteen days.
There are some other reflections on this subject worthy of the most deliberate
attention of the British parliament; but they are of such a nature, I do not
choose to mention them publicly. I th^ught I discharged my du^y to my country,
taking the liberty, in the year 17^5, w^ile the St^mp-Act was i^ suspense, of
writing my sentiments to a man of the greatest influence at home, w^^
^fterwards distingui^^^d himself by (...) our c^u^e, ^^ the debates concer^i^g
the repeal of that act.


instrument of administration, if lower there may be, is a personage, whom it
may be dangerous to offend.

I shall be extremely sorry if any man mistakes my meaning in any thing I have
said. Officers employed by the crown, are, while according to the laws they
conduct themselves, entitled to legal obedience and sincere respect. These it
is a duty to render them, and these no good or prudent person will withhold.
But when these officers, through rashness or design, endeavor to enlarge their
authorit^ beyond ^ts due limits, and expect improper concessions to be made to
them, from regard for the employments they bear, their attempts should be
considered as equal injuries to the crown and people, and should be
courageously and constantly opposed. To su^^er our ideas to be confounded by
names, on such occasions, would certainly be an inexcusable weakness, and
probably, an i^remediable error.

We have reason to believe, that several of his Majesty's present ministers are
good men, and friends to our country; and it seems not unlikely, that by a
particular concurrence of events, we have been treated a little more severely
than they wished we should be. They might not think it prudent to stem a
torrent. But what is the difference to us, whether arbitrary acts take their
rise from ministers, or are perpermitted by them? Ought any point to be allowed
to a good minister, that should be denied to a bad one? The mortality of
ministers is a very frail mortality. A *** may succeed a Shelburne -- a *** may
succeed a Conway.

We find a new kind of minister lately spoken of at home -- The minister of the
house of Commons. The term seems to have particular propriety when referred to
these colonies, with a different meaning annexed to it, from that in which it
is taken there. By the word "minister" we may understand not only a servant of
the crown, but a man of influence among the Commons, who regard themselves as
having a share of the sovereignty over us. The minister of the house may, in a
point respe^^ing the colonies, be so strong, that the minister of the crown in
the house, if he is a distinct person, may ^ot choose, even where his sentiments
are favorable to us, to come to a pitched battle upon our account. ^or though I
have the highest opinion of the d^f^r^nce of the house for the King's minister;
yet he "U^i imperium ad ig^aros ant minus bonos perv^^it* no^^m illud exemplum,
ad dignis et idon^is, ad ^ndignos et non idoneos transfertur." Sall. Bed. Cat.
f. 50.
may be so good natured as not put it to the test, except it be for the mere
and immediate profit of his master or himself.

But whatever kind of minister he is, that attempts to innovate a single iota
in the privileges of these colonies, him I hope you will undauntedly oppose,
and that you will never suffer yourselves to be either cheated or frightened
into any unworthy obsequiousness. On such emergencies you may surely without
presumption believe that ALMIGHTY GOD himself will look down upon your
righteous contest with gracious approbation. You will be a "Band of brother's"
cemented by the dearest ties -- and strengthened with inconceivable supplies of
force and constancy, by that sympathetic ardour which animates good men,
confederated in a good cause. Your honor and welfare will be, as they now are,
most intimately concerned; and besides -- you are assigned by Divine
Providence, in the appointed order of things, the protectors of unborn ages,
whose fate depends upon your virtue. Whether they shall arise the noble and
indisputable heirs of the richest patrimonies, or the dastardly and hereditary
drudges of imperious taskmasters, you must determine.

To discharge this double duty to yourselves and to your posterity; you have
nothing to do, but to call forth into use the good sense and spirit, of which
you are possessed. You have nothing to do, but to conduct your affairs
peaceably -- prudently -- firmly -- jointly. By these means you will support
the character of freemen, without losing that of faithful subjects -- a good
character in any government -- one of the best under a British government. You
will prove that Americans have that true magnanimity of soul, that can resent
injuries without falling into rage; and that though your devotion to
Great Britain is the most affectionate, yet you can make proper distinctions,
and know what you owe to yourselves as well as to her -- you will, at the same
time that you advance your interests, advance your reputation -- you will
convince the world of the justice of your demands, and the purity of your
intentions -- while all mankind must with unceasing applauses confess, that you
indeed deserve liberty, who so well understand it, so passionately love it, so
tem^erately enjoy it, and so wisely, bravely, and virtuously, assert, maintain,
and defend it.

Certe ego libertatem quae mihi a parente meo tradita est, experiar, verum id
frustra, an ob rem faciam, in vestra manu situm est, quirites.

For my part, I am resolved strenuously to contend for the liberty delivered
down to me from my ancestors; but whether I shall do this effectually or not,
depends on you, my countrymen.

How little soever one is able to write, ye^ when the liberties of one's
country are threatened, it is still more difficult to be silent.

A FARMER.
Is there not the greatest reason to hope, if the universal sense of the
colonies is immediately expressed, by resolves of the assemblies, in support of
their rights; by instructions to their agents on the subject; and by petitions
to the crown and parliament for redress; that those measures will have the same
success now that they had in the time of the Stamp Act.



To the ingenious Author of certain patriotic Letters, subscribed A FARMER.
MUCH RESPECTED SIR,
WHEN the rights and liberties of the numerous and loyal inhabitants of this
extensive con ^ne^t ^re in imminent danger, -- when the inveterate enemies of
these colonies are not more assiduous to forge fetters for them, than diligent
to delude the people, and zealous to persuade them to an indolen^ acquiescence*
At this alarming period, when to reluct is deemed a revolt, and to oppose such
measures as are injudicious and destructive, is construed as a formal attempt
to subvert order and government; when to reason is to rebel; and a ready
submission to the rod of power, is solicited by the tenders of place and
patronage, or urged by the menace of danger and disgrace: It Is to YOU, worthy
SIR, that AMERICA is obliged, for a most seasonable, sensible, loyal, and
vigorous vindication of her invaded rights and liberties: It Is to YOU, the
distinguished honor is due; that when many of the friends of liberty were
ready to fear its utter subversion: Armed with truth, supported by the
immutable laws of nature, the common inheritance of man, and leaning on the
pillars of the BRITISH constitution; you seasonably brought your aid, opposed
impending ruin, awakened the most indolent and inactive, to a sense of danger,
re-animated the hopes of those, who had before exerted themselves ^n the cause
of freedom, and instructed AMERICA in the best means to obtain redress.

Nor is this western world alone indebted to your wisdom, fortitude, and
patriotism: GREAT BRITAIN also may be confirmed by you, that to be truly great
and successful, she must be just: That to oppress AMERICA, is to violate her
own honors, defeat her brightest prospects, and contract her spreading empire.

To such eminent worth and virtue, the inhabitants of the town of BOSTON, the
capital of the province of the MASSACHUSETS-BAY, in full town meeting
assembled, express their earliest gratitude. Actuated themselves by the same
generous principles, which appear with so much luster in your useful labors,
they will not fail warmly to recommend, and industriously to promote that union
among the several colonies, which is so indispensably necessary for the
security of the whole.

Though such superior merit must assuredly, in the closest recess, enjoy the
divine satisfaction of having served, and possibly saved this people; though
veiled from our view, you modestly shun the deserved applause of millions;
permit us to inturde upon your retirement, and salute The FARMER, as the FRIEND
OF AMERICANS, and the common benefactor of mankind.

Boston, March 22. 1768. The above letter was read, and unanimously accepted by
the town, and ordered to be published in the several newspapers Attest.
WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.




