The great Importance of Speaking in the most intelligible Manner in the
Christian Church. A SERMON, Preached at the INSTALLATION Of the Rev. Nathaniel
Sherman, Over the Church of CHRIST in Mount-Carmel, NEW HAVEN, MAY, 18th, 1768.

By the Rev. NAPHTALI DAGGETT, A. M. Professor of Divinity in YALE-COLLEGE, in
NEW HAVEN, and President of the same.

Published at the Desire of the Hearers.

SI NON VIS INTELLIGI, DEBES NEGLIGI. NEW HAVEN: Printed by THOMAS and SAMUEL
GREEN.

THE GREAT IMPORTANCE OF SPEAKING, IN THE MOST INTELLIGIBLE MANNER IN THE
CHRISTIAN CHURCH.
1 CORINTHIANS, XIV. 19TH. Yet in the church I had rather speak five words with
my understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, than ten thousand
words in an unknown Tongue.


AS the Apostles of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and many other primitive ministers
of the Gospel, were sent forth with an extensive commission, to teach all
nations, and gather them into the Christian church, so they were endowed with
power from on high, suited to the design of their mission. They were not only
sanctified to an eminent degree by the special grace of GOD; but also furnished
with various extraordinary, and miraculous powers: among these was the gift of
Tongues; which was an ability to speak with ease, and propriety various
languages, which they had not learned in the ordinary way of gaining the
knowledge of them. Hereby two important ends were answered; one was this, that
hereby they were enabled to teach and instruct the different nations, to which
they were sent, by speaking to them intelligibly in their own native tongue --
the other; that such an incontestable miracle afforded strong proof of their
extraordinary mission, so that they might be justly regarded, as true
messengers of the LORD OF HOSTS.

This gift of tongues appears to have been an abiding, permanent endowment,
when once bestowed: otherwise it is inconceivable how they could have been able
to abuse it, as many in the Corinthian church evidently did. They were unduly
elated with this, and other miraculous gifts, and thence disposed to make a
vain ostentation of it, by exercising it needlessly in their worshipping
assemblies, where there was no occasion for working a miracle, by speaking in
an unknown tongue, whereby the hearers received no instruction or edification.

For this the apostle very justly reproves them in this chapter, showing them
the unprofitableness, the great impropriety, and even absurdity of such a
practice; observing to them, that the gift of tongues was intended to be a sign
to them that believe not, as other miracles were: and not to be used with
those, who had already believed, and professed the Christian Faith, and only
needed farther instruction in the truths of the Gospel, which they had embraced
upon sufficient evidence.

He leads them to consider, that while any of them spoke in the church, in a
language not understood by the assembly, either in praying, singing or
preaching, it was impossible they should profit, or edify their hearers, who
could not, under these circumstances, bear any part in the worship, or say,
Amen to their prayers, or thanksgiving, however just and pertinent they might
otherwise be. Indeed the case was very plain. The apostle therefore declares to
them, that although he had reason to acknowledge with gratitude to GOD, the gift
of tongues, and his ability to speak diverse languages, more than all of them,
answerable to his extensive commission, as the apostle of the Gentiles, yet he
was far from an inclination to spend his time in a worshipping assembly of
professing Christians, in displaying these his gifts, without any advantage to
the hearers; and affirms, under inspiration, that in the church he had rather
speak five words with his understanding, that is, intelligibly, or in a known
tongue, than ten thousand words of gibberish, in an unknown language.

It is plain from the text, as well as several other passages in this chapter,
that speaking with the understanding intends speaking intelligibly, or so as to
be understood by the hearers, in direct opposition to speaking in an unknown
tongue. This is very evident from the reason here assigned by the apostle, viz.
that by his voice he might teach others also, which he could not do by uttering
ever so many pompous, unintelligible sounds. The text clearly teaches us this
DOCTRINE, That it is a matter of great importance, that all teaching or
speaking in the christian church, should be in the most plain intelligible
manner, and not in an unknown tongue.

This is very forcibly expressed by the apostle's comparison of five
intelligible words, with ten thousand unmeaning sounds, or words of doubtful
signification, and his giving the preference to the former. So that taking the
expression in literal exactness, it is above two thousand times better to speak
intelligibly, than in an unknown tongue.

We may briefly consider what is required in speaking with the understanding,
or intelligibly: -- and offer a few considerations to show the importance of it
in the church.

I. We may briefly consider, what is required in speaking with the
understanding, or intelligibly.

Now as this is directly opposed to speaking in an unknown tongue; and as
persons may use a language unknown either to themselves, or their hearers, or
to both, in order to avoid each of these, it is necessary,

1. That those who speak in the church should themselves have as clear ideas,
as may be, affixed to the words they use. I say, as clear ideas as may be,
because there are some sublime Mysteries asserted in the sacred Oracles, of
which we can have but very imperfect and inadequate conceptions in the present
state -- Such are the doctrines of the Trinity, the Union of the human and
Divine Nature in the Person of the one MEDIATOR. Here we may have clear ideas
of the truths asserted; although when we would attempt to illustrate the manner,
in which these assertions are true, our conceptions must be very imperfect, by
reason of the incomprehensibleness of the subject, or our not having any thing
in the sensible world, that bears any near resemblance to it. But where the
nature of subjects is such, as bears any considerable proportion to the measure
of our scanty intellectual capacities, we should be careful to get the clearest
ideas of them, when we attempt to speak about them; and not deal out mere
empty, unmeaning sounds, without knowing what we intend. When persons in
speaking thus, use words without any clear ideas affixed to them, they are
chargeable with using an unknown tongue in a double sense: for if they know not
what they mean themselves, it is certain their hearers cannot understand what
their meaning is. This great abuse of language is extremely common among the
less thinking part of mankind, especially when they converse about things of a
religious or moral nature. How common is it to hear them prattle out the words
they have learnt, as Parrots do, without any clear, fixed meaning to them in
their own minds? So that a more difficult question cannot be put to them, than
to ask them, what they mean. And it would be well, if there were less of this
to be found in the discourses of those, who are under advantages for knowledge
and learning, and make pretensions to it.

This great mischief in the use of language, arises very much from learning
first the words used to convey the more complex ideas of moral and religious
subjects, and resting in the bare words, without taking due care and pains to
get clear and determinate ideas annexed to them in their minds.

This is to be carefully avoided by all those who speak in the christian church.

2. They should speak with propriety, or use words in the plain, generally
received sense, which established custom has affixed to them.

Although words are mere arbitrary signs of our ideas, yet custom fixes and
determines their meaning. And he that would talk to others in a known tongue,
must use them in the sense, in which they are generally used and understood in
that language; otherwise he is guilty of the gross impropriety of calling
darkness light, and light darkness. He may not affix to them a new and
different sense, and use them to signify this new meaning, unless he gives
suitable notice of it, by defining the meaning of the terms he uses. This is so
plainly requisite to speaking intelligibly, that it is needless to enlarge upon
it.

3. It is necessary, that those who speak in the christian church, should adapt
their language and discourses to the understanding and capacity of their
hearers in general.

There will indeed be some in every christian assembly of so low seize in
knowledge, as not to understand even plain discourses. These are to be taught
and instructed more privately; as it is highly improper that the public
teaching should be brought down so low, as to be adapted, and as it were
confined to a few such, to the neglect and injury of a much greater number. The
observation only intends, that all public teaching or instruction in the church
should be suited to the understanding and conception of the generality of the
hearers, which may be done in our assemblies, without descending to a very low,
grovelling or puerile manner of diction. This great master of language, the
apostle Paul, who also had the gift of diverse tongues, commends himself to the
Corinthians, as having used great plainness of speech with them in his
instructions, 2 Cor. iii. 12. This is highly necessary in all teaching, as it
is the first and principal design of all speaking, to communicate our ideas
clearly to those with whom we converse. If therefore any persons in public
teaching indulge themselves in the use of such a sublime style, abounding with
lengthy intricate periods, or frequently introduce abundance of such hard words
or lofty expressions, as are unintelligible to their hearers, they are guilty
of a very unpardonable fault, and miss the great end of edifying their hearers.
For so far as the language used is unintelligible to them, it is an unknown
tongue; and then it matters not, as to the important purpose of their
instruction, whether it be English, or Hebrew. If any public teachers practice
thus under the notion of excellency of language, or goodness and elegance of
style, they greatly miss-judge as to the most essential quality of a good
style, which is intelligibleness, or perspecuity. And if there be any, who
affect the use of such hard words, and scholastic phrases with a view to gain
the reputation of profound learning, among the common people, they are herein
profoundly silly, and ridiculously vain. Such language thus used justly
deserves the title of high swelling words of vanity.

4. That they avoid, as much as possible, the use of ambiguous words, or those
of a double and doubtful meaning. There is a vast number of words in every
copious language, to which men have annexed more meanings than one; and so they
are used, and may be understood, in different senses. And hence a person's
using such words does not clearly determine, or satisfy the hearers, what the
speaker means by them, because they are of doubtful signification. They are, as
the apostle observes in the context, like a trumpet that gives an uncertain
sound, and so does not certify the army, whether they are called to prepare for
battle, or to retreat from the enemy. They are words not easy to be understood
-- they don't give such a distinction in the sound, i. e. do not convey such a
certain determinate meaning, as that it can be known, what is spoken, or
intended by the speaker. This is a defect, and imperfection necessarily
attending human language in some measure; and therefore ought not to be
increased and promoted; but to be avoided and remedied, as much as possible.
This is justly complained of, as a fruitful source of much confusion in
discourses, of great misunderstandings and disputes in the world. And to affect
this ambiguity of expression in speaking, is to affect one of the greatest
imperfections of language. This must be utterly unbecoming the character of a
philosopher, and much more beneath the character of a gospel minister, a
messenger of the Lord of Hosts. And therefore those who would speak in the
church with the understanding, should carefully avoid it, as much as they can,
and never use any expressions of a doubtful meaning in matters of religion,
while they can find others more free from ambiguity, and which will more
precisely and determinately convey the sentiments of their minds, and make
known to their hearers the messages they bring from GOD. And the designed use
of such ambiguous expressions, when speaking in the church, either in praying,
preaching, or any other way of declaring to the church our sentiments upon
religious subjects, is evidently affecting to speak in an unknown tongue, which
is so plainly condemned by the Holy Ghost in the text. It would be very
shocking indeed, to suppose that any minister, speaking in the name of GOD,
uses such doubtful ambiguous language, on design to conceal what he really
takes to be the truth of GOD, revealed in his word. To suppose this, without
strong evidence, would be grossly uncharitable; while it is the professed
design of the gospel ministry clearly to lay open, and explain the great truths
of the gospel, and declare the whole counsel of GOD.

But if this be a defect so necessarily attending all languages, how can it be
avoided in speaking? I answer,

5. By using great care in defining and explaining our words, where there is
any danger of a misunderstanding. For although this may not always absolutely
answer the desired end, yet it is the most natural, and indeed the only
possible remedy for this imperfection of language, as is very judiciously
pointed out by Mr. Lock, and many others upon this subject. And if proper care
be taken in this matter, we may considerably remedy this defect of language,
convey our ideas with clearness, avoid the inconveniency, and absurdity of
speaking in an unknown tongue. Nor will it be ordinarily necessary to spend
much time in defining our words: it may therefore be easily done, and ought
always to be carefully practiced, when we apprehend there is any danger of
being misunderstood; or whenever they that hear us desire an explanation of the
words we use. This is the great end, and advantage of all expositions on the
scriptures by preaching or printing. The only pertinent design of all this must
be to point out and explain the true sense and meaning of
scripture-expressions, which meaning is the Scripture itself, the object of
faith, the word and truth of GOD, which lives and abides forever. This has
also been ever regarded, and aimed at, as one great end of those human
composures, called Confessions of Faith. They are only an open, plain, honest
definition of what a church or person means by scripture-expressions; and their
assent to them is only a declaration of their belief of the word of GOD, i. e.
of the truths or propositions revealed in the word of GOD. And all this with a
design to avoid the irrational practice of speaking in the church in an unknown
tongue. For in however plain and determinate language the holy Scriptures were
first delivered, it is undeniably evident in fact they are got to be ambiguous,
and of doubtful meaning in the mouths of professing christians: so that by the
same scripture-expression one will understand and mean one thing, and another
will mean quite a different thing. This is not owing to any defect of the
sacred Scriptures, properly speaking: but partly to the unavoidable
imperfection of human language, which is the channel, wherein divine truths are
conveyed to us, and more especially to the perverseness of men, who have been
laboring from age to age to wrest them from their true genuine meaning, as
they were first given by Inspiration of GOD. The expressions of Scripture
having been monstrously tortured and wrested by various sects of nominal
christians for seventeen hundred years, it is not in the least strange, that
they are become ambiguous, by reason of the various different, and contrary
senses affixed to them by the many different sects in the christian world.
Notwithstanding this, the Scriptures indeed in the mouth of God, and as they
are his language to us, are sufficiently clear, plain and determinate in their
meaning; so that by comparing scripture with scripture, the true sense thereof
may be discovered and determined in all important points by them that are
honestly desirous to know the truth, as it is in JESUS. So that this ambiguity
of scripture-expressions does not properly belong to the scriptures, considered
as the word of God to us; but as these same expressions are used by men of
contrary sentiments, they are evidently become of uncertain, doubtful meaning
in their mouths. And that this is true in fact, is demonstrably evident from
hence, that both Protestants and Papists will readily give their assent fully
and plumply to the sacred scriptures, while they differ as widely in their real
belief concerning the true sense of scripture, even in very essential points,
as Heaven from Hell, or Light from Darkness. In what intelligible sense can it
be said, that both these believe the scriptures, i. e. the truths which GOD
has revealed, concerning those important points, wherein they so widely
differ? The utmost that can be rationally understood, from their declaring
their belief of the holy scriptures to be the word of GOD, is simply this, that
they believe there is some sense or other, which may be put upon these
scripture-expressions, which sense they believe to be true, and designedly
revealed from GOD. What has been here observed concerning Papists and
Protestants, is well known to be true with regard to all the different sects of
christians in the known world, however monstrously erroneous, or diametrically
contrary to each other, their religious sentiments may be.

I mention these things to show, that the expressions of scripture, both in the
original languages, although they are words taught by the Holy Ghost, and also in
our translation of the Bible, however judiciously chosen by the translators,
are in fact come to be of a doubtful, uncertain meaning, in the mouths of men,
and are therefore in a great measure an unknown tongue; or, to use the
apostle's simile, are like a trumpet that gives an uncertain sound. And
certainly those must be endowed with a very extraordinary discernment, who can
be fully satisfied of the soundness of a person's Faith, by a declaration of
his belief of the holy scriptures; or understand with clearness what a person
means, when he speaks in an unknown tongue. This is truly a very peculiar
sagacity, which is far from being common to men.

After what has been here said, it may seem the less strange, that such an
ambiguity, or uncertainty of meaning should have happened to the sacred
scriptures, as they are used by men, when we consider a very notorious fact of
a similar nature, respecting the doctrinal articles of the church of England,
which are very intelligibly expressed, and have been compiled but a few years,
comparatively speaking; and yet they are become so very ambiguous, and of such
uncertain meaning, by the dexterity and subtlety of learned expositors, that
they are now understood by thousands to mean almost any thing, or nothing, and
are readily assented to, and subscribed by huge multitudes of the Episcopal
Clergy, who no more believe them in the true, natural, genuine sense of the
Compilers of them, than they believe the doctrine of Transubstantiation, or the
Infalibility of his burlesque Holiness, the Bishop of Rome. And when ever this
comes to be evidently the case with a translation of the Bible, or any other
composition, used in speaking in, or to the church, common sense teaches the
necessity of finding out words and expressions of a more certain, determinate
signification, whereby we may intelligibly communicate our ideas, in order to
avoid the absurd conduct of speaking in an unknown tongue.

To make this further evident, I proceed,

II. To offer a few considerations, showing the importance of speaking
intelligibly in the christian church, in opposition to the using of an unknown
tongue.

It is the plain design and spirit of the text, together with the context, to
assert and illustrate the preferableness, and so the importance of this Matter.
The inspired apostle was directed to write particularly to the Corinthian
church upon this subject, and to reprove the public teachers therein for so
gross an error, as that of speaking unintelligibly in the church, although they
herein made use of a language miraculously given them of GOD, which might seem
to furnish them with some plausible excuse for the using of it in the church.
And yet the practice was utterly to be condemned: the Apostle insisted upon
plainness and intelligibleness of speech; that they should utter words easy to
be understood; and not of a doubtful, ambiguous meaning, like the trumpet that
gives an uncertain sound. The expression in the text to this purpose, is very
forcible: as if the apostle had said, You had almost as good be silent in the
church, as to speak in this unprofitable, trifling manner. The fewest
intelligible words, that can form a proposition, upon any important subject of
religion, are more advantageous, and convey more instruction to the church,
than ten thousand words of an unknown, or uncertain meaning. I will briefly
observe,

1. The importance of it appears from hence, that the great end and design of
all speaking, is the communicating of our ideas, or the conveying of truth to
others. When this end is not answered, or properly aimed at, speaking is vain;
and this noble gift of language, whereby GOD has so much distinguished, and
raised the human race above the brutal creation, is ungratefully perverted and
abused, and prostituted to a very low and trifling purpose.

2. It is the only way, in which there can be any such thing, as teaching or
instruction in the christian church.

The great design of the gospel ministry, and of all speaking in the church, is
the edification of the body. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations. But what
teaching or edification can there be, without the conveyance of knowledge or
truth to the mind? Or how can these be conveyed by mere unmeaning,
unintelligible, or uncertain sounds? Some indeed may be so weak, as to feel
very devoutly affected, and perhaps imagine themselves extremely edified, only
by the sound of words, without any ideas or meaning to them; or only by a
peculiarly modulated, sanctimonious tone of the voice. And there is just reason
to fear, that a great deal of those high religious affections, visible in some
worshipping assemblies, has its rise from no better cause, than mere sound and
noise, without the clear perception of any important, affecting truths
presented to the view of the mind. But all such devotion, or supposed
edification is just as worthless, and as far from any thing truly spiritual, as
those emotions of animal nature which are raised by the blast of a trumpet, the
thunder of a drum, or the sound of a violin. And the irrational practice of
speaking in the church, in an unknown tongue, or the dealing in sounds, to the
neglect of sense, without any clear, determinate meaning, has a powerful
tendency to promote this kind of animal devotion, in which there is no religion
at all. The apostle despises, and condemns all such speaking, as being
destitute of any real instruction. He chose on the contrary, to speak with the
understanding, for this important purpose, that by his voice he might teach
others; not divert or amuse them with empty noise. The sincere milk of the
word, i. e. pure gospel truths, is the only food or nourishment, whereby
Christians can grow in grace, be truly edified, and make advances in a life of
faith and holiness. And if any persons can be satisfied with mere uncertain
sounds, it is evident they feed upon the wind, almost in a literal sense; and
surely no solid growth can be expected from such slender airy aliment.

3. The speaking in an unknown tongue, or in ambiguous, doubtful terms, is a
gross affront to common sense, and a manifest imposition upon those whom we
pretend to teach.

It would certainly be taken so in the common, and civil affairs of life, to
have an answer returned to a proper, pertinent question, in an unknown
language, or in words of such uncertain signification, as leave just room to
doubt the true meaning of him that answers. If a person, pretending to give a
serious answer to a plain question, does it in such a manner, as does not
amount to a real answer, or a plain declaration of his meaning, we are obliged
to look upon it as a mere evasion, and imposition: and if he refuses to explain
his meaning clearly, it is just the same as refusing to give an answer. And if
this would be justly resented in the common affairs of life, it surely ought to
be greatly disliked, and avoided in the more weighty concerns of religion.

4. Speaking intelligibly in the church, is plainly required by that great
principle of christian morality, the doing to others, as we would have them do
to us.

When we are spoken to, or addressed by others, especially in matters of any
considerable importance, we always choose to have it done in such a manner, as
that we may clearly understand what they intend. And if, while they make a show
of informing us by speaking, they discover a design to conceal their true
meaning from us, we directly judge, they really abuse and mock us. And
therefore, as we should justly look upon this abusive in others, we ought to
avoid it in our dealings with them, and endeavor to let them know our meaning
clearly and plainly, when we make a pretension to it. Hence,

5. This is absolutely requisite to the character of Integrity and Uprightness.

Without uprightness and godly sincerity there can be no true religion. Without
this moral honesty, and integrity of heart, all pretensions to it are vain.
Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle, who shall abide in thy holy hill? He
that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the truth in
his heart. Psalm. xv. 1.2. Whenever therefore in preaching, or in any other
method of speaking in the church, we make a profession of declaring the truth,
or delivering our sentiments upon the great subjects of religion, if we
designedly endeavor to conceal our real sentiments, or what we take to be the
truth, by speaking in an unknown tongue, or by using doubtful ambiguous
expressions on design, we must be guilty of gross dishonesty; we do not
uprightly speak the truth in our hearts, i. e. the true meaning and real
sentiments of our hearts. Such a conduct cannot be reconciled with moral
honesty; it is plain, wilful deception; and would be justly stigmatized with the
name of knavery, in bargains, civil contracts, or commerce. And why it should
be any better in matters of religion, when we are professedly declaring the
truth, as witnesses for GOD, is very hard to conceive.

6. Speaking in the church unintelligibly, or in an unknown tongue, is acting
the part of a child, of a Barbarian, and even of a madman.

Children are very apt to use words without ideas, to be pleased with their own
unintelligible prattle. And such the Apostle plainly intimates this conduct of
the Corinthian teachers to be, in the verse following the text: Brethren, be
not children in understanding; howbeit, in malice be ye children; but in
understanding be men. And in ver. 11, the Apostle plainly declares it to be
acting the part of a barbarian; Therefore if I know not the meaning of the
voice, -- he that speaks shall be a barbarian unto me; i. e. it will be much
the same, as if he should talk Indian to an English auditory. There needs
nothing said to display the ridiculous absurdity of such a piece of conduct.
Nay the Apostle proceeds farther, and represents it as acting the madman, ver.
23. If therefore the whole church be come together into one place, and all
speak with tongues, and there come in those that are unlearned, or unbelievers,
will they not say that ye are mad? that is, will they not have just reason to
look upon you in that light, and to say you act like madmen?

7. Speaking intelligibly in the christian church is of great importance, as it
tends to promote brotherly Love and Union, and preserve the Liberty of the
churches of CHRIST.

The time will not allow me to dwell upon the great importance, and excellency
of brotherly love, or display, how good, and how pleasant a thing it is for
brethren to dwell together in Unity: neither need I do it; they are by the
consent of all confessedly so excellent and desirable, and the want of them so
uncomfortable and destructive to religion and the welfare of the church of
CHRIST. Now the Practice of speaking very intelligibly and unreservedly upon
religious subjects has the greatest tendency to promote this brotherly love
among Christians: Whereas suspicions, jealousies, and misunderstandings are
frequently occasioned, and abundantly strengthened by shyeness, reservedness,
and apparent reluctance to unbosom ourselves, and speak our minds freely to one
another upon all religious subjects. I am verily persuaded, that many unhappy,
misunderstandings, and wide divisions, which have terribly rent the churches of
CHRIST, might have been prevented, or speedily healed by such an open, honest,
ingenuous proceedure. Such an upright, christian-like conduct in persons, who
might not entirely agree in sentiments with their brethren in all points, would
be the likeliest way to their receiving light, if they were in an error; or
enable them to administer conviction to their brethren, if the error should be
on their side. At the same time such an open, honest behavior would very
powerfully invite to mutual condescension, even where they could not after all
fully agree in lesser, circumstantial matters. Whereas a contrary conduct
unavoidably gives just occasion for distrust and jealousies. There is just
reason to suspect a person, who is not willing to use the greatest freedom,
openness, and plainness of speech in declaring his religious sentiments. In all
such cases, common sense will dictate, that there is just ground for suspicion.
Nor will it be at all strange, if, under these circumstances, persons should be
suspected of holding worse, and more erroneous tenets, than they really do. And
if this should happen to be the case, they can justly blame nobody but
themselves, and ought in justice to impute it to their own culpable
unwillingness to speak plainly in a known tongue, without affecting the covert
of ambiguity. And then farther, there is something so inexpressibly charming,
engaging and winning in right down openness, and honest, plain dealing in these
matters, that it cannot fail to conciliate respect and esteem, and mightily
promote Love and Union among christian brethren.

And then the important Liberty of the churches, wherewith CHRIST has made
them free, cannot be too solicitously, and tenderly regarded by us, when rightly
understood. Now this Liberty of the churches is essentially the same with the
right of private Judgment in Individuals, and includes the same things; as for
instance, the churches Right and Liberty to think and judge for themselves; to
worship GOD according to their own Consciences, to choose their own ministers,
and to determine for themselves, what form of church discipline they judge to
be most agreeable to the word of GOD; and with what churches and ministers they
will choose to walk in stated Union and Communion, and with whom they will not,
as judging it not consistent with their purity and safety, or not conducive to
their Edification, according to the word of God. It is here to be carefully
observed, that the true liberty of particular churches consists in their Right
of choosing their own Constitution, or Form of Church Government, which they
shall judge to be pointed out by CHRIST in his Word; and in determining for
themselves, whether they will be Independent, or Consociated with other
neighboring churches, and walk in strict Union with them, in transacting the
more weighty and important matters relative to the churches, (as the
Ordination, Removal or Deposition of Ministers, or any difficult cases of
discipline) according to such Rules and Orders, as they shall judge to be
agreeable to the Word of GOD, most conducive to their peace and edification.
Here they have full, entire Liberty. And when they have freely come into such a
voluntary Union with other churches, it is no Diminution of their Liberty, but
rather the height and full Enjoyment of it, to be subject to the Rules and
Conditions of this Union. And in perfect consistency with Freedom, they are
evidently obliged to a strict observance of this Agreement, until they shall be
convinced in their consciences, that this Agreement or Union is unscriptural
and wrong. And if that should be the case, 'twill then be their indispensable
duty, to signify to the other churches their change of Sentiments, either with
respect to principles, or the Plan and Rules of their Union, freely proposing
to consideration their difficulties, scruples and objections. And if they shall
not get them removed, or convince their brethren, then they may peaceably
dissent, or withdraw from that special Union, without any just Offense. But the
renouncing of an ecclesiastical constitution, or breaking over the rules of it,
without taking these previous measures, is evidently a disorderly and
unchristian Separation, and ought to be treated as such. And such a conduct is
yet more criminal in any church or minister, when they apprehend themselves
liable to be called to an Account, or censured, for disorderly walking, by the
body of churches with which they have been united. This must be deemed a mere
sham design, attended with all the aggravating circumstances of a clandestine
attempt to escape from justice, which cannot be the least reason why they should
not be proceeded against in a way of Censure.


Now I apprehend, that speaking plainly, intelligibly, and unreservedly in the
church, and upon all subjects relative thereto, is very conducive, and highly
necessary to the preservation of this important liberty. Hereby suspicions and
jealousies will likely be either prevented, or removed; professing Christians
be able to see how far they are agreed in the great principles of religion, and
so be enabled to comply with the apostle's direction, Phil. i. 27. Stand fast
in one Spirit, with one mind, striving together for the faith of the gospel.
Chap. ii. 2. Fulfill ye my joy that ye be like-minded, having the same love,
being of one accord, of one mind: -- and iii. 16. Whereto we have already
attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing. By such
freedom and Openness, Christians will readily see, whether they are so far
agreed, in what they judge to be the great essential doctrines of the christian
religion, and the necessary rules of church government, as that they can safely
walk together in close union and communion; or whether they differ so widely in
matters of religion, as that it is necessary for them to be separate, each one
peaceably enjoying his own sentiments, worship and discipline. And such a
knowledge of each others belief, and religious sentiments, as can be obtained
only by speaking plainly, and intelligibly, is absolutely necessary to their
walking together consistently in the Fellowship of the Gospel. And this is what
every one has an undoubted right to know, and be satisfied about, with respect
to all those, who desire to enjoy communion with him, or to be united with him
in the same plan or form of ecclesiastical discipline. For it would be a most
evident and gross Insringment upon christian Liberty, for a person, or a church
to be obliged to hold communion, and walk in strict Union with those,
concerning whose qualifications for such communion they can have no clear and
rational satisfaction. But I am sensible, there is one grand objection may be
raised against speaking thus freely and intelligibly in a known tongue, to the
following purpose. Suppose I am concerned with a church, or a number of
churches and ministers, of whom a great many, or even the greater part, labor
under unhappy prejudices and mistakes; perhaps they are narrow, contracted and
bigoted in their sentiments, and lay a mighty stress upon some mere
circumstantials, in which I cannot agree with them; and if I should open my
mind freely upon all religious subjects, they would reject me, and not hold
communion with me; may I not in that case keep upon the reserve, or deal a
little in doubtful, ambiguous expressions, which I apprehend they will
understand in a sense different from what I really intend, in both which senses
the words will well bear to be understood? May I not prudently do this with an
honest view and design to instruct them better, and gradually bring them off
from their unreasonable prejudices, as I shall find they will be able to bear
it? And is there not a degree of christian condescension and forbearance to be
used in such cases?

To which I will answer freely, with great plainness of speech, without a
designed reference to any particular case, person, or persons whatever, and
with a disposition to be thankful to the kind friend that will correct me
wherein I may be wrong.

I doubt not, but that there have been, and still may be cases very similar to
this which is here supposed: I also readily allow, that in this dark, imperfect
state there ever will be great room, and abundant occasion for much
condescension and forbearance in reference to the mistakes and prejudices of
our fellow christians, and a disposition to practice this, as far as may be
safely done, consistent with adhering to plain important truth and duty, is a
very amiable and necessary part of the christian temper. But then the necessity
of practicing this mutual condescension and forbearance is a very substantial
reason, why we should use the greatest freedom and intelligibleness in speaking
in the church, so that when we have opened our minds, and sentiments freely,
then all concerned may be able to exercise their undoubted right of judging for
themselves, how far we are agreed, and whether there is any such material
difference in sentiments between us, as may forbid our walking together in the
strictest union and fellowship, in all the important concerns of religion and
the church. But without this freedom and openness, what possible room can there
be for condescension? What gospel precept, or principle of reason can dictate
such a preposterous condescension, as to be satisfied with persons talking in
Arabic, or any other unknown tongue, upon the momentous subjects of religion;
and to believe at the same time, that they mean very right, or, to besure,
nothing materially wrong? This would be a very odd sort of christian
forbearance, to which the gospel is an utter stranger!

But perhaps it will be urged, that after all this plainness of speech, those
with whom I am concerned, and with whom I want to be connected, and have
communion, are so wrong-headed, whimsical, and such scrupulous bigots, that
they not only embrace a great many errors in things circumstantial, and less
material; but also hold several of these wrong notions to be of great
importance, or almost essential to religion; and if they knew I did not almost
entirely agree with them herein, they would immediately reject me. I say then,
that all attempts to crowd myself upon them by concealing and disguising my
real sentiments, would be a gross tyrannical infringment upon their christian
Liberty. It is true, they may err, and hold those things to be of great
importance, or even essential, which I believe, or know to be otherwise; and
for this they must answer to GOD another day: and I shall act a very christian
part, in laboring to convince them of their mistakes, and inspiring them with
more just and generous sentiments, if I can. But then after all, they have as
good a right to judge for themselves, as I have to judge for myself; and to
determine for themselves, what truths are of high importance, or essential in
religion, as I have to determine for myself in these matters. And if herein
they grossly err, they are accountable to GOD for it; not to me. And if I
presume to make my judgment a rule for them, I encroach upon their Liberty, and
deny them that right of judging for themselves, which I claim to myself, which
does not very much breathe the true spirit of Liberty and Freedom.

Let us suppose there to be a number of Roman-catholic churches in any
particular place, who firmly believed the Infallibility of the Pope, the
doctrines of Purgatory and Transubstantiation to be so essential in religion,
that they could not in conscience receive any minister or member, who could not
profess his belief of the same; I conceive they have a clear and indisputable
right, in the sight of men, to believe and judge for themselves concerning the
truth and importance of these points; and no men upon earth have any right to
hinder them from practicing conformably to these erroneous sentiments, provided
they be otherwise peaceable, orderly members of Society. They may be justly
blamed for holding such absurd tonets, contrary to the gospel; but they cannot
be justly accused of invading the rights, or of doing any thing against the
liberty of other persons or churches, while they readily allow to others the
same right of judging and acting for themselves. And if I, being a protestant,
should endeavor to get into the communion or ministry, in these churches, by
concealing or disguising my true principles upon these points, I should be a
criminal invader of their liberty: because they have a clear right, in
consequence of their principles, to reject me from their communion, and I must
worship by myself, which is the only liberty and privilege they claim to
themselves. And if I should call their conduct in this matter, tyranny, or an
arbitrary infringment upon my liberty, I should be guilty of as gross
impropriety of speech, as if I termed it murder, adultery, or high treason. I
ought to pity them for their ignorance, superstition and errors; and may justly
blame them for departing from the truths of divine revelation: but cannot, with
any propriety, accuse them of violating the principles of christian liberty,
and shall be guilty of the greatest Impertinency in bringing such a charge
against them. It Is true, their mistakes and errors will be attended with
prejudicial effects and consequences to me; just as any person's imprudent
disposal, or wrong application of his own private property will always be
consequentially detrimental to the welfare of the community.

On the other hand, should I endeavor to get into the communion, or ministry
in one of these churches, even with the most disinterested design to reclaim
them from their errors, and should succeed in my attempt, by concealing my real
though true sentiments from them, they would have very just reason to complain of
me, as invading their liberty, and doing the same thing in effect, as if,
having it in my power, I had forced a member, or minister upon them contrary to
their mind, judgment and choice. They might justly complain of me, as
injuriously disturbing them in the enjoyment of their undoubted right, and
liberties, and treat me as a false brother, crept in privily, unawares to them,
to spy out their liberty, in order to destroy it, and bring them into bondage.
And I may venture to affirm, that the destruction of liberty, both in church
and state, is much oftener effected by such clandestine, delusive measures, than
by the open exertions of power. And therefore the true liberty of the churches
is in the greatest danger from this quarter. And speaking in the most plain,
open, intelligible manner upon all religious subjects, according to the belief,
and real sentiments of our Hearts, is evidently necessary to the preservation
of this desirable and important Liberty; and is the most effectual guard
against ecclesiastical Tyranny.

8. Speaking in an unknown tongue in the church is symbolizing with the
Papists, in one instance of their conduct, justly condemned by all Protestants.

The Papists say their public prayers in the church, in a language unknown to
the common people. A most absurd ridiculous practice. For however well they may
pray in the spirit, it is certain that those who hear, cannot safely say, Amen,
to their prayers, or join in the worship. But all designedly unintelligible
speaking in the church partakes of the very nature and effence of this
absurdity, and is so far a verging toward popery.

9. The infinite importance of religious subjects is a weighty reason, why we
should speak upon them in the most plain, intelligible manner.

This consideration gives force to all the preceding reasons. In matters of
small concernment there may be some allowance for trifling. But to trifle in
the church of GOD, with religion, with the gospel, is very horrible, and
absolutely intolerable. Here the Glory of GOD, the liberty and welfare of the
church, which he has purchased with his own blood; here the endless happiness
or misery of immortal souls is very nearly concerned. Certainly where such
infinitely weighty consequences are depending, the greatest plainness of speech
is highly important. That which is of importance enough to be spoken in the
church, ought to be clearly understood. And indeed the most of subjects, proper
to be treated upon in the church, are so interesting in their nature, and
practical consequences, that it is of high concernment they be clearly and
rightly understood. Such as the doctrines concerning the Person, Natures, and
Offices of CHRIST: the doctrines of faith, repentance, etc. How can the honest
Arian, who believes our Savior to be only a mere creature, persist in applying
the name and titles of GOD to him, without ever clearly informing his hearers,
that he is only a God, in a lower sense, as angels and civil rulers are styled
Gods in scripture? -- how can he let them go on deceived, as they must be, in
his opinion, in the very Object of their Worship, paying divine homage and
honors to one, who is not by nature true eternal GOD, and be thereby assisting
to their idolatry? And I may say in general, that it is utterly inconsistent
with integrity, and is a violation of one of the most sacred trusts, ever
committed to mortals, to neglect declaring in the most plain, intelligible
language, what we take to be the truths of GOD revealed in his word. Since
therefore the subjects treated on are so important; since GOD speaks plainly in
his word, and the Spirit speaks plainly, and the grand design of all speaking,
is to be clearly understood, those that speak in the church should use great
plainness of speech, that all who hear may rightly understand the things that
belong to their everlasting peace.

APPLICATION.
I. We hence infer it to be very necessary, that all who speak, as public
teachers in the church, should have clear ideas of divine things, and be well
acquainted with language.

It is a very just observation, that the having of clear ideas is very
conducive, and highly necessary to speaking clearly and intelligibly upon any
subject. And the reason is very obvious; for if the conceptions of the mind are
confused, this confusion of thinking will unavoidably run into a person's
discourse, and leave a visible tincture of itself in his Speaking. Language is
the picture of the mind's thoughts; and will therefore naturally bear a
resemblance thereto, in point of clearness or confusion. How then can he be
supposed to speak clearly, whose mind is always beclouded with the thick fogs
of confusedly floating vague ideas? In order to avoid this mischief, it is
highly necessary, that ministers should be much devoted, not only to reading,
but also to meditation, close thinking, and writing too; and not content
themselves with uncertain, fashionable sounds, in stead of clear, determinate
ideas. And then in order to be apt to teach, it is plainly requisite, that a
person be well skilled in the language he uses in teaching. Indeed the
knowledge of the original languages, in which the scriptures were written,
which are the words the Holy Ghost has taught, is for many weighty reasons
highly advantageous; that so persons may be able to go to those sacred
Fountains of divine knowledge, and see, and judge for themselves, comparing
scripture with scripture. For the best translation is, in a sort, an human
performance, and partakes of the general nature of the translators confession
of their faith, or a declaration of what they take to be the true meaning of
the words used here and there, in the sacred Original. Indeed our translation
of the Bible is so confessedly just, that it may be safely regarded and relied
upon, as a true declaration of the mind and will of GOD in all material points;
and ought to be very thankfully prized, as a most invaluable Blessing, whereby
GOD speaks to us in a known tongue, if we will be at the pains to study the
scriptures, and compare one place with another. And certainly the study of the
English language, so as to be accurately acquainted with the true import, and
precise meaning of the words especially as they are used in the scriptures, is
exceedingly requisite for those who speak in the church of GOD, or preach the
gospel. Without this, we shall be in great danger of misleading and misguiding
those that hear us.

II. We should, as much as possible, avoid all ambiguous expressions, or words
of a double, doubtful meaning, in speaking in the church.

Words are said to be an unknown tongue, for this reason only, that their
meaning is unknown, or cannot be determined by the hearer. And when this is the
case, it makes no material difference, whether the words be English, Greek, or
Hebrew. And this is evidently the case with all ambiguous words: for as they
are frequently used in different, or perhaps contrary senses, the hearer cannot
know in what sense the speaker intends them, unless he defines them by other
words, to show their meaning. They answer exactly to the Apostle's description
of, words not easy to be understood; by which it cannot be known, what is
spoken. Hence they are so fitly represented by a trumpet that gives an
uncertain sound.

It is true indeed, the hearers may themselves have right ideas annexed to
these words: but then it is also very probable they may have wrong ones. And in
that case, we shall be all the while teaching them error, and not the truths of
GOD, if we don't carefully define, and explain the meaning of our words. Should
any, for instance, get to conceive, that the title of GOD, when applied to our
REDEEMER, intends only a God by Office; and that notwithstanding this, he is
only an exalted creature: our calling him GOD ever so often, without clearly
defining what we mean by the term, would only serve to confirm them in this
their false opinion, and serve to uphold, and strengthen them in denying the
only LORD that bought them. The same might be observed concerning the words,
faith, repentance, grace, justification, etc. Where the frequent use of the
words, without a clear, precise definition of what we mean by them, will give
no instruction, and may be as likely to lead into error, as to convey the
knowledge of the truth. Since therefore such is the imperfection of human
language, the careful explaining of our meaning is an incumbent duty of high
importance, and the neglect of it is an unpardonable withholding of
instruction and knowledge from the church of GOD, which we are appointed to
teach and feed: Yea, it is a practical declaring in the Name of GOD, that we
will not explain to them what the scripture says, and what GOD has revealed
in his word concerning these things. Must not this approach near to the sin of
perjury, in those who have bound themselves by solemn vows to be witnesses to
the truth. Let us then, as faithful witnesses for GOD, use great plainness of
speech, while we are professedly endeavoring to make known the whole counsel
of GOD, in the knowledge of which the salvation of those immortal souls, for
which CHRIST died, is very nearly concerned. To this we are most sacredly
bound, as we desire to save the souls that hear us; -- as we would promote
brotherly love, that great christian duty, and distinguishing badge of CHRIST's
disciples, and as we would preserve, and perpetuate the important Liberty of
the churches.

But I must conclude with a few words, by way of address.

FIRST, to him who is now about to take the pastoral charge of this church, and
feed this part of the flock of CHRIST.

Reverend and dear Sir,
We have not the least suspicion, but that you will faithfully endeavor to
speak with the understanding in the church, and declare the whole counsel of
GOD plainly, that you may be free from the blood of all men. We trust you will
in all respects study to show yourself approved of GOD, a workman that needs
not to be ashamed, watching diligently for these souls, now to be committed to
your care and charge, as one that must give an account of your stewardship very
soon. You know, that the more you care for your own soul, the more you will
care, and pray and labor for the souls of your hearers. We hope you will
therefore make that religion, which you preach to others, the grand business of
your life, and diligently keep your own vineyard. O, with what affecting,
impressive weight should those solemn words of the Apostle lie upon the minds
of all of us, who are ministers of the gospel, Lest that by any means when I
have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway!

As you have been several years in the ministry, we hope you have greatly
improved and profited by study and experience; and that you are now furnished
with a large stock of knowledge, wisdom, and ministerial prudence, so as to
know well, how thou ought to behave in the house of God, which is the church
of the living God, with all that christian harmlessness, and inoffensiveness,
which may consist with faithfulness to your solemn trust. We heartily wish you,
Sir, all needed Grace to be faithful, and the great happiness to be successful,
to the saving your own soul, and the souls, even of all them that hear you. And
may we all duly bear in mind the exceeding shortness of the time, which we
shall any of us be allowed to serve as stewards in the house of GOD, and the
solemn account we must soon render to him, who has appointed us.

SECONDLY. To the church and congregation in this place.

Beloved Brethren,
We desire to rejoice with you this day, that after long difficulties, and
repeated disappointments, you are like to have the gospel ministry settled
among you in so great peace and quietness. We cannot but hope it is a kind token
for good to you: and that you will yet know by happy experience, how good and
pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together in unity, while each one studies
the things that make for peace, and mutual edification, exercising all that
christian forbearance and condescension, which may be consistent with a steady
adherence to plain truth and duty.

Let me just observe, that you will not be so unreasonable, as to expect your
minister to save your souls, and the souls of your families, while you
yourselves carelessly neglect them. At most he can be only an helper to you in
this important concern. Remember there is much incumbent on you, to cooperate,
and be helpers together with him; and particularly by good family government,
and family religion; by duly restraining, instructing and training up the
rising generation, under your care, in the nurture and admonition of the LORD.
Otherwise there is reason to fear, the ministry will be unsuccessful to you and
them, or only serve to enhanse your guilt, and aggravate your condemnation,
proving a savor of death unto death to you, which may GOD of his infinite
mercy prevent. Brethren, we wish you all the Blessing of GOD out of Zion.

Let me just observe to this assembly in general, that GOD speaks plainly and
intelligibly to all in his word. Life and immortality, and the way thereto, are
clearly brought to light under the gospel, and the great things of our peace
are set before our eyes, as in the meridian light of noonday. We cannot
therefore, under our circumstances, plead any want of light, as an excuse for
our continuance in a state of sin, impenitency and rejection of the great
salvation. With whatever vain pleas we may now endeavor to quiet ourselves in
sin, the day is just at hand, when it will appear with irresistible conviction,
that the grand reason, why we continue in sin to our destruction, is a criminal
aversion to religion at heart, and a real unwillingness to be saved in a way of
holiness; an inexcusable dislike of CHRIST in the character of Jesus, as one
appointed to save us from our sins: -- and that this aversion is so obstinate,
that if we can resist the light we now enjoy, and carelessly disregard all that
GOD says to us, we should be equally unpersuadable, though one should rise from
the dead, and come a messenger to us. And if this be the case, consider
seriously, how utterly inexcusable we shall be, when sentenced by GOD, at the
great day, to endless punishment, at the same time fully self-condemned,
conscience loudly ecchoing to the justice, and even necessity of the dreadful
sentence of condemnation. Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says
to the churches.

AMEN.

