SOME OBSERVATIONS OF CONSEQUENCE, In Three PARTS. Occasioned by the STAMP-TAX,
Lately imposed on the BRITISH COLONIES.

Printed for the Author, MDCCLXVIII.

A PREFACE ADDRESSED TO BRITISH COLONISTS.
My dear Brethren,
THE following explicit Observations, only for Corrections and Additions, were
intended for the Press in October, 1765, when his Majesty's Colonies were
thrown into Commotions by the Stamp Act, which may account for the Spirit and
Freedom of them. They were first prepared hastily for three Weekly Papers, and
recommended to the Printer's Correction, which indeed they greatly wanted, as
new and but poorly digested Considerations; and as they could not then reach
the Public, are now expediently presented to it; for though old Flames are
greatly abated, they are not yet extinguished, but may soon blaze afresh, and
even consume us, if not timely prevented, and by disclosing the genuine Source
of a virtual Representation, I have clearly shown, we are not any Way
represented in Parliament, and of Course, that we cannot be constitutionally
taxed by it.

English Money-granters, say they, have a right to tax us: And their injurious
Claim has no Basis but a pretended virtual Representation, which is surely but
a fictious one; yet our most learned and worthy Remonstrants, so far as I have
seen their Writings, have left that principal Matter in much Obscurity; and our
Freedom never can be secure, while we may be taxed at Home, under a Color of
Right, as I have clearly shown in another Place. My Arguments may have been
rendered needless, by superior Labors on the same Subject, but I have not seen
them in my Reclusion, and therefore sends my own Sentiments abroad; for though
our late Grievances are justly redressed, Affairs at Home are still in a
fluctuating Condition, and our very impatient Enemies, who can but poorly brook
their late Disappointment, yet boldly contend we are virtually represented by
English Commons, and may therefore, be regularly taxed by them.

The Stamp Act was soon repealed, according to our Prayer, and the importunate
Clamours of English Tradesmen, after their Tone about us was changed, but a
right of taxing us at Home, said to be founded on a virtual Representation, is
still warmly insisted on, even in open Contempt of all our former
Remonstrances; and surely our inestimable Freedom, as English Subjects, can
never be out of Danger, while that unjust Claim is supported by the Power of a
British Legislature. The most arbitrary Monarch in Being, may sometimes attend
to the humble Complaints of his grieved Subjects, as the Parliament lately did
to ours, and still maintain an absolute Dominion over them, nor was the late
unjust Tax taken off us as an arbitrary Imposition, but under a specious
Pretense of Favor, to a disquieted People, and perhaps more to oblige British
Tradesmen than American Planters. The injurious Claim still exists on which it
was founded, and not merely the Stamp Act, but the momentous Right of Taxation,
was and is the important Dispute between England and us; and as proper
Representatives, only may tax us constitutionally, our Adversaries say, we are
virtually represented in Parliament, and may therefore be regularly taxed by
it, yea, even as constitutionally as British Non-Electors themselves.

This is the only Source of the alarming Contention before us, and if we are
virtually represented in the British Senate, like Non-Electors at Home, we may
of Course be as justly taxed by it as they are, which I now freely confess, and
have clearly proved in the following Pages, would be very uprightly indeed; but
I think some of my succeeding Observations not only render such idle
Pretensions evidently groundless, but even ridiculous to a high Degree,
notwithstanding the profound Knowledge of their prejudiced Supporters. These
are my present Conceptions, and should my brief Arguments on that Subject be
indisputably conclusive, and incontestably demonstrate we are not represented
in Parliament at all, or become a solid Foundation for more copious Reasonings
that do so, we cannot possibly be taxed in England, under the faintest Color
of a constitutional Right, which is the grand Point we should invincibly prove,
if we are able to do it, and not weakly content ourselves with the Repeal of
the Stamp Act.

To favor that great End is the principal Intention of this Pamphlet, and yet,
all my Arguments relative to it, take up much less Room, than preceding and
following Observations of another Kind, which are not quite insignificant, and
perhaps may not prove entirely fruitless; but Brevity, Importance, and
Clearness are often connected by the Learned, if the Encomiums of Fame are well
grounded, and some unlearned Writers may possibly unite them by an happy
Accident at least. However improbably such Things may be, yet they are not
utterly impossible, and to prevent the trouble of fruitless Criticism,
ill-natured Cavilling, and vainglorious Carping, I confess myself a Stranger
to Scholastic Embellishments; but must also take leave to observe, that
genuine mental Treasure, never should be contemned, for want of mere
inessential Ornaments; the most curious Devices and Impressions, at Coining,
can never heighten the intrinsic Worth of pure Gold, nor the Want of them
impair it; and Bible-Worshipers should unanimously acknowledge, that
Providential Disputants themselves, even the very greatest of them, have been
utter Strangers to them Arts and Sciences now called liberal.

This Truth must be confessed by well informed Scripturians; and yet a
predicted Antichristianism is grown so rampant, that I know a Christ-like
Teacher, possessed of as much human Learning as his Master, who is proudly
contemned for Want of Scholarship, as well as cautiously open Christian
Reprehensions, and not only by haughty learned Deists, but several vain
glorious Impostors also, blasphemously called Christian Divines, and formerly
honored accordingly, while some of them evidently prefer notorious Courtezans
to true Evangelists, and while others, not quite so audacious, with some
renowned Laymen, dare impiously keep such incarnate Fiends in Countenance, and
profanely help them to abandon Shame, because they can drink Wine, wear Velvet,
pervert Learning, sooth the fashionably ungodly, and excite Laughter, though
but very frothily, considering their Education and Experience.

True Advocates for a rigidly holy Gospel will hardly escape Contempt, the Fear
of God effectually stem evil Dispositions among nominal Christians, nor our
savage Enemies be reclaimed from Cruelty, while such Antichristian Apostles,
such graceless Dictators, such traitorous Wretches are awfully suffered to
preside over the Church, and kindly smiled on by Probationers of Understanding,
Reputation, and Influence. Well may a true Apostolical Zeal, Reproof, and
inflexible Holiness be ridiculed, and offensive Truth called abusive and
slanderous, while their most flagrantly perfidious Enemies are honored as
Christian Teachers, and while our Legislatures connive at their horrid Treason,
or at the evident Ungodliness of any Person called a Divine; their Profession
of Christianity is an Insult to its slighted Author, notwithstanding they
pretend to believe he will finally judge them.

I hate Bigotry, Superstition, and stupid priestly Dogmas, sanctimoniously
founded on trying Figures, as well as a holy sacerdotal Perfidy; but am sorry a
pure practical Fear of our Heart viewing Creator, Judge, and Rewarder, should
be absurdly deemed Folly, and the contrary Wisdom, by any of our leading and
learned Sages, or even their weakest Inferiors of common Sense, for such
Conclusions are far beneath the real Dignity of the human Intellect, and never
can favor the great Summum Bonum of moral Agents, by exciting them to a noble
voluntary Discipline, in the midst of a trying Patience, and free Probation,
according to the Law of a pure rational Faith; and compulsive Displays must
not, cannot wait upon a State Trial, for there could be no Probation under
constraining Exhibitions. Such deadly Notions cannot possibly proceed from
Wisdom or Virtue, nor ever tend to the Promotion of either, but even quite the
Reverse, in a higher or lower Degree, whatever the most idolized deistical
Philosophers, or their most understanding Votaries, may loftily say, or blindly
think to the contrary; and even infatuated Atheists are more consistent than
Slighters of a confessed God. A carnal Clergy, and their learned Opponents,
have long exploded each others gross Errors, and fondly perverted Knowledge in
favor of their own, with an equal mixture of Sophistry, and Confidence; both
Parties have evaded the Rigor of a brave self conquering Warfare, by wresting
trying Figures in a different Manner.

But, after this flaming unfashionable Digression, which answers a special
Purpose, and should promote a general Good, I must farther observe, that all
the Pageantry of human Learning, can never make bad Men good Ones, nor
injurious, absurd, trifling, or unintelligible Productions valuable and
praiseworthy, nor the Want of it, render the Reverse justly contemptable, even
in the least Degree, and e're many Years attend upon us, if I am not greatly
deceived, the most adored Gods of the Earth, notwithstanding their
Philosophical Omnisciency, will be awfully surprised at the alarming Dictates
of an unlearned, yet obscure, and even much despised Pen, after its Fortitude
has outbraved a rigid Discipline, heavy Disappointments, a pungent Ridicule,
and other very grievous Trials.

Gilded Pills may be rank Poison, when unguilded ones are conducive to Health;
a fair Woman may be a base Prostitute, when a virtuous Matron has a contrary
Aspect; and even a Man of great Capacity may be a Fool, when one possessed of
fewer Talents is truly wise, through a counter Application of Knowledge. Should
I purchase immortal Happiness with my one Talent, I am surely wiser than Men
that buy endless Sorrows with ten; however, such knowing Fools may vaunt
against me, and pernicious, or inadequate Arguments may be artfully clothed
with shining Language, when divine Truth itself is destitute of such delusive
Ornaments.

Men should honor momentuous Instruction more than frivolous Niceties; and
most of the succeding Observations, or at least the most material of them
should have been corrected by the Printer, when they were first hurried very
imperfectly out of my Hands, and might all have been soon put now into a modish
Dress, by one or other of our learned Rabbis, had not weighty Considerations
forbid it, which may timely appear to the World; but all the Punctilios of the
Schools can never secure our Freedom, nor demonstrate the Parliament has no
Right to tax us; and should my Arguments without them effectually do it, or
enable others to evince it incontestably, they should not be utterly despised
by learned Americans, even the most eminent Professors in our Infant
Seminaries, how justly soever their Superiors at Home may contemn them, in the
transcendently matured. Universities of England.

I greatly prize the valuable Labors of good learned Writers, and would not
offend any of them by these extorted Hints, nor meanly degrade human Learning
because I am destitute of it, but would gladly induce my learned Readers to
guard against Prejudice, they will of Course be tempted to imbibe, and to
prefer essential Worth to inessential Decorations, how pretty soever the latter
may appear, lest my own rough Performances should generally meet but a poor
Reception, and perhaps much worse than they really deserved. No doubt such
inaccurate Observations, though ever so worthy of a moral Respect, will be
treated but coolly at least by vain Critics, that judge of Arguments as
beauish Coxcombs do of Persons, and can allow none to be valuable but what are
fashionable; but however they may fare in the Hands of learned Cavillers, I
think they may be sooner carped at than fairly refuted, and seemingly disdained
than utterly contemned; and could such inartificial Resonings possibly excite
Envy, truly, great Men could not discountenance them through that base Passion,
should it even partly disturb them as frail Creatures; and should I but happily
obtain their courted Approbation, the most important Triflers could not much
hurt his unpolished Labors, who sincerely loves his King and Country, and has
therefore assumed the Name of

LOYAL PATRIOT.

OBSERVATIONS, etc.
PART I.
POLITICAL British Colonists, exert yourselves nobly, while your Ability may
probably favor a maltraited Country, which calls very loudly for your speedy
Assistance, and bend humbly to Fear, ever Despair waits upon us; a Fire is
already kindled in our habitable Deserts, which, if not timely extinguished,
may even rage into a general Conflagration, and finally consume us; for we have
not only plenty of Combustibles, but have also great Reason to fear many
exciting Blasts; and yet I doubt our Gentlemen of Understanding and Leisure,
are generally amusing themselves with useless Speculations, indigested Ideas,
fruitless Complanits, dangerous Resolutions, and unprofitable Protestations at
least, which never can defend our constitutional Rights, either by convincing
the Parliament of its oppressive Error, or steming its formidable Power against
us.

Our open Colonies, in a State of Minority, are alarmingly threatened with
unnatural Encroachments, from a haughty Parent Country, that should treat them
affectionately, even with a tender Guardian Friendship; and we complain warmly
of her arbitrary Treatment, but to what rational Purpose do we inveigh against
it, while there are so few reasonable Efforts to avert the impending Danger I
had seen no weighty Arguments on the Subject, when these Complaints were
uttered, in 1765, but some valuable Considerations upon it were then published,
which came to Hand a few Days after, and I fear my Complaints have yet some
Foundation; for great Emergencies require great Efforts, and no doubt, many
able Writers have been much too negligent. I understand some very good Pens
have lately been at Work; but one of the worthy Father's Twelve Letters, and
one of the Virginia Monitor's florid Epistles, are all I have yet seen of their
laudable Productions, in the midst of a very singular Retirement; and I wish
they may yet obtain many new Assistants; for when imminent Danger is swiftly
approaching, no formidable Castle of Defense can be speedily finished, without
a great Number of good Artists of different Kinds, and the Materials they
severally prepare, will ever be scattered about for some Time, like the various
Materials of other Artificers, before they are properly ranged in the much
wanted Fortress, according to the Laws of a complete Martial Architecture.

These suitable Hints may justify my patriotick Complaints, and show more
Laborers are much wanted to assist them worthy Men already employed, for
sufficient Materials must be fitly prepared, before the great Work can possibly
be completed; and the Materials of grand moral Structures, as well as others,
mostly want successive Changes, and sometimes very great ones, after they are
first collected from proper Forests and Mines; so as better Artists have been
too backward, I have endeavored to forward the important Work a little, though I
can but poorly attend on such Labors, and even but roughly perform them, as
they are quite foreign to my proper Occupation.


. Free Complaints, and bold Protestations, will surely inflame wilful
Oppressors; and should our Rights only be invaded, through a plausible Mistake,
sound Reasoning and Evidence alone can remove it; nor may any Thing else
justify spirited Declamations against our Superiors, however they may be
palliated through surprising Provocations. Let us not merely cringe, nor rashly
offend, but unite Courage with Circumspection, and support free Complaints by
proper Remonstrances.

My succeeding Freedom, without an argumentative Authority, would render me
justly obnoxious to censure, but I hope to justify it by sound geometrical
Reasoning, before I have done, and dare therefore introductively say, without
any farther Prelude, has a victorious England, with our Assistance, exempted
us from the Incursions of our French Neighbors, and partly intimidated our
Indian Enemies, that she may tyrannically enslave us herself? Should that be
our deplorable Lot, would not their accidental Inroads, be less grievous than
her perpetual Chains? And how intolerable is lordly Oppression, from a hard
hearted Parent, that should be our most endearing Guardian and Protector! How
shocking are the arbitrary Beginnings alluded to; and should Principals which
gave them Existence prove long lived and fruitful, what a horrid Brood of fatal
Consequences must successively attend us, while we labor under the heavy and
galling Yoke! Should our potent Mother greatly amass such mental Treasure,
judge, my inattentive Brethren, yea, judge timely and ripely, what a fine
Patrimony will descend to her American Children.

Let us even grant our late War was partly undertaking, and very gallantly
maintained for our Interest, as well as the Advantage of Great Britain, and
that we should consequently defray a small Part of the Expense, proportioned to
our straight Condition, if it is not fully done already, or help to support a
sufficient Number of standing Forces, which in peaceable Times will be but a
few; and would our Circumstances even admit of it, we never should maintain
many to oppress us. Let us ever deserve Fidelity and Affection, and not be
enslaved under a Pretense of being guarded. We may be driven to Distraction,
then called Rebels, and treated accordingly; but Oppression only will cause a
general Disloyalty, whatever invidious Clamours, disappointed Ambition and
Avarice, may sometimes raise against just Monarchs; and when affectionate
Subjects are rendered uneasy, by injurious Treatmen, they should not be loaded
with causeless Expenses, as dangerous Malcontents, through the immoral
Jealousy and Perverseness of their Oppressors, who naturally suspect Aversion
they consciously deserve.

Let us be treated fairly, and behave dutifully, for we have some Property
scattered about in this extensive Wilderness, and should, doubtless, be at a
reasonable Expense, according to our small Fortunes and Occasions; but let our
Enemies also confess it should be a voluntary one, and that we should be
uprightly permitted, as free British Subjects, to grant or withhold our Money
discretionally, without having it violently extorted from us. Let us be active,
voluntary, and prudent Loyalists, and not passive Vassals in arbitrary Chains.

But while we complain warmly of over-bearing Treatmen, let us wisely consider
where it came from, and that it chiefly proceeded from our assuming Fellow
Subjects; for we must know the principal Authors of it, before our
Remonstrances can be properly directed: The Prince only passed the Law we
complain of, after the Commons of England, as our pretended Representatives,
had injuriously prepared it for his Assent; and the best and greatest of
Monarchs, as frail Men, may often be deceived by pernicious Schemes, which
plausibly advance their Revenues, or any other favorite Purpose, and more
especially young Princes, ever mature Knowledge befriend them, which due
Experience only may give. When pleasing Offers have a fair Complexion, they are
too frequently embraced without a proper Examination, and momentous Affairs are
often but slightly viewed at very magnificent Courts; for they occur too often
to occasion Surprise, or even a deep Attention, amidst all the Interruptions
attending August Royalty, unless some very alarming Circumstances wait upon
them.

We may thus clearly see how virtuous young Princes, who tenderly love their
People, may soon follow plausible gratifying Designs, into very considerable
Errors, when even most of the greatest Politicians in the Nation, artfully
combine to deceive them about remote Colonies, in a very extensive Empire. A
Prince must surely be very tall indeed who can view his far distant Subjects
clearly, when a great Number of very tall Men, and his own lofty Desires also,
stand crowded before him, and strive to intercept his Sight.

In the Case before us, as the public Debt is very heavy, the Necessity of
raising Money is consequently apparent; and a young Prince, under such
Circumstances, equally desirous of increasing the Revenue, and mitigating the
Burdens and Clamours of his surrounding Subjects, might pass the Stamp Act
from equitable Motives, worthy of a good Monarch, without maturely considering
the more distant Consequences of it, when he was even much excited to give it
Authority by the Public, as well as private Council of England, and had no
weighty Representation against it. Let us but consider the prevailing Clamours
of the Nation, the general Bent of the Parliament, the King's strong Motives to
concur with it, especially in Money-Bills, and what Party surrounded the
Throne, when the Stamp-Tax was imposed, and then our Surprise at the royal
Assent, must entirely vanish.

British Princes must needs be very unwilling to dissent to Money-Bills, or any
other Favorite Projection of the Money-granting Commons; and all Kings are
naturally fond of Power, and raising the Revenue; and though the Stamp Act
greatly wounded the Power of the Crown, and even rendered the Grants of our
Sovereigns contemptable, so far as it annulled the Force of our Charters, and
made us fear more arbitrary Proceedings, yet, it gave the Prince a new Power
over us, which might seem more advantageous at that delusive Juncture; and no
Wonder therefore, it obtained his Assent, without a very scrupulous
Examination, when it was even generally applauded as a most expedient and
equitable Imposition; but it is merely astonishing wise Fellow Subjects,
exceedingly tenacious of their own Freedom, could fondly and ignobly throw ours
away, repugnant to the constitutional Bias of free Britons. The King only gave
Power to a Bill presented by our nominal Guardians, by political Sages of
Experience and Renown, that pretend to be the faithful Defenders of our sacred
Magna Charta Compact, and every other constitutional Privilege; so let us blame
the criminal Betrayers of our Rights, and dutifully stem groundless Murmurs
against the Crown, which had plausibly darkning Motives for its Assent.

The seeming Virtues of regal Tyrants, are justly detested by good Men, that
see the base Motives they flow from; and of Course, the greatest Errors of
virtuous Princes, should always be viewed in a favorable Light, as they never
proceed from dishonorable Intentions, but are always the Effect of plausible
Appearances; and the most understanding Monarchs, will ever be more liable to
faultless Mistakes, in the great Multiplicity of public Occurrences and
Contingencies, than private Men of much less Judgment can possibly be, unless
wise and faithful Counselors prevent it; and even a sufficient Number of them,
should but one Favorite convey their occasional Assistance to the royal Mind.
Several wise ministerial Intelligencers, must assist every prime Minister, that
adequately serves his Master and the Community; for the wisest of Subjects is
but a frail Creature, and the most august Throne, refulgent Crown, and
extensive Dominion upon Earth, never can make their frail Possessor infallible,
but may probably render him more liable to inculpable Error than he could
possibly have been in a much lower Station, and therefore, candid Allowances
should always be made on such Occasions.

But offended Carpers may contend I have treated my Sovereign too freely, by
presuming to palliate his Conduct; so, let me say, the loyal Part I have acted,
however it may be taken, is more dutiful than seditious Complaints, which
inflame his Majesty's Subjects against him, or the inflammative Projection
occasioned them. As offensive Laws are executed in the King's Name, the
Affection of his murmuring People, on such Occasions, without proper Means of
Prevention, is much sooner alienated from him than other Branches of the
Legislature, which may be principally or solely to blame; and when such
Prejudices are like to prevail, discerning Loyalists should bring their
mistaken Causes into a moral Light, and thus direct Complaints into a proper
Channel, which would otherwise rage against the Innocent, and perhaps seldom
more perniciously than at present.

I may be falsely censured from various Motives by licentious Contemners of
Government, and its arbitrary nominal Friends also; but the Intention of my
preceding Hints about Monarchs generally, and our own Sovereign particularly,
is to remove and prevent the Prejudice of Subjects, at a very critical Time,
and not to palliate any real Fault in Princes; for of Course they should always
be the best of Men, and thus be truly great indeed, but never ought to be
condemned for blameless Mistakes, which will often be their Lot, if not
occasionally prevented. The Bulk of Mankind are much greater Politicians about
the galling Execution of bad Laws than their artfully veiled Causes, and will
often blame a faultless Prince for the former, through his Ministry or
otherwise, more than a criminal Parliament for the latter, unless they obtain
much better Directions, than their own feeble Judgment is able to give. These
Observations will hardly be disputed by understanding Readers of Candor; and
let me now turn my Views from the assenting Part of the British Legislature to
that assuming Branch which prepares Money-Bills.

The morally thinking Part of us must say, we ought to be taxed, according to
our Circumstances and Occasions, but not to defend extensive Conquests we have
no Advantage from, and which may perhaps injure our Trade at length, by helping
to glut all our Markets abroad. We should doubtless be liable to expedient
Impositions; but when and by whom they should be laid upon us, and what they
should occasionally be, both in Nature and Degree, are the grand Matters in
Debate; and if assuming British Commons have a Right to tax us at all, they
have equally a Right to do it at Pleasure, and even in what Manner they please
continually, which would reduce us to Vassalage beyond Dispute, for we could
lay them under no constitutional Obligation, as we should have no Power to
continue or change them, however they behaved, and could have no Advantage
English Non-Electors constitutionally enjoy, as I hope to show clearly by and
by.

No absolute Monarch is more independent of his People, than British Commons
are of our Favors and Frowns; and should it even be our wretched Lot to be
taxed by them, what good Treatment can we expect from lofty Oppressors, after
all our free and provoking Complaints, who treated our Petitions with the
utmost Disdain, before we had incured their formidable Displeasure, for only
being repugnant to their Money-raising Will! While powerful Encroachers
haughtily reject humble Prayer, they will hardly honor cutting Freedom, which
cannot possibly intimidate them; and should our little Fortunes lie at the
Mercy of such lordly Gentlemen, how might the British Patriots ease that
Nation, even to the utmost Extent of our narrow Circumstances, by loading her
American Children with arbitrary Taxations, under plausible false Pretensions
of Justice, Expediency, Necessity, and the great Danger of our growing Opulence
and Independency? Slavery might thrive very fast through such Nourishment, and
invidious Charges of Rebellion for extorted Invectives:

Oppressors always seek Pleas of Justification; for Oppression hates to appear
in a true Light, and, like other ugly Vices, ever strives to hide its Deformity
under specious Veils of one Kind or other; but should we be lorded over by
arrogating Strangers to us, our Ability, and various Concernments, under the
most plausible Pretensions that can be invented, yet their most colorable
Arts, never can persuade impartial Men of Understanding, we are virtually
represented by them, till they can show Persons and Matters unknown, or but
very imperfectly known at best, may be properly and effectually represented.
They may have profound Knowledge, but are not quite omniscient; and should even
the best Limner on Earth, only view me at a great Distance, and consequently
but very imperfectly, he could surely pourtray me but poorly indeed, and yet
might represent me as truly by a Picture, as English Commons can represent
Americans in Parliament at present; and I hope timely to show the Words,
virtually and represented, are not merely insignificant Sounds, and that
faithful Representatives never can enslave the People they act for.

We came here to improve a lonesome Wilderness, with Power to make wholesome
Laws for the gradual Advancement of our Interest; and what may all our
Charters, provincial Assemblies, and legislative Regulations avail us, if
England should tax us at Pleasure! We may, it seems, enact prudent Laws
successively, and even get Money by them as fast as we can, that she may call
for it when she pleases, but must not have the Honor of granting it to our
Sovereigns for necessary Uses, nor the Privilege of Retention, when she calls
for it ever so inexpediently, ever so unjustly; are these constitutional
Proceedings? Are they consistent with British Liberty or sound Morals? If
Freedom be not much worse than an empty Name, can it even possibly attend upon
us, while our Interest is torn out of our Hands repugnant to our Will; and may
not powerful legislative Usurpers, under some Pretense or other, as colourably
and justly deprive us of every other constitutional Privilege? If this be
Freedom, let me have Bondage, for I prudently choose the reverse.

Should even a lawless Distraction be the Consequence of such male Treatment,
ought we to be censured for it, or they, which made us run mad? Which Party
threw the Empire into Confusion, and should be stigmatized accordingly, as
criminal Incendiaries! Let virtuous English Freemen look upon us with
Compassion, and even blush at the late awful Mistakes, or more shocking Designs
of their august and renowned Legislature; and as we may get all the Money we
can by our own Laws, let us be permitted to give it prudently away by them
likewise. This is not only a requisite Privilege, founded on true Morality, but
even one inseperably interwoven with the Law of British Taxations; and how
hardy therefore must English Senators be, that would cruelly rob us of it, when
their arbitrary Dreams are exchanged for true Ideas! Should the King tax us,
they would soon be alarmed, and yet he might surely force our Money from us, as
constitutionally as the Parliament, and as justly as the Commons of England can
grant it; for our own Delegates only may tax us as British Subjects; and such
Strangers to us and our Circumstances are not blindly chosen to represent us;
and if they dare outrun a constitutional Justice, they will hardly guard our
Weal from natural Motives, as their private Interest has no Connection with
ours. These Considerations alone may sufficiently damn their injurious
Pretensions, even with a true Argumentative Authority; and yet we have others
against their pretended virtual Representation, which, as they sap the
Foundation of their Claim, may still seem more cogent and powerful.

Were but English Politicians divested of Prejudice, they might find much
better Employ than plotting against our Liberty, for great Regulations are
wanting in this Part of the British Empire, both concerning the Demands of the
Crown upon it, and apportioning our Grants to the various Circumstances of the
Colonies; for we should judge of the Expediency or Unreasonableness of the
former, with a Parliamentary Order, and constitutional Freedom, and divide the
latter regularly among us, which cannot be done in our present disunited
Condition. I think it is very demonstrable, that all our Grants to the Crown
should be general, for were Supplies ever so necessary, and we ever so able to
grant them, I fear the King would not timely obtain an adequate Assistance in
our present loose Situation; and should all the Requisitions of a British
Ministry, by highly expedient, which is no very probable Supposition, yet the
respective Quotas of many young Provinces, under various Advantages and Degrees
of Improvement, could not be so exactly pointed out at Home, as here; nor
should unjust Demands ever be granted, though ever so fitly proportioned to our
Circumstances, yet some Colonies no doubt would comply with them, under the
irregular Plan of special Applications, and others reject the most reasonable
Requisitions, so keep Things in perpetual Disorder among us, and consequently
in England also.

A great Number of unconnected Colonies, variously inclined from the Influence
of very different Views and Apprehensions, will hardly come under regular
Taxations for a public Good, while each may constitutionally reject any Part,
or even the Whole of every Claim from the Crown; but were they politically
united for the Purpose before us, all their private Views might be justly
overruled for a public Utility, and our Sovereigns requisite Demands be
speedily honored without either unreasonable Burdens or Exemptions. Thus a
general Aid would also kindly attend on every special Emergency, and perhaps
occasionally prevent insupportable Exigencies, which might otherwise distress
particular Provinces alternately, while we are liable to the barbarous
Incursions of bloody Savages; and surely no strait and short-sighted provincial
Patriotism, but the more generous Direction of a public Spirit only, can
possibly excite a Marylander to write in this Strain. A provincial Utility no
doubt should be favored, when it stands not in Competition with an imperial
Good; but when a public and private Interest happen to be temporary Rivals,
the former should ever be wisely preferred, and even for the lasting Security
and Promotion of the latter.

For these weighty and obvious Reasons, let us have an American Parliament, as
well as provincial Assemblies, and be gently tied together, with the pleasant
Chords of a Sovereign Policy, instead of the galling Chains of a threatened
Slavery. Let us throw our Mites dutifully into the imperial Treasury, but let
us do it on a moral Plan, as soon as possible, and as loyal English Subjects,
without a groundless and immoral Compulsion. Let us do it by proper Delegates
of our own choosing, that know when and how to tax us better than Foreigners,
and whose Interests are closely connected with our own. Such Men will hardly
load us and themselves with unnecessary Burdens, nor lose or endanger the
Whole for Want of granting a requisite Part; so let them first help us to get
Money, and then grant it expediently for a general as well as provincial
Benefit, as soon at least as a proper Scheme is wisely concerted, by our
national and provincial Politicians, and firmly established by a wholesome
legislative Authority; for we may indeed be virulently but not virtually
represented by soaring Strangers.

Let our general Welfare be favored at a general Expense, occasionally levied
by Virtue of our own Delegation, for we may be ingloriously oppressed by
powerful Legislators at Home: But I must now draw a virtual Representation out
of Obscurity, where it has hitherto lurked in Ambush against us, and thus
utterly annihilate their pretended Right to tax us, by showing clearly it has
no real Foundation, and that we are not represented in Parliament at all. This
no doubt is the main Point in Question, notwithstanding I have but slowly
approached to it; and though I absolutely deny we can be constitutionally taxed
at Home, yet I freely grant British Subjects may be constitutionally taxed by
virtual Representatives, and that a great Number are virtually represented in
the English Senate; for the Commons of that Nation, cannot faithfully serve
their Constituents as legal Delegates, without favoring Non-Electors as
virtual Representatives, and must still promote the Interest of those which
have no Vote, by serving them well that gave them a Seat in the House, because
the Interest of both Parties, throughout the Kingdom, are very (...) mostly
inseperably connected. Thus English Non-Electors are and ever must be virtually
represented and favored, while Electors themselves are faithfully served; and
it might even be said with great Propriety, that we were virtually represented
in the British Legislature, if all our different Interests were similar to
those of English Electors, and so closely interwoven with them, that the House
of of Commons could not properly favor the latter, without duly promoting the
former; but as Matters are repugnantly circumstanced, it is so absurd to
pretend we are virtually represented in Parliament, that even a Schoolboy,
acquainted with such Words, should be duly corrected for perverting them so
basely.

Where Voters and Non-Voters have the same Dependence and Interest, there
cannot be a Legal without a virtual Representation; and had our Colonies a
sufficient Number of faithful Delegates in the British Senate, well acquainted
with all their Concerns, a Part of each provincial Society would be virtually
represented by them; but I must be dreaming or delirious, if it be not even
ridiculous to say we are now virtually represented at Westminster, by assuming
Strangers to us and our fluctuating Affairs, unless a Parliamentary
Signification of the Words Virtually, and Represented, be quite foreign to the
common Acceptance of them.

British Non-Electors may be as justly taxed at Home, as our Non-Voters are
here; for the numerous Commons of England, are not only collected from every
County, and every City, but even from more inferior Boroughs also than there
are very considerable Towns in the Kingdom, though some large Towns want
Borough Privileges, and have therefore properly before them, all the various
Kinds of Manufactories, Modes of Agriculture, and Branches of Trade, a national
Prosperity flows from, and by effectually cleansing them Sources of their
Wealth, that they may flow freely, they evidently advance the Interest of the
whole Community, as well as that Part of it which empowered them to do so. By
duly purging and promoting all the Springs of a national Welfare; they
incontestably favor every one that drinks at them, as well as their
Constituents, and may consequenly tax British Non-Electors, thus befriended,
with a pure constitutional and moral Authority; for of Course Men so favored
should be expediently taxed, toward the Advancement and Support of a public
Good which promotes and secures their own private Benefits.

It would even be as absurd to say such People should not be taxed by the
Parliament, as it is to contend we ought to be taxed by it, and a greater
Absurdity than the latter can hardly appear; for they indeed are virtually
represented by English Commons, according to the true Signification of such
Words, and so Men are virtually represented and taxed here as well as in
Great Britain; but we never can be represented in that Manner by Strangers,
which neither promote, regard, nor even know our manifold Interests. Can we
possibly be virtually represented by such arrogating Foreigners; or should they
levy our Money without a constitutional Authority, and even quite repugnant to
their own fundamental taxing Maxim, which should ever teach themselves as well
as others, that British Subjects only can be constitutionly taxed by proper
Representatives? How inconsistent are such lawless Stretches with true British
Liberty, the real moral Dignity of just English Lawgivers, and that solid
Basis of equitable Taxations they solely build their own taxing Right upon!
Should the Parliament thus violate one of the greatest Laws of our inestimable
Constitution, and injured Colonies suffer for justly resenting it, or incensed
Mobs be chastised for illegal Commotions? I am sorry this Kind of plain Dealing
was extorted, by Proceedings highly derogatory to our imperial Senate.

The Lords of Parliament have an immense Interest in the Nation; and yet as
they hold their Seats from the Crown, while the Commons are elected by the
People, they are excluded from pointing out Ways and Means of raising Money.
This well known Fact will hardly be disputed; and the immemorial Claim of the
Money-granting Commons is entirely founded on this laudable Argument, that as
their numerous Constituents bear the principal Burden, they should be
permitted to grant or withhold their own Money occasionally, as their Delegates
may deem to be most expedient, when Matters are maturely debated among them.
From these weighty Considerations, the Moneygranting Representatives of the
People admit of no Direction from the higher Branches of the Legislature. They
are chosen and relied on by the Freemen of England; so justly contend they
ought to promote and guard their reasonable Interest, and therefore claim the
sole Right of forming Money Bills; but as this sound Reasoning holds good for
their taxing the Inhabitants of that Kingdom, it absolutely forbids their
giving away our Money, who neither choose, know, nor have any Reason to trust a
Majority of them; and clearly shows we should be taxed by Persons of our own
choosing, whom we confide in for that great Purpose, among other occasional
Requisites of Consequence.

I call Taxation a great Purpose, which indeed it surely is in many Respects,
and even a Privilege of vast Importance, a free People must ever possess; for
no Community can possibly be free without it; and should our Colonies be
cruelly deprived of it, Vassalage of Course must be their Portion. While
Subjects command their own Purses absolutely, a Misapplication of granted
Money, and all other grievous Proceedings, may be generally prevented in a
peaceable Mannner, and mostly suppressed without Violence, when they accidently
offend any Community; but take that Shield away from the governed, and
governing Oppression and Tyranny may thrive gradually, in every growing Season,
and even rage uncontroulably at length, till they are awfully drowned in a
Deluge of Blood.

While the Rights of the Crown and Subject are equally guarded and secure,
agreeable to our excellent Constitution, expedient Grants and Applications of
Money may keep good Princes and dutiful Subjects very naturally under mutual
Obligations, greatly conducive to a public Utility, and the former, as
successive Parents of the Whole Community, may probably apply its Money more
regularly than the latter, and be much less influenced by private Views than
their partial Children; but when the People want Power to withhold their
Interest from the Crown, they have no political Shield to screen them from the
Darts of Oppression, and how well soever just Monarchs may treat them, yet only
a violent and bloody Hostility, or intimidating Fears of it, may stem the
impious Carreer of imperious Oppressors, at the Head of a national Army.

Should our Freedom be violently rended from us, let us brook a helpless
Bondage with Fortitude and Prudence; but let us struggle bravely for its
Preservation; and not madly surrender it up to King George himself, though
perhaps one of the best of Monarchs, for he cannot possible intail all his
legal Virtues on every Successor, nor even the least he possesses upon any one
of them. Education, Admonition, and Example cannot absolutely govern free
Agents; and Hanoverian Princes, by Nature, have licentious Passions in common
with other frail Men, which some of them may control very gallantly, and
others gratify as ingloriously, whatever Adulation may say to the contrary.

These are undeniable Conclusions; so let us strive heroickly to save our
inestimable Privileges, and dutifully honor a British Prerogative. Let a
constitutional Relation between Prince and Subjects, their Respective Rights,
and mutual Obligations be ever inviolably preserved; for Princes may as
reasonably expect Favor from us, as we can expect it from them, and never
should be Slaves to our Avarice, Ambition or Caprice, while we are befriended
by their Administration. Let us render to Caesar all that should be Cesar's, and
be ruled by him with a noble Sovereign Fidelity. Let us grant Money
expediently, according to our Circumstances and Occasions, and the Crown
advantagiously apply it.

But ever I take my Leave of this great Topic, I must yet detect a Subterfuge
relative to it; for our alarmingly overborne Colonies, according to our Enemies
Pretension, are as much represented in the British Legislature, and may be as
justly taxed by it, as English Bodies corporate without legal Delegates. Thus
our lordly Antagonists argue; and this fine Time serving Pretense is entirely
founded on Falsehood, however plausible it may seem to weak or prejudiced Minds;
for notwithstanding some English Bodies corporate, which are far from being
inconsiderable, have no Power to send Delegates to Parliament, yet all the
special Interests of such little common Wealths, which are but particular
Sources of a national Utility, are openly before the Commons of that Kingdom;
and though such private Communities are not represented as incorporated Bodies,
they are all directly represented by the Knights of Shires, and some of them
also, by the Delegates of Cities or Boroughs they vote for, and may likewise
promote the Election of other Favorites greatly, and even have some of their
own Members elected, for their respective Counties, adjacent, or distant
Boroughs. These incontestable Truths show a wide Difference between such Bodies
Corporate and our Colonies; and without such great Privileges, the former might
even have a great Interest in Parliament, from an intimate Correspondence, and
perhaps a more beneficial Connection with many of its Members, which far
distant Americans could not procure.

Could such political Bodies not vote for either City or Borough
Representatives, nor have any of their own Members elected; and could no
advantageous Attachments flow from their Vicinity; yet, as all their Voters may
choose County Delegates, they are even thus as fully represented, as a great
Part of the British Freeholders, instead of being in our Condition, and in
every much controverted Election, but very few more than half the Voters
themselves may be represented by Persons of their own choosing; and as a
Majority of Electors and Non-Electors may probably be of the same Opinion, from
the great Intermixture of themselves and Affairs, even the latter, as well as
the former, may frequently be represented by Men they approve.

I think these are respectably Conclusions about this important and much
wrested Subject; and when Voters are even divided into the most strenuous
Parties, they may still have their joint Interest principally in View, and only
differ in Opinion about the properest Advocates for it; and should Prejudice
even blind each Party, or either of them, and cause their principal Intentions
to be ever so opposite, yet, as I have clearly evinced, the Commons cannot
serve their Constituents faithfully without favoring their warmest Opponents
in a similar Manner, from the great Affinity and Connection of their Interests.
Thus the various Interests at Home are regularly promoted, by Men intimately
acquainted with them all, and as special Sources of a national Emolument; but
were the same Gentlemen ever so much disposed to favor us, they could not
possibly represent or befriend us effectually, for Want of proper Ideas of our
changing Affairs, and can therefore never tax us with a constitutional Equity,
either as British Non-Electors, or any Kind of incorporated Bodies at Home.
Were they even unanimously our sincere Friends, which surely they are not at
present, we could not be virtually represented by such Strangers; nor may any
Person contend for such a Representation, or the fictitious Right founded upon
it, without a very weak Head, or a very bad Heart, and a palpable Absurdity.

It must needs appear now to be very demonstrable at least, and I think to be
already briefly demonstrated, that we neither are virtually represented in
Parliament, nor can possibly be so represented at present; and that we may even
tax England as justly as she can tax us, but not enforce arbitrary Impositions
with an equal Power. Could that Idol, called British Freedom, even possibly
exist among us, while our Interest is disposed of by Foreigners, without our
Consent, and repugnant to our Will, or while we are restrained from
manufacturing provincial Commodities, for our own Use at least, it would hardly
be worth adoring and boasting of, according to the immemorial Custom of
Englishmen. Without oppressive Taxations, the Scourges of Prohibition may drive
us into Bondage, into absolute Bondage; but I must leave the latter to other
Writers, and close my present Arguments against the former by only just
observing farther, that we should be viewed as genuine Branches of the British
Family, and that the adjacent People of Ireland, a conquered Country, might be
much better represented by English Senators, and more equitably taxed by them,
than far distant Americans can possibly be, unless the awfully different Sounds
of Irish Parliament, and American Assemblies entirely change the Nature of such
Things; and yet I presume they will hardly tax that contigious Kingdom, however
over-borne Colonists, already a much more numerous People, may be tyrannically
forced to groan under arbitrary Burdens.

I have now drawn this much perverted Subject out of Darkness, and I think our
most sanguine Adversaries, after reading my Observations upon it, can no more
presume to say, we are virtually represented in England, and may be justly
taxed by her. Their virtual Representation is now damned with an argumentative
Authority, much too powerful for all the Sanctions of Sophistry, which no doubt
was our greatest one Thing needful from the Beginning; for all their Batteries
against our Freedom, are erected upon it, and our most confident Denials could
never refute their confident Assertions, nor show the wide Difference between
us and British Non-Electors, or English Bodies corporate, without special
Representatives.

When their pretended virtual Representation, and the nominal Right leaning
upon it, are utterly annihilated by invincible Arguments, a naked Injustice
only may enslave us, which the worst of our imperial Senators will hardly avow;
and yet many of them may be as deaf to Remonstrances against a Parliamentary
Despotism, while they have any Color of Right to favor it, as overreaching
Bargainers are to moral Reasonings, that would persuade them to annul their
Kind of fair Contracts, and to forego Advantages they may legally retain. While
Innovators have an ideal Right, and colorable Intention, they always encroach
as upright Men; and pungent Arguments may drive them gradually to Tyranny,
under the Name of abusive Invectives, instead of exciting them to grant
Redress. Warm moral Complaints against legal Pretensions, or injurious
Proceedings founded upon them, may soon raise national Storms of a fatal
Consequence. Very lofty superstructures without a good Foundation are more
likely to crush than favor their Inhabitants, especially in tempestuous
Seasons; and I think the present Aspect of our imperial Planets, does not
portend very temporate Weather.

While Parliamentary Encroachments are neatly dressed, with the Shadows of
Right, and a plausible Purpose, they will ever be called just and expedient
Exertions of Power; and Truth very warmly uttered against them, will not only
be exploded as seditious Calumny, but usurping legislative Bigots will even
think often it is so, while they seem to have any constitutional Authority; and
that Pretext must be entirely taken from them ever free Remonstrances
effectually prevail, however successful soothing Petitions may now and then
prove. Had we not many imperious Grenvils to struggle with, one or a few of
them could not hurt us; and such lordly Gentlemen, may kindly vouchsafe to
grant humble Petitions, properly adapted to their supposed Excellency, but
never can brook cutting Remonstrances against their most injurious
Transactions, while the least Show of Right waits upon them; so we should
entirely deprive them of such Pleas, or seem to give up our Rights, and
cringingly implore Favor, instead of boldly demanding Justice by irritating
Remonstrances and provoking moral Complaints. While such Arrogators can
maintain a pretended Right, they will nobly resent abusive Truth, and be very
highly incensed at moral Slander. I am well acquainted with such nobly
inglorious Tempers, and have purchased my Ideas of them, at a very considerable
Expense.

No doubt many English Senators have another Kind of Greatness, and gallantly
suppress Excitements to an ignoble Loftiness of Mind; but we know not how many
of them are well disposed, as most of them are utter Strangers, nor can we tell
who may succeed them; so if I have not already shown, incontestably shown, we
are not represented in Parliament at all, I hope others will improve my
Arguments on that Subject, or advance better on a new Foundation, if that may
be done, and demonstrate it even so conspicuously, that none may presume to
dispute it. I think it is rendered indisputable already; and should I greatly
over value my own Arguments, according to the Custom of petty Scribblers, yet
surely it is capable of such a Demonstration, and our threatened Welfare loudly
calls for it.

Should the People of France, or any absolute Monarchy, argue ever so justly
and wisely in favor of Freedom, I suppose their strongest moral Reasonings
would hardly procure the wanted Blessing, but might probably draw new Evils
upon them, if perseveringly and ardently advanced, much sooner than weaker and
less pungent Arguments; and perhaps no absolute Monarch is fonder of his
unlimited Prerogative, than many British Commons now are; and others may be
hereafter of an unlimited Money-raising Power; so of Course we must clearly
show their taxing Power is bounded, and that it does not extend to the
Colonies, before our endangered Freedom can ever be secure, however their
Designs may be repressed a while. Encroachments proceed slowly, while Shame or
Fear can stem them, but may gradually advance till their potent and enraged
Authors, are rendered almost insusceptible of either; and there must be a very
great Change of Times indeed, e're moral Reasonings drive Men from an idolized
constitutional Right, or any darling Claim that is deemed to be one; nor will
parliamentary Enthusiasts, weded to idle Notions, add here less fondly to a
favorite ideal Right, than to one the most firmly established, until they are
properly undeceived by forcible Exhibitions; and e're wilfully false
Pretensions to Right are openly detected, their immoral Authors will hardly
recede from them, which sufficiently justifies my present Conclusions, let our
Grievances proceed from Mistake or Design.

Moral Arguments, indeed, should always be honored by moral Agents that have
Power to weigh them, but very rarely succeed when opposed to an ideal or
pretended Right; and arrogating Encroachers will not only call Absurdity
Reason, but, through an artificial Blindness, often deem it to be so while it
can be prettily clothed with a plausibly gratifying Sophistry; so their
assumed Right must be utterly effaced before our Freedom can possibly attend us
in Safety, as Subjects to the Crown of Great Britain; and the Support of one
imperial Government is enough for England and her Colonies. A notional Right is
a dangerous Weapon in the Hand of Oppressive Power; and arbitrary Impositions
upon us, while they have such a Foundation to befriend them, must be glaringly
injurious e're Strangers to our Circumstances, highly prejudiced in their
Favor, and much provoked by our galling Complaints against them, will even
think them unjust or unreasonable, so long as they are colourably applied; and
should Redress abate our present Alarms, yet our Danger must exist perpetually,
while the Parliament can support its assuming Right of taxing us. Abated Flames
may soon revive through accidental Blasts when much Fuel is near them, and even
rage more fiercely than ever; so let our invaded Rights be explicitly
ascertained before we have done, for they should now be absolutely fixed, as
parliamentary Infringements may show us.

We labor already under more Grievances than the Stamp-Tax, which are far from
being inconsiderable, and it is Time to know our Condition certainly; for we
should not always wander in Darkness about a Matter of such vast Importance,
but have proper Limits fixed between us and the British Legislature, which
never can be done constitutionally by a parliamentary Bill of Rights we had no
Share in. As no Law can affect British Freemen without their Consent, it will
be hard to show how we can be constitutionally affected by any parliamentary
Bill of Rights we never assented to, and without such arbitrary Proceedings,
had we but an American Parliament, the momentous Relation between England and
her Colonies might naturally induce their two great Legislatures to proceed
harmoniously, and to secure a parental Precedence to our Mother Country,
without Oppression, lordly Treatment, Complaints or Disaffection.

Let us draw Good out of evil Intentions, get our Rights clearly ascertained,
and take every Handle from our Enemies; for when national Encroachments are
brought into Being, they will hardly perish for Want of Subsistence, while a
pretended Right, and colorable Purpose may feed them, however they may be
stunted a while. A parliamentary Despotism may occasionally forbear to act
offensively, while it is even defended by the strongest Fortification and
Garrison on Earth; but we must deprive it entirely of all Kinds of Subsistence,
that has any Appearance of constitutional Provision, before it will ever
surrender to our Pleasure, how loudly soever our Heralds may summon it; and we
can hardly force it otherwise to Submission.

While the Parliament has Recourse to arbitrary Bills of Right, it will hardly
lay down an assumed Power against us it may colourably retain; for surely
French Edicts may operate against us as constitutionally as any arbitrary
British Statute whatever; so let Order be drawn out of Confusion, and proper
Boundaries be openly fixed as soon as possible between English Privileges and
ours. A Bill of Right for Great Britain may be regularly proposed in
Parliament, as the Rights of that Nation are solely divided between the King
and People of it, and as no Bill can pass without the Assent of both Parties;
and had we a Negative in the British Legislature, such Laws might
constitutionally extend to us also, because they could have no Force without
our Concurrence; but as Matters are repugnantly circumstanced, nothing can be
more arbitrary than such Acts of Parliament, so far as they affect the
Colonies. This Doctrine may greatly alarm our most soaring Enemies, that dream
as wildly of a parliamentary Omnipotence, as Papists do of their Church's
Infallibility; but it surely proceeds from a constitutional Pen, that hates
Petulancy, as well as Encroachments; and should the Parliament have a Right to
fix Limits between England and us, independent of our Assent, it may as justly
alter such Limits at Pleasure, and no French Monarch can be more absolute; so
let the Rights of each Party be constitutionally ascertained before our
important Debates subside, that invigorating Harmony may strengthen the Empire,
and intestine Feuds enervate it no more. The grand Dispute is warmly commenced,
and let it be prosecuted to a sovereign Purpose.

I think these Hints should be honored by English Encroachers, and American
Writers against them, for they may be very useful to the latter, so far as they
turn the former and their first Dependants inside out. I have been very
explicit indeed, and we never should trifle in alarming Danger, when even a
very formidable Power, we relied on for Protection, threatens us and our
Posterity with perpetual Chains.

British Commons pretend to defend the Rights of the Subject, as faithful and
noble constitutional Guardians; but I fear a great Number of them, after every
just Palliation in their Favor threw ours very ingloriously away, when they
fondly prepared the Stamp Act for the royal Assent, and in other considerable
Instances also, which I must wave at present; and we may well be as free in
Remonstrances, that have argumentative Sanctions, as they have been in Attempts
to enslave us. They should not force us to complain, and then condemn us for
complaining, for we had rather bless them as Friends, than curse them as
Enemies; and should they have been deceived through Inclination, Precipitancy,
and false Shows of Right, we ought to render their shocking Mistake apparent,
and the horrid Fruits of it detestable, that we may obtain Redress, and prevent
the like for the Future.

For these Reasons, I think my openest Language highly expedient, and
consequently very justifiable; but Writers, much heated by great Provocations,
are often prejudiced in Favor of their censuring Freedom, and should I ever be
made conscious of such an Error, I am willing to make public and adequate
Reparation; for it is noble to make Satisfaction for known Injuries of any
Kind, and Meanness only may excite Men to defend them, as I would fain persuade
our Superiors and others to believe. But while we inveigh freely against the
assuming House of Commons, for the arbitrary Proceedings of a Majority, let us
virtuously remember some brave Men, a praiseworthy Minority, in that
arrogating and sometimes giddy Assembly, which scorned temporizing Pursuits,
and whose laudable Efforts, though fruitless, call loudly for our grateful
Acknowledgement and Esteem. When we complain the most warmly of injurious
Numbers, and the invincible Force of parliamentary Yeas against us, let us
treat such over-borne Worthies with a lively Respect that is evidently due to
their Merit.

Let suitable Petitions humbly sue for the favorable Influence of the Crown,
and spirited Remonstrances, from the Press or otherwise, fully evince our
threatened constitutional Rights, and clearly detect the groundless Claim of our
assuming Fellow Subjects against them, which solid Arguments only may effect.
Let us proceed in this Manner till our Grievances are removed, and our
constitutional Privileges firmly established, if that may be done. We may thus
draw every true Briton to our Interest, leave our persevering Enemies no Color
of an Excuse, convert the falling out of Friends to the Advancement of their
Friendship, and perhaps timely convince our loftiest Oppressors, we are not
mere Beasts of Burden, created for their Service, but the Fellow Creatures,
and Fellow Subjects of such great Men.

When we want Favors from the Parliament, and when it proceeds according to
the genuine Dignity of a British Legislature, let us humbly present our
Petitions, and treat it with a dutiful Reverence, as our august imperial
Senate, but let us not flatter the Vanity, nor feed the Errors of imperious
Fellow Subjects, in the most exalted Stations, that want oppressively to lord
it over us; for much less injurious Proceedings than we complain of, would even
render a German Diet utterly unworthy of Honor. If Men are not really and
essentially great, a lofty Situation cannot possibly make them so; and
sprightly Dwarfs may not only climb very high, but even solace greatly, and
shine brightly with Pageantry, on a very soaring Eminence, when very great Men
are in Trouble, and Obscurity at the Bottom of it; so if our Freedom must fall
a Victim to potent Ambition, let it die honorably, but not through our own
Pertness, Precipitancy, and false Ideas of Honor. Should dreadful Times even
forbid us to speak Truth freely, let us not meanly utter Falsehood, but guard
our Virtue with a sullen Integrity, that nobly disdains to extend a
Time-serving Adulation, and never rail at Men for holding great Offices, but
treat good Officers with a proper Respect.

Indeed the greatest frail Men are but fallible Creatures, and liable to
plausibly mischievous Errors, but never can ignobly defend them when fully
disclosed, for moral Eminence only is real Greatness, so if our Superiors have
wandered after a colorable Deception, adapted to their Inclination, let them
be now open to Conviction, as truly honorable Men, and henceforth merit and
obtain a respectful Submission, according to my ardent Desire; but let us not
meanly sooth them, when we cannot honor them sincerely. Their Ability of
Course is greater than ours, as they have greater Opportunities of Improvement;
but our Arguments on this Subject, are no doubt generally much superior to
theirs, and as such should be honored by the greatest of them, for they have
not only constrained us to ponder maturely, but sound Reasoning does not suit
their Purpose, as Truth is entirely on our Side the Question. As our Arguments
have a solid Foundation, an opposite Sophistry can but have a fictitious one,
and Necessity is often the Mother of important Considerations, as well as other
useful Inventions; and none truly great may immorally despise her argumentative
Productions, when they openly call for Redress of Grievances, however base
Flattery may abuse their Contemners.

I have dealt very plainly with our potent Disturbers, for I cannot be properly
regarded without being clearly understood; and Compliments are no proper Return
to male Treatment, nor do Opulence and Greatness always associate as friendly
Companions, but are often great Strangers and Opponents to each other, as every
Propriator of both, as well as Possessors of the latter only, will freely
confess instead of resenting; and though the StampAct obtained the Royal
Assent, after soaring English Money-granters prepared it for that Purpose, yet
some of my preceding Observations, as well as the Dignity of Monarchs, may show
why the Crown should be addressed by Petition, while we freely explode their
lordly Proceeding. They have already spurned at our humble Petitions; and now
let us prudently resent their Disdain, without any Kind of seditious or abusive
Invectives, for no virtuous Loyalists can be pleased with the latter, when he
coolly reflects upon them; and the former must be approved by every real Friend
of British Liberty, when it and the Cause of it are presented to his Mind; for
no true Briton, without Abhorrence, can possibly see English Subjects, even the
remotest Branches of them cruelly deprived of vital Freedom, and tyrannically
buried alive in Despotism.

PART II.
I HAVE doubtless proved in my former Essay, among other Things of Importance,
that England cannot tax Americans constitutionally, nor even without a manifest
Violation of a national Faith, in a Matter of the utmost Consequence; and I
hope now to show her late Overbearings against us were as far distant from true
Policy as good Morals, which, indeed, in process of Time, will ever be found to
be inseperably united.

As correct Maps have not yet disclosed the Certainly, let us take it for
granted at present, that British Dominions, on the Continent of North America,
are now equal to a Square of a Thousand Miles, and then maturely consider what
Colonies are wanted, and what a vast Number of People may be supported, and
very advantageously employed, in that widely extended Empire. I think we have a
reasonable Hypothesis before us; and such a prodigious Tract of Ground contains
a Million square Miles, or six Hundred and forty Million Acres of Land, which
would even be sixteen Acres for each Individual, when equally divided among
forty Million Inhabitants; and it will surely follow of Consequence, that a
truly political British Legislature can never treat People oppressively,
haughtily, or even coolly, which are most likely to forward the Settlement of
it.

That extensive Territority we are now imperfectly surveying, is, perhaps, more
than twelve times the Area of England and Wales, and would probably contain
more than a hundred Million Inhabitants, if crowded with People like them
Countries; so two Fifths of that vast Number, or the forty Million I have
assined it to, would hardly overload it with Residents; for which weighty
Reason, its present blooming Colonies should not be rashly scourged, but even
very kindly treated, to induce proper Numbers to fill it up speedily. They
ought to be tenderly guarded by a jealous Love, that valuable Fruits may
proceed timely, and even abundantly, from their very promising Blossoms, which
the Storms of a jealous Tyranny would blast and prevent. Loyal Subjects can but
poorly brook such injurious Tempests, from a Consciousness they are not
deserved.

We have indeed Mountains, barren Deserts, Morasses and Waters, like other wide
Empires on this terraqueous Globe; but our external Barrens, like such in other
Places, as well as our fine Bays, Rivers and Lakes, may be internally fruitful,
employ a great Number of People, and not only bestow many Necessaries, but even
much Wealth also upon the Empire. These are natural, and therefore probable
Conclusions; and as our improvable Wilds want many new Colonies, can that
important End possibly be promoted by violently breaking down our
Constitutional Fences, that arbitrary Brutes of Prey may rudely spoil those
already planted? Do not the Laws of true Policy, and even of true common Sense
itself, as well as the Laws of common Justice, and our excellent Constitution,
absolutely prohibit the preposterous Measures alluded to? Can extending bad
Treatment to good old Tenants induce other Husbandmen to struggle with many
Hardships in settling difficult new Tenements for such Landlords?

When British Commons rashly extort such Queries, they could not possibly be
directed by true Policy, admit it could even exist in Opposition to a
constitutional Justice; and as they have viewed our large Continent itself but
very imperfectly, at so great a Distance, they can hardly properly represent
our little thriving Nurseries upon it, which change considerably every growing
Season, nor see clearly what trimming and other Improvements they successively
want; for great Mountains are more visible afar off than small artificial
Mounts can be, and are even often discovered when many of their own
considerable Eminences and Cavities are not distinguishable at all. While Men
cannot see or overlook very great Things, they never can have clear Ideas of
much smaller Matters connected with them; and potent Strangers may indeed send
Force enough to plunder us, under a Color of Law or otherwise, but never can
represent us virtually, when they neither can clearly see us, our little
changing Affairs, nor even the new World itself we live in. Before such Men
virtually represent us, the common Signification of such Words must be reversed.

After warmly encountering and partly subduing rude Forests, dangerous
Serpents, wild Beasts, and worse Savages, we now begin to make some Figure on
our Part of the Globe; and I suppose it will hardly be denied, that some of our
first Settlements lately purchased a Peace for Great Britain, and that we
cheerfully assisted her afterward in stretching out this vast Empire to its
present extensive Dimensions; and yet, after all our Loyalty and Bravery, added
to the Importance of our Trade, what alarming Returns does she make us! Do we
deserve that hard Treatment we meet with? May either Justice or Wisdom extent
it? Can it even possibly nourish our Loyalty or Affiance? Are galling Chains
our righteous Desert? May they and our extorted Complaints favor new
Settlements, and help England to exchange our useless Trees for useful Colonies
of People? Strange Proceedings, most surely, for the most celebrated
Legislature on Earth!

Of Course the Parliament has been lulled asleep, and the Conduct complained of
proceeded from a Dream, or our ancient lawgiving Mother, which has been deemed
rigidly virtuous, and exceedingly wise, wants to gratify imperious Lust very
wantonly, impoliticly, and even very unnaturally in her advanced Years, at the
great Expense or Ruin of her legitimate Offspring, and hitherto dutiful
Children. Alas! our Prospects are very gloomy indeed; and yet let us not
cherish Despair or Aversion, but even hope for the best, while we can prudently
cherish buoying Expectations; for I would fain believe our present Grievances,
how wilful soever they may sometimes appear, must needs be the Effect of our
Mother's slumbering Delusions, and will straight be removed when the old
Empress awaketh. A virtuous Matron may have lacivious Dreams, and detest their
Excitments when she can deliberate freely; and even tender dreaming Parents may
receive bad Impressions against a hopeful Progeny, yet greatly abhor them when
truly delineated by Reason. These are dutiful conjectural Palliations, and
should they even be incorrigibly resented, the charitable Author cannot be to
blame.

But can our imperial Mother cruelly resent them, and enforce her arbitrary
Impositions by a causeless Vengeance! can she be so greatly degenerated,
sacrifice her Honor so ignobly, prostitute her Power so basely, or even
possibly keep our Complaints alive, after our importunate Clamours awake her,
and excite her to ponder maturely! Let us not fondly imbibe such imbittering
Apprehensions, but cry aloud for Redress and suppress them, while we can safely
cherish a better Opinion; and should all our Remonstrances be loftily slighted,
can she reasonably look for a persevering filial Respect, if she still declines
a parental Regard, and strives unnaturally to oppress us! Should not Parents
show good Examples to their Children, as well as expect a dutiful Behavior
from them; and should not their Respect always be reciprocal? It is a wretched
Precedent, most surely, when Parents first make very irregular Demands, and
then threaten orderly Children for not complying with them; and, doubtless, all
our Superiors, but our spiritual Fathers in God most signally, ought to show us
repugnant Examples.

Should faithful Subjects have slavish Chains made for them, by a Power that
should ever protect their Freedom, and then be viewed as Rebels for refusing to
wear them, while they can possibly avoid it? Are we Traitors to King George, or
any of his Dominions, for justly spurning at unconstitutional Fetters, or they
which would cruelly force us to wear them, and thus make alarming Inroads into
British Freedom, and even sap the very Foundation of our most excellent
Constitution! Whether should our Flames or the Conduct of our Inflamers be
condemned? which Party acts traitorously to our free State, by dangerously
wounding its exquisite Establishment, and rending its Peace and Strength to
Pieces? Can Justice authorize England to lord it over us, to load us at
Pleasure with arbitrary Impositions, and to punish us for an extorted
Resentment? Or may any Kind of Policy acquaint her, that plucking up our
constitutional Freedom violently by the Roots, is a likely Method to make new
Colonies take deep Root downwards, and bear much Fruit upwards? Can such
momentous Queries be justly answered in Favor of the Stamp Act, or any other
Infringement of our Rights; or any wise and upright Legislature perseveringly
defend such Proceedings, however it was hurried into them, as neither Wisdom
nor Virtue may justify, and jointly explode and abhor? Such Questions may be
offensive to some of their Extorters, but I never should he censured for them.

My freest Observations loudly call for Thanks instead of Resentment; for the
Purpose I expose is pregnant with horrible Mischief, that may even prove fatal
to both Parties, if not timely suppressed; and while England treats us ill,
after all our Dangers, Hardships and Dutifulness, her late Acquisitions can do
her small Service, as unprejudiced common Sense may plausibly fore bode; for it
is unreasonable to suppose the Contrary, or that any considerable Number of
People will leave their Native Countries, and come hither to cultivate a
Wilderness, under such a criminal and impolitic Discouragement. How greatly
must any State be surcharged with Inhabitants, or distressed otherwise, ere
many would leave it, and exchange their native Land for our Deserts, under such
preposterously intimidating Prohibitions? Can small Inducements and great
Discouragements probably, or even possibly, cement this great Empire with
England, or furnish it timely with proper Inhabitants? Will breaking forcibly
into our Vineyards, and gathering our Fruit at Pleasure, induce others to plant
new Ones at a great Expense or Labor, that would be equally liable to such
Robberies, or attach us firmly to the Interest of such Plunderers? If these are
political Proceedings. I have no Idea of Politics.

The bare Word of Princes should ever be a sacred Ground of Reliance; and yet
the monstrous Proceedings before us, if madly supported, must even soon render
the very Patents of our Sovereigns utterly contemptible, and the Great-Seal of
England a despicable Signet; for the same Power that annuls or curtails any of
our Charters, or any Privilege granted by it, may even as justly annul every
one of them entirely, and do likewise to all King George and his Predecessors
have granted, or that he and his Successors can grant: So of course our
Monarchs Charters cannot be prudently relied on, while a parliamentary
Despotism is preposterously avowed. Was Justice even but an empty Name, such
Policy will not quickly fill our large Vacancies with People, and speedily
transform all the improvable Parts of our immense Forest into earthly
Paradises, nor bring Honor to the royal Prerogative, or Affiance to the
public Faith; for no doubt the Parliament has as much Right to revoke every
Charter the Crown has granted, or can grant, as it has to annul the least Part
of any one of them.

Should the Credit of the Crown's Grants be thus bartered away for an
unconstitutional Power of collecting our Money, or any other parliamentary
Encroachment? And as Monarchs are genenerally too fond of raising their
Revenues, should young Princes be abused by their Council, and artfully seduced
into such fatal Errors? should not the Honor of the Royal Prerogative, and a
public Faith, be even very watchfully guarded, instead of being murdered by
the Sword of a parliamentary Despotism; and should such arbitrary Pushes even
not injure them at all, may not a victorious England have Work enough
frequently from her jealous combining Neighbors, without struggling with evil
Consequences, madly urged, by driving three Million of good Subjects from
Loyalty to Dissafaction, which at best must be very Mischievous in alarming
Exigences? If this be the Fruit of true Policy, its lauded Productions are
surely detestable.

Wrangling Britain, what has bewitched thee; what deadly Infatuation have thou
lately imbibed! Expel thy horrid Delusion, and resume a constitutional Policy,
ere a lordly Faction a Home renders thee contemptible Abroad, and before thy
lording it over us cause others to lord it proudly over thyself. Sold an
arbitrary Faction prevail in England, or its imperious Demagogue have free
Access to the Throne, may not learned Debauchees as fitly tutor frail Youths,
full of dangerous Impulses, as obstinate Men of a perverted Understanding,
greatly depraved by Ambition, may counsel young Monarchs in Favor of their
Revenues, or an Increase of Power? Should the Parliament tear the Empire in
Pieces, and perhaps render it a Prey to foreign Enemies, by supporting,
preposterously supporting, the detestable Schemes of such knowing Fools? Should
a British Influence be thus enervated at any Time, and more especially at a
very critical and dangerous Juncture? Our national Power, through an
invigorating Harmony, has lately been formidable in every Quarter of the World;
and let it not be rendered as despicable in them, through debilitating
Commotions stupidly fomented.

What enchanting Fiend, what malevolent Seducer, has lately directed our
imperial Councils, transformed our Unity to Discord, our Glory to Ridicule, and
made the Empire a Butt for its Enemies Sneers and Plots! I am even but a poor
unlearned Country Shopkeeper, very little thought of by my understanding
Neighbors, and yet I think all my judicious and impartial Readers must be
fully persuaded I could make a much better Prime Minister of England than any
Grenvilian Disturber of the Empire, however some of them may be idolized by
their prejudiced Votaries.

This seeming vain Glory will hardly translate me from a Cottage to St.
James's, or any Palace near it, and induce my Sovereign to take a rational
Peasant for his first Officer of State, but may fitly help to degrade a
diabolical Policy, authoritatively exposed by such a petty Scribler. There may
be Storms enough in the watery Empire without employing Conjurers to raise
them: And should a parliamentary Power wed oppressive Machinations, through any
Kind of Enchantments whatever, and strive to enforce the Stamp Act, or any
other arbitrary Imposition or Prohibition, can true British Colonists tamely
bear such ungrateful Scourgings, after all their dutiful and gallant Behavior,
while they have so many Ambuscades to befriend them? Should we prove such
dastardly Creatures, would not every true Englishman, and even our soaring
Enemies themselves, when Prejudice would suffer them to think coolly, inwardly
condemn and despise us? Is not male Treatment a poor Retaliation for our
Loyalty and Bravery? and should we ignobly brook it without a proper
Resentment, or be censured for breaking the Peace of the Empire, when lawless
and ruffinous Assaults have made us cry out?

But notwithstanding this extorted Freedom, we are very sensible our Trade,
Towns, and most valuable Plantations, are quire defenseless against England,
should Tyranny out-brave a constitutional Justice, and other great Powers,
without her Protection; but many of us, like our robust and shifting
Forefathers, can breath and strugle a while without them. We have friendly
Labyrinths to hide us, wild Food to sustain us, and natural Fortresses to
defend us for some Time: And should Great Britain madly drive us to the last
Extremity, we could not only form a common Interest with numerous Indian
Nations, now our Enemies, but even call her jealous Neighbors also to our
Assistance, and perhaps to enslave us at length, as no other Kind of European
Despotism would appear so intolerable as here is. We may, doubtless, choose our
Masters, or die for and with our Freedom, if we cannot live free.

Explode not this occasional Explicitness, for I greatly abhor Sedition; and
the thinking Part of us, should not hastily rush into any Thing like it; but
stem Rashness, seek Redress, and keep good Decorum as much as possible, until a
domineering Oppression drives us into Tumults. This, no doubt, is our duty, and
many of us yet can weigh Things in the Scales of Reason; but the ghastly Face
of real Desperation, or even very ungrateful and exasperating Provocations,
might soon deprive us of that great Advantage, and rashly drive us from one
Evil to another, and, perhaps, from a less to a greater, successively; for when
intestine Flames rage to a national Conflagration, they are far more licentious
and fatal than any other Kind. When former Friends become irreconcilable
Enemies, their Enmity has no Limits; and when good Subjects are driven into a
State of Desperate Madness, a furious and outrageous Resentment may soon cause
their Oppressors to lose Sight of their own Crimes, to throw all the Blame on
the injured Party, and even to deem the bloodiest Revenge but extorted Justice.

Our Enemies already verify these Observations, by perversely inveighing against
us as Rebels, for some little Hurly-burlies and warm Invectives their own evil
Conduct solely occasioned; and was their Power but equal to their incensed
Ambition, they would doubtless chastise us severely, as very upright Men, for
only resenting their wicked Attempts to enslave us, with some irregular
incidental Commotions, too common at Home on much less Provocations: This is
the cursed Fruit of intestine Quarrels. And should England and her Colonies be
universally inflamed against each other, how soon might the Darts of a lawless
Phrensy wound, torment, and blind our Oppressors, and even make them deem
Cruelty but a just Retaliation, after they were rendered incapable of seeing
that successive male Treatment, which made us run mad, and kept us out of our
Senses! May not our own Annals beneficially teach us, that dismal intestine
Storms may sometimes have but a moderate Beginning; and yet gradually fill a
Nation, even a learned Nation, with such gross Darkness, that infatuated
Princes at length, though above earthly Tribunals, may even be tried, condemned
and executed by lawless Subjects, after the latter have been sacrificing one
another. Let us shudder at the Prospect of such destructive Quarrels, and
stigmatize the persevering Fomenters of them, while prudential Considerations
can favor each Party; for we are as liable to an infatuating, imbittering, and
ruinous Prejudice, as our frail Ancestors could be, if their instructive Harms,
and due Consideration excite us not wisely and bravely to stem it.

The Measures I degrade are awfully preposterous; for the growing Envy of
jealous Confederates against England, may too soon cause her to want the utmost
Fidelity and Assistance of all her Subjects, in every Quarter of our extensive
Empire; and even nothing but Traiterousness, or a very gross Infatuation, can
ever excite her to urge the contrary. Should foreign Troubles greatly alarm
her, intestine Feuds would doubtless subside; but should all our Remonstrances
be slighted 'till then, what Affiance could either Party have in the other?
Consider my native Country, Great Britain consider maturely, and let the
Colonies behave circumspectly, for I would by no Means favor Undutifulness, by
striving vigorously to stem Oppression; and should our Conduct ever merit
Correction, let us justly feel the Rod of a Sovereign Power, and not be
suffered to offend with Impunity. Let us be wisely and nobly governed according
to the Laws of a constitutional Policy, for Anarchy is detestible and ruinous;
but let not oppressive Ambition drive us to Self-Defence, Invectives, Enmity,
and outrageous Distraction, and then tyrannically knock out our Brains as
outlawed Rebels.

I think those expedient Hints should not be disdained, for they may reasonably
prevent shocking Mischief, which even seems already to stare us grimly in the
Face; and perhaps our most illuminated Guides of the moral World but rarely
give better Advice from the Pulpit, how costly soever their Lectures may be,
and however brightly they may shine with a Scholastic Pageantry. Had but our
learned Prelates preached as good Doctrine in their Temples frequently, and in
the House of Lords occasionally, the Stamp Act would hardly have passed into a
Law; and as my plain Dealing is morally adapted to a great Emergency, they
might and should have prevented, I think they should honor it signally, as
God's most holy Vicegerents and divine Presidents, to all about them. When such
great Men have rendered momentous Freedom absolutely necessary, they should of
Course very humbly revere it; and I am sorry mine was rashly extorted, for
surely the mutual Interest of England and her Colonies equally requires the
former to merit our Allegiance, and the latter to deserve her Protection and
Favor, nor may any unprejudiced Friend of either Country think otherwise,
whatever our Enemies and some very choleric Americans may perversely say or
idly imagine.

The staple Commodities of Great Britain are very suitable Merchandise for most
of our Provinces, and no doubt she is completely qualified at present, when her
State Affairs are rightly conducted, for the august Seat of Government,
Impartial Magazine, and strong occasional Bulwark of a grand maritime and
trading Empire, and should of Course greatly encourage all her Colonies for her
own Advantage as well as theirs. This will hardly be disputed by unprejudiced
Men of Understanding, for I think it may even be clearly demonstrated, by sound
common Sense itself, that true British Policy can neither curtail our Freedom,
nor cramp our Trade; but guard the former, and promote the latter, which should
not only favor the expeditious Settlement of new Plantations, and that perhaps
very greatly indeed, but empower us to deal much more freely at Home, than our
present Circumstances will by any Means admit of; and also inspire us with a
noble Resolution of defending a British Glory and Utility, at the Expense of
our Lives and Fortunes occasionally; which precious Fruits never can proceed
from arbitrary Scourgings.

But to wave a raging Jealousy and Dissaffection, and all their destructive
Consequences, which are surely the most fiendish Offspring of Oppression; we
yearly want more British Goods considerably than our Exports to that Nation can
purchase; and were but proper Markets opened for all the rest of our vendible
Commodities, we could traffic more and more with our Mother Country, and throw
more and more Cash into her Coffers successively, while a true British Policy,
a constitutional Justice, and a sovereign Amity subsisted between us; nor would
any Thing more naturally facilitate the Settlement of new Colonies, than
causing those already planted to flourish greatly. When old Tennants are very
well treated, new ones will soon grow fond of such good Landlords; and our
large Vacancies call loudly for such virtuous Policy, instead of the counter
Treatment extended to English Colonists, which, if madly supported, can hardly
fail of ruining both Parties at length, and must even incontestably, while
defended by the Parliament, render the firmest Grants of the Crown exceedingly
precarious, if not utterly contemptible, and thus deeply wound the Royal
Prerogative, the Peace, Affiance and Affection of its Grantees, the Progress of
new Settlements, and a Public Faith in general.

I hope England will be ashamed, afraid, of such monstrous Proceedings, and
even run swiftly from them before their direful Consequences make her shudder;
and these Expectations seem well grounded, for admit she is very much
degenerated, which I would not fondly believe, yet as her late Encroachments
are so glaringly repugnant to her own Interest, as well as a constitutional
Justice, I think they proceeded of Course from Delusion, and must vanish when
it is removed. I think we may rationally conclude, that after the great
Fatigues of a hot War, and the intoxicating Elatements of a glorious Peace,
some very officious Spirits, such as victorious Kingdoms abound with, rocked
her Helmsmen into a deep mental Slumber, in the enchanting Cradle of Ambition,
and that all our Alarms proceed from mere Chimerical Visions, which must
absolutely vanish, and our Grievances with them, as soon as them celebrated
Sages are thoroughly awaked. These are buoying and charitable Hopes, and let us
yet cherish them in Spite of our gloomy Appearances; for History and Experience
may abundantly show us, that many famous Men, in the wisest Ages, have wildly
dreamed, with their Eyes open, in Favor of one darling View or other.

Some of my Readers, may call these ludicrous Observations, but surely they are
not mere sportive Trifles, nor do I know how to account more rationally for our
surprising Grievances; and of Course, soothing Delusions thrive always the
faster when they are planted in a very rich Soil, and eagerly cultivated by
very strong Abilities. I would not write in vain, so have endeavored to affect
Men of Different Tempers, by interspersing argumentative Banters among graver
Reasonings, and a Diversity of striking Similies of the same Import, which may
not prove fruitless like vain Repetitions, and should not be degraded
accordingly.

Let us keep up our Spirits, and a good Decorum also, and when we remonstrate
ever so freely, let us also behave circumspectly, and suppress Insurrections as
much as possible, in the midst of our warmest Complaints of Encroachments. Let
Force only drive us into Tumults that have any Appearance of Sedition, for we
are but hurt yet, by alarming Apprehensions concerning the StampAct, and surely
our Grievances must instantly be removed, when proper Representations appear in
in our Favor. Let us be watchful, let us be courageous, and convince our
Superiors Freedom is dearer than Life; but throw neither of them rashly away.
Let us keep our Arms in good Order, but Compulsion only make us use them.

We are doubtless too numerous, valuable and spiritful, to be utterly
contemned, and to have all our Complaints proudly disdained, by a coolly
deliberating Parliament, notwithstanding that Freak of Elation offends us. When
a Scotch Prince ascended to our imperial Throne, that great Elevation made him
and some of his Descendants very light headed; but surely, the late Conquests
of Great-Britan cannot long intoxicate her wise Legislature accordingly,
however their Fumes may affect it a while. Men of generous Revolution
Principles may sometimes have Jacobitish Dreams, but never can adhere to such
arbitrary Delusions, when their injurious Tendency plainly appears: And could
England even reduce us instantly to Vassalage, every laudable Consideration
absolutely forbids it; and it must needs be more glorious for our august
Monarchs to reign mildly, over many affectionate Subjects, like Princes, and
numerous Myriads of loyal inferior Freemen, than to lord it over mean and
dispirited Slaves.

PART III.
I HAVE already clearly proved, according to my own Conception, that the
Stamp Act wounds the royal Prerogative deeply, and is equally inconsistent with
the Honor of the Crown, a national Faith and Affiance, a constitutional
Justice, the fundamental Law of British Taxations, and true political Wisdom,
which should abundantly excite moral Agents to damn such brooding Evils, and
all their horrid Offspring; but as arbitrary Tempers are exceedingly fond of
mischievous Encroachments, I must yet strive to render them more detestable, by
farther exposing their vieled Deformity, which is far from being fully
disclosed at present, and will even be much secreted when I have done, so let
others display it effectually at length. Such rude Pushes at our Freedom are
very alarming, when seriously viewed in any Light, how sportive soever we may
sometimes decry them, in the midst of our fluctuating Ideas, when Hope
alternately gets the better of Fear, but are most shocking when we consider
where they came from, and that they actually proceeded from its nominal
Guardians.

If powerful Friends stood firmly by us, we might safely despise the base
Designs of much weaker Enemies, but should be very circumspect and gallant too,
when potent nominal Friends join eagerly with open Foes to enslave us; and that
wicked Law which threatens to destroy our Freedom, was the amazing Draught of
its nominal Protectors; of Men that pretend nobly to defend constitutional
Rights and Privileges, against both regal Usurpations and ministerial
Corruptions. That British Commons thus assume the Guardianship of the Subject,
is even incontestably notorious; and yet now our famous nominal Guardians,
through the Plentitude of their Money-raising Power, would freely damn the
constitutional Liberty of their American Fellow Subjects, an ignobly intail
perpetual Slavery upon us! We are thus experimentally instructed, that great
Pretensions have sometimes but small Foundations, and are not always supported
by great Realities; but surely such Gentlemen must be surprisingly deceived, or
British Electors might find much better Delegates, if Old-England is not even
inexpressibly degenerated. A genuine British Patriotism, immemorially lauded by
the greatest Men, can never be a partial Disposition highly inglorious.

Were such arrogating Mortals our best Advocates and Guardians, and should they
adhere to their present Intention, how wretched indeed would our Circumstances
be! we should thus be treated like the holy Author of Christianity, who was
sacrificed by the nominal Friends of the Messiah; and who is still betrayed to
a faithless Contempt by nominal Christians, even the greatest of them, our
lofty High Priests themselves; but let us be truly thankful, for our Condition
is not quite so gloomy, unless our wounded Grants from the Crown be entirely
murdered at length, which should, no Doubt, be instantly healed, and inviolably
honored for the future. Our Provincial Legislatures, however diminutively they
may be spoken of, are not confined to trifling Bylaws, like Companies and
Towns corporate, but even our Fortunes, Reputations and Lives are as much
subjected to their successive Acts as those belonging to the Inhabitants of
England are to the Statutes of that Nation; so we may well be suffered to tax
ourselves discretionally, according to our Circumstances and Occasions.

Under what Color of Justice may a very distant Legislature, unacquainted with
our Ability and Occasions, or rather the assuming Commons of England, deprive
us of that great constitutional Privilege! Such British Patriots would be
highly inflamed, indeed, if a Prince on that Throne illegally demanded our
Money, and threatened to scourge us for Noncompliance because that Kind of
arbitrary Exactions, if not timely suppressed, might soon bury their own
Freedom, as well as ours, in the yawning Grave of Despotism; but while their
own Rights seem to be out of Danger, they can fondly deprive us of ours, and
authorize the Servants of the Crown to plunder us boldly, under a Color of
Law. If such Proceedings are consistent with true Honor or the genuine Dignity
of a British Parliament, I have hitherto been greatly mistaken; and surely such
Men are not faithful Guardians of a constitutional Freedom, which should be
equally maintained in every Part of the Empire, but partial Sticklers for the
Freedom of their own Island only.

How dishonorable are such Stretches of inverted Power, of Power that should
nobly defend them momentous Rights it aims to destroy! and how could the
Intriegues of a few restless Enemies make us dread such parliamentary
Encroachments, ere we saw them, even in a free-thinking Age, wherein British
Liberty is merely idolized! How could we surmise great Men, exceedingly
tenacious of their own Freedom, could ingloriously wrest ours from us, and thus
run from the Dignity of a British Legislature! Should the Court ever remove to
this Continent, how would GreatBritain like such male Treatment! And should our
imperial Power thus change its Situation, would not Americans have as much
Right then to abuse it as their English fellow Subjects have now? In a State of
Trial, Probationers must have Temptations to various Kinds of Evil, but should
a bad Ministry direct the British Legislator, or a good Parliament control its
injurious Designs! Strong Men may extend evil Treatment to their weaker
Brethren, as Experience too often evinces, but strong Virtue never can produce
it, nor strong Reasoning ever defend it.

The Stamp-Tax is evidently a partial Imposition, and was it ever so equitable
in its own Nature, that could not possibly justify an Arbitrary Taxation; and
judicious British Commons, as staunch English Patriots, would be greatly
alarmed at despotic Exactions from the Throne, that were ever so reasonable in
themselves, for they would be fully persuaded, as prudent fore seeing Men, that
Despotism, which began the most plausibly, if not timely repelled, might
gradually advance to intolerable Oppression; and can sound Reason persuade
English Money-Granters it is better for us to be arbitrarily thumped by the
Scepter and Mace also than by the former alone! When such Proceedings are
placed in a proper Light, how censurable and defenseless must they appear? And
what is the dreaded Power of a Royal Prerogative, when compared with such a
boundless Moneyraising Authority? If we must be reduced to Slavery a while, let
us not have so many hard Masters to lord it over us, for doubtless one will be
more than enough, and the latter may probably be much sooner intimidated from
Tyranny, than a great Number of powerful combined Oppressors, perpetually
inflaming each other against us. We had better endure the Rod of an Absolute
Monarch only, however we may dread it, than Arbitrary Scourgings from the
Crown, and every Member of the British Parliament, or but even a majority of
them also. We had better form a common Interest with all the Subjects of an
Absolute Monarchy, against the Power of a despotical Ruler, than have ten
Million fellow Subjects to help a Prince to enslave us, and to keep us fast
chained in Bondage.

These are very free Observations, and I suppose our Adversaries will call them
Treason; but let impartial Readers seriously consider, whether they or we are
Enemies to the State, and that our Loyalty cannot possibly keep always alive,
if it has nothing but Poison to feed on. Small Portions of Bane may not kill
it, and be timely expelled by proper antidotes; but male Treatment never can
nourish our Fidelity, while Causes only produce natural Effects: And should not
those be censured which strive to infect it, instead of us which call loudly
for wholesome Provisions, that may and should preserve its Health and Vigor?
We have indeed already been constrained to drink deadly Potions, which perhaps
would have poisoned our Loyalty entirely, had not Hope and Redress, as a
considerable Counter-poison, greatly repelled their baneful Operations: And
should we be driven forcibly to Enmity or even any Thing like it, when we
ardently desire indissolvable Friendship, and then (...) as Traitors for being
disaffected! Or be severely scourged by Potent Injustice, and then deemed
Rebels for some bitter Complaints and frantic Gestures, occasioned by the
Torments of our agonizing Wounds, or the torturing Apprehensions of our
distracted Minds!

Should not Britain be ashamed of her idle Clamours against us on Account of
our late Irregularities, after she had driven us forcibly into them; and should
not our Lectures excite her to ponder maturely, to behave like herself for the
future, to protect the Rights of all her Subjects impartially, and to
stigmatize criminal Innovators under their most blazing Pretensions of
Patriotism? Have we not been very indirectly treated, and are not our Enemies
pestilent Disturbers of the Empire? Do they not behave more like French
Incendiaries than true British Patriots? Should they approach the Throne at
Pleasure, and have open Avenues for that Purpose, or a strong Faction render
them very powerful, and enable them to force a Passage to it through his
Majesty's Guards? I am not vain enough to suppose my weightiest Considerations,
though not very trifling, will have Power to lead some of our Foes to
Retraction, for, perhaps, Arguments sent down from Heaven itself, would hardly
extort Confession from obstinate imperious Offenders, that set up themselves as
infallible Oracles; but let Old-England consider maturely, and timely consider,
and let not a generous People be gulled any longer by friendship Machinations
the most neatly dressed by artful Sophists. Let them draw Wisdom out of their
late shocking Confusion, even as Light was first extracted from a rude Chaos,
and let not us be elated by victorious Arguments, as Great Britain was by her
late Conquests, for we never should copy after such bad Originals, whatever
temptations assail us. We justly explode her licentious Wanderings, so let us
not strole at Random ourselves, but cheerfully render to Caesar all his just
Dues, with a loyal constitutional Submission.

In our great monarchial Commonwealth, the Rights of the Crown and People
should be equally guarded; for no Prince can sufficiently befriend us without
an adequate Power, nor the People be truly happy without Freedom and Security.
These are well grounded Observations; and yet great Sticklers for parliamentary
Privileges, frequently explode a wholesome Power in others, that they may
engross a noxious one themselves; and perhaps many arbitrary British Taxers, if
not Court Minions, could but poorly brook a beneficial Prerogative in the chief
Magistrate, while they are encroaching, even very injuriously, as Senators; and
doubtless the Court, if not cautiously prevented, would soon Monopolize all the
Power of the freest Nation.

These Conclusions are justified by History and Experience, and therefore
should not our august House of Lords, as a proper medium between the King and
his People's Delegates, equally guard the Rights of Prince and Subject, and
thus keep the public Scales ever in good Order, that Commonwealth Affairs may
be properly weighed in every Part of our extensive Empire? This not only seems
to be the constitutional, important, and indispensable Duty of the powerful
Nobility of England, but is even a System of Politics wisely adopted by them
great Men; and therefore, how could the Lords of Parliament, consistent with
their own political Maxims, the Honor of the Royal Prerogative, the
indubitable Rights of the Subject, and the Dignity of their exalted Station,
gratify the assuming Commons against us, and thus furnish executive Power with
a Sword to murder our constitutional Freedom, and the Force of its Masters
Grants, under the Great-Seal of the Empire! The Stamp Act is equally injurious
to the Prince and People, though in a very different Manner, and under a
Pretense of favoring the former; but let us wave the bleeding Prerogative at
present, and ask how the Princes of the British Diet, with so many inspired
Guides among them, came to wander so amazingly, when that detestable Law came
into Existence! what led them so to grieve our Infant Colonies, and to withdraw
their paternal Regard entirely from them?

It is Time surely, high Time indeed, for British Colonists to be greatly
alarmed, when a great Majority of English Commons eagerly combine to enslave
us, as our pretended Representatives, and the Potent Lords of that Realm concur
with their measures; for while them two Branches unite against us, the Court,
no doubt, though very erroneously, will carry their arbitrary Purpose into
Execution, for various Reasons that might be assigned; and yet at that very
unpropitious Juncture, we had some tender Friends in both Houses, but their
weightiest Arguments were Legislatively outdone by the much superior Force of
Yeas and Contents.

Our requisite Plainess should not be resented, for the Injured have surely a
Right to complain; and even very bitter Words might be justly uttered on such
provoking Occasions, if Prudence did not forbid them. I would not affront any
Peer in Britain, but would induce them all to abhor their arbitrary
Proceedings, for they certainly are detestable; and while moral Freedom is
occasionally extended to the Crown itself, through the Ministry or otherwise,
as the avowed and much applauded Privilege of Englishmen, we should not only be
allowed, without Censure, but even with constitutional Encomiums to treat our
greatest fellow Subjects as openly, whenever their Conduct renders it
necessary. I think temporal Lords greatly blameable, and their spiritual
Brethren much more culpable; for the latter, very signally, as God's most holy
Vicegerents, should ever assist his weaker Creatures, occasionally, against the
injurious Designs of their stronger Brethren, instead of combining with such
powerful Oppressors, like Jewish high Priests and lofty Rabbis of old. Our
Prelates have Precedence of temporal Lords, and should evidently deserve it, or
be justly contemned; for Merit only may properly entitle them to it.

The great Primate of all England himself can hardly refute this Doctrine, and
I know not what his Grace may think of it; but I think he should dutifully and
humbly revere it, even in the midst of his greatest pontifical Glory, and that
he cannot possibly do otherwise, without greatly dishonouring the Laws and
Precedent of the Messiah, who, I suppose he now and then vouchsafes to call
Master, with an orthodox Formality, on extraordinary Occasions. The Stamp Act
is but Part of the base Fruit of a passionate Darkness, that has long reigned
proudly over Great Britain, and which never could have done so, had but her
dignified Clergy shined as bright spiritually as they have done temporally, and
been as fond of a pure Christlike Greatness as they have been of a carnal
Eminence.

Formal hail Masters are easily repeated; scandalous Offenses, without much
pain, avoided; and our kind of pharisaical Works are not very grievous, but the
rigorously perfecting Laws and Precedent of Christ, are no more honored by
modern than ancient Rabbis; and English Bishops now prefer legal Grandeur to a
Gospel Renunciation of the World, as much as Hebrew chief Priests did formerly.
Our wise Reformers could easily distinguish good Popish Livings from bad Popish
Tenets, and their understanding Successors make the same Distinction as
clearly. Protestant Absurdities are less ridiculous than Popish Ones; and our
dignified Leaders can freely support the former in Opposition to the latter,
but like idolatrous Papists, they so piously rail at, are much fonder of great
Popish Revenues, fine Palaces, Coaches and Retinues, than following the
Messiah, apostolically, through a Soul-humbling Poverty, and a brave
Self-conquering Warfare.

The greatest of Men are surely but fallible Creatures, and liable to injurious
Mistakes, even as extensive as their Influence, unless due Circumsection
prevent it, for not only many famous Grecians and Romans of old, but even many
celebrated Politicians, Philosophers, and Divines of our more enlightened Day,
have wandered strangely after favorite Views into very gross Errors, and
rashly wounding our Freedom is not the least of them; for I will venture to
prophesy freely, without the illuminating Aid of a Prelate's Benediction, that
our roughly treated Colonies ere long, however they may be over-borne for a
while, will either become some of the brightest Jewels in the Diadem of
England, or present Crowns of Thorns to her Monarchs successively; and I am as
confident the greatest Emolument of each Party absolutely requires the former.
These are now my deep-rooted Sentiments; and should the Opinion and Arguments
of a Cottager, be ever so loftily despised by Proprietors of Palaces, yet Time
will surely determine, whether lordly Curtailors of our Rights, or prudent and
loyal Remonstrants against them, are truly political and sound Commonwealth's
Men.

We are bravely defended indeed against foreign Usurpers, but our Allegiance
and Advantage to Great Britain, loudly demands that Protection, and yet it may
surely avail us but little, should our open Colonies be plundered, by England,
which has more Power to hurt us than any other State; and as a Conflagration
may actually proceed from a small Coal, or even a single Spark of Fire, so may
Bondage, a complete Bondage, if not timely prevented, from much smaller initial
Encroachments than what we resent. I appeal to Free Britains of Understanding,
Generosity, and Influence, and let them nobly guard against Prejudice, for
though great Men are liable to very injurious Deceptions, while they lurk
artfully under plausible Favorite Pretensions; yet, as I have Occasionally
observed, they cannot ignobly cleave to them when properly Unmasked; and were
but our most Strenuous Adversaries over-borne Colonists, I fancy they would
complain as warmly as any of us; for Men fond of lording it over others, can
but poorly brook lordly Treatment themselves, and should not therefore ignobly
extend it to their fellow Creatures, but uprightly and bravely control base
Impulses to it.

A very Potent Nation may forcibly drive us into Slavery of one Kind or other,
though perhaps not with the utmost Facility; but what Right has England to
demand our Allegiance, had we even no Grants at all from the Crown, without
securing to us the Privileges of British Subjects? Are we not Legitimate
Children, have we not hitherto been Dutiful, is not a constitutional Patrimony
our just Due, and may our Parents without Tyranny deprive us of it, and cruelly
drive us into Bondage, with the Scourges of Ambition or Avarice! Have I not
shown we are not Represented in Parliament at all, and can English Subjects be
taxed justly by any but their own Representatives? Should not British Subjects
possess British Rights; and is not Freedom our Right by the sacred Law of
Nature, as well as the Laws of our excellent Constitution? We certainly ought
to be Free; and can we possibly be so, while our Interest is disposed of by
others without our Consent, and repugnant to our Will; or even under any Kind
of arbitrary Impositions or Prohibitions whatever? If this be Freedom what is
Vassalage! I speak intentionally to wise British Senators, to Men that have
Power to oppress us, and perhaps to enslave us a while, but should nobly defend
our inestimable Rights.

The unaccountable Proceedings before us may be somewhat palliated, but nothing
can possibly justify them; for let us even suppose the national Debt, the
Expense of the late War, the Backwardness of some wrangling Colonies in our
present loose Condition, and other Considerations of Consequence, might
naturally throw the Parliament into great Agitations about us, when its Spirits
were much elated by a glorious Peace; yet when all this is granted, what could
possibly justify an arbitrary Imposition, before a constitutional Demand had
been made and perversely rejected! Arbitrary Stretches never can be expedient
in peaceable Times, void of Emergencies, ere prudent constitutional Measures
have been utterly contemned; and of Course the Stamp Act was very unwarrantably
carried into Force, admit such despotical Exertions of Power were sometimes
necessary in very Alarming and dangerous Exigencies. Should our Superiors have
had upright Intentions, they were very prematurely and rashly executed; but if
they ran hastily after false Ideas into soothing Error, of a very awful
Tendency, let them grant us Redress when their deadly Mistake appears, and
cautiously pursue a constitutional Justice for the future through all their
legislative Transactions. We can freely forgive true Penitents, but not be so
willingly enslaved by incorrigible Enemies.

I know a scheming Ministry, and the Crown through it, are generally blamed for
offensive Laws, as if the Parliament could do no Wrong, or was quite above
Censure; but whatever Respect may be intended by it, I think it but a very poor
Compliment to the Lords and Commons of England, to be thus represented as mere
Ciphers, or passive Figures at best, occasionally used by a few great Officers
of State, and have therefore treated them with a much greater Respect, as free
and voluntary Agents in a very important Station, that are morally accountable
to the Public for their Conduct, and even much more so, than Men possessed of
but few Talents, a low Trust, and a small Influence can possibly be. I cannot
view or treat such great Men as mere inanimate Tools, taken up and used at
Pleasure by State Artificers, for thus our famous Parliament would only be a
pompous Show, a fictitious Good, or a mere idolized Name, and even have less
Power than impotent French Parliaments, while British Ministers had more than
the Ministry of France. I very much esteem a good Ministry, and hate the
Proceedings of a bad one, but cannot think the Security of our rights leans
upon the former, nor that the latter can rend them forcibly from us, or compel
the Parliament to do it.

A young British Monarch, indeed, in the Case before us, must have been under
the darkning Influence of strong Desires to increase the Revenue, to concur
with a Money-granting Parliament, and to gratify his importunate surrounding
Subjects, that were artfully prejudiced against us by the public and private
Councils of the Nation; and as the greatest young Princes, ere much Experience
waits upon them, must often rely on the Advice of others, they may receive
false Ideas from the plausible Arguments of private Counselors; but a Majority
of English Lords and Commons cannot possibly have such Palliations in their
Favor, for they should have guarded our Rights against the natural Bias of the
Crown; and many of them are possessed of much Experience, as well as a great
natual Capacity and liberal Education.

These Truths are even quite incontestable; nor is it less indisputable, that
the injurious Proceedings of such great Men, may be as justly exploded, as
their Praiseworthy Tansactions can be gratefully lauded. This should not only
be acknowledged by the greatest censured Reader, but our spiritual Lords should
even confess it in a very examplary Manner, and not treat me for such
occasional Freedom, as haughty Jewish Doctors treated she poor, sorrowful,
unlearned, and freely reproving Author of Christianity, for boldly promulgating
that sacred Truth they pretend to defend; nor yet as Papists treated inveighing
Protestant Reformers; for great Professions can no more justify the counter
Proceedings of dignified Protestants now, than they justified the Crimes of
Jewish and Popish Rabbis formerly.

As we are grieved by a parliamentary Dispotism, we should doubtless
remonstrate directly against its injurious Supporters, how great soever they
appear, and not content ourselves with branding the Conduct of an unjust
Minister; for had not Mr. Granville many powerful Confederates, and was there
but one over-bearing Mortal in England, he might incessantly plot against us in
vain: And why should we flatter the Vanity of such an imperious Enemy, by
falsely attributing our Grievances to his Influence? His greatest Efforts could
not have hurt us, and he might have racked his Brains to no Purpose, had not
English Senators been pleased with his mischievous Devices, and we could hardly
treat the British Legislature more affrontively, or with a greater Indignity,
than by petitioning him to direct it to repeal the Stamp Act; and yet he has
certainly as much Authority over it in that Respect as he had when it came into
Force against us, which may show the great Irregularity of our common
Declamations. Let our Complaints be directed into a proper Channel, for it is
not a lordly Impotence, but the King, Lords and Commons of the Realm, that may
drive our alarmed Colonies farther into Thraldom, or restore and protect our
Freedom. A bad Ministry might project our present Grievances, but could not
drive us authoritatively into them; and when the Excitements of Injurious
Ministers can justify parliamentary Oppression, the Instigations of the Devil,
of other artfully wicked Impostors, or even an impulsive Depravity itself, may
justify all Kinds of Offenses, and permit Immorality, Anarchy and Ruin to rage
inculpably throughout the great Commonwealth of Mankind.

This explicit Reasoning may be called abusive by incorrigible Delinquents, but
it is surely very far from being so; and a moral Deformity should be
occasionally exposed, when a natural one is compassionately covered, for that
is a proper Object of Disgrace, and this of Pity; and when the former is
rendered detestable, it may instantly be exchanged for Beauty, but the latter
cannot be so advantageously bartered away. My Expressions are very open on this
provoking Occasion, and yet I would not wilfully offend any of my Superiors,
nor even the least or worst of the human Race; but as I treat indirect
Proceedings and their Authors very freely, I expect my Observations will
displease many in this passionate Age, but that is far from being their real
Intent, and I think they should produce much nobler Effects.

I have only been expediently open according to my own Conceptions, and all my
Freedom is doubtless very justifiable, however it may be taken, if it has but
sufficient argumentative Sanctions, as well as Truth to support it; and as
certainly blameable if it has them not, how just soever it may be in itself.
Men view their pernicious Conduct very partially whenever they do wrong through
Mistake or Design, and therefore reproving Freedom should not only have a just
Foundation, but have its solid Basis rendered apparent, else a greater or
lesser Degree of Resentment instead of proper Convictions, and the moral Fruit
of them will probably and almost certainly repay it.

Even very generous Unbelivers of a moral Disposition will be excited to curse
rather than bless our ardent Divines, when such illuminated Worthies with a
burning Zeal, angry Brow, glowing Cheeks, a priestly Authority, and great
Anxiety for their Welfare, threaten Damnation for slighting a very
Sanctimonious priestly Jargon about our holy Sacraments, Grace, Election,
Faith, Works, Law, Gospel, Jews, Gentiles, Adam, Christ Man's Fall, our
Impotence through it, Original Sin, imputed Righteousness, Justification,
Sanctification, and Satisfaction through the Blood, Sufferings and Merits of
the Messiah; for however sacred such Articles of Faith may be, yet what
understanding Creature will cordially brook Threats of Ruin, or even but a
stern Reproof itself, for disbelieving them, before he can see how they may be
rationally assented to, and conscientiously honored? I shall not Blasheme such
Doctrines deistically, and thus offend their sanctified Guardians, however I
may doubt their Divinity sometimes, for I know they are the very Quintessence
of Protestantisim, after all the Refinements of our boasted Reformation; but my
present Purpose enjoins me to say, they are only honored by inspired Guides
and implicit Belivers, as no other Person is able to view their Reasonableness.

According to my Ideas, trying Symbols and Figures must ever attend on a State
of Divine Probation, but can by no Means conceive how true Teachers can found
Doctrines upon them, utterly repugnant to all the Plain Laws of God, and the
Dictates of his Monitor in Probationers, and how wise moral Agents can piously
assent to such Tenets or be damned for the contrary. I think also Bible Figures
will be soon defined, according to the Law of a reasonable Faith; and that pure
mortifying Documents will not be duly revered, while the most sacred Priestly
Absurdities are ever so devoutly mixed with them; nor can I even see the very
Foundation of a modern Orthodoxy, or how the Messiah could bear the Sins of the
World atoningly; but can easily conceive how that just and gallant Youth might
suffer for the unjust, as a Soul convicting Precedent, and noble Pattern of
invincible Purity. I cannot see how our Creator can possibly require or accept
such Satisfaction; and should I even believe both undoubtedly, I could not
perceive any Propriety in such Doctrine, or how the Sufferings of one Man could
make adequate Satisfaction for the Sins of all Mankind; and I suppose our
Advocates for such a Propitiation, even the most extravagant of them, will
hardly say the Divine Nature suffered. The Code of Probation is tryingly
veiled, and letter Teachers, Antichristian Apostles, may very piously wrest its
sacred Figures, but never expound them according to the Law of a vital Faith.

Open scriptural Ethics unanimously require a legal Submission, correspondent
to the Law of my Conscience, and my Ideas of God's moral Attributes; so what
counter Doctrine even from an Angel may reasonably induce me to think
otherwise, and to lay the Stress of Salvation upon any other Thing. Can I
rationally honor such Lectures, whenever so confidently preached by the most
famous saintish Babblers, brim full of an Antichristian Orthodoxy; and not only
much inspired with Latin and Greek, but greatly illuminated also by a pious
Conceit or Enthusiasm, and a very hallowed Bigotry, or even by the Archbishop
of Canterbury himself, under the most awful Pontifical Sanctions, after his
Grace, as a Protestant Doctor, has enjoined me to read and honor our plain
Bible Statutes? A true Answer to such Questions, may not be very favorable to
the best established Religion upon Earth, or its most celebrated Guardians; and
were priestly Mysteries ever so divine, yet while I deem them to be impious, I
can neither sincerely honor them, nor Threats or Censure for contemning them,
for no Person can sincerely honor Offensive Reproof or Threatenings but what he
conceives ought to be revered.

I hope my Freedom will be approved by every impartial Reader that weighs my
Reasonings; but should all my free Expressions stand naked, perhaps not only
the most generous Lords and Commons I have presumed to censure, but all the
rest of my wisest Readers, would even blush at them, as scurrilous Invectives,
full of Turpitude, and yet in that Condition, like a modest naked Woman, they
would even be as chaste as they are now, when abundantly clothed with good
rustic Arguments, which shows the justest Reproof should be sufficiently
dressed, and never make its Appearance without documental Garments.

We frequently hear Damnation authoritatively denounced from the Pulpit, for a
persevering Contempt of mystical priestly Dogma's, which seem very feasible to
implicit Believers, but even quite absurd to considerate Persons of
Understanding; and a good Man may indeed reprove freely without adequately
showing his Reasons, upon a Supposition the culpable Party fully knows them;
but let me tell our most famous censuring Divines, as well as their Hearers,
yea even those adorned with Mitres themselves, that no truly wise Man can
proceed so imprudently, for let his own Ideas of any Offense be ever so just,
and his Charges ever so uprightly adapted to them, yet the latter, instead of
giving proper Convictions, will more or less offend the censured Person, while
their Reality, or even Fitness, is concealed from his View. These Conclusions
are evidently just, and should I have been guilty of such common Errors, I
might keep myself in Countenance, by pointing out similar Mistakes in many
famous Writers, but that would not change the Nature of my own, so Reparation
of Course should be made for them, when reasonably demanded by proper
Exhibitions; but not such Reparation as perverse Carpers may call for.

I should not abuse the meanest of my fellow Creatures, nor cringe to the
greatest unconscientiously; and as infectious Weeds grow rankest in a rich
Soil, I have faithfully endeavored to expel a very poisonous Delusion many
British Lords and Commons have fondly imbibed; and however offensive my strong
Antidote may be, yet I think it is but an adequate Remedy, judiciously and
uprightly administered, and that I should not therefore ask Pardon of the
greatest Peer in England, nor even of King George himself, before I can see a
moral Reason for it. I know very little Creatures, puffed up with Pride,
Flattery, Affluence, Success, or even but a false Peace itself, while the
contrary waits on their much greater Reprehenders, will proudly resent just
Reproof, very prudently extended, and even demand Satisfaction for it with a
lofty Brow; but surely the greatest Monarchs, rather than God's inherent
Monitor, should ever be displeased by moral Agents let the temporal Consequence
be ever so grievous.

I may incur the Displeasure of haughty Mortals, but not of really great Men,
if Truth, Decency, and clear Reasoning always accompany my Freedom; and
nominally great Men, without essential Greatness, are not only proper Objects
of such allayed Freedom as mine, but even of the keenest decent Satyr can reach
them; for indirect Proceedings are much more hurtful and blameable in Princes,
Noblemen, Philosophers, and Divines, than they can possibly be in uncultivated
Peasants, of a trifling Judgment and Influence. A common Gentleman, or to speak
more properly, a Person that might really be one, may even deserve a severe
moral Censure, for what a Dunce should be pitied; and when nominally great Men
proceed indirectly, they should ever be more keenly reprehended than the
Vulgar, but in a very different Manner, for as the latter have very gross
Perceptions, as well as rude Passions, they must often be very roughly treated,
and even filled with intimidating Terror, ere they sufficiently view an
offensive Picture of their Conduct, or properly attend to the best Admoniton;
and the former should be occasionally moved in a gentler or sharper Method, by
the fair Dint of Reason alone. Plain Dealing also is absolutely necessary on
this Occasion, for when great Men ramble fondly after Prejudice, they hate to
think they are going astray, and blindly gadding after a soothing Delusion; so
rarely return from such favorite Wanderings, before they and their evil
Tendency are explicitly disclosed. After Men of Ability wed gratifying Error,
they are very unwilling to be divorced from it, or to think it even capable of
jilting them, as some of my understanding Readers, and even perhaps some of our
Prelates themselves, may too shortly and evidently evince.

According to these Ideas, I have endeavored to place the Subject in a true
Light, so far as I have handled it, and to give our Superiors such open
Conviction, through very explicit Arguments, as may reasonably excite them to
redress our Grievances, and abhor such Abuses of Power for the future, but
would not designedly offend one of them by my very freest Expressions, which I
think only represent Matters justly, and even for so laudable a Purpose, as
that of re-uniting Great Britain and her much disturbed Colonies, in the sacred
Bands of a perpetual Amity; nor will any Person decry my Explicitness, that
would have duly honored a less Display. By suitable Reasonings, I may
argumentatively influence the Parliament, according to our ardent Desire, but
could not possibly bully it into Compliance, should I even stupidly attempt it;
and we should not wilfully exasperate it against us. The greatest moral Agents
should honor Freedom they have rendered necessary, and no truly great Man can
ever resent Plain Dealing, which the great Part of his own Nature cannot
explode. Indeed, as frail Probationers, your wise and rigidly chaste Virgins,
which disdain to gratify licentious Passions, and nobly control each impure
Excitement, may have the same natural Desire, that others meanly follow to the
vilest Prostitution, and the greatest Men may feel irregular Emotions, in very
uncommon Trials, but cannot ignobly give them an injurious Vent.

I have wandered surprisingly from the Tract of learned Writers, and have
therefore had Recourse to apologizing Observations, which, I think, may
reasonably prevent mischievous Constructions; and surely the pertinent Freedom
of this little significant Pamphlet should not only be freely excused, but even
greatly approved, by every Reader of Judgment, and I hope no generous British
Senator can possibly resent it, but deem it expedient and suitable to the
Occasion.

The Subject is surely a very great one, and not beneath the serious Attention
of the greatest British Peer, nor even of Caesar himself, when placed on his
august Throne, with a glorious Crown upon his Head, and all his princely Nobles
about him; nor should my Observations upon it, though unlearned ones, be
utterly contemned by any of them. I have endeavored to mix Loyalty,
Patriotism, and expediently free Reasonings properly together, and should not
have been so explicit, had less Plainess seemed adequate to my great Purpose,
and sufficient to raise necessary Convictions, in Spite of a reluctant
Prejudice. Nor can I be justly obnoxious to Censure, for interspersing
Religious Hints with political Arguments, while our Divines have a Share in the
British Legislature, for that Establishment greatly countenances such a Mixture.

My Balls fly not generally at the base Designs of a Single Mr. Grenville, but
of a menacing Evil of a much higher Nature, for I had much rather slay a
Parliamentary Despotism, than spend my Ammunition against the Malevolence of an
impotent Swaggerer. I would not hang or burn him in Effigy, as the potent
Oppressor of our Colonies, nor take his Life as an impenitent Offender, but
spare the haughty Criminal Time for Repentance, though perhaps to no Purpose.

I cannot always honor old Maxims, for some of them are but very poor Ones;
and I think new Ones, awfully superior, will soon be ushered into a secure
World, when it never less suspected them, and even without the great Assistance
of a Bishopprick, a priestly Illumination, or a scholastic Omnisciency, and
not only from a Person very unlikely to spread them, but also from a Place the
the most unlikely to produce them, according to the Ideas of earthly Gods.
These are my deep rooted Conceptions, and I know not how they may fare abroad,
but have Reason to fear many Sages will treat them as idle sanatical Notions;
for my understanding Neighbors have long contemned them, and me for adhering
blindly to such Whims, as Men of too profound Judgment to mind either; and as I
could not drive their powerful Contempt away, I seemed generally to be
insensible of it, as a Person having Ears that could not hear, and Eyes that
could not see, but secretly cherished my Sort of Vanity, according to the
Custom of such conceited Bigots, and never thought them altogether so wise, nor
myself quite so foolish as their Words and Behavior denoted. They or I have
wandered strangely, and perhaps these Lines may show some of my Readers which
Party has blindly and proudly roamed.

My Arguments now draw near a Conclusion, and I think every Member of our high
Court of Parliament, by condescending to weigh them deliberately, may clearly
view the Irregularity of the Stamp-Tax, and the shocking Tendency of any Sort
of arbitrary Proceedings, even in many important Respects, and that loyal
Americans cannot be taxed at Home, under any Pretense whatever, without a
manifest Outrage against their constitutional Rights. The idle Pretense of our
being represented in Parliament, the fictitious Right founded upon it, and the
wretched Policy which contended for them, must now appear utterly contemptible
to all that will view their naked Deformity, as far as it is faithfully
exhibited by this Picture; and yet it cannot even be coulourably disputed, but
the Crown should have its reasonable Demands occasionally granted, as soon at
least as our own Delegates can do it on a regular Plan, which no doubt is a
Matter of very great Consequence, that should be maturely considered and timely
effected. Were but our numerous Colonies wisely united, for that very momentous
Purpose, their own American Parliament, extracted from Provincial Assemblies,
might constitutionally weigh his Majesty's Requisitions, when occasionally
convened, and dutifully honor all his reasonable Demands, without arbitrary
Impositions, partial Exemptions, or unreasonable Burdens.

Thus public Evils might nor only be regularly prevented, but a great Utility
as cordially advanced throughout all the dangerous and favorable Vicissitudes
of perpetual Ages, according to the genuine Dictates of a constitutional
Policy; for as I have formerly shown, every valuable Occupation in our
extensive Empire, has a considerable Number of Voters, and while all them
various Callings are duly favored by wise and faithful Delegates, every Member
of each Vocation which cannot elect them, is virtually represented and
befriended, and should consequently be taxed by them, for the Encouragement and
Support of a public Welfare, which promotes his own private Benefits, and
renders them secure. Upon such a wholesome Establishment, good Monarchs, and
faithful Representatives of loyal Subjects, might not only proceed very
harmoniously, but lay each other under mutual Obligations of a sovereign
Nature, and always promote a public Weal by the most natural Kind of moral
Policy: And should British Lords and Commons yet lay Impositions upon us, and
thus render the Grants of the Crown despicable, under a Pretense of advancing
the royal Prerogative, I know no legislative Vestments they can now tax us
under, as their fine parliamentary Cloak of a virtual Representation is even
irreparably rended in Pieces. The Power of an English Legislature may soon
oppress us, and perhaps drive us into Bondage at Length, but a constitutional
Justice cannot authorize it to tax us, nor true Policy lead it to any Kind of
arbitrary Proceedings, as my unlearned Pen has briefly demonstrated, and might
much more illustrate by expatiating greatly; so well may learned ones render it
conspicuous.

I have now closed my open Observations on this important Subject, and I hope
every judicious Reader of Candor will approve them, notwithstanding my soaring
Freedom and Censure; for trifling will not do on such alarming Emergencies. Our
Freedom is not only much wounded already, by a potent Ambition, but is even in
great Danger of being entirely murdered by it, unless adequate Efforts prevent
its threatened Destruction; and I have not only provided many valuable Materials
for a strong Fortress to defend it, but have also dug deep, cleared away the
Rubbish, and laid its Foundation surely on a very commanding Eminence: So let
proper Artists speedily and formidably finish it, even according to the best
Laws of Fortification.

The END.

