CONSIDERATIONS ON PURE WISDOM, AND HUMAN POLICY; ON LABOR; ON SCHOOLS; And on
the RIGHT USE of the LORD'S OUTWARD GIFTS.

By JOHN WOOLMAN.

The Wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy
to be entreated, full of Mercy, and good Fruits, without Partiality, and
without Hypocrisy, JAMES iii. 17. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by D. HALL, and W.
SELLERS, at the New Printing-Office, opposite the Jersey Market. 1768.

INTRODUCTION.
MY mind has often been affected with sorrow, on account of the prevailing of
that spirit, which leads from an humble waiting on the inward teaching of
Christ, to pursue ways of living, attended with unnecessary labor, and which
draws forth the minds of many people to seek after outward power, and to strive
for riches, which frequently introduce oppression, and bring forth wars and
grievous calamities.

It is with reverence that I acknowledge the mercies of our heavenly Father,
who, in infinite love, did visit me in my youth, and wrought a belief in me,
that through true obedience a state of inward purity may be known in this life,
in which we may love mankind in the same love with which our Redeemer loves
us, and therein learn resignation to endure hardships, for the real good of
others.

While the eye is single, the whole body is full of light, Matt. vi. 22; but
for want of this, selfish desires, and an imaginary superiority, darken the
mind; hence injustice frequently proceeds; and where this is the case, to
convince the judgment, is the most effectual remedy.

Where violent measures are pursued in opposing injustice, the passions, and
resentments, of the injured, frequently operate in the prosecution of their
designs; and after conflicts productive of very great calamities, the minds of
contending parties often remain as little acquainted with the pure principle of
divine love, as they were before; but where people walk in that pure light in
which all their works are wrought in God, John iii. 21, and under oppression
persevere in the meek spirit, and abide firm in the cause of truth, without
actively complying with oppressive demands, through those the Lord has often
manifested his power, in opening the understandings of others, to the promoting
righteousness in the earth.

A time, I believe, is coming, wherein this divine work will so spread and
prevail, that Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, nor learn war any
more, Isaiah ii. And as we, through the tender mercies of God, do feel that
this precious work is begun, I am concerned to encourage my brethren and
sisters in a holy care and diligence, that each of us may so live, under the
sanctifying power of truth, as to be redeemed from all unnecessary cares; that
our eye being single to him, no customs, however prevalent, which are contrary
to the wisdom from above, may hinder us from faithfully following his holy
leadings, in whatsoever he may graciously appoint for us.

On PURE WISDOM, and HUMAN POLICY.
TO have our trust settled in the Lord, and not to seek after, nor desire
outward treasures, any further than his holy spirit leads us therein, is a
happy state, as says the prophet, Blessed is the man that trusts in the
Lord, and whose hope the Lord is.

Pure wisdom leads people into lowliness of mind, in which they learn
resignation to the divine will, and contentment in suffering for his cause,
when they cannot keep a clear conscience without suffering.

In this pure wisdom the mind is attentive to the root, and original spring of
motions and desires, and as we know the Lord to be our refuge, and find no
safety, but in humbly walking before him, we feel an holy engagement, that
every desire which leads therefrom may be brought to judgment.

While we proceed in this precious way, and find arden longings for a full
deliverance from every thing which defiles, all prospects of gain, that are not
consistent with the wisdom from above, are considered as snares, and an inward
concern is felt, that we may live under the cross, and faithfully attend to
that holy spirit, which is sufficient to preserve out of them.

When I have considered that saying of Christ, Matt. vi. 19, Lay not up for
yourselves treasures upon earth, his omnipotence has often occurred to my mind.

While we believe that he is every where present with his people, and that
perfect goodness, wisdom and power, are united in him, how comfortable is the
consideration.

Our wants may be great, but his power is greater. We may be oppressed and
despised, but he is able to turn our patient sufferings into profit to
ourselves, and to the advancement of his work on earth. His people, who feel
the power of his cross, to crucify all that is selfish in them, who are engaged
in outward concerns, from a convincement that it is their duty, and resign
themselves, and their treasures, to him; these feel that it is dangerous to
give way to that in us, which craves riches and greatness in this world.

As the heart truly contrite, earnestly desires to know Christ, and the
fellowship of his sufferings, Phil. iii. 10, so far as the Lord for gracious
^nds may lead into them; as such feel that it is their interest to put their
trust in God, and to seek no gain but that which he, by his holy spirit, leads
into; so, on the contrary, they who do not reverently wait for this divine
teacher, and are not humbly concerned, according to their measure, to fill up
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ, Col. i. 24, in patiently
suffering for the promoting righteousness in the earth; but have an eye toward
the power of men, and the outward advantage of wealth, these are often
attentive to those employments which appear profitable, even though the gains
arise from such trade and business which proceeds from the workings of that
spirit, which is estranged from the self-denying life of an humble contrite
Christian.

While I write on this subject, I feel my mind tenderly affected toward those
honestly disposed people, who have been brought up in employments attended with
those difficulties.

To such I may say, in the feeling of our heavenly Father's love, and number
myself with you, O that our eyes may be single to the Lord! may we reverently
wait on him for strength, to lay aside all unnecessary expense of every kind,
and learn contentment, in a plain simple life.

May we, in lowliness, submit to the leadings of his spirit, and enter upon any
outward employ which he graciously points out to us, and then whatever
difficulties arise, in consequence of our faithfulness, I trust they will work
for our good.

Small treasure to a resigned mind is sufficient. How happy is it to be content
with a little, to live in humility, and feel that in us, which breathes out
this language, Abba! Father.

If that, called the wisdom of this world, had no resemblance of true wisdom,
the name of wisdom, I suppose, had not been given to it.

As wasting outward substance, to gratify vain desires, on one hand; so
slothfulness and neglect, on the other, do often involve men and their families
in trouble, and reduce them to want and distress; to shun both these opposite
vices, is good in itself, and has a resemblance of wisdom; but while people
thus provident, have it principally in view to get riches, and power, and the
friendship of this world, and do not humbly wait for the spirit of truth to
lead them in purity; these, through an anxious care to obtain the end desired,
reach forth for gain in worldly wisdom, and, in regard to their inward state,
fall into diverse temptations and snares. And though such may think of applying
wealth to good purposes, and to use their power to prevent oppression, yet
wealth and power is often applied otherwise; nor can we depart from the
leadings of our holy shepherd, without going into confusion.

Great wealth is frequently attended with power, which nothing but divine love
can qualify the mind to use rightly; and as to the humility, and uprightness of
our children after us, how great is the uncertainty! If, in acquiring wealth,
we take hold on the wisdom which is from beneath, and depart from the leadings
of truth, and example our children herein, we have great cause to apprehend,
that wealth may be a snare to them; and prove an injury to others, over whom
their wealth may give them power.

To be redeemed from that wisdom which is from beneath, and walk in the light
of the Lord, is a precious situation; thus his people are brought to put their
trust in him; and in this humble confidence in his wisdom, goodness and power,
the righteous find a refuge in adversities, superior to the greatest outward
helps, and a comfort more certain than any worldly advantages can afford.

On LABOR.
HAVING from my childhood been used to bodily labor for a living, I may
express my experience therein.

Right exercise affords an innocent pleasure in the time of it, and prepares us
to enjoy the sweetness of rest; but from the extremes each way, arise
inconveniences.

Moderate exercise opens the pores, gives the blood a lively circulation, and
the better enables us to judge rightly respecting that portion of labor which
is the true medium.

The fowls of the Air sow not, nor gather into barns, yet our heavenly father
feeds them, Matt. vi. 26; nor do I believe that infinite goodness and power
would have allotted labor to us, had he not seen that labor was proper for us
in this life.

The original design, and true medium of labor, is a subject that, to me,
appears worthy of our serious consideration.

Idle men are often a burden to themselves, neglect the duty they owe to their
families, and become burdensome to others also.

As outward labor, directed by the wisdom from above, tends to our health, and
adds to our happiness in this life; so, on the contrary, entering upon it in a
selfish spirit, and pursuing it too long, or too hard, has a contrary effect.

I have observed, that too much labor not only makes the understanding dull,
but so intrudes upon the harmony of the body, that after ceasing from our toil,
we have another to pass through, before we can be so composed as to enjoy the
sweetness of rest.

From too much labor in the heat, frequently proceeds immoderate sweats, which
do often, I believe, open the way for disorders, and impair our constitutions.

When we go beyond the true medium, and feel weariness approaching, but think
business may suffer if we cease, at such a time spirituous liquors are
frequently taken, with a view to support nature under these fatigues.

I have found that too much labor in the summer heats the blood, that taking
strong drink to support the body under such labor, increases that heat, and
though a person may be so far temperate as not to manifest the least disorder,
yet the mind, in such a circumstance, does not retain that calmness and
serenity which we should endeavor to live in.

Thus toiling in the heat, and drinking strong liquor, makes men more resolute,
and less considerate, and tends very much to disqualify from successfully
following him who is meek and low of heart.

As laying out business, more than is consistent with pure wisdom, is an evil,
so this evil frequently leads into more. Too much business leads to hurry. In
the hurry and toil too much strong drink is often used, and hereby many proceed
to noise and wantonness, and some, though more considerate, do often suffer loss,
as to a true composedness of mind.

I feel sincere desires in my heart that no rent, nor interest, might be laid
so high as to be a snare to tenants. That no desires of gain may draw any too
far in business. That no cares to support customs, which have not their
foundation in pure wisdom, may have place in our minds, but that we may build
on the sure foundation, and feel our holy shepherd to lead us, who alone is
able to preserve us, and bring forth from every thing which defiles.

Having several times, in my travels, had opportunity to observe the labor and
manner of life of great numbers of slaves, it appears to me that the true
medium is lamentably neglected by many, who assign them their portion of labor.

Without saying much at this time, concerning buying and selling men for term
of life, who have as just a right to liberty as we have; nor about the great
miseries, and effusion of blood, consequent to promoting the slave trade, and
to speak as favorably as may be, with regard to continuing those in bondage
who are amongst us, we cannot say there is no partiality in it; for whatever
tenderness may be manifested by individuals in their life time toward them, yet
for people to be transmitted from a man to his posterity, in the helpless
condition of slaves, appears inconsistent with the nature of the gospel spirit.
From such proceedings it often follows, that persons in the decline of life,
are deprived of moneys equitably due to them, and committed to the care, and
subjected to the absolute power of young unexperienced men, who know but little
about the weakness of old age, nor understand the language of declining life.

Where parents give their estates to their children, and then depend on them
for a maintenance, they sometimes meet with great inconveniences; but if the
power of possession, thus obtained, does often reverse the obligations of
gratitude and filial duty, and makes manifest, that youth are often ignorant of
the language of old age, how hard is the case of ancient Negroes, who, deprived
of the wages equitably due to them, are left to young people, who have been
used to look upon them as their inferiors.

For men to behold the fruits of their labor withheld from them, and possessed
by others, and in old age find themselves destitute of those comfortable
accommodations, and that tender regard which their time of life requires:

When they feel pains, and stiffness in their joints and limbs, weakness of
appetite, and that a little labor is wearisome, and still behold themselves in
the neglected uncomfortable condition of a slave, and oftentimes to a young
unsympathising man:

For men to be thus treated from one generation to another, who, besides their
own distresses, think on the slavery entailed on their posterity, and are
grieved! what disagreeable thoughts must they have of the professed followers
of Jesus! and how must their groans ascend to that almighty being, who will be
a refuge for the oppressed, Psalm ix. 9.

On SCHOOLS.
Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such
is the kingdom of God, Mark x. 14.

To encourage children to do things with a view to get praise of men, to me
appears an obstruction to their being inwardly acquainted with the spirit of
truth. For it is the work of the Holy Spirit to direct the mind to God, that in
all our proceedings we may have a single eye to him. To give alms in secret, to
fast in secret, and labor to keep clear of that disposition reproved by our
Savior, All their works which they do is for to be seen of men, Matt. xxiii. 5.

That divine light which enlightens all men, I believe, does often shine in the
minds of children very early, and to humbly wait for wisdom, that our conduct
toward them may tend to forward their acquaintance with it, and strengthen them
in obedience thereto, appears to me to be a duty on all of us.

By cherishing the spirit of pride, and the love of praise in them, I believe
they may sometimes improve faster in learning, than otherwise they would, but
to take measures to forward children in learning, which naturally tend to
divert their minds from true humility, appears to me to savor of the wisdom of
this world.

If tutors are not acquainted with sanctification of spirit, nor experienced in
an humble waiting for the leadings of truth, but follow the maxims of the
wisdom of this world, such children who are under their tuition, appear to me
to be in danger of imbibing thoughts, and apprehensions, reverse to that
meekness, and lowliness of heart, which is necessary for all the true followers
of Christ.

Children at an age fit for schools, are in a time of life which requires the
patient attention of pious people, and if we commit them to the tuition of
such, whose minds we believe are not rightly prepared to train them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord, we are in danger of not acting the part of
faithful parents toward them; for our heavenly father does not require us to do
evil, that good may come of it; and it is needful that we deeply examine
ourselves, lest we get entangled in the wisdom of this world, and, through
wrong apprehensions, take such methods in education, as may prove a great
injury to the minds of our children.

It is a lovely sight to behold innocent children! and when they are sent to
such schools where their tender minds are in imminent danger of being led
astray by tutors, who do not live a self-denying life, or by the conversation
of such children who do not live in innocence, it is a case much to be lamented.

While a pious tutor has the charge of no more children than he can take due
care of, and keeps his authority in the truth, the good spirit in which he
leads and governs, works on the minds of such who are not hardened, and his
labors not only tend to bring them forward in outward learning, but to open
their understandings with respect to the true christian life; but where a
person has charge of too many, and his thoughts and time are so much employed
in the outward affairs of his school, that he does not so weightily attend to
the spirit and conduct of each individual, as to be enabled to administer
rightly to all in due season; through such emission he not only suffers, as to
the state of his own mind, but the minds of the children are in danger of
suffering also.

To watch the spirit of children, to nurture them in gospel love, and labor to
help them against that which would mar the beauty of their minds, is a debt we
owe them; and a faithful performance of our duty, not only tends to their
lasting benefit, and our own peace, but also to render their company agreeable
to us.

Instruction, thus administered, reaches the pure witness in the minds of such
children who are not hardened, and begets love in them toward those who thus
lead them on; but where too great a number are committed to a tutor, and he,
through much cumber, omits a careful attention to the minds of children, there
is danger of disorders gradually increasing amongst them, till the effects
thereof appear in their conduct, too strong to be easily remedied.

A care has lived on my mind, that more time might be employed by parents at
home, and by tutors at school, in weightily attending to the spirit and
inclinations of children, and that we may so lead, instruct, and govern them,
in this tender part of life, that nothing may be omitted in our power, to help
them on their way to become the children of our father, who is in heaven.

Meditating on the situation of schools in our provinces, my mind has, at
times, been affected with sorrow, and under these exercises it has appeared to
me, that if those who have large estates, were faithful stewards, and laid no
rent, nor interest, nor other demand, higher than is consistent with universal
love, and those in lower circumstances would, under a moderate employ, shun
unnecessary expense, even to the smallest article; and all unite in humbly
seeking to the Lord, he would graciously instruct us, and strengthen us, to
relieve the youth from various snares, in which many of them are entangled.

On the RIGHT USE of the LORD'S OUTWARD GIFTS.
As our understandings are opened by the pure light, we experience that,
through an inward approaching to God, the mind is strengthened in obedience;
and that by gratifying those desires which are not of his begetting, those
approaches to him are obstructed, and the deceivable spirit gains strength.

These truths, being as it were engraven upon our hearts, and our everlasting
interest in Christ evidently concerned herein, we become fervently engaged,
that nothing may be nourished which tends to feed pride or self-love in us.
Thus in pure obedience, we are not only instructed in our duty to God, but also
in the affairs which necessarily relate to this life, and the spirit of truth
which guides into all truth, leavens the mind with a pious concern, that
whatsoever we do in word or deed, may be done in his name, Col. iii. 17.

Hence such buildings, furniture, food, and raiment, as best answer our
necessities, and are the least likely to feed that selfish spirit which is our
enemy, are the most acceptable to us.

In this state the mind is tender, and inwardly watchful, that the love of gain
draw us not into any business, which may weaken our love to our heavenly
father, or bring unnecessary trouble to any of his creatures.

Thus the way gradually opens to cease from that spirit which craves riches and
things fetched far, which so mixeth with the customs of this world, and so
intrudes upon the true harmony of life, that the right medium of labor is very
much departed from. And as the minds of people are settled in a steady concern,
not to hold nor possess any thing but what may be held consistent with the
wisdom from above, they consider what they possess as the gift of God, and are
inwardly exercised, that in all parts of their conduct they may act agreeable
to the nature of the peaceable government of Christ.

A little supports such a life; and in a state truly resigned to the Lord, the
eye is single, to see what outward employ he leads into, as a means of our
subsistence, and a lively care is maintained to hold to that without launching
further.

There is a harmony in the several parts of this divine work in the hearts of
people; he who leads them to cease from those gainful employments, carried on
in that wisdom which is from beneath, delivers also from the desire after
worldly greatness, and reconciles the mind to a life so plain, that a little
does suffice.

Here the real comforts of life are not lessened. Moderate exercise, in the way
of true wisdom, is pleasant both to mind and body.

Food and raiment sufficient, though in the greatest simplicity, is accepted
with content and gratitude.

The mutual love, subsisting between the faithful followers of Christ, is more
pure than that friendship which is not seasoned with humility, how specious
soever the appearance.

Where people depart from pure wisdom in one case, it is often an introduction
to depart from it in many more; and thus a spirit which seeks for outward
greatness, and leads into worldly wisdom to attain it, and support it, gets
possession of the mind.

In beholding the customary departure from the true medium of labor, and that
unnecessary toil which many go through, in supporting outward greatness, and
procuring delicacies:

In beholding how the true calmness of life is changed into hurry, and that
many, by eagerly pursuing outward treasure, are in great danger of withering as
to the inward state of the mind:

In meditating on the works of this spirit, and on the desolations it makes
amongst the professors of christianity, I may thankfully acknowledge, that I
often feel pure love beget longings in my heart, for the exaltation of the
peaceable kingdom of Christ, and an engagement to labor according to the gift
bestowed on me, for the promoting an humble, plain, temperate way of living. A
life where no unnecessary cares, nor expenses, may encumber our minds, nor
lessen our ability to do good; where no desires after riches, or greatness, may
lead into hard dealing; where no connections with worldly minded men, may abate
our love to God, nor weaken a true zeal for righteousness. A life, wherein we
may diligently labor for resignedness to do, and suffer, whatever our heavenly
father may allot for us, in reconciling the world to himself.

When the prophet Isaiah had uttered his vision, and declared that a time was
coming wherein swords should be beat into plowshares, and spears into pruning
hooks, and that nation should not lift up sword against nation, nor learn war
any more; he immediately direct the minds of people to the divine teacher, in
this remarkable language, O house Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the light
the Lord, Isaiah ii. 5.

To wait for the direction of this light, in all temporal as well as spiritual
concerns, appears necessary; for if in any case we enter lightly into temporal
affairs, without feeling this spirit of truth to open our way therein, and
through the love of this world proceed on, and seek for gain by that business
or traffic, which is not of the father, but of the world, 1 John ii. 16, we
fail in our testimony to the purity and peace of his government; and get into
that which is for chastisement.

This matter has lain heavy on my mind, it being evident, that a life less
humble, less simple and plain, than that which Christ leads his sheep into,
does necessarily require a support, which pure wisdom does not provide for;
hence there is no probability of our being a peculiar people, so zealous of
good works, as to have no fellowship with works of darkness, Titus ii. 14.
Ephesians. v. 11, while we have wants to supply which have their foundation in
custom, and do not come within the meaning of those expressions, your heavenly
father knows that ye have need of ^ll these things, Matt. vi. 32.

These things which he beholds necessary (...) his people, he fails not to give
them in his own way, and time; but as his ways are above our ways, and his
thoughts above our thoughts, so imaginary wants are different from these things
which be knows that we have need of.

As my meditations have been on these things, compassion has filled my heart
toward my fellow creatures, involved in customs grown up in the wisdom of this
world, which is foolishness with God, 1 Cor. iii. 19; and O that the youth may
be so thoroughly experienced in an humble walking before the Lord, that they
may be his children, and know him to be their refuge, their safe unfailing
refuge! through the various dangers attending this uncertain state of being.

If those whose minds are redeemed from the love of wealth, and who are content
with a plain, simple way of living, do yet find that to conduct the affairs of
a family, without giving countenance to unrighteous proceedings, or having
fellowship with works of darkness, the most diligent care is necessary:

If customs, distinguishable from universa^ righteousness, and opposite to the
true sel^ denying life, are now prevalent, and (...) mixed with trade, and with
almost (...) employ, that it is only through hu^^^ waiting on the inward
guidance of (...) that we may reasonably hope to walk (...) and support an
uniform testimony to the peaceable government of Christ:

If this be the case, how lamentably do they expose themselves to temptations,
who give way to the love of riches, conform to expensive living, and reach
forth for gain, to support customs, which our holy shepherd leads not into.

The END.

