Mr. SALTER'S ELECTION SERMON, MAY 12th, 1768.

A SERMON, Preached before the General Assembly Of the Colony of CONNECTICUT,
At HARTFORD, ON THE DAY OF THEIR Anniversary ELECTION, May 12 th, 1768.

By Richard Salter, A. M. PASTOR of the First Church of CHRIST in Mansfield.

NEW LONDON: Printed by TIMOTHY GREEN, Printer to the Governor and Company.
M,DCC,LXVIII.

AT a General Assembly of the Colony of CONNECTICUT, holden at Hartford, in
said Colony, on the Second Thursday of May, Anno Domini, 1768.
ORDERED, That SHUBAEL CONANT, Esquire; and Capt. SAMUEL GURLEY, return the Thanks
of this Assembly to the Rev'd Mr. RICHARD SALTER, for his SERMON delivered
before the Assembly on the 12 th Instant, and desire a Copy thereof, that it
may be Printed.

GEORGE WYLLYS, Secr'y.

An Election SERMON.
ESTHER X. 3. FOR Mordecai the Jew, was next unto King Ahasuerus, and great
among the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking the
wealth of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed.
THE words now read, present to our view, true patriotism, and public happiness
in the closest connection therewith; not in theory, but really existent, in the
character and administration of Mordecai the Jew, under the king Ahasuerus.

LONG had the jews enjoyed peace and quiet, during the successive reigns of
several Persian princes, who were as famous for their moderation, as for the
successes of their arms, the extent of their empire, or the grandeur of their
courts: when Haman, a descendant of Agag, a former devoted king of the cursed
Amalekites, by the united influence, of his riches, and his craft, became the
favorite of the king Ahasuerus, and was promoted to be prime minister of state.

AMIDST all his glory, he had the mortification, to be treated with a
conscientious neglect, and scorn, by Mordecai a Jew; whose highest employment,
was that of a porter to the king's palace. This filled the haughty breast of
Haman with the utmost indignation, and raised the old national enmity, of the
Amalekite, against the Jew to its highest pitch.

NOT contented therefore, with the destruction of Mordecai, and scorning to
reak his revenge on a single object, and of so low a character; he plots the
utter extirpation of the Jews from the empire, to gratify his proud and
malicious resentments: and abusing the confidence of his master, he obtained a
decree for that purpose; which according to the laws of the empire, was
irreversible.

SECURE of carrying his point, he pleased himself with the prospect of the
cruel massacre designed. But it was not long before his cursed plot was
defeated by the prudence and application of Mordecai, and his zeal for the
safety and happiness of his people; together with the address and influence of
Esther his kinswoman, whom he had educated as his child and whose tender mind
he had formed, by the (...) of pure religion, and sincere benevolence to public
usefulness; and who by her graceful and virtuous conduct, as well as singular
beauty, had gained the favor of her prince, and was become his queen.

THE virtue of Mordecai had shone with an agreeable luster in private life, and
in the lower offices of service to his master; who had received a special proof
of his loyalty and fidelity, in the discovery of a treasonable design against
his life. But now Providence was pleased on occasion of Haman's villainy, to
call him forth to more public and extensive usefulness; and give him an
opportunity to display his capacity and his virtue in an exalted station.

IN Haman we see the tyrant in real life; no sooner raised to power, than his
selfishness and ambition, cruelty and revenge burst forth, in spite of reason,
honor and conscience, and in defiance of the most venerable rights, and the
claims of equity and mercy; and he disposes of the liberty, property and lives
of thousands, at pleasure, and in a wantonness of rage beyond description. But
the vengeance of heaven soon awoke to vindicate his people's wrongs; and he
fell a victim thereto, and to the just resentments of his abused prince; before
whom his villainy was exposed, by the prudence of the queen, under the direction
of Mordecai. Thus he dropped into oblivion, like other tyrants, unregretted and
his memory rots.

How strong, and beautiful is the contrast; when on the other hand we view the
character of Mordecai! his capacity, wisdom, and virtue appear amiable in
private, but much more in public life: in his most elevated station he is far
from being elated in his mind above it; and notwithstanding all the temptations
to avarice and ambition, cruelty and revenge, attending so great a transition
and change, in his outward circumstances, the true patriot shines with
distinguishing luster, and discovers a greatness of soul, rising superior to
all the influence of private and selfish passions. And the form of government,
among the Persians, being monarchial, and become quite despotic, rendered the
prudence, moderation and virtue of Mordecai the more conspicuous, and the more
worthy of imitation.

BUT whatever forms of government different nations have been led into, from
their differing genius and circumstances, by which they have consented to give
up their natural rights, into the hands of one or more, it has been done in
trust only: the sole original end and design of which, is therefore the public
happiness. And perhaps each form is equally agreeable to the will of God, and
capable of securing this great design, provided it falls into the hands of a
wise and virtuous administration; whereof methinks the instance of Mordecai is
no small proof. Yet that form of government, in which the liberty, property and
life of the subject, has the strongest security, must be the most eligible, as
it is the most perfect.

SUCH is the happy constitution of Britain and her Colonies, which God long
preserve, against the secret machinations and open attempts of its enemies,
domestic and foreign, who envy her, but especially their increasing greatness,
prosperity, and felicity.

THE character of a good ruler is to be drawn; and the qualifications for this
office and trust, are to be determined, by the great end of government, the
public good: and this is the standard, according to which, rulers are to form
themselves to usefulness, in their advanced stations. And the influence of such
a character and conduct, will be great, to secure the affection and loyalty of
the subject; and to promote the felicity of the whole. My text very naturally
leads us into, and confirms us in this thought.

SUCH was the character of Mordecai; who therefore, in the exercise of his high
authority, not only rendered himself grateful to his prince; but perfectly
ingratiated himself with his people; while he steadily pursued, this great end
of government, the public weal. A character, and conduct like his, can hardly
fail of commanding all that respect and obedience, which is a ruler's due.

MORDECAI was great with the king, being advanced to the highest post of
government under him; and one he delighted to honor. He was equally great with
the people; and by gaining their affections, he secured their allegiance to
their prince, and their obedience to his own administration. The reason of all
this greatness of Mordecai, was the greatness of his own mind, and the
excellency of his government; the whole whereof, was directed to the common
good, and under which, the people felt themselves easy, safe, and happy. For
Mordecai the Jew, was next unto king Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and
accepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking the wealth of his people,
and speaking peace to all his seed.

To decypher the character of a good ruler, from this example; and to show its
force, and influence to secure the confidence, respect and obedience of the
subject, shall be my present business.

FIRST then,

I SHALL take some account of the character of a good ruler, as drawn in the
text.

As the great end of civil government is the public good, capacity, and genius,
wisdom, and prudence, courage and resolution, religion, and virtue, and public
spirit, are the most obvious qualifications of a good ruler, and the most
striking parts of his character, and all together form the true patriot. Such a
one was Mordecai; and such civil rulers ought ever to be, in whose hands the
whole, or the principal concerns of government are betrusted.

IN the first place, Capacity and genius is necessary to the character of a
good ruler.

WITHOUT this, Mordecai could never have rose to that eminency of station, he
was honored with; nor in any measure, have supported the dignity of it; nor
answered the designs of his elevation. And how can the ends of government be
attained, without a genius, and capacity suited thereto? when the lowest office
in life can never be well discharged, without talents answerable to its nature,
and design. Men's abilities, must be as extensive as their authority, to
preserve the dignity, and secure the advantages of government. Jethro, Moses's
father-in-law, a man versed in politics, gives Moses that advice, in the choice
of magistrates, to which heaven fixed its approbation, (viz.) that they be able
men, (i. e.) men of strength of genius, and that understand public business; as
Moses afterward, explains it; when he directs the people, to take wise men,
and men of understanding, known among their tribes, to be rulers over them. And
it was the commendation, of the heads of Issachar, that they were, men that had
understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do.

A NATURAL clearness, and coolness of thought, with a turn of mind toward
government, improved by the study of men and books, and judicious observation,
will render a man capable of business, in a good degree: And so essential is
such a capacity and genius, that nothing can supply the defect thereof.

WHAT, but a perpetual series of blunders, and the most dismal confusion, as
the consequence thereof, can be expected, from the administration of weak
headed, short sighted, muddy brained men? who, so far from meriting the
character of good rulers, are, for the most part, the plagues of society, and
the bane of public felicity; while their weak minds, and not less vain,
commonly grow giddy with their advancement; and make them unwilling to be
checked, or to take the advice of wiser men than themselves. And, be it, that
the heart of a ruler destitute of capacity, is honest; yet he knows not where
the true interest of the community lies, nor by what measures to pursue, and
promote it: his benevolent designs therefore, prove abortive, for want of
capacity to execute them to advantage. Besides, from a defect of understanding,
equal to his trust, he is exposed to the intrigues of designing men, and to be
made the tool of a party, or of some fawning parasite, or corrupt minister of
state, whose interested views, and lust of power, can be gratified with nothing
less, than the ruin of thousands. How just, then is that exclamation of
Solomon? Woe unto thee, oh land, when thy king is a child!

ON the other hand, a state reduced to the brink of ruin, by prodigality and
dissipation, or by selfishness and ambition, with its constant attendants,
faction and party spirit; has been often saved, by a single man, in public
place; and rescued from the destruction that visibly impended over it. This,
Solomon long since observed; and therefore says, for the transgression of a
land, many are the princes thereof; but by a man of understanding and
knowledge, the state shall be prolonged.

THE objects that are to employ the thoughts and study of magistrates, require
a more than common extent of capacity, and strength of genius: such are the
natural and social rights of mankind; the history and laws of nature and
nations; the history and municipal constitutions of their own country; the
genius and interests thereof; their connections with, or dangers from their
neighbors; the methods of best increasing the numbers and wealth of the
subjects; and the laws which will render their liberties more secure, and their
necessary burdens more easy and equal; encourage their trade, husbandry and
manufactures; promote virtue and religion, and suppress vice of every kind, and
in every character. What extensive capacities? What penetration and clearness
of thought, and soundness of judgment, are requisite in this view, to render a
magistrate useful, and astate happy?

NOR is it every man of understanding, that is fit for a statesman. A man may
have a noble genius for, and make vast improvements in various branches of
science, or mechanic knowledge, and be thoroughly acquainted with the belles
lettres, who has no understanding of government and politics, nor any genius
for the law, or sufficient acquaintance with humane nature in general, or the
particular constitution, and circumstances of the people he is to govern: and
it is impossible, such a man should be a good ruler; however he may be a man of
wit or learning, and an honest christian.

MOREOVER, in this frail and passing state, in which we have but little
opportunity, for our own experience to serve us; there is need of the
experience of past ages; and of a just discerning, to notice and correct former
mistakes and errors; and to improve advantages obtained, and happy precedents,
to promote not only the present, but the future felicity of the common wealth;
which a good ruler will ever keep in view.

SECONDLY, Wisdom and prudence is not less necessary to form the character of a
good ruler, than capacity and genius. Solomon, deeply sensible of the
importance of such a qualification, made the acquirement of it, the great
object of his attention; and the principal matter of his prayer to heaven, when
he first entered on his government. Heaven heard, and answered with a rich
supply of this, and every other needful gift and blessing. How conspicuous, was
the wisdom of Mordecai, in the measures he took to defeat the cruel and bloody
designs of Haman upon the Jews! By which he turned the mischief on the heads of
their enemies, and procured safety for them, to his everlasting honor.

THERE are a variety of circumstances, that may attend a community; which
expose it to the most imminent hazards, besides the constant and ordinary
business of government, and occasions of the state; which call for singular
measures of wisdom and prudence, to find out expedients, and fix upon the best
means, for its relief: and if in such an important crisis, rulers are destitute
of wisdom, adequate to the demands and expectations of the state; its ruin is
like to ensue, and will lie under their hands. And where parties and factions
prevail, either through ignorance, or design, as too often happens; it will
require the most prudent conduct, to silence murmurs, stop the mouth of
faction, and restore peace and tranquillity. Nor will a less degree of prudence
serve to remove the mistakes, or prejudices, and obviate the designs of those
who have it in their power to oppress and injure the community.

SOME men have a peculiar talent this way; and to find out the most happy
expedients, in every case of public danger, and to pursue them with the
greatest advantage, which must be a distinguishing ornament in their character
as rulers. Whereas others, whose prudence may be sufficient to conduct the
concerns of the public in a calm, are wholly nonplush'd in every special
emergency and difficulty, and appear quite unequal to the trials they are
called to encounter: they yield to them, sink under them, and leave all things
to their own course; which necessarily involves the state in the utmost
disorder and confusion, and endangers the total subversion of government. Sound
wisdom in a ruler is the medium between temporizing caution, and rash
precipitancy; each alike dangerous, and often fatal. And that ruler only, comes
up to the character in the text, who has such a greatness of mind, as to rise
above every difficulty and danger, in the most tempestuous season and
threatening crisis: and while he keeps the full possession of himself, calmly
consults and steadily pursues those measures which have the most direct
tendency to prevent the impending ruin; or at least to lessen and mitigate the
evils dreaded, and render them less pernicious.

I proceed to say,

THIRDLY, Courage and resolution are very essential to the character of a good
ruler.

How firm and steady was Mordecai, under the most threatening aspects, and when
nothing less than the total extirpation, and ruin of his people was plotted and
decreed! Instead of sinking under the prospects of this dreadful fate; he
rises, not to meet it undaunted, which is often but the false image of courage;
and properly styled fool-hardiness, and presumption: but to obviate, and ward
it off, and happily succeeds. Similar dangers call for similar prudence,
application and resolution.

EVERY community lies exposed in some degree to foreign enemies and intestine
feuds; and if in any respects, dependant, to oppression from those, on whom
they are so, through mistaken policy, or the influence of such, as have a lust
for arbitrary power. Nor is any state so wholly free from crafty designing men,
enemies of order and government, or of the liberties of their country; as not
in certain circumstances to endanger, at least its peace, if not its entire
subversion, and ruin. And the follies of some, and vices of others, not seldom,
reduce it to the brink of destruction. In these, and the like dangers, as well
as when rulers are vilified, and reproached for their zeal and fidelity in
their office; courage and steadiness is of absolute necessity. And a man that
dare not confront, domestic or foreign enemies; assert the dignity of his
station, and the constitutional rights belonging to it, against factious
demagogues; or the just, reasonable, and constitutional liberties of the
people, against the encroachments of arbitrary power; that meanly flys his
post, or betrays his trust, on threatening appearances; that sneaks before the
towering menaces of vice, or that sinks under the reproaches cast upon him for
his fidelity: -- The man, in short, that dares not do his duty in the face of
danger, is surely not fit to be a ruler, nor can possibly be a good one.

THE fear of man, brings a snare, to a timorous mind; and every little danger,
is aggravated, and enhanced, by a frightful fancy, and imagination: which
byasses the judgment, and too often bribes the conscience. And who does not see
this to be sufficient to disqualify a man for being a ruler?

WHEN a state is sunk never so low, to despair of its emerging, and flourishing
again, prevents, or enervates all endeavors for its relief; and tends to
hasten and complete its destruction. And to be irresolute, is almost as fatal,
as to despair. A ruler of such a timorous make, must needs be hurried by those
passions, which commonly precipitate the ruin he fears, and which he might with
resolution have prevented. Calm consideration is interrupted, though absolutely
necessary, to guide the judgment, and fix the mind, in the choice, and pursuit,
of the best, or only means of safety and deliverance.

IN every dangerous crisis of the state then, happy is the people that have
rulers of capacity and wisdom, to discern, and of courage and firmness, to
pursue those measures, from which, under God, they may hope for a redress of
grievances, and a removal of those evils, that threaten their ruin.

I go on to say,

FOURTHLY, Religion and virtue are essential to the character of a good ruler.

THERE is not a single character of a good ruler, in the bible, in which
religion and virtue is not a principal part of it. This was a striking part of
Mordecai's character, in private life: and when he left his private station,
for the highest post in government, next the king, he left not his religion
behind him. And it is to be presumed, that when a man has acquired a religious
character, in private, he will support the same in public life. Yet it
sometimes falls out otherwise, through the frailty of human nature, and the
force of those temptations, that attend a public station.

WHERE men have no settled principle of virtuous conduct, we may reasonably
expect it will always be thus. And a man destitute of integrity and principle,
will be regardless of the great ends of government, and make it his business,
rather to indulge his ^ase and pleasures, his avarice or ambition; than to
discharge the duties of his post. In this case, men's capacity and genius,
their wisdom and courage, will be prostituted to their selfish and sinister
designs; or to the humors and lusts of others, on whom they are dependant.
They often become venal, and by their examples teach others to be so: and
sacrifice the interests and liberties of the community, to gratify their
private passions, and to promote their personal advantage: and use all their
policy and influence, to make those they most abuse, insensible of the wrongs
done them, or to compel them to bear them; and to make others the tools of
their avarice and ambition, and the instruments of their oppression and
villainy. An inward principle of religion is therefore highly necessary in a
ruler: for he that rules over men, must be just, ruling in the fear of God.
And to fear God, and hate covetousness, are principal qualifications of the
good ruler. Such a principle will be of use, to influence all the public
measures; and to secure those divine aids and smiles, without which the arduous
and important trust, assigned to rulers, can never be duly, or successfully
discharged.

THIS principle is of a divine nature and original; and a man informed and
actuated thereby, will have a most sacred veneration for the Deity, will place
his confidence in him, will labor to be conformed to him in a godlike temper
and disposition; and have an inviolable regard to his glory and interest, his
will and law. This principle will in a very special manner, lead a ruler into a
dependence on, and conformity to a glorious Christ; and to exhibit that
righteousness and mercy, that truth, meekness, and gentleness, which are so
conspicuous in the administration of his kingdom. It will also give force and
energy to all the motives the gospel suggests, to a faithful discharge of the
duties of his station; and bear them in on his mind in their full weight and
importance. It will subdue his selfish passions, subordinate his private, to
the public interests: and while it enlarges the mind, and enobles the spirit,
will divert him from every low, mean, and criminal view and pursuit; and engage
him to devote his time and talents, with steady zeal, application, and fidelity
to the public good, and to deny himself in every respect to promote it.

THERE are indeed, no principles, but those of christianity, that are
sufficient to make a man truly great; how much soever some of the heathen have
been admired for their seeming greatness, and how much soever they have been
proposed to imitation. Nor do I conceive a man truly great, who, out of vain
glory, and worldly views, is lead to do some great things: nay, that Roman
spirit, so often commended and extolled, which appears to be influenced only by
the prospect of fame, riches, honors, and authority; which not only ceased to
exert itself for the public good, when it met with ingratitude and injustice,
neglect and contempt, suffering and reproach; but shrank, and shrivel'd up into
a mean, dastardly fear, or self-love, that made them run upon the sword, as
their only refuge and relief; is so far from deserving the encomiums given it,
that christians should be rather cautioned against it, and taught to treat it
with the contempt and abhorrence it deserves. It Is the christian religion only,
that inspires the mind with fortitude and grandeur, to suffer in a noble cause,
and not ingloriously desert it; nay, voluntarily to tender its services, when
the state needs them, or is in danger. The post of honor, is not therefore,
always, a private station, though sometimes, it may so happen.

I AM sensible, that a natural generosity of mind; the power of conscience in
men destitute of a principle of true religion; nay even ambition, and
interested views, may be improved by heaven, to render some men useful to the
public; and they may discharge their trust to general satisfaction and
applause. But if a ruler acting on no higher principles, may merit the
approbation of the public; how much more will such deserve it, who act on the
noble and exalted principles of christianity?

WE have indeed but little security for the good conduct of rulers that are
destitute of religion, or for the divine smiles on their administration.
Whereas we have the strongest grounds to hope for both, if they are men of
sincere virtue.

RELIGION is venerable, in the esteem of all, but those who have abandoned
themselves to debauchery and villainy, and whose consciences are perfectly
seared, and callous: hence some men, to serve a low, selfish, and party design,
put on a mask of religion, that they may be respectable, and the easier
accomplish their designs. But if known, they ought to be the objects of the
greatest contempt and abhorrence: nor is it unusual, that they betray
themselves, and act out their true principles, in so open a manner, as to
discover their detestable hypocrisy. It is ever to be expected, that he that is
false to his God, will be unfaithful to men; nor is such a man, when known, to
be trusted in the lower offices of life; and much less in the high stations of
government. Nor can any thing be more preposterous and absurd, than to commit
our properties, life, and liberties, to the care of a man, that pretends to no
religion, or that evidences by his conversation, that he has none: for he that
has no reverence for the Deity, cannot be supposed to have any regard for moral
obligations, nor to be in any degree influenced thereby; and he that will
sacrifice his own most valuable, yea eternal interests, to his vicious
inclinations, will not fail to sacrifice those of the public (when they come in
competition) to the same ruling passions.

Once more, Fifthly,

PUBLIC spirit is an essential qualification of a good ruler, and is
inseparable from his character.

THE ruler's office is for the public good, and if his spirit corresponds not
with the design of his office, he is far from being a benefactor or a blessing:
nor can any state flourish, where public spirit is not the characteristic of
its rulers. This is a spirit of true benevolence, is therefore founded in, or
rather a branch of true religion. The love of our neighbor springs from the
love of God, as its true original and source; it is therefore inseparably
connected with it. This was the spirit of Mordecai, in whom benevolence to his
brethren, was as conspicuous and evident, as his love to God.

GENEROSITY and kindness, condescension and complaisance, were in him, the true
marks of it. A man of this spirit, will ever feel for the public, as well as
for himself; and the benign influences of his heart, will diffuse themselves,
in the most beneficial and happy effects to thousands. He considers himself as
the father of the people, when in the most exalted station* nor disdains to
treat them as brethren. He views all his powers and betrustments, as committed
to him by the great parent of the universe, for the good of the whole; and he
sleeps and wakes for the common benefit. An equal and ardent love of the whole,
possesses his breast, and excites him to those measures, which wisdom and
virtue dictate, whereby the whole may be made easy, safe, and happy. He knows
no distinction of rich and poor, noble or ignoble, friends or foes; so as to
avoid any particular acts of benevolence, which may promote the welfare of
each: nor will the most ungrateful returns, for his disinterested good will,
cause him to cease from the offices of kindness. His heart will be intent upon
the public safety and felicity, ever his delight and joy; and to ward off
dangers, and remedy evils; while he deeply regrets those he cannot heal, and
the mischiefs he cannot prevent.

WHATEVER is useful or beneficial to society, will have his steady attention.
Agriculture will be encouraged, till the wilderness become a fruitful field,
and the desert blossom as the rose. Trade so nearly connected therewith, as the
second source of wealth, will be protected and cherished, that his own
community may derive riches and plenty from other parts of the globe, as well
as their own. Liberty, next to religion, the darling of a generous mind, will
be guarded with the most tender and watchful care. Injustice and immorality,
dissipation and idleness, that ever weaken the sinews of the common wealth,
will be frowned upon, and properly punished; and the contrary virtues
supported, and encouraged, with a view to the dignity of the state, and its
importance with its neighbors; one of the most probable means of its safety,
and peace. Arts and sciences, under his countenance, and favorable auspecies,
will be cultivated and flourish; and yield a pleasing prospect, that wisdom and
knowledge will be the stability of future times, as well as of the present. And
above all, religion in its truth, and native simplicity and freedom, will be
promoted, under a benevolent administration, by the best examples; and provided
for, and defended by such salutary laws, as come within the province of the
magistrate; and this with a special view ^o the divine favor and protection,
without which no community can long subsist, and much less flourish.

SUCH are the exertions, and such will be the effects of true public spirit;
and with unwearied application will a ruler of this character, employ himself
for the good of his fellow men, that are under his administration. While on the
contrary, avarice or ambition, indolence or moroseness, mark the character of
the man destitute hereof; and speak him unfit, for any office of importance, in
government.

HAVING thus drawn into view, some of the principal parts of the character, of
a good ruler, from the instance in the text, I shall proceed to consider,

SECONDLY, The influence of such a character, well supported, to secure the
confidence, respect, and obedience of subjects.

AFTER all that has been said in favor of passive obedience and non-resistance
to what is called the divine right of magistracy in general, or of kings in
particular; it will remain for ever true, that the doctrines of arbitrary
power, and consequently of slavery, are not the maxims of prudence, reason, or
revelation; and put into practice, tend to produce the most fatal convulsions
in a state, unless ignorance, effeminacy, and corruption have prevailed to
enervate men's spirits, to debauch their reason, and sink them into a stupid
insensibility, almost equal to that of the brutes.

IN this case, while the language of despotism, in a proud usurper of the
rights of mankind, raised to power by his own intrigues, or by the folly, or
wickedness of others, is to this purpose. I am vested with sufficient
authority, to give law, and to demand unreserved submission and obedience; and
have power in my hands to enforce it: he that fails therefore, may depend upon
my severest resentments; and destruction shall be the fate of the man that
dares oppose me. The abject minds of subjects, lost to all virtue and honor,
may tamely yield; and they may reply, All that thou have said, we will do, and
will be obedient: Yet, what confidence have such subjects in their magistrate?
How can they but entertain secret jealousies and suspicions, equally
destructive of veneration, and love, of trust, and cordial submission? a
slavish dread, and brutal subjection, or that which is forced, and insincere,
is the most that can be pretended to. As mutual confidence and affection,
between rulers and people, cannot fail of being destroyed by such arbitrary
claims, so the people will be as pleased to have it in their power, to put to
death even a prince, as ever they were to raise him to the throne: nor need we
a large acquaintance with humane nature, or the history of nations, to be
convinced of this: our own nation will indeed furnish us with proof hereof, the
most ample and sufficient.

THAT the most hearty confidence, respect and obedience, is the magistrates
due, perhaps, no one in the sober use of reason, will deny. But the most
likely, and the only rational, and scriptural way of gaining and securing it,
is for the magistrate to exhibit the patriotic character, in its full extent;
and as a father, to pursue the common good and happiness of the subject. He
that is thus, the minister of God to men, for their good, in his ruling
capacity, not only fills his post with dignity and honor, but has all
advantages on his side, to secure the confidence, respect and obedience of
those he governs. For besides, the solemn repeated injunctions of divine
revelation, to this purpose, let every soul be subject to the higher powers;
enforced by a motive, drawn from the great end of magistracy and government,
the good of the whole; which, by the way evidently determines the extent as
well as design of it: as also, by a motive, drawn from the penal consequences,
of an oppugnation of lawful authority, in this world, and the future: I say,
besides such injunctions, which have a peculiar weight and influence on a
people, not sunk in ignorance, and abandoned to debauchery: there is something
in this character itself, that peculiarly strikes the mind, awes it to
reverence, and engages it to love and obedience. It is the image of God on a
ruler, and commands a proportionable respect.

RULERS are called gods, with regard to their office; and if they act in
character, they become amiable and venerable, for their divine virtues; in
which their is a certain engaging sweetness and majesty, not to be described,
which immediately possesses the mind, and gains its approbation, and makes it
revere and honor them, and take pleasure in their commands, as it were by
necessity and constraint. How acceptable was Mordecai to his brethren! and how
great the influence of his truly patriotic character and conduct, to secure all
that confidence and affection, that reverence and submission, which he could
wish for! Nor is it without design, that the penman of his history, remarks the
happy influence of his administration on the people. They felt themselves easy,
safe, and happy under his government, and were fully confident of his capacity
and integrity, and entirely at his devotion.

BUT then, the principle of self-love alone, will engage men to that obedience
to good rulers, by which their own happiness may be promoted, and secured. They
can feel the benign influences of a wise, righteous, and benevolent
administration; and without the labor of reasoning, and reflection, they
generally perceive themselves to be safe and happy, when they are so. When
people have this sense, and perception, it cannot fail of producing those
returns of gratitude and confidence, respect and obedience, which are a good
magistrate's due: or if under some particular burdens, the wisdom of rulers,
sees fit to lay upon them, a few, whose views are narrow and contracted,
complain and find fault; it will rarely be found that their uneasiness is
lasting, or grows up to any great degree of disaffection.

THERE are indeed, in all societies, some men, whose minds are so degenerate
and base, as not only, not to be sensible of the beauty and dignity of the
patriot character, in rulers: but from ambitious, and interested views, or an
invidious and jealous disposition, are ever ready to find fault, and often
become turbulent and restless. Such men are constantly on the watch for
opportunities, from the unavoidable frailties, and mistakes of the best rulers,
to raise some colorable objection against them; and practice the meanest arts
to prejudice others. And while they pretend a great zeal for the public, cry
out of danger, unreasonable burdens, prodigality, or unequal measures; they
too often prevail to raise parties and factions, to the disturbance of the
state. The bottom of all is, they, or their friends are out of place, and they
have little or no prospect, under a wise and virtuous administration, of
serving their selfish designs. And no men more like to take exceptions against
a good administration, than those whose character is quite the reverse of the
true patriot.

BUT however such men, may practice, and prosper a while, they commonly
precipitate their own ruin: or the righteous judge of all, exposes their vile
intrigues in open light, and they become the objects of universal contempt.

IN general, if mankind have not a quick sense of the excellency of true
patriotism in a ruler; yet they know when they are well used; they have some
sense and value for their constitutional as well as natural rights, and can
tell when they freely and fully enjoy them; and will not destroy their own
safety and happiness, by a contempt of, or oppugnation to that authority, which
is the great means of securing it.

IT is certain, the wiser and better part of the community, will have such
grateful resentments of the fatherly tenderness, and watchful care and fidelity
of good rulers, as to engage all their interest and influence, in support of
their authority; and to lighten as much as possible their burdens, by
promoting the loyalty and affection of their fellow subjects. And if a civil
administration, be but tolerably good, experience shows, that those in it, are
honored while they live, by the wise and virtuous; and their memory is revered
long after they are dead: how much more, will this be the case, where rulers
answer the distinguishing character of Mordecai, and approve themselves true
patriots, in the most extensive view?

THE doctrines of arbitrary power, are therefore as useless and insignificant,
as they are absurd and unscriptural; in as much as, rulers have it in their
power to secure all that confidence, respect, and obedience, from subjects,
that is their due, or that they can justly desire, in a way more easy and safe.
Let them only act up to, and support their proper character as ministers of God
for good to the people; and they may be morally assured, of their hearts and
purses, yea, of their lives when the state needs them.

SUCH is the influence, which the patriotic character and conduct in rulers,
will have on the minds of subjects, to secure their confidence, respect, and
obedience.

IN these views, the wisdom and duty of rulers, with the most natural and
effectual motives to enforce it, are plainly pointed out. And we have all
reason, of thankfulness to heaven, that our rulers are men of this character.

NOR can a better acknowledgment be paid to his Honor, the Governor, with the
honorable the Deputy Governor, and Assistants, (whom I would address on this
occasion) under whose wise, virtuous and benevolent administration, we have
enjoyed much peace and quietness; than, in the name of this people, to express
our desires, and hopes, that you may be still continued, in your important
stations, to exert your well known capacities, and spirit, in watching for the
liberty, peace, and happiness of the community. And we freely express our
confidence, that it will be your care to form your selves, under heaven's
influence, to a yet nearer resemblance of the perfect model, of true
patriotism, in its most extensive view: and thereby render your selves most
useful, and the people most happy.

AND as the greater part, of the former Representatives of the people, are
returned to serve in the present general assembly; it speaks their confidence,
worthy Sirs, in your wisdom, and integrity; and is a powerful obligation on
you, to make the most vigorous efforts, answerable to the patriotic character,
to save them from impending ruin.

YOU cannot be insensible, honored, and worthy senators, of the distresses,
many are involved in, by their own dissipation and prodigality; and what
influence this has had upon; and how much it has affected others, that have
been more industrious and frugal. Nor are you ignorant of our embarassments, by
the late parliamentary resolutions, and regulations: nor are we wholly
insensible of the dangers and calamities we are threatened with, which can
scarce be painted in too horrible and gloomy colors.

WE were ready to bless ourselves, when the stamp act was repealed, in the
pleasing prospect of future tranquillity and peace; and the lasting enjoyment of
our distinguishing privileges. And though the resolutions of parliament, at that
time, respecting their constitutional power over America, gave us no small
concern: yet we were ready to hope, that power would never be exerted to our
disadvantage, or the prejudice of our natural and constitutional rights, till
their regulations since, have convinced us of our mistake.

I WOULD be far from thinking, much more from hinting, that, that august
assembly, the guardians of the constitution, and of the liberty and property of
the subject, have formed a system to enslave the colonists: whatever may have
been the ambitious or interested views of any particular favorite, minister,
or statesman, jealous of, or invidious toward our increasing greatness,
prosperity and felicity. And it may be justly presumed, the people of Britain,
tenacious of their liberties as they are, would not suffer a system, of so
fatal a tendency to her, as well as her colonies, to be carried into execution:
since it could be viewed in no other light, than as a prelude to their own
slavery and ruin.

IN this most critical and alarming situation, our eyes are to you, our
honored and worthy rulers, next to God, to exert yourselves as your wisdom
shall judge most loyal, decent, and proper to obtain a redress of our
grievances. And as, without doubt, the British parliament have been induced to
make those resolves, and regulations, that we think, bear so hard, on our
natural and constitutional rights, from misinformations, and abusive
representations of us; it seems, may I be allowed to say it, to belong to you,
to rectify their mistakes, and vindicate us from every injurious aspersion. And
such is our opinion, (...) the wisdom, equity, and tenderness of our gracious
Sovereign, and of the great council of the nation; that we promise our selves,
upon suitable petitions, and remonstrances of the united, and loyal colonies,
by their respective assemblies, we may obtain the wished for relief. We take it
for granted, you will not excuse your selves; though if any should happen to be
of this turn of thought, and it would not be esteemeed impertinent, and
assuming, I should with all deference, remind them of the message, of the
worthy Mordecai, to queen Esther, chap. 4. 13, 14. Then Mordecai commanded to
answer Esther, Think not with thy self, that thou shall escape, in the King's
house, more than all the Jews. For if thou altogether hold thy peace, at
this time; then shall there, enlargement, and deliverance, arise to the Jews
from another place, but thou and thy father's house, shall be destroyed: and
who knows that thou art come to the kingdom, for such a time as this? We
persuade ourselves, at least, that you will never be influenced, by the menaces
of power, the artful insinuations of its tools, the examples of others, or the
temptations of honor, or interest, (under a pretense of obedience to
superiors) to betray the privileges of your country; or do any thing to fix an
arbitrary administration upon us; however colored with an appearance of law,
and constitutional authority.

I SHALL not need, to recommend to your consideration, the importance of
frugality, and industry, among the inhabitants of this colony: nor will you
fail to give all due encouragement thereto, as well as to our own manufactures.
And suffer me to add, that the distressed state we are in, on account of our
amazing debts; the want of a sufficient medium of trade; the uncommon
multiplication of lawsuits, and singular protraction of their issues, in the
courts of justice; and the astonishing consumption of spirituous liquors, are
worthy of, and call for your attention. And the visible growth and prevalence
of vice, dissipation, and debauchery, demands at this day a more vigorous
exertion of yourselves, to suppress and discountenance it. Learning, we doubt
not, will ever have your patronage; and we hope, the College, in particular,
will not be destitute of all needful assistance, to attain in the most happy
and effectual manner, the great ends of its institution. And above all things,
that you will support, and promote to the utmost, the religion of the gospel,
as the surest means of our prosperity, safety and felicity.

GREAT is the weight of the public trust. While therefore you receive it with
caution, and the wisest consideration, as leading into scenes, not of ease and
pleasure, but of burden, and care, especially in the present day; and enter
upon it with a becoming sobriety, and self diffidence, and resolved dependence,
on him, whose is wisdom and counsel, and every needful gift and blessing; and
engage your selves to the greatest application, and unwearied efforts, to
approve your selves faithful in the service of God, and your generation; you
may hope for the divine guidance and smiles, in your future administrations.
And in the steady pursuit of the common good, in all those ways, your wise and
benevolent minds shall dictate; you will have the approbation of your own
consciences; will render your selves acceptable, to the multitude of your
brethren, at least, the wiser and better part of them; and raise a monument to
your honor, in the grateful remembrance of this, and succeeding ages, more
lasting than brass or marble; and what is infinitely more, you will meet with
the divine acceptance, and a large reward, in proportion to your fidelity, and
the numberless important blessings, you will be instrumental of diffusing to
thousands.

SUCH is the character the gentlemen of the sacred order, generally sustain
among us, that I may with the greatest assurance engage on their behalf, that
they will not depart from the generous, loyal, and religious principles of the
fathers of this country: but that they will steadily, and with equal order,
exert themselves, in their place and station, to support the honor and dignity
of government, and to enforce the duty of the subject, and cultivate loyalty,
peace, and good order, with a love of the English constitution, and the
practice of every social virtue. And especially, that they will urge on men,
the peculiar doctrines, important precepts, and engaging motives of the gospel;
with a view to promote true and vital religion, as not only the means of their
private and personal happiness; but as the alone sure basis of public virtue,
and felicity.

I MAY also fairly presume, it will be the care of the wise and the virtuous,
not to increase the burdens of government: but on the contrary, to
discountenance unreasonable jealousies, murmurs, and complaints; expose the low
arts and intrigues of designing men, to deserved reproach and contempt; and
prevent as much as possible, factions and parties: while at the same time, with
the firmest union, and most manly and christian resolution, they assert and
maintain their natural and constitutional rights; and are ready to spend their
treasure and their blood, in the noble cause of civil and religious liberty.

AND methinks, every one capable of the least reflection or prospect, should
unite in the most vigorous endeavors, to promote peace and loyalty, virtue,
economy, and religion in the present dark and cloudy day.

IT would betray a want of gratitude to heaven, on this occasion, as well as a
narrow contracted turn of thought, not to observe the divine patronage of right
and liberty in Britain, from its most early times. Britain, most highly
favored of God, in the preservation of her civil and religious freedom, while
most of the neighbor nations, have been enslaved to despotic power, and
arbitrary sway; and the tyranny of prelates, as well as princes. Let her
rejoice herein, and learn soberly and virtuously to use both her power, and her
liberty, which will thus be, as it has been, her glory and her safety.

IT IS worthy of remark, that not all the changes, that have passed over her,
have ever yielded an opportunity to her enemies, to deprive her of her darling
liberty: (...) at times it has been greatly oppressed, and in the utmost
danger. The weakness and wickedness of her princes, and their counselors, the
treasons and rebellions of her subjects, the invasions of foreigners, have
often reduced her to the last extremity. But heaven has seasonably interposed,
and by some surprising and unexpected turn, has made all their injurious
attempts, subservient to fix her liberty on a more solid basis, and to guard it
with stronger securities. A plain intimation this, that God never gives men up
to be slaves, till they loose their national virtue, and abandon themselves to
slavery.

THE establishment of the succession to the imperial crown of Great Britain, in
the illustrious house of Hanover has been a most happy and effectual means,
under God, of preserving the British rights and constitution: while the princes
thereof have nobly maintained the dignity of their station, by a sober
improvement of the prerogative, within its constitutional limits, and a steady
aim to live and reign in the affections of their subjects. Never was religious
and civil liberty more secure, loyalty more cordial, arts and sciences better
cultivated, trade more flourishing, domestic peace and tranquillity more stable,
or Britain more the pride of her sons, or the envy and terror of her foes; than
under their paternal and patriotic administration. Her glory has been rising,
with growing luster, to the most exalted summit, in the age and reign of George
the third, our lawful and most gracious sovereign. Heaven grant it may be
perpetuated, and still (if possible) increase: for, so far are we from envying
her, that her grandeur and happiness is ou^ boast, and our connections with,
and constitutional dependence on her, what we wish the most lasting permanency
to. May she ever flourish, and under her shadow may we be safe.

WHAT thanks owe we to heaven, in special, for our distinguishing privileges,
civil and religious! and that when they have been so often threatened,
deliverances have been seasonably granted! auspicious deliverances to Britain,
as well as her American Colonies: alike interested in the important cause of
liberty, and the happy events by which it has been rescued from its dangers,
and amply secured.

NOR should we forget the noble patrons of liberty, on the other side the
atlantic; who not long since, so boldly espoused, and effectually pleaded its
cause; as to obtain a repeal of the stamp act: nor those worthy patriots in
America, who then, or more lately appeared in its defense; among whom the
ingenious, generous, sensible, spirited, and loyal FARMER, deserves our
peculiar notice and acknowledgments. May they all still continue their
benevolent efforts, in the important cause; and may their names be handed to
posterity, with the most grateful sense of their friendly offices; and after a
long series of the most beneficent and extensive services to their country, may
they receive the rewards, that ever await such distinguished merit, and public
usefulness.

IF we call to mind the ideas we entertained, at the close of the late war, or
on the repeal of the stamp act; with what exultation and triumph were we ready
to sing, the snare is broken, and we are escaped! We then congratulated
ourselves, and each other, on the wondrous things God had wrought for us, and
in the pleasing prospect of lasting tranquillity and peace, and the full
unmolested enjoyment of civil and religious liberty: which to secure, our
fathers spent the whole labor of their lives, with an amazing treasure, and
many of them their blood. Here thought we, may we now sit, under our own vine,
and fig tree, and reap the fruit of our own and our fathers toil and expense,
secure from the rage of the enemy, and from the tyranny of bigoted prelates,
the capricious humor of arbitrary ministers, and the power of lawless sway.
Here shall our parent state, still tender of our liberties as of her own, find
all the returns of filial duty and affection from her true born sons, that she
can desire; and be honored, strengthened and enriched, by their growing numbers,
and increasing commerce and wealth. Here arts and sciences, and every useful
manufacture shall flourish, and make continual advances toward perfection.
Here religion shall remain, and be preserved undefiled, in the doctrines of
faith, the duties of the christian life, and that worship of God, which is most
agreeable to primitive evangelical simplicity: and from hence shall be diffused
through unnumbered tribes of heathen, and bring them to the knowledge,
profession, and obedience of the truth; and the desert shall blossom as the
rose: and God, even our own God, shall bless us, and we shall see his salvation.

SUCH were the bright and blissful scenes that opened to our view. But oh, the
mutability of human affairs! How soon are these agreeable prospects changed for
those which are most dismal! the sad fruit of our own folly and wickedness. A
gloomy cloud has gathered over our heads, and intercepts every pleasing vision
and hope, and portends the most insupportable and fatal calamities. This has
roused the attention of the most thoughtless, and filled the minds of all the
friends of civil and religious liberty, with anxious solicitude; and engaged
them to (at least) a seeming union and vigor, in promoting industry, economy
and manufactures, as the great means of the salvation of their country: which
is truly praiseworthy. But methinks the conduct of Esther and Mordecai,
together with the Jews, under their distresses, and when the proud and
revengeful Haman had obtained a decree for their total extirpation; comes most
strongly recommended, as a pattern and precedent; I do not say from a
similarity of circumstances, so much, as from the justice and propriety of the
thing in itself; and from the happy success that attended it. I mean, that of
religious fasting and prayer. This, to be sure, in the present alarming crisis,
cannot be improper for particular persons, families, societies, or the public.
And the experience we have often had of God's gracious readiness to hear, and
save us in our distresses; as well as the promises of his word; together with
the assurance, our reason must give us, that without heaven's interposition,
and the continuance of the divine patronage of our rights and liberties, all
our own efforts for relief will be vain; conspire to engage us to apply to God
in this way herefor. Nor let us expect his gracious regards, unless herewith,
we put away the evil of our doings, and become a virtuous and religious people.
This Sirs, this is the only, and blessed be God, it is a sure way to recover
and secure the divine favor and smiles we have forfeited, to obtain a redress
of our grievances, and to have our liberties restored and confirmed to us, and
to derive them down to unborn ages: for we are assured that God will be with
us, while we are with him; he will not leave, or forsake us. Know therefore,
that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which keeps covenant and
mercy, with them that love him, and keep his commandments, to a thousand
generations.

THE END.

