Mr. Shute's ELECTION-SERMON, MAY 25 th. 1768.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY FRANCIS BERNARD, Esquire GOVERNOR, HIS
HONOR THOMAS HUTCHINSON, Esquire LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, THE HONORABLE His MAJESTY'S
COUNCIL, AND THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, Of the Province of the
Massachusets-Bay in New England, MAY 25th. 1768.

BEING the Anivesary for the ELECTION of His MAJESTY'S COUNCIL for said
PROVINCE.

BY DANIEL SHUTE, A.M. Pastor of the Third Church in HINGHAM.

BOSTON: NEW ENGLAND: Printed by RICHARD DRAPER, Printer to His Excellency the
Governor, and the Honorable His Masefty's Council. MDCCXLVIII.

Province of MASSACHUSETS-BAY. In COUNCIL, 26th May, 1768.
ORDERED, That ISAAC ROYAL, BENJAMIN LINCOLN, and ROYAL TYLER, Esquires, be a
Committee to wait on the Rev'd Mr. DANIEL SHUTE, and return him the Thanks of
the Board for his Sermon preached Yesterday, before the Great and General
Court, being the Day appointed by the ROYAL CHARTER for the Election of
Counselors for the Province; and that they desire a Copy of the same for the
Press.

A. OLIVER
, Sec'y.
AN ELECTION SERMON.
EZRA X.4. ARISE; for this matter belongs unto thee; we also will be with
thee; be of good courage, and do it.
HE, whose happiness can admit no accession, and whose perfect rectitude
excludes every degree of malevolence, must design the happiness of those
creatures he calls out of nothing into existence; to suppose the contrary is
inconsistent with absolute perfection, and implies the worst of characters.

THE communication of happiness being the end of creation, it will follow, from
the perfections of the creator, that the whole plan of things is so adjusted as
to promote the benevolent purpose; to which the immense diversity in his works;
the gradation in the species of beings that we know of, and many more perhaps
than we know of, and somewhat similar gradation in the same species, arising
from their make, their connections, and the circumstances they are placed in,
are happily subservient. And every creature in the universe, according to its
rank in the scale of being, is so constituted, as that acting agreeably to the
laws of its nature, will promote its own happiness, and of consequence the
grand design of the creator.

AGREEABLY hereto, all beings in the class of moral agents are so formed, that
happiness will result to them from acting according to certain rules prescribed
by the creator, and made known to them by reason or revelation. The rules of
action, conformity to which will be productive of happiness to such beings,
must be agreeable to moral fitness in the relation of things; in perfect
conformity to which the rectitude, and happiness of the creator himself
consists. And such in the connection and dependency of things, that happiness
will result from conformity to these rules, not only to individuals, but
likewise to the whole; for the beneficial effects of such conformity are
reciprocal. -- It naturally tends to promote the order and harmony of the moral
system and so the general good.

THE plan of the creator being thus manifestly adapted to promote the happiness
of his creation, his conduct herein becomes a pattern to his creatures that are
rational moral agents, and the rule of their duty, according to their measure;
for all moral obligation on such, indubitably, arises from the will of God, as
there is so exact a coincidence between his will, and the relative fitness of
things; so that the nearer they resemble him, the nearer they will come to the
perfect standard of right action, and the nearer they come to this the more
happiness will be produced.

IT being so evidently the will of God, from the general constitution of things
that the happiness of his rational creatures should be promoted, all such are
under moral obligation in conformity thereto, according to their ability, to
promote their own, and the happiness of others.

THE nature of the human species, therefore, being so adapted to society as
that society will afford vastly more happiness to them, than solitary existence
could do, indicates the will of their creator, and makes it morally fit that
they should associate. From the make of man, the disadvantages of a solitary,
and the advantages of a social state, evidently appear. A state of separation
from the rest of the species will not admit the exercise of those affections
and virtues, in which, from his natural constitution, his happiness very much
consists; but in connection with others there will be opportunity for the
exercise of them. As each individual living in a separate state would be
preventive of the happiness for which men were evidently formed; and as this
happiness can be obtained only in a social state, to form into society must be
not only their interest, but their duty.

THE instinct, or propensity, implanted in the human species leading them, as
it were mechanically, to that to which they are morally obliged, is an instance
of the creator's goodness as it facilitates the performance; and in the same
proportion it does so, must make their neglect the more inexcusable.

MANKIND being formed into society, the moral obligation they are under to
civil government will appear from the same principle, as being necessary to
secure to them those natural rights and privileges which are essential to their
happiness. Life, liberty, and property, are the gifts of the creator, on the
unmolested enjoyment of which their happiness chiefly depends: yet they are
such an imperfect set of beings that they are liable to have these invaded; by
one another: But the preservation of them in every fit method is evidently
their duty. The entering into society lays the foundation of a plan for
securing them; but this plan will be. incomplete without the exertion of the
united power of the whole for their mutual safety; The exertion of this power
for that purpose, correspondent to the ^^^^lasting rules of right, is what is,
here, i^^ended by civil government; and as this is a method the best adapted,
in their power, to secure the rights and privileges neccessary to their
happiness, to go into it is morally fit, and evidently the will of their
creator.

WHATEVER mankind are oblige to perform must be within the verge of their
power: The impracticability of the human species continuing to be one society
for the purpose before mentioned, makes it neccessary and fit they should form
into distinct and separate societies, and erect civil government in them for
that end.

UPON the same principle, still, the natural rights of one society being
invaded by the superior power of another, so long as the former are unable to
assert their freedom, it is morally fit they should receive laws from the
latter ^ending to their happiness, as being the best means in their power to
promote it, rather than admit a state of anarchy, big with confusion and every
evil work: But from these circumstances it is morally fit they should rescue
themselves whenever it is in their power, only it may be as fit to use caution,
that by such attempts they do not plunge themselves the deeper into distress.

THE obligation mankind are under to civil government, in some form, as
essential to their happiness in the present state, and perhaps not without its
influence upon their happiness in a future, is not only deducible from the
natural constitution of things, but also supported by written revelation; in
which it is represented as greatly tending to their good, and therefore an
ordinance of the great benefactor of the world, whose tender mercies are ever
all his works. In the epistle to the Romans, the civil power is expressly said
to be of God, to be ordained of him, and the civil ruler to be the minister of
God for good.

THE line, indeed, between one society, and another, is not drawn by heaven;
nor is the particular form of civil government; as whether it shall be
conducted immediately by the whole society, or by a few of their number, or if
by a few, who they shall be, expressly pointed out; but, as mankind are
rational and free agents, these are left to their determination and choice;
only herein they are restricted by those rules which arise from the moral
fitness of things productive of the general good, which they are ever bound
invariably to observe.

NOR does the sacred story of the Hebrew polity militate against the
established order of things relative to civil government among men. The
theocracy of the Jews, was an extraordinary vouchsafement of God to that
particular nation, but not counter to, ordesigned to alter, the general
constitution of mankind.

THE right the supreme ruler of the world has to bestow favors upon some, out
of the common course of things, while others are left in the enjoyment of their
natural privileges, can, in reason, no more be doubted, than his right to
create one being superior to another; for, though unknown to us, that, as well
as this, may be in the original plan for the communication of happiness.

THE ecclesiastic, and civil polity of the Jewish nation, being under the
immediate direction of God himself, was not only a signal favor to them, but
also designed to answer very important purposes in his government of mankind.

THEIR civil polity coincided with the fitness of society, and civil government
among men, in all their salutary effects, but the extraordinary manner, in
which it was conducted, was never exhibited as a pattern to the other nations
of the earth; but they were still left to judge for themselves, as to the form
of civil government, within their power, that might be most subservient to the
public good.

THAT this peculiar form among the Jews was not designed to be perpetual
appears probable, from the particular directions early given, by Moses the
servant of the Lord, to regulate the administration of a king that should, from
among, themselves, in future time, be set over them; and also by the revolution
that in process of time ensued by more than the divine permission. After which
the civil state of the Jews symbolized with the civil state of other nations.

THE Deity's condescending to be, in a political sense, king in Israel, being a
signal favor to them, as hereby they had a civil government better adapted to
their circumstances, and better contrived to promote their welfare, than they
could have had by all the wisdom of man, it must have been impiously ungrateful
to reject him in that character, and desire that one of the imperfect sons of
men should be their supreme ruler; and therefore deserving the severe
reprehension given them, by the prophet, under the direction of God himself.

BUT though their inadvertent and rash desire was such an ungrateful
resignation, and just forfeiture of the special favor they enjoyed, that God
saw meet to discontinue it, and to chastize them for their wickedness therein,
yet he did not withdraw the protection and blessing of his providence from them
in the exercise and enjoyment of the rights and privileges common to human
nature. And if the alteration made at their desire, the extraordinary
vouchsafement of the Deity apart had not been agreeable to the natural
constitution of mankind, and fit in the relation of things, it is not easy to
conceive how he should so far countenance the thing as to be active in setting
kings over them: And not only direct them in their choice, but also prescribe
rules for the regulation of such an office, and express his approbation of, and
afford his blessing to those who formed their administration according to them.

THE difference between them, now, and the other nations seems chiefly to have
arisen from their religious state; which indeed had still some kindly influence
upon their civil. In the exercise of their natural constitutional rights
relative to civil government, it was no doubt fit to seek direction from him by
whose providence kings reign. Their expectation of immediate direction from
heaven was founded on the peculiar gracious dispensation they were under; and
therefore the like could not be expected by any other nation.

No set of beings can, in reason, suppose themselves wiser than their maker;
but must think that to which he directs to be wisest and best; and, therefore,
when they have certain notice of his pleasure respecting any transaction of
theirs, both duty and interest urge them to a compliance. And what nation of
men on earth, in the exercise of this natural right, unalienable to any mortal,
would not be glad of immediate indubitable direction from heaven? But when the
these special directions are not obtainable, as according to the natural
constitution of mankind they are not, the affair being so important to society,
and the happiness of the whole so intimately connected with it, it is fit that
they should first implore the influence of providence, which may be real,
though not immediate and sensible; and then transact it in the exercise of that
liberty wherewith the creator has made them free.

EZRA's advancement to the government over the Jews did not, indeed, originate
from their election, but from the civil power of that nation to which they were
then in subjection; but yet, as their circumstances would not admit of their
exercising all the rights of a free state, it became fit that they should
cheerfully acquiesce in that appointment to promote their happiness, as it was
the best method in their power.

THEY were now emerging from the lowest state of depression; for seventy years
they had been unable to break the iron yoke of captivity, and to assert their
national freedom. But under the favor of Cyrus part of the nation had returned
to their own land, and were laying anew the foundations of the commonwealth of
Israel. Their dependence on a foreign power, not only for permission to return
to the land of Palestine, but also for protection in the re-settlement of it,
made it evidently their duty to submit to a deputation from that power, with a
view to promote their welfare.

AND Ezra's being sent from the Persian Court, with ample commission to settle
affairs among them, ecclesiastic, and civil, according to their pristine form,
was no doubt highly agreeable to them, as he was of their own nation, and his
qualifications were so adequate to the important trust, for he was a ready
scribe in the law of Moses, and well understood the magna charta of their
constitution; and also as he was a man of great piety, and virtue, and ardently
disposed to advance the interest of his nation: Who therefore could be more
welcome, who more likely to put things into a proper situation, and to promote
the welfare of the community, the only worthy end of government?

THE kind reception he met with appears, in part, from the early application
made to him respecting illegal marriages in vogue among them, to which, the
words I have read immediately refer. -- The story shows how ready he was to
exert himself for their good; his known character points out his qualifications
for the purpose; and the united efforts of the people with him, to this end,
with an acknowledgement of his authority, are expressed in the text: Arise, for
this matter belongs unto thee, and we will be with thee; be of good courage,
and do it. And if we may be indulged to take this instance as a specimen of
Ezra's general administration, and of the people's friendly spirited assistance
through the whole; and as we go along to notice his distinguished character;
the way will be open to turn our attention -- to the part of civil rulers -- to
the qualifications of such -- and to the necessity of the united exertions of
the people with their rulers, to answer the salutary purposes of civil
government.

AND FIRST, The part of civil rulers, in general is to keep in view the end of
civil government, and of their own particular advancement, and to act
accordingly.

THOUGH in the constitution of things it does not belong to man to live alone,
or without government in society; yet he is invested with certain rights and
privileges, by the bounty of the creator, so adapted to his nature that the
enjoyment of them is the source of his happiness in this world, and without
which existence here would not be desirable. And mankind have no right
voluntarily to give up to others those natural privileges, essential to their
happiness, with which they are invested by the Lord of all: for the improvement
of these they are accountable to him. Nor is it fit, that any of the sons of
men should take from others that which they have no right to give, nor by their
misconduct have forfeited; though in this case there should be mutual consent,
the compact would be illegal, and both parties indictable at the bar of heaven.

CIVIL government among mankind is not a resignation of their natural
privileges, but that method of securing them, to which they are morally obliged
as conducive to their happiness: In the constitution of things, they can
naturally have no rights incompatible with this; and therefore none to resign.
For each individual to live in a separate state, and of consequence without
civil government, is so pregnant with evil, and greatly preventive of that
happiness of which human nature is made capable, that it could never be
designed as a privilege to man by the munificent creator: And, perhaps, is not
a privilege to other orders of rational creatures, as much superior to man, in
virtue, as in rank of being.

MANKIND may naturally have a liberty to live without civil government in the
same sense that they have a liberty, i.e. a power to neglect any moral duty:
But they are evidently made dependent on one another for happiness; and that
method of action, which in the constitution of things, will prevent misery, and
procure happiness to the species, on supposition of their being acquainted with
it, and in a capacity of going into it, is not only wrong in them to neglect,
but even duty indispensible to pursue. From hence arises their obligation to
civil government as mentioned before; and when the same reason urges the
lodging this government in the hands of a few of the number associated, the
same obligation lies on them to do so.

A COMMUNITY having determined that to commit the power of government to some
few of their number is best, the right the some few can have to it, must arise
from the choice of the whole; for in this state the government belongs to the
whole, and one has no more right to govern than another; the right therefore
that individuals can have to this must be delegated. This delegation is not
indeed the giving away of the right the whole have to govern, but providing for
the exercise of their power in the most effectual manner.

IT is by virtue of the previous consent of society as being best, that
government may devolve on some by succession, and that others may be appointed
to rule by thoose already in authority.

A COMPACT for civil government in any community implies the stipulation of
certain rules of government. These rules or laws more properly make the civil
constitution. How various these rules are in different nations is not the
present enquiry; but that they ought in every nation to coincide with the moral
fitness of things, by which alone the natural rights of mankind can be secured,
and their happiness promoted, is very certain. And such are the laws of the
constitution of civil government that we, and all British subjects are so happy
as to live under.

THE rectitude of the laws of a civil constitution are of more importance to
the well-being of society than the particular form of administration, but that
form which is best adapted to secure the uninterrupted course of such laws is
most eligible, and herein also we outvie other nations.

THOSE laws which prescribe the rights of prerogative, and the rights of the
people, should be founded on such principles as tend to promote the great end
of civil institution; and as they are to be held sacred by both, it may be
supposed, ought to be as plain as the nature of the thing will admit: Mysteries
in civil government relative to the rights of the people, like mysteries in the
laws of religion, may be pretended, and to the like purpose of slavery, this of
the souls, and that of the bodies of men.

THE design of mankind in forming a civil constitution being to secure their
natural rights and privileges, and to promote their happiness, it is necessary
that the special end of the electors in choosing some to govern the whole,
should be assented to by the elected to vest them with a right to govern, so
far at least as to direct the administration, without which they are indeed
vested with no authority; for the being chosen to a particular purpose by those
in whom the right of choice is, can give no rightful power to act beside or
counter to this purpose. And therefore to the proper investiture of any in the
office of civil rulers to which they are chosen by the people, it is necessary
they should consent to act the part for which they are chosen; and this sets
them in the high office of government, and gives them authority to regulate the
whole.

THEIR consent to take the office to which they are chosen by the community
lays rulers under a moral obligation to discharge the duties of it with
fidelity. And if for the greater security of society, they who are thus
introduced into office are bound to the faithful discharge of it by the
solemnity of an oath, their obligation hereto is the greater.

WHAT is right in the relation of things, and which has the general consent of
mankind, being the rule of civil government in a well constituted state, civil
rulers are to be so far from invading, that they ought to be the guardians of
the natural and constitutional rights of their subjects; which are here
supposed to be so nearly the same that there is no interfering between them. To
form a civil constitution otherwise would be to establish iniquity by law.

THE various duties of their office then center in one point, the end of their
election, and that is to promote the public welfare.

MINUTELY to enumerate these duties is no indeed pretended, not only as it
would take up too much time, but also as the wisdom of the politician can
better apply general rules to particular cases as cimcumstances vary; I
therefore shall take the liberty only in a more general way to observe: That
whatever is injurious to the community, whether foreign or intestine, is theirs
to endeavor to prevent. In this state of imperfection and sin, particular
societies are liable to injuries from one another, hence vigilance becomes one
part of the duty of civil rulers; to this they are more obliged than other men:
In office they are as eyes to the political body, the proper use of which is
necessary to its safety. It is no small part of their care to desery danger, to
penetrate the designs formed abroad to the detriment of the community. And as
they are set for the public defense, when such dangers are discovered by them,
it is their part to provide against them at the public expense; which must be
in their power at all times, or at some times it may not be in their power to
act in the character of guardians to the public. Individuals of the same
society are likewise liable to unequal treatment from one another, which also
claims their attention. They are to rescue the weak and helpless, the widow and
fatherless, from the cruel hands of oppression, and equally secure to all, high
and low, their rights.

AND whatever is for the advantage and emolument of society, is also their part
to promote, not only barely to secure to their subjects the cardinal privileges
of human nature, but also kindly endeavor to heighten their happiness in the
enjoyment of them. Those methods which will be most conducive to the
preservation and prosperity of the whole are to be studiously devised, and
faithfully urged by them; hence agriculture and commerce, liberal and
mechanical arts should be encouraged, as pointed out in providence for the
benefit of mankind; in proportion to improvement in which will be the benefit
resulting from them, by which a supply may be obtained not only for necessity,
but also for delight; and hereby their political strength will be increased,
and they become more able to support the common cause. The wealth of the people
is the strength of the state; and therefore, as the diligent hand makes rich,
they should reduce the vagrant, and call the idle to labor, and all to industry
in their respective callings, so essential to the public utility.

BUT wisdom is a defense as well as money, and necessary to the well being of a
community. The education of the youth is therefore carefully to be provided
for; that hereby such improvements may be made, as happily tend to abate the
ferocity of uncultivated nature, to soften the temper, and give a high relish
to the sweets of social life; and such geniuses may be formed as public offices
require; that the people, in church, or state, may not be destroyed for lack of
knowledge; but wisdom and knowledge may be the stability of the times.

THE civil power also should be exerted to suppress vice as pregnant with
mischief to society; and to support virtue as the foundation of social
happiness.

THAT public homage which the community owe to the great Lord of all; and which
is equally their interest as their duty to pay, should be earnestly promoted by
their rulers. The fitness of which reason dictates and revelation confirms, as
a proper expression of the dependence of mankind on him, and of their grateful
sentiments toward him, who gives to all life and breath and all things; and
also as the way more deeply to impress on their minds a sense of their
obligations to conform to his will; conformity to which will produce order and
harmony, and qualify for the blessings of his providence.

THE great advantages acruing from the public social worship of the Deity may
be a laudable motive to civil rulers to exert themselves to promote it; and
will have an influence on them who have the public good at heart, as well as a
proper sense of duty to him, who is higher than the highest: In this way, while
the ministers of religion are under the patronage of the civil power, the
people will be in structed in those principles, and urged to those practices,
which will greatly subserve the interest of the community, and facilitate the
end of government.

EZRA'S commission extended to church as well as state; and there is indeed
such a connection between them, and their interest is so dependent upon each
other, that the welfare of the community arises from things going well in both;
and therefore both, though with such restrictions as their respective nature
requires, claim the attention and care of the civil rulers of a people, whose
duty it is to protect, and foster their subjects in the enjoyment of their
religious rights and privileges, as well as civil, and upon the same principle
of promoting their happiness.

IT is therefore the part of civil rulers to make, and as occasion shall offer,
to execute such laws as tend to promote the public welfare. These indeed are in
some measure to be varied, according to the temper and circumstances of the
subjects, by the wisdom of the legislators; but yet it is necessary there
should be in them a conformity to the immutable laws of nature, to answer the
true design of civil institution.

To these laws it is fit they should add such sanctions as will give them
energy if they are suitably applied by those in civil office whose part it is
to put the laws into execution.

PROVIDED always, that no laws be made invasive of the natural rights of
conscience, and no penalties inflicted by the civil power in things purely
religious, and which do not affect the well being of the state: In these, every
man has an unalienable right, in the constitution of things, to judge for
himself: No man, and no number of men therefore have a right to assume
jurisdiction here.

ON the free exercise of their natural religious rights the present as well as
future happiness of mankind greatly depends; the abridgement of which by penal
laws is evidently incongruous to the eternal rules of equity; but these rules
are never to be violated in the exercise of civil power. Civil laws, of right,
can relate only to those actions which have influence on the welfare of the
state; and to all such the subject may be urged by the civil authority
consistently with that freedom of mind, in judging of points of speculation,
and that liberty of conscience relative to modes of worship, which he has a
natural right unmolested to enjoy.

OBLIGATION on civil rulers to secure the rights and promote the happiness of
the people, most certainly implies a power in them to that purpose, -- to make
laws and execute them; without which, ruler is but an empty name: To this
purpose they are indeed clothed with authority, and armed with the united
power of the community; only in the exercise of this power they are under the
same moral restrictions with those by whom it was delegated to them.

As in a well constituted civil state there is a subordination among rulers,
and each has his respective part to act with a view to the public good; so to
carry the grand design into execution it is necessary that each should keep the
line of his own particular departments every excentric motion will introduce
disorder and be productive of mischief: But each keeping a steady and regular
course in his own sphere, will dispense a benign influence upon the community,
and harmoniously conspire to promote the general good: As in the solar system,
every planet revolving in its own orbit round the sun produces that order and
harmony which secures the conservation of the whole.

THE part that civil rulers have to act supposes qualifications for that
purpose, and accordingly we have begged leave in the SECOND place, from the
distinguished character of Ezra to suggest some of them.

RELIGION, learning, and firmness of mind in the discharge of the duties of his
office, were conspicuous parts of his character, and comprehend perhaps most of
the qualifications requisite in civil rulers.

RELIGION includes piety and virtue, and is acting agreeable to the will of God
according to the capacity of the moral agent. To this all men are under
obligation as they would answer the end of their creation, and qualify
themselves for the happiness for which they were formed: And to this they are
obliged in their social connections, that the happy effects of it may be felt
not only by themselves but also by others. Nor is there any station among
mankind so elevated as to free from this obligation.

THE public good is in proportion to right action in every individual. -- But
as in the civil subordination among men some have it in their power to do more
good or mischief to the whole than others, so it is of more importance to
society that such should be virtuous than others. There is an essential
difference between virtue and vice, and their different consequences to society
will be sensibly felt: nor is it in the power of earth, or hell, to alter the
natural constitution of things.

VICE is detrimental to society in some degree in any of its members, but is
more so in those who manage the public affairs of it. It disqualifies for
public services at the same rate, as it debases the mind, weakens the generous
movements of the soul, and centres it is views in the contracted circle of
self-interest.

BUT virtue qualifies for public offices as it dilates the mind with liberal
sentiments, inspires with principles of beneficent actions, and disposes to a
ready compliance with the apostolic injunction, look not every man on his own
things, but every man also on the things of another.

THE religion of Jesus is designed to destroy the works of the devil, to bring
men from darkness to light, from error to the truth, and from the power of
satan unto God -- It inspires the mind with a sacred regard to God, and with
benevolence to men, -- it is an imitation of his example, who came down from
heaven and went about doing good, -- of his, who is good to all, and whose
mercy endures forever -- and it also more powerfully inforces all moral
obligations, as it illucidates a future state of rewards and punishments.

THAT character therefore which is formed from those principles, which are
abhorrent to sinister views, and indirect measures to promote a man's own
private interest, and lead to generous godlike actions diffusive of goodness to
mankind, and which afford the strongest motives to such actions, evidently
corresponds to a public station, and is most likely, ceteris paribus, to
discharge with fidelity the duties of a civil post.

NOR is the influence, the example of rulers will, in high probility, have upon
others, unimportant to society: Facts demonstrate examples to be very forcible
on human nature. Inferiors especially are apt to copy the pattern set them by
superiors, and too often even to servile imitation. In some proportion then as
the example of those who are in exalted stations is virtuous or vicious it may
naturally be expected the character of the whole will be: Nor is sacred history
silent as to the influence public characters have had upon the morals of a
people; in this view therefore it is the wisdom and interest of a community to
prefer the virtuous to the vicious for their rulers.

BUT the goodness of the heart influential on the life, without discernment in
the heart, will yet leave civil rulers short of a qualification necessary to
discharge the duties of their office. Men may be pious and virtuous and yet not
capable of penetrating very far into the nature and connection of things, and
therefore unequal to transactions which require more than common abilites.

THE natural and acquired accomplishments of mankind are various, all answering
good purposes in their respective situations, and subservient to the general
good; and in proportion to these they are qualified for different employments.
Of Ezra's learning particular notice is taken in his commission for government,
as qualifying him for the important post. And something corresponding hereto in
all civil rulers is undoubtedly requisite in their several departments; I mean
a capacity of discerning the nature and duties of their office, and how to
perform them.

It is not Indeed of so much importance how they come by their qualifications,
whether by less or greater application, as that they are really possessed of
it; on this in no small degree the welfare of society depends. Those posts, to
perform the duties of which distinguishing abilities, clearness of
understanding and soundness of judgment are required, cannot be filled to
advantage by those in whom these are wanting; if the blind lead the blind both
will fall into the ditch. In this fluctuating uncertain state, the community
will, at particular seasons more especially, need wise men for pilots, to save
the threatened bark from surrounding gaping ruin. The weighty and multifarious
concerns of state require great and extensive abilities to stear the whole in
that channel which will terminate in the public security and emolument.

CAPACITY for posts of public trust without virtuous principles is indeed
precarious, and not safely to be depended on; but when probity and wisdom unite
in the same person they form a character that tends greatly to support the
confidence, and secure the happiness of the people.

BUT to these we may yet add firmness of mind in the execution of their office
as a very necessary qualification in civil rulers, without which an habitual
disposition to do their duty, and the good sense to understand it, may not in
all circumstances answer the end. The necessity of this is supposed by
Shechaniah when he says to Ezra in the text, be of good courage, and do it. And
was exemplified by that ruler in his administration.

THE present state of things will afford frequent occasions of trying the
virtue as well as the wisdom of rulers. -- Like other men they are exposed to
temptations, and perhaps to more and greater than others; and human nature at
best is very imperfect. The temper of domination so strongly interwoven in the
make of man may induce them to a wanton exercise of the power reposed in them.
Flattery by its soothing addresses and artful insinuations may insensibly
divert them from a right course, and lead them to dispense the blessings of
government with a partial hand. Calumny and cruel censure may provoke in them
too great resentment, or subject them to that fear of man which brings a
snare: Firmness of mind is therefore necessary to repel these and a thousand
other temptations -- to supress every undue sally of the soul, and to urge the
spring of action, that they may pursue with steadiness and vigor the great end
of their office.

THOSE noble exertions of mind which a due administration requires clearly
evinces the necessity of this temper in civil rulers: As in order hereto the
art of self-denial must be learned and frequently practiced by them; -- a
prevailing attachment to their own private interests and gratifications be
given up to the public -- angry resentments be tempered down to the standard of
right action, -- their ease superseded by incessant labors, and sacrificed to
the benefit of others.

SOFTNESS and timidity of mind indulged into habit will weaken resolution, and
relax the nerves of effort in the most trying seasons, and perhaps betray the
cause their office calls, and their virtue inclines them to support. But
firmness and fortitude of soul arising from principle, and cultivated with
care, will not easily admit those fordid views that lead supinley to neglect,
or tamely to surrender the interest of society, but enable them to comport with
personal inconveniences, and stand firm amidst the severest trials, in
executing the duties of their office.

GOOD may indeed be done by him, who is distinguished by one of these
qualifications alone, and more especially in his connections with others
employed in, the same office; their different qualities may operate in
subserviency to each other, and by their mutual aid lead into measures
conducive to the general safety; and happy to mankind that in this imperfect
state it is so! But without determining which of them being wanting in civil
rulers would be of most dangerous consequence to society, it is very certain
their meeting in the same person forms a character that will best answer the
design of such promotion; and the more there are of this character among them,
the more likely it is that the public welfare will be promoted.

BUT, if every good quality should Meet in civil rulers yet THIRDLY, the united
exertions of the people with them are necessary to answer the salutary purposes
of civil government.

A COMMUNITY 'having delegated to some of their number the power of civil
government as a method of exercising that power the best adapted to secure
their natural rights and promote their happiness are not at liberty to
counteract the method, but under obligation, in every fit way, to support it;
and indeed without their exerting themselves to this purpose, their rulers,
however well qualified, will be unable to answer the end of their advancement.

THE cause in which rulers and ruled are engaged is the same, though the parts
they have to act are different; these all tend to one grand point, the welfare
of the community; and people are as much obliged to fidelity and ardor in the
discharge of their duty, as rulers to theirs, in supporting the common cause.

THE discharge of the duties of civil office merits an adequate reward from
them, whose business is done thereby; and the community are unquestionably
obliged to see that business performed. Rulers devoting their time and their
talents to the service of the public entitles them to an easy and honorable
support: For real service and great benefit done them, it is the duty of the
people to render to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, and custom
to whom custom. If this should not be afforded them by the public, they could
not attend continually upon the duties of their station, and of consequence
civil government, on which so much depends, could not be upheld to advantage.

A RESPECTFUL treatment of their rulers is also due from the people, and
greatly conducive to the end of civil institution. They are raised to exalted
station by the people, under the governance of his providence, who wills the
happiness of all men, and in promoting which they are to be considered as his
vicegerents executing his will, and therefore worthy of esteem and veneration.
Their success in administration also very much depends upon this respectful
deportment toward them: To pour contempt upon rulers is to weaken government
itself, and to weaken government is to sow the feeds of libertinism, which in a
soil so prolific as human nature, will soon spring up into a luxuriant growth;
nor will it be in the power of rulers to stop the growing mischief, or, to keep
things in a proper situation, without, the concurring aid of the people.

A SACRED regard to civil authority, according to the true design of it, is to
be cultivated in all; and as a means naturally tending to this, including the
necessity of divine influence in their arduous, and benevolent work, it is
directed by the supreme lawgiver, that supplications, and prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made -- for kings, and for all that an
in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty.

To keep up veneration for rulers, is to keep up a regard to government itself
in the community, and to open the way for its happier influence. Honor
therefore should be rendered to them to whom it is due for the good services
they have already done, and as being the way to give them opportunity of doing
more, and to stimulate them to improve the opportunity by the vigorous
exertions of their abilities to that purpose.

BUT still and more especially, the united efforts of the people with their
rulers are necessary to the putting those laws into execution that are made for
the good of the community.

IT is here supposed, that the laws made by civil rulers coincide with moral
fitness, and are calculated to answer the end for which only they are empowered
to make laws; if otherwise, the subject can be under no obligation to observe
them; but may be morally obliged to resist them, as it must ever be right to
obey God rather than men. The doctrine of passive obedience and non-resistence
in the unlimited sense it has been urged by some, came not down from above, as
it can be supported neither by reason nor revelation, and therefore if any
where, may be urged with a better grace by the rulers of darkness, in the
regions below, upon those who by the righteous decree of heaven, are excluded
the common benefits of creation, than by those powers that are ordained of God
for the good of mankind. But though with the highest propriety this doctrine
may be exploded, it does not at all lessen the moral obligation of obedience in
the people to an equitable administration; and to use their endeavors that the
laws made by their rulers to promote the good of the community should take
place to that purpose: This is only the continued exertion of that power which
is necessary to carry into effect the plan of civil government laid by
themselves, and without which the best laws will fall short of it. There may be
good laws, and faithful executors of them, and yet such a practical combination
of the subjects as in some measure frustrate the happy effects of them: The
violation of these laws may be so connived at in one another, as to prevent the
executors having the opportunity to suppress them. The laws of the supreme
legislator of the world are unquestionably just and good, and yet are
transgressed by daring mortals every day: And though under his all-discerning
eye the impenitent shall not finally escape with impunity, yet the
transgressors of human laws founded on the same principles as the divine, may
illude the inspection of man and the force of his laws: And when this practice
shall become general in civil society, the energy of government will of course
be relaxed. Nor can it be in the power of rulers the best qualified and the
most sedulously attentive to the duties of their office to prevent it, unless
they were gods in a higher sense than the scripture intends by giving them that
title, and were able not only to make good laws, but also to inspire their
subjects with a principle of obedience to them.

IT is therefore plain, that the united efforts of the people are necessary to
support civil government, and make it efficacious to the great and happy end
for which it was instituted: And as rulers are holden by the strongest ties to
consult and endeavor the welfare of the people; the people are equally bound
to aid and assist them in these endeavors.

WHAT has been imperfectly suggested in this discourse may lead to, some
reflections on the goodness of the supreme ruler of the world, to mankind in
general and to ourselves in particular, in the present state, more especially
as expressed in the institution of civil government: And give occasion to urge
the attention of rulers and people to the duties of their respective stations.

THE goodness of the Creator appears through all his works, but more
illustriously to man than to any other creature on this earth; him he has set
at the head of this part of his creation: The place of his present abode is
accomodated to his necessity and pleasure; and his mind is endowed with reason
and understanding to guide and regulate him in the enjoyment. With a view to
secure him in the possession of the munificence of his creator, he is directed
by instinct and reason to associate, and amicably unite the strength of
individuals for the defense and safety of the whole.

AND this method is peculiarly adapted to the present depraved state of
mankind, in which by leaping the mounds of right man is the greatest enemy to
man. If there was no such thing as civil government among them, what ravages!
and what depredations would there be! This earth would be the habitation of
cruelty, and a field of blood. The consequences of perfect anarchy among
mankind would be more unhappy and mischievous to them, than if the foundations
of the earth were out of course, the sun should be darkened, and the moon not
give her light, and the stars fall from heaven; And the natural order of this
system should be interrupted by a general and most ruinous confusion.

BUT the plan of civil government, as included in the constitution of things,
and obvious to the common sense of mankind, well executed by them, gives such a
check to evil doers, and support to them that do well, that the nearer mankind
pursue it, in its true intention, the more this earth will become a habitation
of peace, of security and happiness. This privilege is put into their hands by
the Lord of all, as the great security and completion of their earthly
felicity; to him therefore their united acknowledgements should like incense,
with fervor ascend.

WE ourselves have reason, not only to join in the universal tribute, as
partaking of the blessings of the creator in common with mankind, but also in
particular to express our warmest gratitude to him whose providence determines
the bounds of the habitations of all the nations of men that dwell on the fact
of the earth; that we live under a constitution of civil government the best
adapted to secure the rights and liberties of the subject: The fundamental laws
of which are agreeable to the laws of nature resulting from the relation of
things, worthy of men and christians; and the form of administration the best
contrived to secure a steady adherence to those laws in the exercise of civil
power. Our King sways the scepter in righteousness, and his throne is upholden
by mercy: The legislative and executive powers are guided by the same laws.

THE beneficial effects of the happy constitution extend to the remotest parts
of the British empire: Britons exult in the enjoyment of their natural rights
under its auspicious influence, nor less the colonists in North America while
they participate with grateful and loyal hearts the like blessings from the
same source.

THE colonists indeed on account of local circumstances, have been indulged to
form into little distinct states under the same head, and to make laws and
execute them, restricted at the same time by the laws and dependent on the
supreme power of the nation as far as it is consistent with the essential
rights of British subjects and necessary to the well-being of the whole. And
this is so far from being the ground of their complaint that it is in their
opinion the very foundation of their happiness; from the ancient stock they
delight to draw nutrition as hereby they flourish, and in their turn bear to
that proportionable fruit. Nor could any thing more sensibly affect them, or be
thought of with more regret, than to be rescinded from the body of the empire,
and their present connections with Great Britain.

IN their little depedent states they have long enjoyed her parental smiles,
which has greatly increased their attachment to her: The relief she has kindly
afforded them in times of danger and distress will always invigorate the
addresses, and support the confidence of her children toward her, under the
like circumstances, till they shall find themselves discarded by her. Which sad
catastrophe may all-gracious Heaven prevent! But the same patronage is still to
be hoped for by the colonists while they do nothing to forfeit it. Nor is it to
be thought that Great Britain would designedly enslave any of her freeborn
sons, and thereby break in upon that constitution so friendly to liberty, and
on which her own safety depends.

THIS Province has not the least share in privileges derived from the civil
constitution of her parent country, and which are amply secured to us by royal
charter.

OUR Governor is by deputation from our most gracious Sovereign as the
representative of his sacred person in our provincial model of civil
government. His Majesty's paternal care in this respect is most readily
acknowledged by us, as the Gentleman who has this honor at present is well
acquainted with the laws and formalities of our civil constitution, and has
abilities equal to the important post. Whose presence forbids every thing that
looks like adulation, but may admit of the warmest wishes for his happiness in
this world and the next.

THE other two branches of the legislature are chosen by the people, either
immediately by themselves or mediately by their representatives, which
coincides with the freedom of the British constitution, and we shall always
esteem as a pledge of the Royal favor.

THE return of this day is auspicious to our civil liberties, and fills every
honest heart with joy. The liberty of choosing men from among ourselves, whose
interest is inseperably connected with the whole, for his Majesty's Council in
the province, whose part is not only to aid the power of legislation, but also
"freely to give advice at all times to the Governor for the good management of
the public affairs of government," will always be considered as a privilege
dear and sacred by all who are not, by blind prejudice or fordid views, lost to
a sense of the inestimable value of their natural and constitutional freedom.

THE election of so important a branch of the legislature will naturally gain
the attention of those who are concerned in it. Fidelity in the discharge of
the trust reposed in them, and a regard to the welfare of the province will
determine their choice. All personal piques, and personal friendships, and
private interests will be laid aside upon this interesting occasion. And while
the public good is kept in view, qualifications for a place of so much weight
and influence in government will be chiefly regarded.

WE rest assured in the good opinion we have of the Electors, that they will
divest their minds of every wrong bias, and will not take those who neither
fear God, nor regard man; who have no steady principles of action to be
depended upon, unless those that lead them to break through the the highest
moral obligation, and to live as without God in the world: and in whose minds
private interest evidently turns the balance against the public. Not those who
are unfriendly to learning, who at the most have only taken the intoxicating
draught at the pierian spring, but have not drank so deep as to open their eyes
and give them a just discernment of things, who in their patriotic phrenzy
would deprive church and state of the the means greatly conducive to the
wellbeing of both. Nor yet the pushlanimous who would not dare to speak their
minds in their Country's cause in trying seasons, and are only fit for a
private station.

THEIR virtue and wisdom will fortify them against artful addresses and wily
intreagues in this important transaction. A just concern for the interest of
their country will lead them to prefer those qualities and accomplishments
which are most likely to promote it, and to give their suffrages for men
evidently possessed of them to sit at the Council Board the ensuing year.

AND may all, who by the people under God are advanced to posts of civil power
and trust, attend to the true design of their advancement, and with fidelity
and incessant ardor pursue it.

The matter which belongs unto them being altogether interesting to us, as
every thing dear in this world is connected with it, we surely may be allowed
to hope for an upright and wise management of it, and as the task is arduous,
and attended with various and great trials, to press them by every
consideration to be of good courage, and do it.

AND no motives to urge them to patriotic efforts are wanting. -- The neglect
of their duty, or that which is worse the counteracting the grand design of
their office, by indirect methods, they will be able to answer, neither to
their country, to their own conscience, nor to God the judge of all; for not
only the present, but future generations also, will feel the unhappy
consequences, and execrate the authors of what they feel. Their consciences
will give them trouble at certain periods, but especially at the near approach
of the decisive day, when all their dignity will forsake them, and they will
appear in their real worthless character, and creep into the holes of the
rocks, and caves of the earth for fear of the Lord, to shelter themselves from
that vengeance which yet will inevitably light on their devoted heads. On the
other hand, the diligent, the faithful and intrepid execution of the duties of
their office, will make them benefactors to the people at present, and transmit
their names with honor to posterity, who, in futurity, will participate the
blessings. And such conduct will afford to their mind a satisfaction that
nothing can equal short of the plaudit of their judge; who Will not forget
their labor of love, but amply reward their services for mankind, and as they
have been faithful over a few things he will make them rulers over many things.

THE happiness of THIS PEOPLE in the enjoyment of their natural rights and
privileges under providence is provided for by their being a part of British
empire, by which they are entitled to all the privileges of that happy
constitution; and also by the full and ample recognition of these privileges to
them by character.

THEIR civil constitution as the basis of all their temporal felicity is their
dearest stake. Every privation of their natural rights is subversive of their
happiness, and every infringement of the form of their constitution has a
tendency to such privation: The preservation of their constitutional rights, in
every fit method, will therefore ever forceably claim their attention; and to
this purpose, while they are awake to a sense of their interest, the vigilance
and care of their rulers will, of right, be earnestly expected by them.

THEIR being dependent on the supreme power of the nation as a part of the
whole, is so far from making it unfit to remonstrate under grievances of this
nature, that it is a reason why they should do so; when by the constitution
every subject has an equal claim to protection and security in the exercise of
that very power.

THEIR being loyal subjects to the best of Kings, whom may God long preserve!
and disposed to cultivate, and if possible to increase their loyalty, will
always incline his gracious ear; and give weight to their petitions with his
parliament.

WITH indifference to surrender constitutional rights, or with rashness to
oppose constitutional measures, is equally to rebel against the state. Anarchy
and slavery are both diametrically opposite to the genius of the British
constitution, and indeed to the constitution of the God of nature; and equal
care at least is to be taken to avoid the former as the latter. A ready
compliance with constitutional measures will always justify a tenacious claim
to constitutional privileges, and support the hope of their continuance.

THE welfare of the province, at all times, demands the attention of the
guardians of our natural and civil rights; to this purpose the legislative and
executive powers are to be exercised. But laws are useless in a state, unless
they are obeyed; nor will putting the executive power into the best hands avail
to the designed purpose, if there is not proper application made to it upon
those occasions that require the exercise of it; for in proportion to the want
of this application the most excellent code of laws will be a dead letter. It
is necessary in the nature of the thing, and indispensably obligatory upon the
people to unite their endeavors with their rulers to give life and energy to
the laws in producing the designed happy effects.

WE have good laws; and magistrates appointed to put those laws into execution,
whose fidelity may not be impeached: What therefore seems to remain to complete
our political happiness is the exerting ourselves to aid the civil power, in
surpressing every thing that may be detrimental, and in promoting that which
may be of advantage to the whole.

THOUGH some are appointed and bound by oath to give information of breaches of
the law which come within their knowledge, yet all are under certain obligation
to assist in conveying such information through the proper channels to the
executive power, as it is the ordinance of God for the good of the community.
But from the want of a due regard to the public -- or from a misguided fondness
for ourselves, we are too apt to be criminally indulgent to one another, and of
consequence to desert the magistrate, and in some degree frustrate the design
of his office. We have laws wisely provided against the evils of idleness and
intemperance -- and whatever has appeared to the wisdom of the legislature to
be hurtful to society; to whom then may the increase of such disorders be
attributed? to those whose business it is to execute the law upon offenders, on
due information, or those who rather than give such information choose to have
fellowship with iniquity: -- But not only they who are specially appointed for
the purpose, but all should attend to the moral obligation they are under to
exert themselves, in their respetive stations, to prevent the interruption of
the happiness of society, and instead of leaving the magistrates unaided,
should voluntarily rise up for them against the evil doers, and lend their
assistance to bring the workers of iniquity to condign punishment.

BY this general exertion the most happy effects would be produced; --
transgressors would soon be taught a greater reverence for the law, and all be
more secure in the enjoyment of their rights: Hereby obstructions would be
removed, and the executive power have free course; and judgment would run down
as waters and righteousness as a mighty stream.

INSTEAD therefore of speaking evil of dignities, and cruelly charging them
with the blame of prevailing disorders, we should recriminate on ourselves, and
do our part to aid the magistrates in putting the laws already made into
execution, and conside in the wisdom and fidelity of the legislators to make
such new ones as the circumstances of the community may require.

AND while the guardians of THIS PEOPLE are intent upon securing their rights
and promoting their happiness, in every wise and laudable method, liberal
support should be granted, great honors done, and cheerful obedience yielded to
them.

OUR safety and happiness must always arise from the united exertions of rulers
and ruled to the same salutary purposes. The security of our liberty and
property by the fundamental laws of our civil constitution is the strongest
motive to maintain an inviolable attachment to it; and to exert ourselves to
promote the interest of the nation to which we belong. Every well-directed
effort to support the constitution on which the happiness of the whole depends,
and to augment the wealth and strength of the British empire, as our duty and
interest, should be readily made by us. To multiply settlements on the
uncultivated lands, and reduce the wilderness to a fruitful field, by
emigration from our older towns, and especially by the introduction of
foreigners not unfriendly to our constitution -- to make greater improvements
in agriculture and in every useful art evidently tends to the general welfare.

ARBITRARY and oppressive measures in the state would indeed dispirit the
people and weaken the nerves of industry, and in their consequences lead to
poverty and ruin; but a mild and equitable administration, will encourage their
hearts and strengthen their hands to execute with vigor those measures which
promote the strength and safety of the whole.

To lay a foundation of greater security to ourselves is indeed a laudable
motive to such efforts; and may be justified by the principle of
self-preservation: But the advantages of such improvements will not be confined
to ourselves -- the more populous and opulent we grow, the more able we shall
be to defend this important part of the British dominions -- the more our
nation will be a terror to her enemies -- and the better able shall we be to
make remittance for what we shall necessarily want of her manufactures.

BY a proper attention to the general interest, and vigorous pursuits of
measures that tend to promote it, things may be put into such a situation as to
be of mutual advantage. The growth and prosperity of her colonies must be of
real advantage to Great Britain. -- The means for exportation being increased
in them, will be so to the colonies, by winch they may sink their present heavy
debts, and more easily defray necessary public charges.

THE same attention, with a little prudence, would lead us to retrench
extravagant expenses, and to promote frugality, good order, and industry, that
we might give a seasonable check to increasing debility, enjoy what we possess
to more advantage and widen the foundation of future felicity. Under greater
advantages we may receive monitory and directive hints, by turning our eye to
the provident ant, which having no guide, overseer or ruler provides her meat
in the sammer and gathers her food in the harvest.

WE are now reaping the happy fruits of our Fathers hard labor and inessable
sufferings; and shall not a concern for future generations warm our hearts --
produce some acts of self denial, and closer application for their sakes? or
shall we do nothing for our posterity when the first renowned settlers, here,
did so much for theirs? Could they look down -- or rather be permitted in flesh
to visit their dear-bought country, with what astonishment would they behold
the ungrateful neglect -- with what severity reprove the prostitution of
patrimonial privileges, and chide the criminal want of philanthropy, in their
degenerate offspring: and with what ardor would they urge them to perfect the
work they had nobly begun, and thereby make room for millions yet unborn
quietly to enjoy their natural, their civil, and religious liberties.

IN fine. To secure his own, and to promote the happiness of others, is the
part of every one in this great assembly. To this end were we born, and for
this cause came we into the world. We were placed in that rank of being, and
under those circumstances, which the infinitely wise and good Creator saw
proper. And as we are moral agents, and accountable; it is of great importance
to us in every station, to keep in view the end of our being called into
existence.

THIS is but the bud of being -- we are candidates for a succeeding state; into
which, we are assured by the gospel of the Son of God, the consequences of our
actions in this, will follow us, Nor in the constitution of thing have we long
to continue here, but mortality will soon translate us to the state of
retribution. With what care then should we avoid every action debasing to the
mind, and with what assiduity pursue those that tend to raise it to nobler
heights.

BY inattention and vice we may forfeit the blessings of creation and
redemption, and by a continued course of fordid and unworthy actions,
dishonorary to God and unfriendly to mankind, we may finish the ruins of our
nature; and put ourselves into a such state, that it would have been good for
us if we had never been born. But by a diligent improvement of the talents
committed to our trust in exercises of piety toward God, and charity to men,
we may enoble the mind, and qualify it for the sublime happiness for which it
was originally designed. Having therefore acted our part with fidelity in the
service of God and our generation, we shall quit this imperfect state with
dignity and honor, and rye superior to the highest grandeur and felicity in
these regions of mortality; and by the immerited munificence of the Creator --
walk -- High in Salvation, and the Climes of Bliss. MILTON.


THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 35, Line 2. read, agreeably. Page 38 Line 5. for heart read head. Page
39, Line 2. read this qualification. Page 46, Line 3. read a veneration. Page
48, Line 1, read to frustrate.

