A LETTER TO THE Reverend Dr. DVRELL, VICE CHANCELLOR OF THE UNIVERSITY of
OXFORD; OCCASIONED By a late Expulsion of SIX STUDENTS from Edmund-Hall.

By GEORGE WHITEFIELD, M. A. Late of PEMBROKE-COLLEGE, OXFORD; AND Chaplain to
the Countess of HUNTINGDON.

LUKE xii. 57. Yea, and why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right? JOHN
vii. 24. Judge righteous Judgment. LONDON Printed, 1768.

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Reprinted and sold by THOMAS and JOHN FLEET, at the
Heart and Crown, in Cornhill, 1768.

A LETTER TO THE Reverend Dr. DURELL.
Reverend Sir,
BEING a Master of Israel, and placed at the head of one of the most renowned
seats of Learning in the world, you need not be informed that the Mission of
the HOLY GHOST is the one grand promise of the New, at the coming of JESUS
CHRIST was the great promise of the Old Testament dispensation. -- "I will pray
the Father, says our blessed LORD to his almost disconsolate Disciples, and he
shall give you another Comforter." And again, "It is expedient for you, that I
go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I
depart (it being the purchase of his all-atoning blood, and designed to be the
immediate fruit and proof of the reality of his resurrection, and subsequent
ascension into Heaven) I will send Him unto you." And that they might know that
this Comforter was not (...) confined to or monopolized by them, but was to be
of standing general use, He immediately gives them intimations of the design
and nature of his office: and therefore adds, "and when he is come, he will
convince the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment."

Strange and till then unheard of, promise this! Such as a Confucius,
Zoroaster, or any other fictitious uninspired Prophet or Lawgiver never dreamt
of. A promise, which none but One, who was GOD over all, could dare to make; a
promise which none but One, who was GOD over all, could possibly fulfill.

Agreeable to this promise, having ascended up on high, led captivity captive,
and received this gift for men, this divine Paraclete, this Holy Ghost, on the
day of Pentecost, came down from heaven like a rushing mighty wind; and there
appeared cloven tongues, like as of fire, and (...) upon each of the Apostles."
-- The effects were immediate and visible -- Poor, illiterate Fishermen,
instantaneously commenced Scholars, Preachers, Orators. And well they might;
for, being filled with the Holy Ghost, as the Spirit gave them utterance, they
began to speak with other tongues the wonderful things of God.

But what was all this divine apparatus, this divine preaching, this divine
oratory intended for? The following verses inform us: The hearers of those
wonderful things, the spectators of this transcendently amazing scene, "were
pricked to the heart, and were made to cry out, Men and Brethren, what shall we
do? And the same day were added to this infant church about three thousand
souls." Here were proofs, substantial, incontestible proofs, of the reality of
the Resurrection, Ascension, and likewise of the Efficacy of the all-powerful
Intercession of their once crucified, but now exalted LORD; not only
substantial and incontestible, but at the same time entirely* suitable to the
nature of his Mission, who in the days of his flesh by his doctrines and
miracles declared, that his only design in coming into the world, was to save
sinners.

Upon this rock, namely, an experimental manifestation and application of his
Divinity to the renewed heart (which flesh and blood, human Reason, vain
Philosophy, moral Suasion, or any, or all barely external evidence whatsoever
cannot reveal) has he built, does he now build, and will continue to build his
church; and therefore it is that the gates, neither the power or policy of
hell, shall ever prevail against it. By the influence of this almighty Agent
has he promised to be with his ministers and people, even to the end of the
world. And agreeable to this, has taught us daily to pray that his Kingdom may
come; which being to be begun, carried on and completed, by one continued
emanation of divine influence communicated to believers in the use of all
appointed means, can alone enable us to do GOD's will on earth, with any degree
of that unanimity, cheerfulness, universality and perseverance, as it is done
by the holy angels above. And as this is the daily united prayer of the whole
catholic Church, however distressed or dispersed, and however varying as to
circumstantials and non-essentials, over the whole earth; it follows, that
every addition of any individual monument of divine mercy, out of every nation,
language or tongue, must be looked upon in part as an answer to the daily
prayer of every individual believer under Heaven.

Hence, no doubt, it is, that as the Angels are sent forth to be ministering
spirits, to minister to those who shall be heirs of salvation, that there is
said to be joy in Heaven over every sinner that repents. And as there is joy
in Heaven, so in proportion as they rise into the nature of Angels, will there
be joy also upon the same account amongst good men on earth. Accordingly, the
lively Oracles inform us, that "when the Apostles and Brethren which were in
Judea heard that the Gentiles also had received the word of GOD, they glorified
Him, saying, Then has GOD also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life."

And conformably to this, we are told, that "when Barnabas came to Antioch, and
saw the grace of GOD, he was glad." And why? Because he was a good man, and
full of the Holy Ghost and of faith. And as the same cause will always be
productive of the same effect, persons endued with the same benign and godlike
disposition with this good man, will always be glad when they see or hear of
any scriptural marks or practical evidences of true and undefiled Religion,
wrought in, or appearing upon any subject of divine grace whatsoever. And this
joy must necessarily rise, in proportion as such subjects, either by their
abilities or circumstances, and situation in life, promise more important and
extensive usefulness in the world and church of GOD.

No wonder therefore, Reverend SIR, that it has gladdened the hearts of many,
and afforded matter of uncommon joy and thanksgiving to the Father of mercies
and GOD of all consolation, to hear, that for some time past there has been a
more than common religious concern and zeal for promoting their own and others
salvation among some of the Sons of the Prophets. What a pleasing prospect has
hereby been opened of a future blessing to the rising generation! A blessing,
which we well hoped, would be not less salutary and beneficial to the moral,
than the new cruse of salt, which the prophet Elisha, when complaint was made
that the water was naught and the ground barren, cast into the spring of
waters, with a Thus says the LORD, I have healed these waters, was to part of
the natural world. "There shall not be from thence, says the prophet, any more
death or barren land: So the waters were healed unto this day."

But alas! how is this general joy damped, and the pleasing prospect almost
totally eclipsed, by a late melancholy scene exhibited in that very place from
whence, as from a fountain, many of their preachers frequently and expressly
pray, that pure streams may forever flow to water the city of the living GOD?
You need not be told, Reverend SIR, what place I mean. It was the famous
University of Oxford. Nor need I mention the scene exhibited; it was a
tribunal, a visitatorial tribunal, erected in Edmund Hall -- six pious
students, who promised to be the salt of the earth, and lights of the world,
entire friends to the Doctrines and Liturgy of our Church, by a Citation
previously fixed upon the College door, were summoned to appear before this
tribunal. They did appear; and, as some were pleased to term it, were tried,
convicted, and to close the scene, in the chapel of the same Hall, consecrated
and set apart for nobler purposes, had the sentence of Expulsion publicly read
and pronounced against them.

So severe a sentence, in an age when almost every kind of proper discipline is
held with so lax a rein, has naturally excited a curiosity in all that have
heard of it, to inquire what notable crime these delinquents may have been
guilty of to deserve such uncommonly rigorous treatment. But how will their
curiosity be turned into indignation, when they are told, that they were thus
rigorously handled for doing ^o evil at all, and that no fault could be found
in them, save in the law of their GOD?

It is true indeed, one article of impeachment was, "that some of them were of
Trades before they entered into the University." But what evil or crime worthy
of expulsion can there be in that? To be called from any, though the meanest
mechanic employ, to the study of the liberal arts, where a natural Genius has
been given, was never yet looked upon as a reproach to, or diminution of, any
great and public character whatsoever. Profane History affords us a variety of
examples of the greatest Heroes who have been fetched even from the plough, to
command armies, and perform the greatest exploits for their Country's good. And
if we examine sacred History, we shall find, that even David, after he was
anointed King, looked back with sweet complacence to the rock from whence he
was hewn, and is not ashamed to leave it upon record, that GOD took him away
from the she^^folds, as he was following the ewes great with young ones; (as
though he loved to repeat it) he took him, says he, that he might feed Jacob
his people, and Israel his inheritance.

But why speak I of David? When JESUS of Nazareth, David's LORD, and David's
KING, had for his reputed father* a Carpenter, and in all probability (as it
was a common proverb among the Jews, that "he that did not teach his son a
Trade, taught "him to be a Thief;") worked at the trade of a Carpenter himself?
For this indeed he was reproached and maligned; "Is not this, said they, the
Carpenter's son? Nay, Is not this the Carpenter?" But who were those maligners?
The greatest enemies to the power of godliness the world ever saw; the Scribes
and Pharisees; that generation of vipers, as John the Baptist calls them, who
upon every occasion were spitting out their ^^^om, and shooting forth their
arrows, even bitter words, against that son of man, even that son of GOD, who,
to display his sovereignty, and confound the wisdom of the worldly wise, chose
poor Fishermen to be his Apostles; and whose chiefest of the Apostles, though
bred up at the feet of Gamaliel, both before and after his call to the
Apostleship, labored with his own hands, and worked at the trade of a
Tent-maker.

If from such exalted and more distant, we descend to more modern and inferior
characters, we shall find, that very late, not to say our present times,
furnish us with instances of some, even of our Dignitaries, who have been
called from Trades that tended to help and feed the body, not only to higher
employs of a spiritual nature, but even to preside over those that are
entrusted with the cure of souls. And who knows but some of these young
Students, though originally mechanics, if they had been suffered to have
pursued their studies, might have either climbed after them to some preferment
in the Church, or been advanced to some office in that University from which
they are now expelled? One of the present reverend and worthy Proctors, we are
told, was formerly a Lieutenant in the Army; and as such a military employ was
no impediment to his being a Minister or Proctor, it may be presumed, that
being formerly of Trades could have been no just impediment to these young men's
becoming in process of time true Gospel Ministers and good Soldiers of JESUS
CHRIST.

Their being accustomed to prayer, whether with or without a form, I humbly
apprehend, would by no means disqualify them for the private or public
discharge of any part of their ministerial function. "In that day, that
Gospel-day, (these last days wherein we live) says the great GOD* I will pour
cut a Spirit of grace and a Spirit of supplication upon the house of David and
upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem." And the Apostle Paul speaks of it as the
common privilege of all Believers, that the Holy Spirit helps their
infirmities, and makes intercession for them with groanings which cannot be
uttered. Forms of prayer, certainly, have their use; and take it altogether,
our English Liturgy is, without doubt, one of the most excellent established
forms of public prayer in the world: but then, as no form in the very nature of
the thing, can possibly suit every particular case, it is to be feared that
many must never pray, at least for the particular things they most stand in
need of, if they are so to be tied up to their forms, that they cannot vary
from them, or use free prayer at all.

The great Bishop Wilkins has therefore wisely wrote an excellent Treatise on
the benefit and importance of this kind of prayer; and could our
University-youth be trained up to use proper extempore prayer, both before and
after sermon, in the opinion of all good judges, it would be as commendable, as
that strange custom of putting off our auditories with what is called the
bidding prayer; in which there is not one petition for a blessing upon the
following Sermon, and scarce any thing mentioned but what has been prayed for
over and over again in the preceding common service of our church.

But supposing such liberty should be denied in public, as blessed be GOD it is
not, surely we may be allowed, at least it cannot be deemed sinful, to use free
prayer in our secret or private social exercises of dev^tion. If so, what
sinners, what great sinners must they have been, who prayed, and that too out
of necessity, in an extempore way, before any forms of prayer were or could be
printed or heard of? The prayers we read of in scripture, the prayers which
opened and shut heaven, the effectual, fervent, energetic prayers of those
righteous and holy men of old, which availed so much with GOD, were all of an
extempore nature. And I am apt to believe, if not only our Students and
Ministers, but private Christians, were born from above, and taught of GOD, as
those wrestlers with GOD were, they would want Forms of Prayer, though we have
such a variety of them, no more than they did.

The Sick, the Lame, the Blind, the Lepers that came to our Lord for healing,
wanted no book to teach them how to express their wants. Though some were only
poor Beggars, and others, as the self-righteous Scribes and Pharisees
superciliously chose to term them, Gentile dogs, yet conscious of their wants,
and having a heartfelt sense of their distress, "out of the abundance of their
hearts their mouths spoke; and the compassionate IMMANUEL, who came to heal our
sicknesses and bear our infirmities, sent them away with a "Go in peace, thy
faith has made thee whole: Be it unto thee even as thou will."

How unlike, yea how very unlike such a blessed dismission is the treatment
these young Students have lately met with at Edmund Hall, who, amongst other
crimes of a like nature, were expelled for using extempore prayer. A crime not
so much as mentioned in any of our Law Books; a crime for which, in this last
century at least, no one has ever been called to the bar of any public court
of judicature; and a crime for which it is to be hoped, no Student will ever
hereafter be summoned to appear and hear himself expelled for, at the bar of
any of the reverend Doctors of Divinity or Heads of Houses in the University of
Oxford. But should any be so infatuated as to determine, Jehu-like, to drive on
thus furiously, as judgment has unhappily begun, as it were, at the very house
of GOD, it is to be hoped, that as some have been expelled for extempore
praying, we shall hear of some few others of a contrary stamp, being expelled
for extempore swearing, which by all impartial judges must undoubtedly be
acknowledge to be the greater crime of the two.

Singing, composing, or reading Hymns composed by others, and doing this in
company, seems to be as little criminal as praying extempore. When the last
words of David are about to be recorded, he is not only styled, "the son of
Jesse, the man who was raised up on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob,"
but the grand title of being "the sweet Psalmist of Israel" brings up the rear.
And "to teach and admonish one another in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual
songs," is as truly a scriptural command, as "Thou shall love the LORD thy GOD
with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and thy neighbor as thyself."

When Elisha the Prophet was about to prophesy before two kings, he called for
a minstrel, on which he played, to sooth his ruffled passions, and prepare his
heart the better for the reception of the Holy Spirit And were the Sons of the
Prophets more frequently to entertain themselves thus, I believe it would be as
suitable to the ministerial character, and recommend them as much, perhaps
more, to all serious Christians* than their tripping up their heels, skipping
and dancing at the music of a Ball-room, or playing even a first Fiddle at a
concert. And was the voice of spiritual melody more frequently heard by those
who come occasionally to visit our Colleges, it might be as much to the honor
of the University, as the more common and too, too frequent noise of Box and
Dice, at the unlawful games of Hazard and Back-gammon.

Popish countries, Popish seminaries, think it no shame, no disgrace to be
heard singing the high praises of their GOD in their Convents, their Houses, or
even in their Streets; and why Protestants in general, and Protestants Students
in particular, should be any more ashamed of, or restrained from the free
exercise of such acts of devotion, either in secret or in private societies, no
good reason can be given; unless it be proved to be good reasoning to assert,
that Protestants ought to be less devout than Papists. We must confess that
Papists, though they take this liberty of singing and chanting privately and
publicly themselves, yet deny this liberty of conscience to our Protestant
assemblies, those attending divine worship at our Ambassador's chapels not
excepted. But for Protestants to disuse it themselves, and at the same time lay
as it were a spiritual embargo upon their fellow Protestants, nay punish and
expel them for so doing, is very unaccountable.

What spirit then must those be of, Reverend SIR, who have lately joined in
pronouncing the sentence of expulsion against six religious Students, not only
for having been of Trades, and praying extempore, but for reading, and singing
Hymns also? His Royal Highness the late Duke of Cumberland, was of a very
different disposition, for when abroad in Germany, in one of our late wars, (as
I was informed by a person then on guard) hearing one evening as he was passing
by, a company of soldiers singing at some distance in a cave, he asked the
sentinel what noise that was; and being answered that some devout soldiers were
singing Hymns; instead of citing them to appear before their Officers, ordering
them to the whipping post, or commanding them to be drummed out of the
regiment; acting like himself, he only pleasingly replied, "Are they so? Let
them go on then, and be as merry as they can." In this he acted wisely; for he
knew, and found by repeated experience, as did other commanding officers, that
singing, nay, and praying extempore too, in these private societies, did not
hinder, but rather sitted and animated these devout soldiers to engage, and to
fight their country's battles in the field. And it may be presumed, that if
these Students had not been expelled for singing Hymns, and praying extempore
they certainly would not have been less, but in all probability much better
prepared for handling the sword of the Spirit, the Word of GOD, and fighting
therewith, either from the Press or the Pulpit, the battles of the LORD of
hosts.

To see or hear such divine exercises treated with reproach, and spoken of with
contempt by common and open blasphemers, is bad, but that any who came on
purpose to be trained up for the sacred work of the Ministry, should be looked
on as criminal, and expelled a University for being sometimes employed in them,
is too sad a proof not only that "our gold is become dim, and our fine gold
changed, but that our very foundations are out of course." What then must the
righteous do?

What indeed, but weep and lament. And weep and lament indeed they must,
especially when they hear further, that meeting in a religious society, giving
a word of exhortation, or expounding and commenting a little now and then upon
some portion of scripture, are not the least of these accusations for which
some of these young worthies had the sentence of expulsion pronounced against
them.

It is recorded in the Old Testament, that in a degenerate age, "those that
feared the LORD spoke often one to another; that the LORD hearkened and heard,
and that a book of remembrance was written before him for those that feared the
LORD, and thought on his name: and they shall be mine in that day, says the
LORD, when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them as a man spares his own
son that serves him." Thus it was in the Old Testament times. Nor are such
meetings mentioned with less approbation in the New: for therein, in order that
we may hold the profession of our faith without wavering, we are commanded to
"consider one another, to provoke unto love and to good works; not forsaking
the assembling ourselves together, but exhorting one another, and so much the
more, as we see the day approaching." Nay, one immediate consequence of that
grand effusion of the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost, we are told, was
this, namely, that "they who gladly received the word, and were baptized,
continued steadfast in the Apostles doctrine, in fellowship, in breaking of
bread, and in prayer." This is a short, but withal a full and blessed account
of the first truly apostolic primitive Church; and we may venture to affirm,
that as we are more or less partakers of a true apostolic primitive spirit,
such kind of religious or fellowship-meetings, will in proportion increase or
decrease among us. To talk therefore, or write, or preach against, or either by
private persuasion or open violence to oppose or endeavor to suppress or
discountenance such kind of religious societies, is flying, as it were, in the
very face of the scriptures of truth, and of the Holy Ghost himself.

In all our charters granted by the crown, wherein authority is given to bodies
corporate to enact laws, it is always with this limitation, namely, that no
laws shall be enacted by such bodies corporate contrary to the laws of the
realm. And as the Scriptures are our grand Codex Legum and Magna Charta, in
respect to our religious principles and practices, what affront must we put
upon our country in general, and the church of England in particular, even by
barely imagining that any law now exists that prohibits any of her members from
frequenting such societies as have the divine authority and superscription so
apparently stamped upon them?

The private meetings that are in any wise deemed and denounced illegal, are
such, and only such, as are seditious, and composed of seditious persons, who
associate, indeed under a pretense of religion, but indeed to plot against the
state. The sooner any that can be convicted of this are made to forsake the
assembling themselves together, the better: and though composed of a threefold,
three hundred fold, nay a three thousand fold cord, no matter if, like the
cords wherewith the Philistines bound Samson, they were immediately broken. But
as nothing of this nature can with the least shadow of truth be objected
against the meetings and societies frequented by these Students, but quite the
contrary urged in their favor, if scripture and the practice of the primitive
Christians are to be our guides, they ought not only to be permitted, but
countenanced and encouraged by every true lover of our church and nation.

And supposing in any such religious society one of them should venture now and
then to drop a word of exhortation, or even attempt in a small degree to open,
expound, or enlarge upon some practical text of scripture, how can even this be
looked upon as illegal, much less sinful or worthy of expulsion, when, I could
almost say, it is a necessary preparation for the future service of the
sanctuary? To be apt to teach, is one indispensible qualification required by
Scripture either in a Bishop or Presbyter. But how can this aptness or an habit
of teaching be acquired without the exercise of previous acts? Or what business
is there in the world, even from the lowest mechanic, to the highest profession
amongst us, (except that of divinity) wherein Pupils, Clerks, nay common
Apprentices, are not by previous exercises trained up for a complete
proficiency in their respective callings and occupations?

Our all-wise Master, we know, sent his Disciples on short excursions, before
He gave them the more extensive commission to go into all the world: and were
our Students in general, under proper limitations, to be thus exercised and
employed, while they are keeping Terms at the University, or among their poor
neighbors in the country, when they return home in time of vacation, they
would not turn out such mere novices, or make such awkward figures, as too many
raw creatures do when they make their first appearance in the pulpit. I
remember, above thirty years ago, after some young Students had been visiting
the sick and imprisoned, and had been giving a word of exhortation in a private
house, that upon meeting the Ordinary and Minister of the parish in their
return to College, they frankly told him what they had been doing; upon which,
he turned to them, and said, "GOD bless you: I wish we had more such young
curates." A milder, and therefore a more christian sentence this, than that of
a late expulsion for the very same supposed crimes and misdemeanors.

As for the reports of these young Students being accused or condemned for
barely being acquainted with, or occasional visitors of some of the most
laborious painstaking worthy parish-ministers in England, it is almost
altogether incredible. And yet the standers-by, as well as the supposed
Culprits themselves, as we are informed, aver this to be real matter of fact:
attended with this melancholy aggravation, that they were hissed at, pushed
about, and treated in a manner that the vilest criminal is not allowed to be
treated, either at the Old Bailey, or any Court of justice in the kingdom. We
are likewise told, that a copy of their indictment was asked for, but denied
them. And not only so, but that one, from whose politebehaviour in the worldly
walk, better things might have been expected, was heard to say, as he came out
of Chapel, to their grand Accuser, after sentence of expulsion was pronounced,
that he would have the thanks of the whole University for that day's work.
Pudet hac opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, et non potuisse refelli.
What thanks, Reverend SIR, he may meet with from the whole University, I know
not: but one thing I know, namely, that he will receive no thanks for that
day's work from the "innumerable company of Angels, the general assembly of the
Firstborn, which are written in Heaven, or from GOD the judge of all, in that
day when JESUS, the Mediator of the New Covenant shall come in his own glory,
in the glory of the Father, and his holy angels, and gather in his elect from
all the four corners of the world."

But, Reverend SIR, may we not presume to hope that this voluntary speaker for
the whole University, whoever he be, it makes no matter to me, was somewhat
out and mistaken in his calculation. For it seems not above three or four
Doctors, if so many, were present at, at least sat as judges at this
extraordinary tribunal. The worthy Provost of Queen's, (and undoubtedly many
other worthy Heads of Houses, were, and are like minded) was for prescribing
more lenient methods: and all are glad to hear that these young Students worthy
Principal, who must necessarily be supposed to be the best judge of their
principles, practices, and qualifications, boldly stood up in their defense,
asserted their innocence, confronted their accusers, and brought in books to
vindicate both their principles and conduct. But how this worthy Principal, as
well as pupils, were treated, is best known to those who had an active hand in
all.

However, as the Holy Ghost has left upon record, to the honor of Nicodemus,
that he stood up in defense of our LORD before the whole Jewish Sanhedrim, and
was not consenting to his death, so wherever this act of expulsion is recorded
(and recorded it will be, even to latest posterity) it will be mentioned to the
honor of Doctor DIXON, (and for acting thus he will have the thanks of all
moderate, serious, sober-minded Christians in the three kingdoms) that he had
no hand in, but did all he possibly could to prevent these young men's
expulsion. An expulsion for Articles of Impeachment to which indeed the accused
pleaded guilty; but for Articles which (wherever they may be called to minister
in holy things) will be their testimonial; and their expulsion for holding and
confessing those Articles, the strongest letters of recommendation.

How these young worthies are now to be disposed of, or how they will dispose
of themselves, as it was not so much as hinted that they had the least
connection with me, is not my business to inquire. But surely such an expulsion
as this cannot deter them from pursuing their preparations for their
ministerial calling: friends they cannot want, because "he is faithful who has
promised that whosoever forsakes father or mother, houses or lands, for his
sake or the gospel's, he shall have an hundred fold in this life with
persecution, and in the world to come life everlasting." But if any act so
dastardly as to make unscriptural concessions, or be terrified by unscriptural,
and therefore mere brut^ fulmina, if they were of Trades before, the sooner
they return again to their trades the better: for it is to be feared such
cowards would only make a trade of the Ministry if they were admitted into the
Church, and the fewer of such kind of tradesmen our church is troubled with,
the safer she will be.

But what a mercy is it, Reverend SIR, that we live under a free government,
under a King whose Royal Grandfather repeatedly declared (and he was as good as
his word through a long and glorious reign) that there should be no Persecution
in his time; and under a King who in his first most gracious and
never-to-be-forgotten Speech from the throne, gave his people the strongest
assurances "that it was his fixed purpose, as the best means to draw down the
divine favor on his reign, to countenance and encourage the practice of true
Religion and Virtue, and maintain the Toleration inviolable."

That both Students and common People will be in danger of being tempted by
such violent proceedings to put themselves under the act of Toleration, may
easily be foreseen: and it may as easily be guessed how such treatment will
necessarily discourage serious people from sending their sons to the University
of Oxford; and at the same time furnish them with a new argument for entering
their youth in some of our dissenting Academies, where they will be in no
danger, it is presumed, of being expelled for singing Hymns, speaking a little
now and then in a religious Society, or using extempore Prayer.

Alas! alas! what a disadvantageous point of light must all concerned in such
an extraordinary stretch of University-discipline stand in among all foreign
Universities whatsoever? In what point of light it will be viewed by our
ecclesiastical Superiors at home a very little time will discover. Nay, it is
to be feared, the discovery is made already: for by a letter dated so lately as
March 29, it appears that a certain venerable Society "on account of some
circumstances that have lately happened (probably the circumstances of a late
expulsion) are under a necessity of coming to a resolution to accept of no
recommendation for persons to go abroad as Missionaries, but such as have had a
literary Education, and have been bred up with a design to dedicate themselves
to the Ministry." This resolution seems to be taken in order the better to
prevent any of these cast-outs or any other laymen, however otherwise well
qualified and recommended, from applying to the Society for Holy Orders, that
they may be employed and sent abroad as Missionaries. But to what a sad dilemma
will many serious persons be hereby reduced? They must not, by such resolutions
it seems, be allowed to be Lay-Preachers, and yet if sent by their friends to
the University to pursue their studies, in order that they may be regularly and
episcopally ordained, if they sing Hymns, pray extempore, or give a word of
exhortation in a religious Society, though entirely made up of the members of
the Established church, they must be ipso facto expelled for so doing. O
tempora! O mores! If matters proceed in this channel, what stamp, Reverend SIR,
may we suppose our future Missionaries to the Islands and Continent will be of?
To my certain knowledge all of them are not looked upon as very burning and
shining lights already. -- But if what little light of true Religion some may
have, is to be thus damped by acts of expulsion before they leave the
University, and even this little light, as far as lies in the power of man, is
to be thus turned into total darkness, how great must that darkness be! Surely
it must be worse than Egyptian darkness; a darkness that will be most
deplorably felt by all true lovers of our common salvation both at home and
abroad.

You need not be apprized, Reverend SIR, that a design for the establishment of
Episcopacy in our Islands and Plantations, has been long upon the tapis; and
that it has been, in part at least, the subject of annual Sermons for several
years last past. No longer ago than in the year 1766, the present Bishop of
Landaff insisted upon the necessity and expediency of it in the most explicit
manner; nay, his Lordship carries the matter so far as to assure us, that this
point, namely, the establishment of Episcopacy, being obtained, "the American
church will go out of its infant state; be able to stand upon its own legs, and
without foreign help support and spread itself: and then, adds his Lordship,
this society will have been brought to the happy issue intended." Whether these
assertions of his Lordship, when weighed in a proper balance, will not in some
degree be found wanting, is not for me to determine. But supposing the
reasoning to be just, and his Lordship's assertions true, then I fear it will
follow, that a Society, which since its first institution has been looked upon
as a Society for propagating the Gospel, has been all the while rather a
Society for propagating Episcopacy in foreign parts: and if so, and if it ever
should appear that our Right Reverend Archbishops and Bishops do in the least
countenance and encourage the unscriptural proceedings at Edmund-Hall, how must
it increase the prejudices of our Colonists, both in the Islands and on the
Continent, against the establishment of Episcopacy; that persons of all ranks,
from Quebec down to the two Floridas, are at this time prejudiced and more than
prejudiced against it, is very notorious; but how will the very thought of the
introduction of Lords Bishops even make them shudder, if their Lordships should
think proper to countenance the expulsion of such worthy and truly religious
Students, whilst those who have no religion at all perhaps, may not only meet
with countenance, but approbation and applause?

Besides, if such proceedings should be continued, (which God forbid) what
little credit may we suppose will hereafter be given to future
University-Testimonials, namely, that the bearers of them have behaved
studiously, soberly* and PIOUSLY; and how must we in time be put under a
disagreeable necessity of having a new, or at least altering some part of our
present most excellent Ordination office? As it now stands one of the questions
proposed to every candidate for Holy Orders (...) thus: "Do you trust that you
are inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost?" But if all Students are to be expelled
that sing Hymns, pray extempore, attend upon, or expound a verse now and then
in a religious church of England society, should it not rather, Reverend Sir,
he worded thus, namely, "Do ye trust that ye are NOT inwardly moved by the Holy
Ghost to take upon you the office and administration of the church?"

You will excuse this freedom, Reverend SIR, Agitur de vita et sanguine Turni.
Love to GOD, love to mankind in general, and love to that University, that
alma matter where I had the honor of being educated, and, what is infinitely
more, where I had the happiness of receiving the witness of the Spirit of GOD
in my heart, altogether constrain me.

The news of these young men's expulsion has made, and will make the ears of
all that have heard, or shall hear of it, to tingle: and therefore if some do
not speak, and use great plainness of speech too, the very stones would, as it
were, cry out against us. -- In respect to my self* Reverend SIR, I hope, in
taking the freedom of troubling you with this, I do not justly incur the
censure of acting as a busy-body in other men's matters. For, whatever other
pretenses may be made, such as disqualification in respect to learning, age,
being of trades, etc. etc. etc. (Nuga tricaque calenda) it is notorious and
obvious to all intelligent persons, that the grand cause of these young men's
expulsion was this, namely, that they were either real or reputed METHODISTS.
An honor this indeed unwittingly put ^^ Methodists, whoever or whatever they
be, since scarce any nowadays can pray extempore, sing Hymns, go to Church or
Meeting, and abound in other acts of Devotion, but they must be immediately
dubbed Methodists -- I say, dubbed Methodists; for it is not a name given to
them by themselves, but was imposed on them by some of their fellow Students
and Cotemporaries in the University.

I take it for granted, Reverend SIR, that you need not be apprized that I am
one of these Methodists; and blessed be GOD I have had the honor of being one
of them for about thirty-five years. If this is to be vile, may I be more vile!
If this be my shame, upon the most mature and serious reflection I really glory
in it. But then lest any more innocent Youths should hereafter suffer barely
for the imputation of a nickname, give me leave simply and honestly to inform
you, Reverend SIR, and through you the whole University, what not barely a
reputed, but a real Methodist is: "He is one of those whom GOD has chosen in
CHRIST out of mankind to bring them by CHRIST to everlasting salvation, as
vessels made to honor. Wherefore they, which be endued with so excellent a
benefit of GOD, be called according to GOD's purpose by his Spirit working in
due season: they, through grace, obey the calling; they be justified freely:
they be made the sons of GOD by adoption: they be made like the image of his
only begotten son JESUS CHRIST: they walk religiously in good works; and at
length, by GOD's mercy, they attain everlasting felicity." This is the true
portraiture of a Methodist, drawn at full length, drawn to the very life, and
that too not by an ignorant dauber, but by those good old skilful scriptural
limners, CRANMER, LATIMER, RIDLEY, in the xviith Article of our Church; an
Article that deserves to be written in letters of gold; and yet, for holding
this very Article in its litteral grammatical sense, agreeable to his
subscription at the time of matriculation, one of these young Students, as we
have been informed, was expelled. If our information be wrong in this or any
other respect, the nation may soon be set right by an authentic publication of
the whole judicial proceedings.

If you should desire, Reverend SIR, a definition of Methodism itself, as well
as of a Methodist, you may easily be gratified -- It is no more nor less than
Faith working by love -- A holy method of living and dying, to the glory of GOD
-- It is an universal morality, founded upon the love of GOD shed abroad in the
heart by the Holy Ghost: or, to keep to the exact terms made use of in the last
Collect of our excellent Liturgy, it is the grace of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, the
love of GOD, and the fellowship of the HOLY GHOST; which we cannot go to church
or chapel on Sundays, Holidays, or other common days, without praying, not that
it may be driven from, but be with us all evermore.

If this be Enthusiasm, the true Methodists confess themselves to be
Enthusiasts. But then, they humbly apprehend, that they cannot with any just
propriety of speech be termed modern Enthusiasts; for it is an Enthusiasm which
our blessed LORD, in that prayer which he put up when he was about to take his
farewell of his Disciples, and which is a pattern of that all-prevailing
intercession which He is now making at the right hand of GOD, most earnestly
insists upon, and demands that all his disciples may be possessed of: "Father,
said he, I will that those whom thou have given me, may be with me where I am;
that they may be one with me, even as thou, O Father, and I are one: I in them,
and they in me, that they all may be made perfect in one." An Enthusiasm with
which Peter and John were fired, when Annas the high priest, and Caiaphas, and
John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the kindred of the high priest,
seeing their boldness, and perceiving that they were unlearned and ignorant
men, marvelled, and took knowledge of them that they had been with JESUS. An
Enthusiasm with which the Proto-Martyr Stephen was filled, when he cried, "Ye
stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy
Ghost." An Enthusiasm which Ignatius, supposed by some to be one of those
little children whom the Lord JESUS took up in his arms, was absorbed in, when
he styles himself a Bearer of GOD; and for witnessing of which good confession,
in order to cure him of this Enthusiasm, was ordered by Tr^j^n, the Roman
Emperor, to be thrown to the Lions. An Enthusiasm for which Cranmer, Ridley,
and Latimer, those glorious lights of the Reformation, those excellent
compilers of our Liturgy, Articles, and Homilies, were burnt alive for, near
Baliol college. And, to mention but one more too too recent an example, an
Enthusiasm, for being only a little tinctured with which Six Students, on March
11th, in the Year of our Lord 1768, were publicly expelled in Edmund Hall
chapel.

But think you, Reverend SIR, that this is the way to stop the progress of this
Enthusiasm? Or rather, may we not imagine that this very act of expulsion will
be a means of furthering and promoting its progress far and near? To speak my
own thoughts, I am fully persuaded, that if such unscriptural methods of
stopping this Enthusiasm be pursued further, it will be only like cutting off
the Lyrnean head; instead of one, an hundred will spring up.

Indeed, if the Picture of modern Enthusiasts, drawn up and presented to the
public by your Right Reverend Diocesan, be a just and proper one, supposing at
the same time the Methodists are thereby referred to, no matter how soon they
are banished out of the University, and out of the Church also: for his
Lordship is pleased to tell us "that they act in direct opposition to the
perverse Pharisees of old; these ascribed the works of the Holy Ghost to
Beelzebub; and it is no uncommon thing for these modern Enthusiasts, adds his
Lordship, to ascribe the works of Beelzebub to the Holy Spirit." Surely his
Lordship, by these modern Enthusiasts, cannot mean any who apply for Holy
Orders, and profess before men and angels, that "they are inwardly moved by the
Holy Ghost, to take upon them the office and administration of the church:"
when the searcher of hearts knows that they are moved only by secular views and
worldly hopes of preferment; this is indeed ascribing the works of Beelzebub to
the Spirit of GOD with a witness: or, to use the words of a no less learned,
though less censorious Prelate, I mean the moderate Bishop Burnett, "it is a
committing the horrid crime of Ananias and Saphira over again; it is lying, not
only unto man, but unto GOD."

This is a modern kind of Enthusiasm, Reverend SIR, which the true old
Methodists always did, and I trust always will abjure, detest and abhor. If
worldly church p^^ferments had been their aim, some of them at least might have
had worldly ladders enough let down to them to climb up by: but having received
a kind of Apostolical commission at their Ordination, when those who profess
themselves lineal successors of the Apostles* said unto them, "Receive ye the
Holy Ghost now committed unto you by the imposition of our hands:" they would
fain keep up and maintain something of the dignity of an apostolic character;
and therefore without ever so much as designing to enter into any political
cabals, or civil or church factions whatsoever, without turning to the right
hand or the left, or troubling the world with so much as one single sermon or
pamphlet on the bare externals of Religion; they have endeavored to have but
one thing in view, namely, to determine to think of nothing, to know nothing,
and to preach of nothing but JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified; to spend and be
spent for the good of souls, and to glory in nothing save in the cross of
CHRIST, by whom the world is crucified unto them and they unto the world. It is
true, by thinking and acting thus, the Methodists have been, and it is presumed
always will be, charged and condemned by men of corrupt minds, as thinking and
acting irregularly and disorderly: But as such a charge, in the very nature of
the thing, supposes a deviation from some settled standing rule, they would
humbly ask wherein the irregularity and disorderliness of this way of acting
and thinking does specifically consist? Is it irregular and disorderly to be
instant in season and out of season? Is it irregular and disorderly to do what
every Bishop at the very time of our being ordained Priests positively tells us
pertains to their office, namely, "to seek after the children of GOD,
scattered abroad in this naughty world?" Is it irregular and disorderly after
we have established the truth of what we deliver in our sermons by scripture
proofs further to confirm and illustrate them by repeated and particular
quotations, taken from the Liturgy, Articles, and Homilies of our Established
Church? Is it irregular and disorderly to fill her Pews, to crowd her Communion
Tables, and to recommend a frequent and constant devout attendance upon her
public Offices and Services? Or, supposing they should, merely by caprice or
prejudice, be denied the privilege of preaching within the Church, can it be
justly termed irregular or disorderly, at least can it possibly be looked upon
as criminal, to preach the same truths, to make use of the same kind of
illustrations, to repeat the self-same recommendations without the church
walls, in the fields, or any other place whatsoever?

The late candid Bishop of Lincoln, I am positive, did not think such a way of
acting altogether so very criminal; for in the charge given to his Clergy some
years before his translation to the Sea of Salisbury, he told them to this
effect, "that they were not to look upon themselves as Ministers of a Plato, a
Pythagoras, or any other heathen Philosopher, consequently they were not to
entertain their auditories with mere moral harangues, but that they were to
consider themselves as Ministers of JESUS CHRIST; and therefore if they would
not preach the gospel in the Church, they could not be justly angry if the poor
people went out to hear it in a field." A charge this truly worthy of a sober
minded, moderate, wise Bishop of the church of England. For even in acting
seemingly thus irregularly and disorderly, these modern Enthusiasts only copy
after the greatest and brightest examples the world ever saw, and whose
examples it is more than criminal not to follow or copy after. Our blessed
LORD, when denied the use of the Synagogues, seeing the multitude, went up and
chose a mountain for his pulpit, and the heavens for his founding-board. At
other times he sat by the seaside, nay, went into a ship and preached, whilst
the whole multitude stood on the shore. When Peter and John, that this kind of
Enthusiasm might spread no further among the people, were straightly threatened
and commanded that they should thenceforth speak at all to no man in CHRIST's
name, they calmly yet boldly replied unto their threatners and commanders,
"Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you, more than unto
God, judge ye: For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and
heard." A certain woman, named Lydia, a seller of purple, had her heart opened
when the great Apostle of the Gentiles was preaching and praying by a
riverside; and Dionysius the Areopagite, a woman named Damaris, and others,
believed, and clave unto the same Apostle, from the time they heard him preach
in the midst of Areopagus, or Mar^ hill. And we may suppose he was not less
successful when he was obliged by the angry Jews to preach in the school of one
Tyrannus.

I believe you will agree, Reverend SIR, that the venerable Fox and Bradford
did not appear less venerable for preaching at Paul's cross; neither did I ever
hear that Bishop Latimer was looked upon as degrading his episcopal character,
when he used to preach out in Cotton Garden Westminster, and King Edward the
sixth, that Josiah of his age, with some of his court, leaning on velvet
cushions, looked out at the palace window to hear him. And I hereby appeal to
the whole University, whether the Reverend Doctors of Divinity, Heads of
Houses, Graduates or Under-Graduates, ever looked upon it as criminal, or
beneath the dignity of their place and station, to sit out in the open air on
St. John Baptist's day, to hear a Master of Arts preach from the stone pulpit
in Maudlin College yard; though for fear it may be they should give further
sanction to field-preaching, they have lately thought proper to adjourn into
the Chapel?

You know, Reverend SIR, who it was that, when those who were bidden in a
regular way refused to come to the wedding-supper, without asking any one's
leave for so doing, sent forth some irregulars into the lanes and streets of
the city, into the highways and hedges, with that glorious encouraging
commission, not by fines and imprisonments, not by threats and expulsions, not
by killing the body for the good of the soul, but by filling their mouths with
Gospel arguments, backed with the all-powerful energy of the Holy Ghost, to
compel poor, wandering, weary, heavy-laden sinners to come in. Armed with this
panoply divine, and, as they think, authorized by the same LORD, some few of us
continue to this day, amongst small and great, high and low, rich and poor, in
Church or Chapel, in commons, streets, fields, whenever or wheresoever divine
Providence opens a door, to testify repentance toward GOD and faith in our
Lord JESUS CHRIST: and this not out of contempt of, or in opposition to the
godly admonitions of our ecclesiastical superiors, but because "the love of
CHRIST constrains us," and we think that a woe, a dreadful woe, awaits us if we
preach not the Gospel. Not that we are enemies to a decent or even episcopal
consecration, or setting apart Churches and Chapels for divine and holy
worship: but we are more indifferent about the reputed outward sanctity of
places, because our LORD, with great solemnity, said unto the woman of Samaria,
"Woman, believe me, the hour comes when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor
yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father: but the hour comes, and now is, when the
true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth. Hence we
infer, that every place is then, and only then, properly called holy, when,
like the ground around the burning bush, it is made holy by the divine presence
of Him who spoke to Moses out of the bush; or like mount Tabor, which by the
Apostle Peter is called by way of emphasis, the Holy Mount, because himself and
James and John, not only had upon that mount a visible outward manifestation,
but also a blessed inward heartfelt sense of the Redeemer's excellent glory.
It was undoubtedly this that made Peter break out into that exclamation:
"Master, it is good for us to be here." And it was this that warmed, and not
only warmed, but constrained the enraptured Patriarch Jacob, when he had only
the ground for his bed, the stones for his pillow, and the open firmament for
his curtains and furniture, to break forth into that extatic language "How
dreadful is this place! this is no other than the house of GOD; this is the
gate of heaven."

If then, Reverend SIR, for this and such like things we are accounted
irregular and disorderly, we are truly sorry for it: -- Sorry, but not upon our
own accounts, having the testimony of a good conscience that we act with a
single eye, and in direct conformity to the authority of the word of GOD: but
we are sorry barely on account of our impeachers and condemners, especially
those who being set apart for the ministerial Office, and loaded with
ecclesiastical preferments, preach very seldom, or not at all; or, if they do
preach now and then, preach only as though they were barely reading
wall-lectures, and seldom or ever so much as mention or quote the Homilies of
our Church, though they have subscribed to an Article which says, that "they
contain a godly and wholesome doctrine, and which judges them to be read in
Churches by the ministers diligently and distinctly, that they may be
understood of the people." It is to be feared, that it is owing to such
irregularity and disorder as this, that when our people hear of our Articles or
Homilies quoted by some few in the pulpit, that they are ready to cry out,
"What new doctrine is this? Thou bring certain strange things to our ears:"
At least if it is not so at home, I am sure it is so abroad. Hence it was that
about three years ago, after I had been preaching to a very large auditory in
one of the most polite places on the Continent of America, and in preaching, as
is my usual custom, had strongly been recommending the book of Homilies,
numbers were stirred up to go to the stores to purchase them: But upon
inquiring after the book of Homilies, the Storekeeper, surprised at the novelty
of the word Homilies, begged leave to know what Muslins they meant, and whether
they were not Hummims.

What a pity therefore is it, Reverend SIR, that the book of Homilies, which
ought to be in every hand, and as common as our Common Prayer Books, should
never yet have found a place in the large catalogue of books given away by the
truly laudable Society for promoting Christian Knowledge, though founded soon
after the glorious Revolution. If this be not remedied some way or another, we
shall very soon become disorderly indeed: our Pulpits will still continue to
contradict our Reading-desks, and we shall never have the honor of being
styled regular and orderly, till, regardless of Subscriptions, Oaths, Rubrics,
and Ordination-Offices themselves, our practices give the lie to our
professions, and we seek the fleece and not the flock, and "preach ourselves,
and not CHRIST JESUS our LORD."

Dead Formalists, and proud self-righteous Bigots, may loudly exclaim and cry
out, "the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord
are we!" They may not only cry out, but also cast out; and thinking they
thereby do GOD service, though most notoriously deficient in their own moral
conduct, may plead conscience, and say, "Let the Lord be glorified." But to
such as these our LORD once said, "Ye are they that justify yourselves before
men, but GOD knows your hearts." Like the chief Priests, the Scribes and
Pharisees of old they may plead their Law; for the breach of which these
irregulars, as they imagine, ought to be condemned and suffer; nay, time may
come when they may be permitted to enforce their clamarous accusations by
urging, as their godly predecessors once did against our Master, that "we found
these fellows perverting the nation, and forbidding to give tribute unto
Caesar; but Pilate knew that for envy they delivered Him." And though they
could plead their Loyalty, and say, "If thou let this man go thou art not
Caesar's friend, we have no king but Caesar;" yet both our LORD and his
Apostles rendered themselves, and strictly taught all that heard them, to
"render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto GOD the things that
are GOD's." Fain would the Methodists copy after such gloriously divine
examples: and, blessed be GOD, after a trial of near forty years, upon the most
severe scrutiny, their LOYALTY cannot be justly so much as once called in
question; for, as they fear GOD, so they dearly love and honor their King,
their rightful Sovereign King GEORGE; and have been, and continue to be, steady
invariable friends to the Protestant succession in the illustrious House of
Hanover. And if so, supposing these Methodists should be convicted of acting
somewhat irregular, since it is only the irregularity of preaching and
recommending unfeigned Love to GOD, and, for his great name sake, undissembled,
disinterested Loyalty to their King; is it not the interest as well as duty of
civil government, if not to encourage, yet not to oppose them? For it is
certainly a most incontestable truth, that every additional proselyte to true
Methodism, is an additional loyal subject to King GEORGE the Third, whom, with
his Royal most amiable Consort, our gracious Queen CHARLOTTE, the Methodists
with one united voice earnestly pray GOD long to continue to be a nursing
Father and nursing Mother to our Church and People of every denomination
whatsoever.

Every body is loudly complaining of the badness of our Times, and the
degeneracy of our Morals. Sinners now proclaim their sin like Sodom, and the
nation has suffered more than a second deluge by an inundation of every sin,
and every kind of corruption that was ever committed or practiced under Heaven:
"The whole head is sick, the whole heart faint; from the crown of the head to
the sole of our feet, we are full of wounds and bruises, and putrefying sores."
Shall there no man be found then to stand in the gap? None dare to attempt at
least to stem the impetuous torrent? None venture to go out with their lives in
their hand, and cry to a profane, careless, busy world, "Oh! every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters?" Can any considerate, much more any real good
man, be so cruel, as even to wish that the Gospel should be confined either to
Church or Meeting, when there are so many thousands and ten thousands who, as
to spiritual things, know not their right hand from their lef^, and who never
go either to Church or Meeting at all? If some are called to be settled
Ministers (and may the great Head of the Church fill all our Parish Churches
and Meeting Houses with true evangelical Pastors!) may not others be called out
to be Itinerants? Have there not been Presbyters at large, even from the
earliest times of Christianity? And if some of a more inferior rank and order
should be qualified, and thrust forth by the great LORD of the harvest, when
the harvest is so great, and the laborers so few, who shall dare to say to
Him, "What do thou?" Shall our eye be evil because He is good? If Isaiah was
a Courtier, was not the Prophet Amos a Herdsman? In the days of Moses, when the
Israelites were under a more immediate divine theocracy, news was brought him,
and that too even by a Joshua, that Eldad and Medad were prophesying in the
camp, without his License or his Ordination; what does this meek man of GOD
say? "Enviest thou for my sake? Would to GOD all the LORD's people were
prophets." And in the days of our LORD himself, when He was personally present,
his beloved disciple John, before his heart was more enlarged by divine love,
said unto him, "Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy name, and he
follows not with us, and we forbad him, because he follows not with us."
But what said JESUS, that good Shepherd and Bishop of Souls? "Forbid him not."

Such instances, such striking instances as these, methinks, should make even
good men careful not to give way to a narrow, selfish, bigoted spirit; and
caution them against joining with the world in smiting their Fellow Servants,
by crying down or speaking slightingly and reproachfully of a method of
preaching and acting, which, maugre all opposition, for these thirty yeaars
last past has been blessed and owned of GOD, to the converting of thousands;
not to a bare name, sect or party, or merely to head or notional knowledge, but
"from darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan unto GOD;" from holding
the mere form, to the true abiding possession and practice of true scriptural
godliness, in heart, lip, and life. But if good or bad men now dislike, and
therefore oppose such an irregular way of acting, they may be told to their
comfort, that their uneasiness on this account, in all probability, will not be
of long continuance; for few will choose to bid, or offer themselves candidates
for such airy PLURALITIES: to go thus without the camp, bearing all manner of
reproach; to become in this manner, "Spectacles to GOD, to angels, and to men;"
to sacrifice not only our natural, but spiritual affections and connections,
and to part from th^se who are as dear to them as their own souls, in order to
pass the Atlantic, and bear the colds and heats of foreign climes; these are
such uninviting things to corrupt nature, that if we will have but a little
patience till a few old weary heads are laid in the silent grave, th^se
uncommon gospel-meteors, these field phaenomenas, that seldom appear in the
latitude of England, scarce above once in a century, without the help of any
coercive means, will of themselves soon disappear. They begin to be pretty well
in disrepute already: Yet a little while, and in all human probability they
will quite vanish away. But though I am neither a Prophet, nor the son of a
Prophet* I am greatly mistaken if, in the Redeemer's own good time and way,
some spiritual phoenix will not hereafter arise, some blessed gospel-instrument
be raised, that shall make the devil and his threefold army, "The lust of the
Flesh, the lust of the Eye, and the pride of Life," to fly before the sound of
the gospel trumpet.

I have dwelt the longer upon this particular, Reverend SIR, because the
present learned Bishop of Gloucester, in his late volumes, entitled* The
Doctrines of Grace, is pleased to observe, more than once, that he finds fault
not so much with the matter, as the manner of the Methodists preaching. But if
by the manner, his Lordship would have us to understand, not their manner of
preaching in the field, but their manner of delivery, whether in the church or
field, I would humbly ask his Lordship, if he ever heard any of them preach? If
not, does our law condemn any man, or set of men, unheard? And I would humbly
enquire further of his Lordship, and all others whom it may concern, how they
would have them or any others preach?

I remember the great Doctor Delauny, when I had the honor of being with him,
many years ago, at the Right Reverend Doctor Boulter's, then Lord Primate of
Ireland, among other hints, proper for a young Preacher, gave me to understand,
that whenever he went up into a pulpit, he desired to look upon it as the last
time he should ever preach, or the last time that the people should ever hear
him. O that all Preachers, whether within or without doors, however dignified
or distinguished, went always up into their respective pulpits thus impressed!
They would then preach as Apelles once said he painted, namely, for Eternity:
They would then act the part of true gospel Christian Orators, and not only
calmly and cooly inform the understanding, but by persuasive pathetic address
endeavor to move the affections, and warm the heart. To act otherwise bespeaks
a ^ad ignorance of human nature, and such an inexcusable indolence and
indifference in the preacher, as must constrain the hearers, whether they will
or not, to suspect that the Preacher, let him be who he will, only deals in the
false commerce of unfelt truths.

Were our Lawyers, our Counselors, or our Players to act thus, both the Bar
and the Stage would soon be deserted; and therefore that answer of Mr.
Betterton, to a worthy Prelate, when he asked him "how it came to pass that the
Clergy, who spoke of things real, affected the people so little, and the
Players, who spoke of things barely imaginary, affected them so much," is
worthy of lasting regard. "My Lord, says Mr. Betterton, I can assign but one
reason, which is, We Players speak of things imaginary as though they were
real, and too many of the Clergy speak of things real as though they were
imaginary." Thus it was in his, and all know it is too much the case in our
time. Hence it is, that even on our most important occasions, the worthy
gentlemen concerned in our public charities, generally find themselves more
obliged to the Musicians than the Preachers, for the largeness of their
collections: and hence, no doubt it is, that upon our most solemn
Anniversaries, after long previous notice has been given, when some even of
our Lords Spiritual preach themselves, perhaps not two Lords temporal come to
hear them.

Sorry, am I therefore, Reverend SIR, to inform you, that a celebrated Orator,
in one of his Lectures delivered, if I am not mistaken, in the University of
Oxford, takes the liberty of saying, "That it is to be feared this is too much
the state of the Pulpit-elocution in general, in the church of England: On
which account, adds he, there never was perhaps a religious sect upon earth
whose hearts were so little engaged in the act of public worship as the members
of that Church. To be pleased, we must feel, and we are pleased with feeling.
The Presbyterians are moved; the Methodists are moved; they go to their
meetings and tabernacles with delight; the very Quakers are moved; fantastical
and extravagant as the language of their emotions is, yet still they are moved
by it, amd they love their form of worship for that reason: Whilst much the
greater part of the members of the Church of England, are either banished from
it through disgust, or reluctantly attend the service as a disagreeable duty."
-- Thus far Mr. Sheridan.

B^ why go I to the Bar or Stage to fetch vouchers in defense of earnestness in
heart and action, when speaking for the most high GOD, and offering salvation
to precious and immortal souls, for whom the ever-adorable Mediator shed his
precious blood? You know, Reverend SIR, the character given of Bucolspherus one
of the reformers, Vividus vultus, vividi oculi, vivida manus denique omnia
vivida. You have also heard of a Prophet who was commanded by the Lord God
himself to smite with his hand, and stamp with his foot; and gospel ministers
in general are commanded to "cry aloud, and spare not, and lift up their voices
like trumpets." But why refer I even to Reformers or Prophets? Rather let me
mention the GOD and Savior of all, even our Lord JESUS CHRIST, on whose manner
of preaching the multitudes that followed him, when he came down from the mount
made this just observation, that "he spoke as one having authority, and not as
the Scribes." And after his resurrection when "beginning at Moses and all the
Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning
himself," the two disciples at Emmaus said one to another, "Did not our hearts
burn within us while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us
the scriptures?" And I believe we may venture to affirm, that if preachers in
general spoke and opened the scriptures more under the influence and energy of
his blessed Spirit, whether in consecrated or unconsecrated ground, within or
without doors, they would find that their hearers hearts in a degree would burn
within them too.

But I have done. -- You will be so good, Reverend SIR, as to pardon not only
the freedom but prolixity of this. I have already mentioned the motives for
writing, and therefore shall now close with the advice given upon a similar
occasion to an ecclesiastical council by Gamaliel, a Doctor of Law, and had in
reputation among all the people: "And now I say unto you, refrain from these
men, and let them alone: for if this council or work be of men, it will come to
naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it: lest happily ye be found to
fight against God." To this God, and the word of his grace. I most humbly
recommend both yourself and the whole University, and earnestly pray, that all
at all times may have a right judgment given them in all things; I beg leave to
subscribe myself,

Reverend SIR, Your willing Servant, For CHRIST's sake, G. WHITEFIELD.
LONDON, April 12, 1768.

