A SERMON, Delivered at LITCHFIELD, On the 2d Day of November, A. D. 1768. On
the Day of the Execution of JOHN JACOBS, An Indian Native, Pursuant to Sentence
of Death passed upon him by the Hon. Superior Court, For the Murder of JAMES
CHOCK^ER. Preached upon the Desire of the (...) published at the request of
some o^ (...) Hearers.

By TIMOTHY PITKIN, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in Farmington.

Thou sh^^t not kill. SIXTH COMMAND. HARTFORD: Printed by Green and Watson,
near the Great Bridge.

NUMBERS xxxv. 16. AND IF HE SMITE HIM WITH AN INSTRUMENT O^ IRON, (SO THAT HE
DIE) HE IS A MURDERER: THE MURDERER SHALL SURELY BE PUT TO DEATH.
MEN AND BRETHREN,
WE are convened upon a solemn occasion, to behold a poor prisoner, under
sentence of death, to unite in ardent supplications for his soul, and to give
our last counsel and advice to hi^^, and then to be spectators of his
execution. (...) while there is a fixed approbation in our (...), that justice
takes place, our hearts may (...) affected with tender compassion, for the
(...) us and immortal soul of the poor condemned ^^^^inal -- when I behold the
dying prison^^, and (...) around upon this numerous and solemn as^^mbly, and
look up with a believing view of the ^^eat GOD, the supreme Lord, and lawgiver;
^^ese words seem a proper ground of the present ^iscourse, And if he s^ite him
with an instrument of ^ron, so that he die, he is a murderer; the murderer
^^all su^ely be put to death. This is a statute of ^eaven, a law made by the
great GOD: it was (...) divine pleasure, to provide cities of refuge, for the
manslayer, where there was no premeditated nor present malice in the case, but
killed his neighbor at unawares; and those cities were for the security of
such, from the revenger of blood, as well as typical of CHRIST, the only refuge
for souls; but for wilful murder there was no city of refuge provided, but the
murderer must die.

The doctrine to be noted is this, viz.

It is the statute of Heaven, it is the law of the great God, tha^ a murderer
shall be put to death.

I. My purpose is, to prove the doctrine.

II. Then consider, that GOD is the rightful Lord, Lawgiver, and supreme
Governor of all worlds.

III. Then view the reasonableness and rectitude, holiness and goodness of
GOD's laws, and moral government.

And then apply the whole, agreeable to the day, and solemn occasion.

I. I am to prove, that it is the statute of ^^aven, the law of GOD, that a
murderer shall (...) put to death. Genesis ix. 6. Whosoever sheddeth (...) blood, by
man shall his blood be shed; for in the (...) of GOD made he man. This is a law
which GO^ made, and gave to Noah, the father of the (...) world, to be
published and binding upon (...) mankind. This doctrine is clearly manifested
(...) the law which was revived, and, with solem^ pomp, published at Mount
Sinai, when GO^ spoke all these words, saying, and this divine precept, Exodus
xx. 13. is one of the ten commandments, which GOD spoke, Thou shall not kill.
By this, all murder is absolutely forbidden. Afterward, we find in a variety
of places, GO^ makes it a law unalterable, that murder shall be punished with
death -- though these laws were pen^^ and judicial, and made and given unto
Israel, of GOD, as their king, and political head, yet they were founded upon
this orig^^al statute, Thou shall not kill: yea, and founded upon the law of
nature, for antecedent to all human compact, and forming into society, every
man has a natural right to his own life, and no one has any right to take it
away; and therefore, whosoever does take away the life of another, forfeits his
own; there be many laws which declare that murder shall be punished with death,
Exodus xxi. 12. He that smites a man so that he die, shall surely be put to
death. So in our text and context, he that smites with an instrument of iron,
by throwing a stone, or with a weapon of wood, or by smiting with his hand, any
one, so that he die, such a man is a murderer; he shall surely be put to death,
This divine command was maintained by the wise king Solomon, Prove. xxviii. 17.
A man that does violence to the blood of any person, shall flee to the pit, let
no man stay him. Therefore by the divine law, a murderer must be put to death.

II. I am to consider, that GOD is the rightful Lord, Lawgiver, and supreme
governor of all worlds. For where we find a law, and penalty annexed, it
supposes authority, and right of government. Now, we are to view GOD's absolute
authority to enact laws, and s^t supreme king forever.

1. JEHOVAH is by nature GOD, an absolutely perfect being, the creator and
proprietor of the ^niverse, and is therefore the absolute Lord of all, and the
government of all things devolves upon (...), for the kingdom is the Lord's,
and he governs among the nations; and it is his absolute right, as GOD, to take
his seat at the head of the universe, and conduct all affairs in his own
worlds; and the divine government does extend universally; it reaches to the
highest heavens; and divine control to the lowest hell: through all the natural,
and all the moral world; and it is a matter of joy, that the LORD GOD reigns.

2. Consider GOD is infinitely equal to the province of universal government;
the divine perfections are infinite, and GOD's character absolutely perfect;
the infinite knowledge and wisdom of GOD, can form the most perfect plan of
government; and infinite holiness, justice, and goodness, holding the reins:
every affair is conducted in the best, wisest, and most perfect manner: so
there is an infinite propriety that GOD should reign, and be king for ever;
from the consideration of the divine qualifications, and that all worlds, and
created beings, should be his absolute property.

3. Therefore GOD the rightful lawgiver, has an infinite authority to enact
laws, and govern in his moral kingdom; for if GOD most-high, has a right of
government, then, he has an infinite authority to enact laws; for to suppose a
right of government, and not authority to make laws, nor demand obedience, nor
annex a penalty, is to cut all the sinews of government; but as all moral
created beings, are GOD's workmanship,

(...) (...) suffering? to vindicate the character of GOD* (...) magnify the
divine law, and make it honorable, (...) bring in an everlasting righteousness,
and pave (...) honorable way, through the atonement, for the ^ard^n, and
salvation of poor miserable and hell-deserving sinners. These express the
infinite va^ue and excellence of the divine law, that it was ^ell ^^ade, and
its demands perfectly reasonable, and ^enalty just. I have thought indeed, had
I (...) a spectator of the destruction of the old ^orld by the deluge -- of the
overthrow of Sodom (...) the storm of fire and brimstone -- had I stood ^ith
trembling Israel, at the foot of Mount Sinai, and heard the law given by GOD --
could I have (...) my ear at the door of hell; and heard the (...) o^ the
damned, and then have retired to the (...), and heard the groans of the dying
Imma^uel, to magnify the divine law -- I say, would not ^he agonies and sorrows
of the expiring Savior, have been more expressive of the holiness, the
good^^^^ the purity and justice of the law, and the (...) lawgiver, than the
cry of suffe^ing Sodom, (...) thunders of Sinai, or groans of the damned.

4. GOD's moral government, is equitable, ^^^utiful and wi^e; for GOD governs
agreeable to (...) own most wise and just law. It is certain GOD (...) how to
govern, and as certain that the (...) of all the earth will do right. And though
^arkness is round about him, yet justice and judgment are the habitation of his
throne. What GOD does, (...) know not now, but will be known hereafter, (...)
the glorious plan of moral government shall (...) ^pened to view, and all moral
beings know through heaven, earth and hell, that all GOD's (...) are perfect, and
that every thing has been c^^ducted, in the most wise, equitable, and perf^^^
manner.

IMPROVEMENT.
1. Infer that a revolt from GOD's governne^^ and a violation of his law, is
the most unreaso^ab^^ and renders creatures exceeding criminal; GOD (...)
infinitely worthy of our highest esteem and (...), and every thing there is in
GOD's law (...) government, not only to demand, but to (...) our obedience; and
all the guilt of rebellion (...) at our door. GOD's perfections are
unchangeab^^ the same, his law the same.

2. It is Perfectly just in God, to cast off all sinn^^ as such, and punish
them in hell, with an ev^^lasting punishment; for sin is exceeding sinful,
(...) it is against GOD, and a violation of the law which is clothed with
infinite authority, and deserves eternal punishment.

3. Therefore the plan of salvation is (...) upon grace, and if GOD is pleased
to save* of the fallen race of man, it is of his free, and (...) reign grace.

4. Hence learn, the absolute necessit^ (...) importance of an atonement. We
stand ^^able with awful guilt as transg^^ssors of (...) holy law. To plead not
guilty we cannon (...) plead abatement of the law, we cannot -- to (...)
atonement for our sins, we are absolutely unab^^ though we should offer thousands
of rams, or ten thousands of rivers of oil, all would be insufficient; (...)
Christ Jesus has made atonement. GOD now be just, and justify him which
believes in Jesus, for ^e has ^^gnified the law, and made it honorable. There
is no way for sinners, but to repair to Christ; to Christ we must go, or to
hell.

My discourse now ^urns to the poor prisoner, under sentence of death.

JOHN JACOBS, It was your request, that this last advice, should by me be given
to you, and therefore by help of divine grace, I shall speak to you, with great
plainess, and O! that I may address you, with that warmth and faithfulness,
which your present case calls for, this being the last sermon you will ever
hear.

When I see you a poor criminal, under sentence of death, when I view your
aggravated crimes, and you standing upon the edge of time, and just launching
into an unalterable and eternal state; O! prisoner, what shall I say to you! O!
my hearers, what words shall your preacher choose!

Prisoner, attend! The great GOD has made a law, that he that sheddeth man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed And in our text, if one smite another
with an instrument of iron, so that he die, he is a murderer, the murderer
shall surely be put to death. GOD had an infinite authority to make this law,
and annex this penalty; and, JOHN, this is your case; you smote one of your
fellow creatures in malice and rage, with an instrument of iron, so that he
died; therefore you are a murderer, and you stand chargeable with guilt of
blood; it is just that you be put to death, for by the statute of heaven, by the
law of GOD, you ought to die.

P^^soner, attend! You deserve to suffer the eternal pains of hell, it is just
in God to send you to the hopeless regions of the damned; you was a sinner
born, have been a prayerless, and malicious creature, therefore GOD, against
whom you have sinned, and whose laws you have violated, may justly damn you. As
you have ferved Satan and your own lusts, you deserve to reap the wages of sin,
and to be a sharer in torments with the devil, that old murderer, with whom you
have symbolized. GOD is clear when he judges, and his throne guiltless, and
his character glorious, though the smoke of your torment should ascend for ever
and ever.

Prisoner, attend! Your sins are greatly aggravated, you have been bro't up in
a christian land, capable of reading the word of GOD, and the greater
advantages you have been under, your sins in their aggravation arise in
proportion: you was able to read the statute of heaven against murder, you knew
that it was contrary to the law of GOD, for you to kill your fellow creature,
and in taking away his life, you assumed, daringly assumed GOD's prerogative,
who is the ^ole LORD, and disposer of life; therefore heaven daring, and GOD
provoking is your crime, and calls aloud for divine vengeance to descend upon
your guilty head: keen will be the torments, and dreadful indeed, will be the
damnation of them which perish, who have been favored with the glorious gospel!

And, poor criminal! if you are yet impenitent, and a graceless, and
umbel^eving, Christ less sinner, you are under condemnation, and the wrath of
GOD, abides on you, and you now hang over a ^laming hell! and as with your
natural life, nothing remains but execution, dying in such a state of
impenitence and unbelief, you will descend to woe and hopeless misery! look all
around, how does vengeance pursue, the wrath of GOD hang over your guilty head!
the curses of the law pointing at you, and the sword of justice ready to be
bathed in the blood of your soul.

But, poor prisoner! There is one door of hope, and only one, and that is
Christ: for it is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ
Je^^s came into the world to save sinners, even the chief. 1. Tim. i. 15. The
blood of Christ cleanses from all sin. 1 John, i. 7. Great sinners have found
mercy, the crucifiers of Christ, (some of them at least) were washed in that
blood which they shed, and the dying thief obtained mercy in some of his last,
yea, in his dying moments: but those repented of their sins, and by faith
repaired to Jesus, the only Savior; for without repentance, there is no
remission of sin, and without faith in Christ, there is no justification, nor
salvation.

Therefore you must be sensible of your sin, feel your*guilt, and see your
ruined, perishing and undone estate, and helpless condition; and as you by
nature are totally corrupt and depraved, so you stand in absolute need of a new
heart, and a foundation to be laid in you, by the operation of the holy spirit,
for true views, and holy exercises you must see, and have a sense of GOD, of
the excellence of his law, and government, and of your vileness and odiousness,
by reason of your sin, and see the justice of GOD, in casting you off for ever,
and feel yourself righteously condemned. You must feel your need of a savior,
and under a sense of the gloriousness, and all sufficiency of Christ, the
compleatness of his atonement, and with heart approbation of the glorious way
of salvation, and under a deep sense of your unworthiness, guilt and vileness,
with full consent of heart, come into this way of salvation by Christ, receive
him a Savior to save from sin, and the punishment of sin, and trust all the
affairs of thy soul in his all-saving hands, and with a bleeding heart for sin,
and hatred of it, give up yourself to GOD in Christ, unreservedly, and for
ever. O! now repent, and believe on the LORD Jesus Christ! you stand in the
greatest need of an interest in Christ! for, Mark xvi. 16. He that believes
not shall be damned. And our LORD says, John viii. 24. If ye believe not that
I am he, ye shall die in your sins.

But the fountain of Christ's blood is open, your sin in it is nature is not
unpardonable, unless you fix it by final unbelief; but you cannot be saved,
unless you are truly penitent, and believe on the name of the LORD Jesus
Christ. The matter is bro't to a point, you must accept of Christ, or go to
hell. I therefore, in the name of the LORD, warn you to repent, and to go to
the threshold of mercy; own your guilt, and just condemnation, plead for the
life of your precious soul, that GOD would glorify his grace, in your pardon
and salvation, and that Jesus would save a poor perishing and hell-deserving
sinner.

And now, poor condemned criminal! Your

^tis your business, and your privilege, to go to GOD. Therefore, pour out
your hearts to GOD, and put up your united supplications for this man's soul,
that GOD would give him repentance, and wash him in the blood of the Redeemer,
that joy may be in heaven, over this poor penitent sinner.

And all the children of GOD in this assembly, in the poor criminal's name, I
ask yo^^, ardent prayers: you have an interest in the court of ^^^ven: plead
GOD's free grace, for this poor dying man.

All in this assembly, which are graceless, and umbel^eving sinners, you no
doubt feel your compassions move, when you behold this prisoner; but pray
attend to your own case: He that believes not is condemned already. You are
under the condemning sentence of GOD's law: and thus living, and thus dying,
you will be bro't forth to a more awful execution, and divine vengeance sink
your guilty souls to the prison of hopeless misery.

Finally, this day and occasion, may naturally ^ead our views forward to the
great day of judgment; when, upon the sounding of the last trump ^here shall be
an assembled world at GOD's bar: ^ark to the solemn ^ound! arise ye dead, and
come ^o judgment! gloriou^ and joyful day to faints, to ^ehold the Judge upon
his throne, but terrible to ^^nners! who will call upon the rocks and mountains
to cover them: when final sentence will be passed upon impenitent sinners, and
they be bro't out, the helpless prisoners of justice; and with more than dying
groans, descend to an eternal hell, while the righteous shall shine as the sun
in the kingdom of their father, and praises be sung in heavenly glory forever
and ever,

AMEN and AMEN.

