THAT THERE IS BUT ONE COVENANT, Whereof Baptism and the Lord's- Supper are
SEALS, viz. THE COVENANT OF GRACE; (PROVED FROM THE WORD OF GOD) AND, THE
DOCTRINE OF AN EXTERNAL GRACELESS COVENANT, LATELY ADVANCED, By the Rev. Mr.
MOSES MATHER: In a Pamphlet, Entitled, The Visible Church in Covenant with
God, etc. SHOWN TO BE AN UNSCRIPTURAL DOCTRINE.

To which is prefixed, AN ANSWER, To a Dialogue concerning The
Half-Way-Covenant; Lately printed at NEW LONDON.

BY JOSEPH BELLAMY, D.D.

To the Law, and to the Testimony.

ISAIAH viii. 20. NEW HAVEN: Printed by T. and S. GREEN, in the Old-Council
Chamber, M,DCC,LXIX.

A DIALOGUE between a MINISTER and his PARISHIONER, concerning the
HALF-WAY-COVENANT.
Parishioner. SIR, this third visit I am come to make you, for I have lately
read a piece, printed at New London, entitled, "A dialogue between a minister
and his parishioner, concerning the half-way-covenant continued;" said to be
written by one of the most learned and ingenious ministers in the colony. I
hope, therefore, now, if ever, by the assistance of such a patron, to be able
to carry my point, -- Instructed by him, I give up the half-way-covenant; I
grant there is but one covenant. I give up the half-way-practice too, as
founded only in ignorance, and the mistaken notions of the vulgar. I am
convinced, that he that is qualified to have his children baptized, is equally
qualified to come to the Lord's-table. -- I come, therefore, to claim baptism
for my child, and a place at the Lord's-table for myself, as my proper right.
p. 6. -- However, I am not well pleased at the publication of our discourse in
my first visit, although I must confess you have given a fair representation of
what passed, because being very dull at that time, I make but a very
indifferent figure in the eyes of the public. p. 2.


Minister. Be comforted, my friend, no blame is laid on you by the public. I
bear it all; and I am willing to bear it for your good: and methinks you have
only cause of joy and thankfulness; for, to be convinced, so soon, of your
mistake, is no small favor. No doubt the voice of the clergy, who practice the
halfway, declaring as one man, that he, who is qualified to offer his child,
to baptism, is equally qualified to come to the Lord's-table, has wrought your
conviction; for your former faith and practice were grounded merely on the
custom of the country: this led you to think, that the Lord's Supper was more
holy than baptism. But while you hear all the ministers, with whom you
converse, declare, they mean no such thing; they practice the halfway only in
condescension to the ignorance and groundless, unscriptural scruples of the
common people, you are convinced; you give up the point: you own the command of
Christ, do this in remembrance of me, is binding on all his disciples. -- But,
pray, upon what grounds, do you now so boldly claim baptism for your child?


P. Although I was "uncommonly dull and muddy," in my first visit; yet you know,
sir, what I wanted was to have my child baptized. As you told me there was but
one covenant, so we were agreed, that I had entered into that covenant, the
very same covenant that you entered into three and thirty years ago, when you
was admitted into the church. And, sir, why may I not have the seal of it set
upon my child? p. 4.


M. Did not I expressly tell you, that If the covenant owned is the covenant of
grace, and if the parent acts understandingly and honestly in the affair, he is
a good man, he has a right before God to baptism for his children, and an equal
right to the Lord's Supper? But that if the covenant owned is not the covenant
of grace, those who have owned it, have in the sight of God no right to either
of those ordinances which are seals of that covenant, and of no other: no more
right than if they had given their assent to any chapter in the aprocrypha?


P. True, you did so -- and there is but one covenant, says my patron.


M. This covenant then is the covenant of grace, which, we are all agreed,
requires repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ: or else
there is no covenant of grace at all -- for he says there is but one. -- But
lay your hand upon your heart, and tell me the truth honestly, did you mean to
profess repentance toward God and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, when you
owned the covenant? or in other words, did you mean to profess a compliance
with the covenant of grace? Pray, sir, recollect and repeat the very words you
spoke to me in your first visit.


P. You make me blush -- for I told you the truth in my first visit, from the
bottom of my heart; and this is what I said, I knew myself to be unconverted.
-- I meant to own the covenant, as the phrase is, and have my children
baptized; but I had no design to profess godliness, or to pretend a real
compliance with the covenant of grace. This godly people may do; but it had
been great hypocrisy in me to do it. To lie to men is bad, but to lie to God is
worse. I supposed that owning the covenant was what the unconverted might do.
These were my very words: and on these principles I acted, as do all others,
that I am acquainted with, who own the covenant, have their children baptized,
and do not come to the Lord's table; and I verily though it this was right before
my first visit.


M. How is it possible a man, so honest as you then appeared to be, should now
act such a dishonest part, as you have done? It is my duty as a minister of
Christ, to rebuke you sharply; for then you told me, as you now own, that you
did not mean to profess a compliance with the covenant of grace, upon which I
denied baptism to your child; and yet just now you pretended you did mean to do
it. -- You have need to blush -- This deliberate dissimulation in such an
affair, is no small crime. Did your learned patron advise you to this step, to
get your child baptized? Is this the way to obtain God's blessing?


P. Be this as it may, I am willing now to make a profession, and publicly to
enter into covenant with God, and I have no objection against the form used in
your church. I can make that covenant, and speak truly in the sight of God,
notwithstanding I know I have no grace. p. 6, 7.


M. How can a man who knows he has no grace profess a compliance with the
covenant of grace, without wilful lying?


P. I do not mean to make a profession that shall imply conversion. There would
be 'special hypocrisy' in doing so. p. 14.


M. What then! do you suppose the unconverted do comply with the covenant of
grace? That the unconverted have repentance toward God, and faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ? That the unconverted choose the Lord Jehovah for their
sovereign Lord and supreme good through Jesus Christ, and give up themselves to
his service, to walk in all his ways, seeking his glory?


P. No, sir, by no means. But if it be true that the Lord Jehovah is my
sovereign Lord and supreme good through Jesus Christ. i. e. if it be true, that
he who through Christ is the author of being, and of every mercy, to all the
living, is the sovereign Lord and supreme good of every living soul, it is no
harm to avouch it. I mean to give my assent to this truth, and no more.


M. Does not the devil believe the truth of this proposition as firmly as any
wicked man does? and is he in covenant? You have need to be better instructed
about the nature of entering into covenant with God, before you can be
considered as qualified in point of doctrinal knowledge.


P. No, sir, I am not so ignorant neither. I know in what sense you mean to
understand your covenant. But knowing myself to be unconverted, I cannot
profess a compliance with the covenant of Grace in that sense. I cannot profess
supreme love to God, and that I do actually take him as my God, my chief good,
through Jesus Christ. This is not in my heart. Therefore I mean to adopt the
words of the covenant in a different sense; even in a sense, in which, an
unconverted man, who is at enmity against God, may use them, and yet speak true.


M. But this is not to profess a compliance with the covenant of Grace. And
therefore should you make it, it could give you no right to sealing ordinances
for yourself or your child. Rather is it gross and scandalous dissimulation,
very much like what is practiced by Arians and Socinians among the clergy of
the church of England, when they subscribe the 39 articles, in order to qualify
themselves for a benefice upon the establishment; which practice is condemned
by all honest men.


P. Be this as it may, I can at least, with moral sincerity promise, "To walk
in all his ways and keep all his commands, seeking his glory." p. 7.


M. The obedience engaged by one who professes a compliance with the covenant
of grace is that kind of obedience which the covenant requires, viz. An holy
obedience, an obedience which proceeds from faith and love. And do you mean to
engage this?


P. No, by no means. I mean only to engage what an unconverted man may do,
while such. p. 7. Other writers maintain, that such as know themselves to be
unconverted, when they join in full communion with the church, are to engage
that very kind of obedience required in the covenant of grace, from that time
and forward till they die. They are not to profess that they have as yet loved
God, believed in Christ, repented of their sins, or lived holy lives, but they
are to engage that they will do all this as soon as ever they have Joined with
the church, and from that time forward till they die. This is Mr. Beckwith's
scheme, Answer to Mr. Green, p. 26. -- If these professors are so near being
converted in their own judgments, really and honestly, that they do expect to
be actually converted as soon as they have joined with the church, it is a pity
they do not put off their public profession till the next sabbath; and so be
converted first: and then they might make a full profession of a present
compliance with the covenant of grace, and so the whole controversy might be
ended. This is always the way that honest people take when they enter into the
marriage covenant, to which this writer compares this transaction. They do not
come and present themselves before the priest to enter into the marriage
covenant, till they begin to love each other. And now they can with a good
conscience give their consent to the whole marriage covenant, as being
conscious to themselves that they already have such an heart in them. But
should a pair offer to be married, who had through their whole courtship, and to
that moment, been at enmity against each other, as much as Paul declares every
carnal mind to be against God. Romans 8.7. It would be looked upon as a
hypocritical, mad and stupid piece of conduct.



M. But this unholy obedience is not that kind of obedience, which the covenant
of grace requires at your hands. So that you mean to profess neither to comply
with the covenant of grace at present, nor to live such a holy life as it
requires for the future. In short, you mean to use the words of a saint with
the heart of a hypocrite; and so to come into Christ's visible church, with the
language of a friend; but with the heart of an enemy. Your proposed conduct may
serve to give a very true and just exposition to those words of our Savior,
Friend, how came thou in hither not having a wedding garment? As if he had
said, I call you friend, because you, in words, make the same profession which
my real friends do. But why do you do this, when at the same time you have the
heart of an enemy? why do you act this hypocritical part? Such dissimulation is
special hypocrisy. -- If you could not comply with our covenant in its plain
sense, and in the sense you knew we understood it, why did not you rather come
like an honest man, and say so, and desire to have it laid aside; and a new
covenant, an ungracious covenant introduced in its room; a covenant which you
could make, and act an honest part?


P. I though it there was but one covenant. I though it the covenant you use in your
church, as you understand it, was that one covenant. I though it there was no
other. I though it that baptism and the Lord's Supper were seals of the covenant of
grace, and of no other. And so I must profess a compliance with the covenant of
grace, or I cannot be received among Christ's disciples, or claim the
privileges of such. Therefore I put this new sense on the words, that I might
consent to them with a good conscience.


M. But the words, in this new sense, are not the covenant of grace, but an
ungracious covenant; in sense and meaning exactly like the half-way-covenant,
in use in some churches, where they have two covenants: (A number of such
churches I could name to you) -- so while you cry out against the name of a
half-covenant, you take the covenant of grace, and turn it into the very thing,
in order to bring it down to a level with your graceless heart; and then put on
a bold face, and come and claim the privileges peculiar to those, who profess a
compliance with the covenant of grace itself.


P. Sir, "I am persuaded God has made the Lord's Supper a converting ordinance
to many, and he may make it so to me. p. 9.


M. And, O my friend, will you dissemble in this shocking manner, in order to
get into the church, that you may come to the Lord's-table, and be converted!
Is this what you mean by moral sincerity? I tell you with that plainness, that
becomes my office, that to come thus, is not the way for a blessing, but for a
curse. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, instead of being in the way
of a blessing, exposes himself to the righteous judgment of God; agreeable to
the apostle's words to the Corinthians.


P. Nay, sir, the Corinthians "turned the Lord's supper into a feast of
Bacchus." And what is this to me? p 14.


M. Is not deliberate, designed dissimulation, in the most solemn, religious
transaction on earth, even in covenanting with the great God, as bad as
drunkenness?


P. Nay, sir, but I am expressly commanded to come to the Lord's supper, by
Christ himself. p. 15.


M. This command was given to none but Christ's disciples. And in the apostolic
age none ever pretended to attend the Lord's supper, but those who had made a
profession, and were admitted into the christian church. As yet you have not
made a profession, to be sure, not such a profession as God ever required; nor
is the profession you now propose to make, a profession of a compliance with
God's covenant, even with the covenant of grace.


P. I am able to demonstrate, as clearly as any theorem is demonstrated in
Euclid, that if an unconverted man may not avouch the Lord for his God, nor
resolve to obey him, he may not say, Our Father which art in heaven -- forgive
us our debts as we forgive our debtors. p. 8. And it is damnable heresy to
teach that the unconverted ought not to pray. p. 9. And if they sin in praying,
yet it is less sin to pray, than not to pray. p. 12.


M. It is a greater sin to lie, than to do nothing. Lying is not a means of
grace. Lying is not an appointed means of conversion. There are many things
unconverted sinners may say to God, and speak true. To speak the truth to God
is well. Jam. 2.19. but to say that which they know is not true is a thousand
times worse than to say nothing. Mat. 23, 14. Acts 5.3. And for a man who is
sensible, that it is not in his heart to forgive those who have trespassed
against him, and that in fact he does not forgive them, to come into the
presence of God, and pray, saying, Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our
debtors, is, implicitly, to ask God not to forgive him; but this is a greater
sin than not to pray at all, as all will allow; and it will hold true, as true
as any "theorem in Euclid," that lying is worse than nothing, in praying, in
covenanting, and in every thing else.


P. Sir, on your plan, three-quarters of the christian world will be shut out
of the church. p. 14.


M. Were it not better, were it not more for the honor Christ and
christianity, in the sight of Pagans, Jews, and Mahometans, and in the sight of
the ungodly in christian countries, and more for the good of their own souls,
that nine tenths should be shut out of the church, if need so require, than to
come in by wilful lying! But for a man to profess a compliance with the
covenant of grace, when he knows he has no grace is no better; and yet without
such a profession no man can visibly enter into covenant with God. For God has
no other covenant extant, of which baptism and Lord's Supper, are seals; for
there is but one covenant, as you allow; and to use the words of this covenant
in such a sense, as to make it a graceless half-covenant, gives no more right
to sealing ordinances, than to repeat any chapter in the apocrypha.


P. If your scheme "should prevail, it would bring back the country into the
ancient state of heathenism." Mr. Beckwith*



M. And pray, sir, who do you think will have the hottest hell, a heathen who
dares not lie, or a christian who allows himself to lie in the most solemn
religious transactions? or which will be the likliest to be converted by the
preaching of the gospel?


P. "When men of sense and conscience find themselves denied the enjoyment of
ordinances for themselves and children in our churches," they will turn to the
church of England. Mr. Beckwith*



M. No man of sense or conscience will desire to make a lying profession to get
his children baptized; he would rather they never should be baptized than do
such a wicked deed. And we stand ready to baptize the children of all, who can
understandingly and honestly make that profession, which God requires.


P. "Christ's visible kingdom repuires in its members qualifications like
itself, viz. Those that are visible and knowable." p. 16.


M. And we in receiving them, act entirely on what is visible, viz. On their
public profession, attended with an answerable conversation, just as they did
in the apostolic age.


P. "Every baptized person is a member of Christ's visible church: but I was
baptized in my infancy, therefore I have a right to all the external privileges
of a churchmember." p. 16.


M. You remember the answer I gave to this, at your second visit, viz. Baptism
alone in the apostolic age, never made any adult person, a churchmember,
without a profession -- profession was first made, and then they were baptized.
Those therefore that are baptized in infancy, in order to be members in this
sense, must make a profession, when they become adult. The New England
churches, therefore, are right in demanding it.


P. You must then have a half-covenant for these half-members.


M. No, by no means. They are bound by their parent's act and deed, to comply
with the covenant of grace itself, as soon as they become adult. With this
covenant, and with this alone do we urge them to comply. Whenever they appear
to do it, we receive them to full communion. But if they openly renounce the
God of their fathers and obstinately persist in it, they must be considered and
treated as persons who have visibly renounced their baptism, in which their
parents devoted them to God through Jesus Christ to be for ever his.


P. "It is certain that the gospel contains no rule whereby to determine with
any certainty, that a man is gracious." And therefore your scheme cannot be
acted upon. p. 9. 10.


M. It is equally certain the gospel contains no rule to determine with
certainty that men are orthodox, or found in the faith. They may make an
orthodox profession, but we cannot be certain that they mean as they say. To be
sure, if they allow themselves to use orthodox words in a heterodox sense, as
you do in the Business of covenanting; and the truth is, let the qualifications
be what you please, it is not necessary the church should have a certainty that
the candidates for admission to sealing ordinances have them really and in the
sight of God. It is sufficient, on every scheme, that they appear to have them
to a judgment of charity regulated by the word of God.


P. Such inconsistency may by no means be charged on the Deity, as to institute
an ordinance with a design that never can be carried into execution; as is the
case, it Christ has not given some infallible criterion or mark, whereby to
know who may be admitted. p. 9. 10.


M. Very well, sir, be pleased to take the inconsistence to your self, until
you can be infallibly certain, that the candidate for admission is really
orthodox and morally sincere in the sight of God, as searcher of hearts. And in
order to this, you will need the aid of that enthusiastical sort of people of
whom your minister speaks; (p. 10.) for it cannot be known, without an
immediate revelation. You must get their spirit to come and tell you, whether
men are as orthodox and morally sincere in the sight of God, as they profess to
be before men. For their is no infallible mark whereby you can certainly know
it. An immediate revelation is absolutely necessary for this, "As I am able to
demonstrate as clearly as any theorem is demonstrated in Euclid."


P. Be this as it may; whether the church must be certain or not; yet we
ourselves must be certain, that we have the necessary qualifications, or we
must not come. p. 10.


M. We are naturally as conscious of volitions as of speculations, of love as
of belief, when ever we look into our own hearts, as all will allow. A man
whose mind is wavering between Arminianism and Calvinism, inclining sometimes
to one side from the corrupt biasses of his heart, and sometimes to the other,
by the force of evidence, may not be able to say, which he believes. So a man
whose mind is wavering between God and mammon, inclining sometimes to one
master with a view to his future interest, and sometimes to the other from an
attachment to his present, may not be able to say, which master upon the whole
he chooses, for the double minded man is unstable in all his ways. But Christ
does not desire men to make a profession of being his disciples till they have
sat down and counted the cost, and are come to a settled determination; as is
plain from Luke 14.25 -- 33. And when men are come to that settled
determination, which our Savior there describes, they may say, that they have
come to it. And this is all the profession which we desire.


P. Thus far I have acted the part of a disputant, and I have now done. Suffer
me therefore once more to reassume that honest character which I sustained in
my first visit; for let others say, what they will, I design to act an honest
part. Now the truth of the case is this, I am not specially concerned to know
by what rule the church must be governed in admitting members, neither am I
concerned to know what they must do who are in doubt about themselves; the only
question about which I am exercised relates to my own particular case. I know I
have no grace. I know I am unconverted. I told you so at first, and so I have
told all the ministers with whom I have conversed; and how any man, that knows
he has no grace, can profess a compliance with the covenant of grace, and speak
true, I could not understand years ago. It was this that induced me to own the
covenant, as the phrase is, and not to join in full communion, that so I might
have my children baptized. Not one of the ministers with whom I have conversed,
appears to justify the principles upon which I acted; but all as one man, say,
there is but one covenant, and this one covenant is the covenant of grace:
indeed they explain away the covenant of grace, till they bring it down into a
graceless covenant, and then tell me I can comply with that, and ought to do
so, and thus join in full communion. But you have fully convinced me of the
inconsistence and absurdity of this; and yet I would beg leave to enquire, why
might not the covenant of grace be voted out, by the church, and a graceless
covenant be substituted in its room? and then such as I am could consistently
profess a compliance with such a covenant, and have baptism for their children.


M. But if a church should vote out the covenant of grace, or which is the same
thing in other words, should vote out christianity, how could it any longer be
considered as a visible church of Christ, or as having a visible right to the
visible seals of God's covenant? -- And besides, should you bind your child to
one of your neighbors, to learn some mechanic art, why, in this case, might
not the covenant be sealed, ratified and confirmed by the administration of
baptism, In the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost?


P. The proposal shocks my mind. It would be a profanation of God's holy
ordinance, to take God's seal, appropriated to God's covenant, and put it to
man's covenant.


M. But this ungracious covenant is man's covenant, and not God's. And to take
God's seal, appropriated to God's covenant, even to the covenant of grace, and
apply it to a covenant which God never made, to a covenant made by men, is to
profane the holy ordinance: and knowingly to profane God's holy ordinance is
not a duty, nor is this to put ourselves in the way of a blessing.


P. What need is there of any covenant at all?


M. It is not the manner of men to put a seal to a clean piece of paper. Nor
did God ever appoint seals to be put to a blank. God's seals were appointed to
be put to God's covenant; and we have no right to put them to a blank: and
besides, it would be to give up the import of the actions, and to render
sealing ordinances unmeaning, empty, useless ceremonies.


P. What shall I do?


M. Repent and believe the gospel. Thus preached John Baptist: thus preached
Jesus Christ; and thus his apostles. -- And therefore, being emboldened by
their examples, I say unto you, Enter in at the strait gate; for wide is the
gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be that
go in thereat; because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads
unto life, and few there be that find it.


P. I thank you, Sir, for your kind and friendly instructions. -- I ask your
prayers. -- I must go.


M. I will detain you but a minute longer. -- You remember your former
minister, the author of the Second Dialogue concerning the Half-way-covenant,
said, There is no half-way-covenant. Doubtless it is the covenant of grace. No
one disputes its being the covenant of grace; -- no one DARE DENY IT. -- And
your present patron says much the same. -- You remember also, that in your
second visit, I told you, that, to say this, was implicitly to "yield up every
point for which we contend;" and, in this view, I added, nor do I doubt, if
this controversy should go on, it will soon appear, that there is one who dares
deny it. For otherwise all men of sense will see, that gentlemen on that side
of the question, are grossly inconsistent with themselves. -- And now it has
come to pass, that one of the most discerning gentlemen on that side of the
question has published a labored piece, to prove, that in order to enjoy
sealing ordinances for ourselves and our children, we are not to profess a
compliance with the covenant of grace, but only with a graceless covenant. This
therefore is the only point, that needs to be settled, in order to settle the
whole controversy; to this point therefore I advise you to give a most serious
attention. For, if it can be proved, that baptism and the Lord's Supper are
seals of the covenant of grace, and not of a graceless covenant, the ax will be
laid to the root of the tree. Attend, therefore, to the subject with the utmost
impartiality, that you may obtain, not only light in your head, but also reap
saving advantage to your soul. I have known some christless sinners, by the
means of this controversy, awakened to a greater concern about their eternal
salvation, than ever they were before. And, be assured, sir, that the truths of
the gospel, if they are not unto your own soul a savor of life unto life, will
be a savor of death unto death. -- Eternity -- an endless eternity lies before
you. You have slept secure in sin long enough; it is high time you should
awake. Every circumstance of your own soul, and every circumstance of your dear
offspring calls upon you without delay to awake, and turn to God through Jesus
Christ in sincerity and truth. -- O, what joy, would it give me, ere long, to
admit you into full communion with the church, on a profession of a compliance
with the covenant of grace, in which, you should appear to act understandingly
and honestly! -- That salvation may thus come to you and to your household, may
GOD of his infinite mercy grant, through Jesus Christ.

My dear sir, farewell.


THAT THERE IS BUT ONE COVENANT, Whereof Baptism and the Lord's- Supper are
SEALS, viz. THE COVENANT OF GRACE, PROVED FROM THE WORD OF GOD; AND THE
DOCTRINE OF AN EXTERNAL GRACELESS COVENANT, LATELY ADVANCED, By the Rev. Mr.
MOSES MATHER: In a Pamphlet, Entitled, The Visible Church in Covenant with
God, etc. SHOWN TO BE AN UNSCRIPTURAL DOCTRINE.

By JOSEPH BELLAMY, D.D.

But unto the wicked God says, what have thou to do to declare my statutes, or
that thou should take my covenant in thy mouth?

PSALM l. 16. NEW HAVEN: Printed by T. and S. GREEN.

The PREFACE.
IF we may judge of the sentiments of ministers, in general, by the pieces
lately published on this controversy, all are agreed in these three
propositions, viz.

I. There is but one covenant, a profession of a compliance with which is
requisite to an admission into the visible church of Christ, in complete
standing. II. Those who really comply with this covenant have, in the sight of
God, an equal ^^ght to baptism for their children, and to the Lord's Supper for
themselves. III. All scruples to the contrary are groundless and unscriptural.
There is therefore, but one single point, which now needs to be settled, to
settle the whole controversy, viz. With what covenant are we to profess a
compliance, the covenant of grace, or a graceless covenant?

And this point is of such a nature, that it seems necessary to settle it,
before we proceed to act at all in church affairs; in gathering a church,
settling a minister, admitting members, or administering sealing ordinances. For
'till this is settled, we know not upon what covenant the church is to be
formed, nor what covenant is to be professed by those who are to be admitted,
nor what covenant is to be sealed by baptism and the Lord's supper, nor what
covenant the minister is to preach up and hold out to public view, as the thing
to be complied with by professors and to be sealed by the sacraments. So that
if we mean to proceed like rational creatures, in our church affairs, we must
look this matter to the bottom, and come to a determination.

To say, that it is needless to determine this point, is the same thing as to
say, that it is of no consequence whether our churches are founded on a right
covenant, or on a wrong one; or whether God's seals are fixed to the covenant
he designed, or to a covenant to which he never intended they should be
affixed; which none will care to say: For, if it is of no consequence what
covenant we profess, nor what covenant we seal, a right one, or a wrong one; it
is surely of no consequence whether we profess or seal any covenant at all;
which to say, is to tear up by the roots all notion of a visible church in the
world. But to set aside a visible church, as a needless thing, is to set aside
christianity, as an imposture. There must be christian churches; there must be
a public profession of some covenant or other; there must be sealing
ordinances; these ordinances must be administered by the ministers of Christ to
the proper subjects; it must be determined who they are; it must, therefore, be
determined on what covenant churches are to be formed, and what covenant is to
be preached up, professed and sealed. It is a controversy, which no honest man,
who means to have any thing to do in church affairs, can let alone, as a mere
circumstantial point. Much less can those, who are already in the ministry, or
are about to settle in that work, consistently content themselves to proceed
without any settled scheme at all; unless all they aim at, is to live a quiet
life, right or wrong; which is what none will profess to do.

OUR churches were originally founded on a profession of a compliance with the
covenant of grace, at least, generally. And, indeed, I know not of one church
in New England, of our own denomination, which is now otherwise founded, if we
may judge of their foundation by the words of the covenant which is read to
those who are admitted to full communion. So far as I know, the formulas in
use, express the chief things contained in the covenant of grace, etc. "That
they avouch the Lord to be their God and chief good, and give up themselves to
him, through Jesus Christ, to live to him and seek his glory." And therefore,
should we be convinced, that the covenant of grace is not the covenant with
which the church of Christ ought to profess a compliance, there ought to be an
alteration in our formulas. For, as they stand at present, they tend to lead
all persons whose consciences are awake, to think they ought to be converted,
before they make a profession of religion, and join in full communion with the
church. For, such do not think it right to profess a compliance with the
covenant of grace, when they know they have no grace. Nor do they think it
consistent with moral honesty, to give their consent to the covenant in a sense
different from it is plain and natural sense. There is a necessity, therefore,
if the covenant of grace is not the covenant which ought to be entered into, to
call our churches together, to point out to them plainly this fundamental error
in their constitution, and to lead them to vote out the covenant of grace, and
to vote in a graceless covenant, in order to open a wide and effectual door to
let ungodly men as such, into our churches. And in this method, may be adapted
regularly, the new scheme advanced, by the Rev. Mr. Moses Mather, an ingenious
writer, in his piece lately published, entitled, "The visible church in
covenant with God," etc.

This author has offered this doctrine of an external graceless covenant to
public consideration, as taught in the word of God, and as the only consistent
plan on which the visible church can be founded, and infant baptism vindicated.
He had no desire, it may be presumed, that his scheme should be received by our
churches without examination. The strictest scrutiny cannot hurt the truth. The
truth, like the sun, can bear to be looked upon, without any diminution of its
lusture. A glowworm is in danger of losing its brightness, if the light of day
shines around it. This may be the nature of error; but the truth itself, the
more strictly it is examined, the more will it appear to be like the morning
light, which shines more and more to the perfect day.

Our confession of faith and plan of church discipline have determined for "the
covenant of grace," declaring that "sacraments are holy signs and seals of the
covenant of grace;" and for the necessity of a profession of a "cordial
subjection to Jesus Christ." But these are not the word of God. Mr. Mather
undertakes to prove his doctrine from the word of God. And we ought, with the
utmost readiness, to give up all human composures, when found inconsistent with
the word of God. He appeals to scripture: we join in the appeal; and let him
that reads, understand.

BETHLEM, June 15, 1769.
SECT. I. The nature of Mr. M's external, graceless covenant it is difference
from the covenant of grace, and a general view of the subject.
BY the covenant of grace, Mr. M. means, that covenant with which every true
believer complies in the exercise of repentance toward God and faith toward
our Lord Jesus Christ, and which promises pardon and eternal life to all who
comply with it. Or to use his own words, "A sure promise of eternal life, to
all such, as with a true heart, believe in Jesus Christ." P. 4. And in this we
are agreed. But he maintains, that this is not the covenant, a compliance with
which is to be publicly professed by any of the followers of Christ, when they
join in full communion with the church. It is a chief design of this piece to
prove this point. And in this we differ.

BY the external covenant, he means, not the covenant of grace, externally
entered into, by a public profession of a compliance with it, which is what
some divines have meant by the phrase; but a covenant specifically different
from the covenant of grace. It differs from it in three things. (1.) The
covenant of grace requires holiness, a holy faith, a holy repentance, a holy
obedience: The external covenant requires no holiness at all. (2.) The covenant
of grace is complied with by none but the regenerate, in the exercise of
holiness: The external covenant may be complied with by the unregenerate, by
those that have no grace, in ungracious, unholy exercises. (3.) The covenant of
grace promises eternal life: The external covenant promises no such thing; but
leaves those who comply with it, and do no more, under the sentence of the
divine law to eternal death. This appears through the whole performance. We
maintain that there is no such covenant -- he endeavors to prove that this is
the only covenant, a compliance with which was professed by Abraham, by the
Israelites in the wilderness and by the apostolic converts, when they entered
visibly into covenant with God, and became members of God's visible church; as
will be plain to any one that reads his book. We affirm that a profession of a
compliance with this covenant never was required by God of any man.

THERE is a covenant of grace, indeed, according to Mr. M. which promises
eternal life to the true believer, to which this external covenant, he says,
serves, as means to the end; p. 9. But a compliance with this covenant of grace
never was required, and never was professed, in order to sealing ordinances,
under the old testament or the new; for the seals were not designed primarily
to be seals of the covenant of grace, but of a gracelss covenant, with which
graceless men may comply in the sight of God, while such. And so there is no
need of a compliance with the covenant of grace, in order to a consistent
attendance on sealing ordinances. P. 36, 37. As graceless men may comply with
this graceless covenant; so they may consistently be active in sealing it. And
so there is not the least need of our being born again, or the least occasion
of a profession of godliness, or making any pretense of love to God or Christ;
or to vital piety in order to a regular admission into the church of Christ. We
need not be saints in reality, or in profession; in the sight of God, or in the
sight of men; no such thing is required: no such thing is pretended. For "The
external covenant does not respect a gracious state of heart, as the
qualification requisite, to a person's entering into it." P. 22. A church of
Christ, therefore, is a congregation, in which, there is no visible profession
made of real christianity; i. e. of friendship to Christ, or of christian
grace, or of any thing but what is consistent with a state of total enmity to
God and Christ, and to all spiritual good. This is Mr. M.'s idea of a visible
church; and any higher profession, he thinks, of very bad tendency. P. 51, 52,
53.

IF the least spark of grace is required in the external covenant, or if the
least spark of grace is professed in visibly entering into it, then the man
that knows he has no grace, but is dead in sin, cannot make a profession, and
Mr. M.'s end is frustrated, which was to open a wide and effectual door for
such as know themselves to be ungodly to join in full communion with the church.

AND if this external covenant does not require the least degree of grace or
holiness; then it requires nothing but ungracious, unholy, sinful performance,
(for Mr. M. will not choose to say, that their is a system of religious
volitions, affections and actions, which are neither virtuous nor vicious,
neither holy nor sinful, neither conformable to the holy nature and law of God,
nor unconformable; for this would be to suppose that the divine law is not a
universal rule of life.) -- So that, although Abraham and all Abraham's spiritual
seed, when they first comply with the covenant of grace exercise real holiness,
and live in the exercise of holiness through the course of their lives, agreeable
to our Savior's character of them, in Mat. 7.24. and attend the means of grace
in a holy manner, (Mat. 13.8.) and even hate and abhor that impenitent,
self-righteous, sinful manner in which all the ungodly attend them, (Prove.
15.8.) Yet when they come to make a public profession, they are to covenant and
promise to attend all means in no better manner, than that, in which,
impenitent, self-righteous sinners do. For they are publicly to profess and
promise nothing but a compliance with the external covenant: and the external
covenant requires nothing more. -- And having made this ungodly profession, and
by covenant bound themselves to attend all means of grace in this manner, they
set to it God's appointed seal; and this unholy covenant the most holy
Christian is to renew and seal every time he comes to the table of the Lord
till he dies; which, how it can possibly be done with a good conscience, Mr. M.
has not yet told us. The external covenant it a graceless covenant, suited to
the hearts of graceless men. Therefore to be in heart conformed to the external
covenant, is to have a heart destitute of grace. Every true convert therefore
renounces the external covenant in his heart at the time of his conversion, and
complies with the covenant of grace. Nor can he ever go back to the external
covenant in his heart without falling from grace. So that if Abraham was in the
covenant of grace before, as Mr. M. says he was, p. 8. then he fell from grace
when he entered into the external covenant. And if by sealing the external
covenant he obliged himself to conform to it as long as he lived, he did
thereby bind himself to continue unconverted till death. But the covenant with
Abraham was an everlasting covenant. Genesis 17, 7. To which Abraham was obliged
to conform in heart and life as long as he lived.


THUS we have taken a brief and general view of Mr. M.'s scheme of an external
graceless covenant. I think I understand him right. But if any of his admirers
should say, this is not his scheme, but the external covenant requires real
holiness, and the public profession is to be accordingly, a profession of
godliness, then those, who know themselves to be unconverted, are as much shut
out from full communion in the visible church on his scheme, as on the scheme
of our forefathers; which Dr. Increase Mather, affirmed to be the scheme of
protestants in general, in opposition to papists. "I do readily acknowledge,"
says he, that as it is only a justifying faith which gives right to baptism
before God, so it is the profession or visibility of this faith that gives
right thereunto before the church. Some have maintained that a dogmatical
historical faith, or faith of assent to the truth of the gospel, does entitle
to baptism. But the common protestant doctrine against the papists, speaks
otherwise. Discourse concerning the subject of baptism. P. 52.


But the question now before us is not what was the doctrine of protestants or
papists? but a question much more interesting, viz. What is the doctrine of the
bible? the only book we are obliged to believe and obey on pain of God's
eternal wrath. And the question is, What is God's covenant, which is to be
professed and sealed; a gracious, or an ungracious covenant? What was the
Abrahamic covenant? and what the covenant into which the Israelites professed
to enter in the wilderness? and what is that covenant revealed in the gospel,
of which baptism and the Lord's Supper are seals? an holy covenant? or an
unholy one?

But before we enter on the subject, it may not be improper to observe, that
Mr. M. has given up the grounds on which Mr. Jonathan Dickinson, and after him
Mr. Peter Clark, vindicated infant baptism, viz. That the covenant with Abraham
was the covenant of grace. See Mr. Clark's defense of infant baptism, chapter iv.
in which the covenant with Abraham is proved to be the covenant of grace; and
Dr. Gill's objections, in his piece against Mr. Dickinson; some of them the
same with Mr. Mather's, are answered. -- And Mr. M. endeavors to lay a new
foundation for infant baptism, perhaps never before laid by any writer on that
subject, viz. An external graceless covenant; and what the effect among common
people will be, if they shall see Mr. M.'s external covenant proved to be a
mere nonentity, cannot yet be known. But if any are shaken in their belief of
infant baptism, when they find Mr. M.'s foundation give way under them, they
ought to remember, that the defenders of infant baptism have not built their
arguments on this foundation, but always on a supposition, that the covenant
with Abraham was the covenant of grace.

Thus Mr. Bostwick, late minister of the presbyterian church, in New York, in
his vindication of infant baptism, p. 19, says, The covenant made with Abraham
was a covenant of grace, and the same for substance that is now in force under
the gospel. This I look upon to be the grand turning point on which the issue
of the controversy very much depends; for if Abraham's covenant, which included
his infant children, and gave them a right to circumcision, was not the
covenant of grace, then I freely confess that the main ground on which we
assert the right of infants to baptism is taken away; and consequently the
principal arguments in support of the doctrine are overturned.

SECT. II. The Covenant with Abraham was a holy covenant, and could not be
really complied with but in the exercise of real holiness.
SHOULD a dispute arise concerning the contents of any covenant between two of
our neighbors, what way would common sense teach all impartial men to advise
to take, in order to settle the controversy? Would they not say, Come
neighbors, no more dispute about this matter, bring out the writing, let us
read it, and see with our own eyes how the bond runs?

Now these are the contents of the covenant with Abraham, in Genesis 12; where it
is first of all mentioned; Now the Lord had said unto Abram, get thee out of
thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land
that I will show thee. And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless
thee, and make thy name great; and thou shall be a blessing. And I will bless
them that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee; and in thee shall all
the families of the earth be blessed. And was this a graceless covenant, or the
very gospel of Christ? Hear what an inspired apostle says, Gal. 3.8. And the
scripture foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached
before the GOSPEL unto Abraham, saying, IN THEE SHALL ALL NATIONS BE BLESSED.
And in Genesis 12.4; follows an account of Abraham's compliance. So Abram
departed, as the Lord had spoken unto him. He did not merely "endeavor," but
he actually complied. And was this done in faith, or in a graceless manner?
Take the answer from an inspired writer. Heb. 11.8. By FAITH Abraham, when he
was called to go out, etc. obeyed. Just parrallel to the conduct of Christ's
true disciple, when he was on earth. Mark 2.14. And he said unto him, follow
me, and he arose and followed him.

AND this same covenant was renewed on GOD'S part in Genesis 15.5. And he brought
him forth abroad, and said, look now toward heaven, and tell the stars, if thou
be able to number them. And he said unto him, so shall thy seed be. And in ver:
6, follows Abraham's compliance; and he believed in the Lord. And the very next
words determine, that this was not Mr. M.'s external covenant, in a compliance
with which no man is justified, and that Abraham's faith was a true justifying,
saving faith; and he counted it to him for righteousness.

AND in chap, 17. This same covenant was renewed again, with this additional
declaration, I am God almighty, absolutely all-sufficient. For he had before
said, chap. 15. I am thy shield, and exceeding great reward; which is something
of a higher nature than what is promised by Mr. M.'s external covenant; yea, it
is added, to be a God to thee, and thy seed after thee. In consequence of which
he was called the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: and
what is implied in this we may learn from, Heb. 11.16. Wherefore God is not
ashamed to be called their God; for he has prepared for them a city. Yea, all
the great blessings of the gospel are summed up in one promise, Rev. 21.7. He
that overcomes shall inherit all things, AND I WILL BE HIS GOD. And this
divine injunction was added at this season of renewing this covenant, walk
before me and be thou perfect; which implied a life of real holiness, and
sincere devotedness to God.

Mr. M.'s external covenant requires no higher kind of faith, than the devil
has, and nothing but ungracious, unholy obedience, which those who are dead in
sin may perform: But neither this faith nor this obedience were the faith and
obedience of Abraham. Mr. M.'s covenant requires what James calls a dead faith,
by which no man can be justified; but Abraham's was a living faith, by which he
was justified, and by which all others will be justified who have it. And his
obedience was an holy obedience, such as is peculiar to the friends of God. Mr.
M.'s external covenant, is adapted to the temper and state of the unconverted,
requiring only such religious exercises as may take place in them: But Abraham
was not in an unconverted state; and so Mr. M.'s external covenant was not
adapted to the temper and state in which he was, if the reader will be at the
pains to take his bible and turn to Genesis 12, and read the whole history of
Abraham's life, he will not find the least hint of more than one covenant with
Abraham; nor was one unholy duty ever required at his hands: rather, on the
contrary, these were the express words of God Almighty to him, walk before me,
and be thou perfect. -- If therefore we judge of the nature of the covenant
with Abraham, as we do of all other written covenants, viz. By the contents of
the written instrument, there is no room to doubt.

AND now this covenant being thus made, and thus renewed from time to time,
through the space of above twenty years, an external seal was at length by GOD
appointed to it. For circumcision was appointed as a token of this very
covenant, which was made with Abraham before he was circumcised. For an
inspired apostle has said it. Romans 4.9, 10, 11. Comes this blessedness, (viz.
that spoken of in the foregoing verse, blessed is the man to whom the Lord will
not impute sin) then upon the circumcision only, or upon the uncircumcision
also? for we say, that faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness. How was
it then reckoned? when he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? not in
circumcision, but in uncircumcision. And he received the sign of circumcision,
a seal (not of Mr. M.'s external covenant, but) of the righteousness of the
faith which he had yet being uncircumcised; that he might be the father (not of
those graceless men, that enter into Mr. M.'s graceless covenant, but) of all
them that believe; -- that righteousness might be imputed to them also. That
all who comply with that covenant as Abraham did himself, might be justified
and saved, as he was. From all which it is evident, that that covenant with
which Abraham visibly complied, when in obedience to GOD'S call, he separated
himself and his family from the idolatrous world, to worship the true GOD only,
and to believe in, and wait for the coming of the Messiah, whose day he saw,
and was glad, was not Mr. M.'s external graceless covenant, by which no man can
be justified and saved; but the covenant of grace, which promises eternal life
to those who comply with it; for God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living. Mat. 22, 31, 32; and that circumcision was a seal of this very
covenant. Which were the points to be proved.

There is not one text in the new testament where the nature of the covenant
with Abraham is pointed out, but that it is spoken of as the covenant of grace;
for it is always spoken of as the way, and as the only way in which a sinner
can be justified. Particularly, read the fourth chapter of the epistle to the
Romans, and the 3d, and 4th chapters to the Galatians, and this will appear in
the clearest light. For, from the manner in which Abraham was justified, Paul
illustrates and confirms the gospel way of justification. For he considers
Abraham as the pattern, and teaches that all sinners are justified in the same
way in which he was; and in this sense he is the father of many nations, as he
is the father of all that believe. Romans 4: 16, 17. For what says the
scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness.
Ver. 3. Now it is not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him;
but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him that raised
up Jesus our Lord from the dead. Ver. 23, 24. Know ye, therefore, that they
which are of faith, (who are true believers) the same are the children of
Abraham. Gal. 3.7. And the scripture foreseeing that God would justify the
heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying in thee
shall all nations be blessed. So then they which are of faith, (i. e. are true
believers) are blessed with faithful Abraham. Ver. 8, 9. But, ver. 10, all
self-righteous sinners are under the curse; for as many as are of the works of
the law are under the curse. But ver. 13, 14. Christ has redeemed us from the
curse -- that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ; that we might receive the promise of the spirit through faith. For it is
the peculiar privilege of believers to have the spirit. Romans 8.9. Ye are not in
the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that the spirit of God dwell in you. Now
if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Gal, 4.6, 7.
Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying, abba, father. And if a son, then an heir of God through Christ.
But, chap. 3, 26. Ye are all the children of God by faith in Jesus Christ. Ver.
29. And if ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to
the promise. For ver. 16. To Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He
says not, and to seeds, as of many; but as of one, and to thy seed, which is
Christ. Therefore, if ye are Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs
according to the promise.

So that if we read the contents of the written instrument, as it is recorded
in the old testament, or consider how the inspired writers of the new,
understood it, nothing can be plainer than that the covenant with Abraham, into
which the believing Gentiles are received under the gospel dispensation, was
the covenant of grace, even that covenant in which, and in which alone
justification and eternal life are to be expected. Nor can Mr. M. apply these
texts to his external, graceless covenant, without perverting the word of GOD
in a most shocking manner. Yea, if these texts do not speak of the covenant of
grace by which alone sinners are justified, no such covenant can be found in
the bible. There was no other covenant revealed to Abraham; and Paul knew of no
way of justification but this. We have as much evidence then that the covenant
with Abraham was the covenant of grace, as we have that there ever was a
covenant of grace, existing since the world began. -- Now observe,

1. From the nature of this covenant with Abraham we may learn the nature of
GOD'S visible church. For as a real compliance with this covenant renders us
the children of Abraham indeed: So a visible compliance with it renders us
visibly the children of Abraham. And as this covenant is but one, so GOD'S
church is but one; according to that article in the apostle's creed, so called,
"I believe in the holy catholic church." There is but one good olive tree,
according to St. Paul. Romans 11. Were there two covenants, there would be two
churches, two olive trees, answerable to the nature of the two covenants. But
the bible knows of but one covenant with Abraham. And so God's church is
compared to one good olive tree. And graceless professors are compared to dry
branches, in this one good olive tree. Whereas on Mr. M.'s plan the visible
church is founded on a graceless covenant: This graceless covenant is the bond
of union. So the olive tree itself, root and branch, is dead and dry, wholly
graceless; and appears to be so; for their is no pretense to any thing else.
Yea, Mr. M. thinks it was GOD'S design, that his real friends should keep hid,
so as not to profess their friendship to him publicly before the world: And so
that GOD should have, in this sense, no visible church in the world; p. 49; not
one open friend upon earth. But Abraham professed to be a friend to GOD, and
was by GOD publicly owned as such before the world; for he is called the
friend of God. Jam. 2.23.

2. WE may also learn that the seal of the covenant of grace may with propriety
be applied to some infants. For all will allow that GOD is the proper judge of
propriety in such a case. And all grant that GOD appointed circumcision to be
applied to some infants. And therefore if baptism is a seal of the covenant of
grace, yet it may be applied to some infants; provided only they have the same
right to baptism, that the children of Abraham had to circumcision.

3. WE may also hence learn the foundation of the right of believing Gentiles
to baptism for their children. For if we are Christ's, then are we Abraham's
seed, and heirs according to the promise. Gal. 3.29. For, if some of the
branches be broken off, and thou being a wild olive, were grafted in amongst
them, that with them thou partakest of the root and fatness of the olive tree.
Romans 11.17. But from the very time that the practice of grafting in Gentile
converts into the good olive took place, it had also been the custom, by divine
appointment, to put the seal of the covenant upon the children, as well as upon
the father. Exodus 12.48. If you consider the covenant of grace, which was made
with Abraham -- and by GOD'S express command to be sealed to infants, you will
there find a sufficient scripture institution for infant baptism. You will find
this covenant in Gen, 17.2 -- 10. Here we are taught as plainly as words can
teach us, that this covenant was made with Abraham, as he was the father of
many nations, the father of the Gentiles as well as the Jews; that this
covenant was a covenant of grace, an everlasting covenant -- that this covenant
was to be sealed to infants. -- From all which it undoubtedly follows, that
this covenant was made with us the seed of Abraham, as well as with the Jews;
he was the father of believers in our nations as well as theirs. President
Dickinson's Divine Right of infant Baptism. P. 10. Providence Edition.

And this learned Writer adds, p. 13. That this covenant was a covenant of
grace -- is abundantly evident from the tenor of the covenant itself;" as he
goes on to show. And, p. 16. "This then is the sum of the matter: Circumcision
is a token or seal of the covenant of grace: Baptism is a token or seal of the
covenant of grace: it therefore follows, etc. etc.




4. IT is self-evident that those, who know that they have no grace, cannot
understandingly and honestly profess a compliance with the covenant of grace.
But the covenant of grace is that covenant upon which GOD'S visible church is
founded. Nor is it lawful to apply the seals of this covenant to any other
covenant of a nature specifically different, devised by men.

5. FOR any church to lay aside the covenant of grace, and introduce a
graceless covenant in its room, is so far forth to unchurch themselves: i. e.
so far as this has influence, to render themselves not a visible church of
Christ; but a society, visibly, of a nature essentially different; even, so
different as the covenants are. -- But it is time to attend to the grand
objection against this doctrine, that the covenant with Abraham was the
covenant of grace; taken, as Mr. M. says, "from the covenant it self." Other
objections, of a more general nature, shall be obviated in Sect. VII. It may be
thus summed up.

OBJECTION. That the covenant with Abraham mentioned Genesis 17. Was not the
covenant of grace, is evident, not only from this, that he was in the covenant
of grace before; but from the covenant it self, which was merely "as external
mark in the flesh." For the circumcision of the flesh was the covenant: as it
is written, this is my covenant. But circumcision is not the covenant of grace,
but a mere external mark, which may be put upon a man that has no grace. Nay,
circumcision cannot be the covenant of grace, for by neglecting to circumcise a
child this covenant might be broken, but there is no falling from grace.
Therefore circumcision is not the covenant of grace, but an external covenant
of a very different nature. P. 5, 6, 7, 8. The reasons which induce me to think
that Mr. M. means as above, are these, I. Because, speaking of the external
covenant, in order, to prove, that it is not the covenant of grace, and to show
the difference, he says, "that, by which, any one enters into this covenant, is
an external mark is the flesh; viz. Circumcision, "but that, by which, any one
enters into the covenant of grace, is the circumcision of the heart." p. 7. By
entering into covenant, he means, complying with it. For this is his argument.
viz. As in the circumcision of the heart, the covenant of grace is complied
with; so in the circumcision of the flesh the external covenant is complied
with: therefore they are not ore and the same covenant, but two, of a nature as
different as these two kinds of circumcisions. 2. He says, P. 8. That
circumcision was a cmpliance with the external covenant. These are his words,
This covenant appears to be an external covenant, in that, although a person was
in a state of grace, and was consequently included in the covenant of grace,
yet this covenant remained to be complied with. Abraham was a true believer
before, yet he must needs be circumcised. which implies, that circumcision it
self was a compliance with the external covenant. And on this hypothesis, he
teaches, that baptism which comes in the room of circumcision, gives a right to
all the blessings of the external covenant; makes us "Abraham's seed, and heirs
according to the promise," P. 12. 13. Even baptism alone, P. 16. 59 which it
could not be supposed to do, were it not supposed to be the only condition of
the blessings, i. e. the only thing required in the external covenant necessary
to give us a title to its blessings. -- So that we have beyond doubt Mr. M's
true meening in the objection above, however inconsistent it is with some other
things in his book; of which, hereafter, Sect. VIII.


ANSW. This is the foundation of Mr. M's. scheme. And perhaps there never was a
fabric built on a more sandy foundation. For he has mistaken, the external
seal of the covenant for the covenant it self. Because it is said, this is my
covenant, he at once concludes, that circumcision is the very covenant it self.
Just as the papists do in the doctrine of transubstantiation: because it is
said, this is my body, they at once conclude, that the bread is the very body
of Christ it self. Whereas nothing can be plainer, than that the contents of
God's covenant had been stated, and Abraham had complied with them, above 20
years before the institution of circumcision. And this very covenant which had,
from time to time, been renewed, is again renewed in Genesis 17; and an external
seal is appointed to it. So that nothing hinders but that the covenant with
Abraham may be what the scriptures teach it to be, and what the christian world
have always thought it to be; viz. The covenant of grace: and circumcision may
still be, what it has been always thought to be; viz. An external seal of the
covenant of grace, which God made with Abraham. And if circumcision was a seal
of the covenant of grace, then every circumcised Israelite was under covenant
bonds, in all things to comply with and live up to the covenant of grace, as
administered under that dispensation. Particularly, he was under covenant
bounds to separate himself and his household from the idolatrous world, and to
love and worship the true God, and to believe in and wait for the promised
Messiah, and to look for a better country, that is, an heavenly one. And he was
under covenant bonds in these views and with this temper to circumcise his
children, and bind them in all things to comply with and live up to the
covenant of grace. And to neglect this was to be guilty of the breach of the
Abrahamic covenant. And those who persisted in this neglect proved themselves
to be not the genuine children of Abraham, but rather apostates from the God of
their father: and as such they deserved to be cut off, according to Genesis 17.14.
-- for Abraham acted sincerely and from the heart in complying with God's call
to leave his native country and in seperating himself and his household from the
idolatrous world to worship and serve the true God, to believe in and wait for
the promised Messiah, looking upon the land of Canaan as a type of heaven,
which was indeed the country for which he sought. For this world was not his
home. But he was a pilgrim and stranger on earth. And all the genuine children
of Abraham are of the same spirit. For they do the works of Abraham, Joh. 8.39.
All his seed therefore according to the flesh by being circumcised on the
eighth day were bound by God to be of the same spirit. And when they became
adult, and children were born to them, they were bound in the same spirit to
circumcise their childen. If they neglected to circumcise their children in
this spirit, they broke God's covenant. If they performed the external rite of
circumcising their children, they did, by that action, practically profess to
be of this spirit. For this was the import of the action. If their hearts were
answerable to their external conduct, then they were Abraham's children indeed:
and heirs not only of earthly, but also of the heavenly Canaan. If they had no
love to the God of Abraham, or faith in the promised Messiah, they were pagans
at heart. Or in other words, they were uncircumcised in heart; and will be
considered and trented accordingly, as soon as ever they shall come to stand
before the bar of God, as searcher of hearts, in the invisible world. For he is
not a Jew, who is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is outward
in the flesh. But he is a Jew which is one inwardly; and cicumcision is that of
the heart. But if thou be a breaker of the law thy circumcision is made
uncircumcision. Romans 2.25 -- 29 However, in this present world, God conducted
toward them not as the searcher of hearts, but in the character of a visible
head; and therefore dealt with them according to visible appearances, trusting
their profession, saying, surely they are my people, children that will not
lie. And in this character he considered them as covenant breakers not
according to what they were in heart secretly, but according to what they
appeared to be in external conduct. These hints may serve to show the true
import of Genesis 17.14. And the meaning of Exodus 4 24.25, 26.

There have been four dispensations of the covenant of grace, the Adamaic,
Abrahamic, Mosaic and the Christian. Repentance toward God and faith in the
promised seed, and holiness of heart and life have been equally necessary in
all times and under all dispensations; but rites and ceremonies have been
varied. Offering sacrifice was always practiced from the days of Adam, but
circumcision was appointed to the family of Abraham. Melchizedeck and Lot were
under the Adamaic dispensation, therefore they practiced sacrificing, but not
circumcision. But there never was a covenant made by God adapted to the temper
and conduct of impenitent self-righteous sinners, requiring men to feel and act
as they do, in their religious exercises and performances; but from the early
days of Cain to the present period, God has ever refused to smell a sweet
savior in such sacrifices. The first persecution and the first martyr was
relative to this point. Genesis 4.3, -- 8.


-- And if God's covenant with Abraham was the covenant of grace, and if the
same covenant, which took place then, continues under the gospel dispensation,
as Mr. M. asserts, P. 12. Then the dispute is at end. Mr. M's. scheme is
demolished. -- However, because he means to gather strength from the Sinai
covenant, let us proceed to consider that.

N. B. If the Abrahamic covenant was is no sense any part of the Sinai
covenant, then circumcision was in no sense a seal of the Sinai covenant: and
in this view the Sinai covenant ought to be entirely left out of the dispute.
Because we are all agreed, that the gospel covenant is the same, for substance,
with the Abrahamic. However, let us see what evidence there is that the Sinai
covenant was a holy covenant, which could not be really complied with, but in
the exercise of real holiness.

SECT. III. The covenant with the Israelites in the wilderness was a holy
covenant, and could not be really complied with, but in the exercise of real
holiness.
THE whole law of Moses, which was written in a book, comprises at large all
the contents of the covenant with the Israelites in the wilderness. This book,
therefore, was called, the book of the covenant. And the little chest in which
it was put, from the special use to which it was appropriated, was called, the
Ark of the covenant, Deuteronomy. 31.9, 25, 26. A brief summary of this law was
written on two tables of stone. Deuteronomy. 4.13. Which two tables of stone were,
therefore, called the tables of the covenant, Deuteronomy. 9 9, 10, 11, 15; and were
also put into the Ark of the covenant, Deuteronomy. 10.4, 5. So that we may be as
certain of the nature of that covenant, as we can be of the meaning of the
Mosaic law.

THE Israelites in the wilderness professed a compliance with this covenant and
with no other, as is beyond dispute certain from Exodus 19.8. And chap. 24.3.
Deuteronomy. 5.1 -- 6. And chap. 26. 16, 17, 18. Chap. 28. 1. 15, 58. And chap. 29. 9
-- 13, compared with chap. 30. 10 -- 16.

AND as soon as they should pass over Jordan, they were expressly commanded, to
set up great stones, and plaster them with plaster, and write upon them all
the words of this law; and to build an alter, and offer sacrifice; and half the
tribes were to stand on mount Ebal, and half on mount Gerizzim, and the Levites
were to say unto all the men of Israel with a loud voice cursed be the man,
etc. that breaks this and that law, twelves times successively, according to
the number of the twelve tribes of Israel. And finally, to sum all in one word,
Cursed be the man that confirms not all the words of this law to do them: and
all the people shall say, Amen. Deuteronomy. 27. And this most solemn and affecting
affair was accordingly attended, soon after they had passed over Jordan. Josh.
8.30 -- 35.

So that, by their own act and deed, they did, in the most public and explicit
manner, declare their hearty approbation of, and acquiescence in, not Mr. M.'s
external covenant, but the perfect law of GOD, in all it is strictness, and with
all it is curses, as holy, just and good. Nor was there, according to that
constitution, any hope of pardon in case of transgression, but by the blood of
atonement. Nor was there any pardon to be obtained in this way, until they
repented, until their uncircumcised hearts were humbled, even so deeply humbled
as to accept the punishment of their iniquity. Lev. 26.40, 41. Neh. 9. Dan. 9.
Then they were to pray for pardon, looking toward GOD'S holy dwelling place,
where the covenant was laid up in the ark, and covered with a lid all made of
pure gold, to keep the law in honor, which was a type of Christ, whose office
it is to magnify the law, and make it honorable, and to open a way for grace to
reign. That lid was called the mercy seat, or rather as critics say, it ought
to have been translated, the propitiatory; for it was a shadow of Christ the
Great Propitiatory. And moreover, to complete the shadow, without shedding of
blood there was no remission. Just thus stands the account in the sacred
writings.

THIS cordial approbation of their law in all its extent, and with all its
curses; and this praying for pardon, looking toward GOD'S holy dwelling place,
offering sacrifices, etc. was, for substance, the same, with what the Apostle
Paul meant by repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ,
which was the sum of that gospel he used to preach to the Jew and also to the
Greek; Acts 20.21. For in repentance toward God, the divine law is heartily
acquiesed in and loved as holy, just and good; and the whole blame of every
transgression is taken to ourselves; with a disposition to say unto GOD, thou
art just when thou speak, and clear when thou judge. And in faith toward
our Lord Jesus Christ, we look only to free grace through him for pardon and
eternal life. So that the covenant of grace, in a legal dress, was the very
covenant into which they professed to enter. So Paul understood it; Romans 10.6
-- 10. Compared with Deuteronomy. 30.11 -- 14; of which more presently.

BUT a heart wholly dead in sin, is in a state of total contrariety to the
divine law, and to the way of salvation through Jesus Christ; or in the language
of scripture, is enmity against God, is not subject to his law, neither indeed
can be. So that there is not the least degree of real compliance with this holy
covenant, in one who is entirely destitue of holiness: and so no degree of real
compliance can be understandingly and honestly professed. But if the truth was
known, and the truth was spoken, by graceless sinners, they would all as one
man declare, agreeable to our confession of faith, "we are utterly indisposed,
disabled and apposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all evil;" for this
is the very truth of the case; as Mr. M. himself professes to believe.

And where now is there the least appearance of Mr. M.'s external graceless
covenant in the old testament? The contents of Abraham's covenant are
justifying faith; he believed in the Lord, and it was counted to him for
righteousness; and gospel obedience; walk before me, and be thou perfect. And
he was called the friend of God. Jam. 2.23. The contents of the covenant at
Sinai is the holy law of God, as the rule of life, and the blood of atonement
as the foundation of hope. And where is this unholy covenant? But to be more
particular in the confutation of this notion.

1. IT is readily granted, that a notion of the Sinai covenant, somewhat like
this, was once espoused by the most respectable sect in the Jewish church: I
mean, the Pharisees. They understood the Mosaic law in this very sense, and in
no other. And in this they were more consistent than Mr. Mather. For he
understands the Mosaic law in this very sense, and in a sense diametrically
opposite to it, at the same time; for he believes the Mosaic law requires
perfect holiness, even that every law which was itself the rule of duty in that
covenant, which was externally entered into; and yet he believes that the
covenant externally entered into did require no holiness at all; but might be
really complied with in the sight of GOD, by a graceless man, dead in sin. But
the Pharisees were more consistent. For the divine law to require contrary and
inconsistent volitions, is to be a self contradictory and inconsistent law,
Mat. 6.24. But sinful and holy volitions are contrary and inconsistent. John 3
6. Romans 8.7. Gal. 5 17.

For God to make two laws, one requiring none but holy volitions, the other
none but sinful volitions, is to make two laws, contradictory and inconsistent;
both of which cannot be in force at the same time: Yes, rather, neither of
which can be in force at all, as they mutually destroy each other.


They believed that the Sinai covenant required nothing more in religion than
they performed. For, as touching the righteousness of the law they were
blameless in their own eyes. For they lived up to its demands in their sense of
it. All these things have I done from my youth up, said one of them. And it was
the spirit of the whole party to say to GOD, as the elder brother did to his
father, Lo these many years do I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any time
thy commandment. Luke 15. For they were in their own eyes, righteous men, who
needed no repentance. And this encouraged them to pray to GOD, and to hope for
his approbation; for they could say as he did, God I thank thee, I am not as
other men; for without the law sin was dead; and so they were alive without the
law. And in this view of themselves, they were bold to claim a covenant
relation to GOD; we have one father, even God. And they gloried much in having
Abraham to their father; and were vexed at John Baptist, and Jesus Christ, for
not admitting their claims to be well grounded; and for representing them to be
not the children of Abraham, nor the children of GOD, but the children of the
devil, a generation of vipers. This was shocking treatment, indeed, of those,
who were not only in covenant with GOD, as they thought; but who, as they
understood it, had lived up to it too: and Mr. M. may be challenged to point
out any essential difference between their notion of what the law of Moses
required, and his notion of what his external covenant requires. For both agree
in this, that a man may live up to the one, and to the other, without really
embracing Christianity. They lived up to the law in their sense of it, and
openly rejected Christ. And one may live up to Mr. M.'s external covenant and
reject Christ in his heart, as he allows. And were it the fashion, he, who
rejects Christ in his heart, might do it in open profession. In the dark days
of popery there were no professed infidels among Christians. Since the
reformation light and knowledge are greatly increased, and infidelity is become
very fashionable in Great Britain. However, there are thousands of professed
Christians yet remaining in the visible church, who believe the bible to be the
word of GOD, not because they understand and believe that scheme of religion
which in fact is contained in the bible; but because they think it contains
their own schemes. Thus Pelagians believe the bible to be the word of God as
supposing it contains a system of Pelagianism, and Socinians as supposing it
contains a system of Socinianism, and Arminians, Neonomians, and Antinomians do
the like; while they allow themselves to disbelieve and hate and oppose that
very system of doctrines and practice which in fact it does contain. In this
view there may be not a few professed Christians, who are infidels in reallity;
i. e. who really disbelieve that scheme of religion which is contained in the
bible, while they profess to believe the bible to be the word of GOD. Thus it
was among the Jews. Joh. 5.46, 47. Mat. 23 29 -- 36 Should light still
increase, and these men find out that their various schemes are not contained
in the bible, if left to their own hearts, they would universally prefer
infidelity to Christianity. And in this case there would be nothing to prevent
their throwing off the profession of Christianity but their worldly interest.
For it is plain fact, that the external evidences of Christianity, when fresh
and before the eyes of the Pharisees, were not sufficient to conquer their
aversion to it, so as to prevent their rejecting of it. And human nature is the
same that it was seventeen hundred years ago.
Nay, How many professors are there, who, in their consciences, view the divine
law very much in the same light that the Pharisees did? They are sensible it
forbids open, gross, and (what the world calls) scandalous sins; such as
stealing, etc. Their consciences will smite them if they are guilty of any such
gross sins: But their consciences never smote them in their lives, for not
being converted, for impenitence, for unbelief, for not loving GOD and Christ
above all things, etc. etc. But they are agreed to a man to justify themselves
in these sins, for they say, "we do as well as we can." -- And these are the
men, who claim church privileges with the greatest boldness, and have the
highest notions of their being in covenant with GOD, and having a right to
covenant blessings. -- If it should ever happen to these men, that their
consciences should be so awakened, as to see, that a state and course of enmity
against GOD and his law, and of rebellion against the Majesty of Heaven, is as
great a sin, in the sight of the holy One of Israel, as stealing, considered as
a crime committed against our neighbor; their consciences would soon tell
them, that the one disqualified them in the sight of GOD, for entering into
covenant with GOD, as much as the other. -- But if we tell men, that a state
and course of enmity against GOD and his law, and of rebellion against the
Majesty of Heaven does not, in the sight of GOD, disqualify them to enter into
covenant with GOD, though stealing does, it will have, according to Mr. M.'s
reasoning, p 44. A direct tendency to prevent their minds being impressed with
a sense of the heinous nature of such sins, and of GOD'S displeasure against
them; but it is highly expedient, they should be so dealt with, as to awaken in
their minds a sense of the displeasure of GOD against their conduct.

2. JESUS CHRIST did not understand the law of Moses, which was the rule of
duty in the Sinai covenant, in the same sense with the Pharisees, as requiring
such a kind of obedience as they performed, and as other unconverted men may
perform; but professedly set himself to give another explanation of it. This he
did in his sermon on the Mount, which may be considered as a confutation of the
Pharisaic scheme of religion. But a man may comply with Mr. M.'s external
covenant fully, who has not the least degree of that religion taught in this
sermon. A graceless man may live up to Mr. M.'s covenant, and at the same time
be entirely destitute of a compliance with the law of Moses, in our Savior's
sense of it. For, says Christ, he that hears these sayings of mine, and does
them, shall be like a man that built his house upon a rock. But a man may hear
and do those things required in Mr. M.'s external covenant, and yet finally be
like the man, that built his house upon the sand; as he himself allows.

3. THE law of Moses, which was the rule of duty in the covenant into which the
Israelites entered, required nothing but holiness. That covenant, which was
externally exhibited, and externally entered into, was so far from being
altogether a graceless covenant, that it required nothing but true grace and
real holiness; nothing but love, with all it is various exercises and fruits, in
heart and life; love to God and man; of this we are expressly assured by one
who came from GOD, and infallibly understood the nature of that dispensation.
Mat. 22.36 -- 40. Master, which is the great commandment in the law? said a
Pharisee to our Savior, referring to the law of Moses. Jesus said unto him,
thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind: this is the first and great commandment, and the second is
like unto it, thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself. Thus he had answered
the Pharisee's question. But he proceeded to add another sentiment, which
overthrew the Pharisaic scheme by the roots. On these two commandments hang all
the law and the prophets; for if the law obliged the Jew to perform every duty
in a holy manner, out of love; and required no other kind of obedience but
this; if all the law and the prophets hung on these two commands; so that
radically love was all; so that this holy love was the fulfilling of the law,
Romans 13.8, 10; then the Pharisees, who were entirely destitute of this, were
equally destitute of that kind of religion required in the Mosaic law, and so
their scheme was torn up by the roots. It is not only a fundamental maxim in
the scripture scheme of religion that love is the fulfilling of the law; but it
is expressly affirmed, that without love the highest gifts and the greatest
seize, the most expensive deeds and the most cruel sufferings are
nothing, and will profit nothing. The apostle Paul carries the point so far as
to say, though I speak with the tongues of men and angels, and have not
charity, I am as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal; as destitue of true and
real virtue. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all
mysteries, and have all knowledge: and though I have all faith, so that I could
remove mountains, and have no charity, I am nothing. And to carry the point as
high as it can possibly be carried he adds; and though I bestow all my goods to
feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it
profits me nothing. For in his view charity, or love was the sum total of all
virtue. And so there is no virtue in any knowledge, faith, or practice any
further then there is love in them, and so where there is no love, these are
all nothing. In a word, holiness in the creature is a conformity to God's moral
perfections. The law is a transcript of God's moral character: God is love. The
whole of what the law requires is love with all it is various exercises and
fruits. Therefore love is the sum of all virtue. Therefore where there is no
love there is no virtue: not the least degree of a real conformity to God's
nature and law. Were this point understood and attended to, it would put an end
to above half the disputes in the Christian world.


4. IT is manifest, that Moses himself instructed the Israelites to understand
the covenant in this sense, and that the blessings of it were promised, not to
an ungracious, but to a holy obedience. Moses did instruct the Israelites to
understand it in this sense, as requiring holiness, Deuteronomy. 6.4, 5. Hear, O
Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. And thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. Lev. 19.18. Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. -- And as requiring nothing but holiness.
Deuteronomy. 10.12. And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to
fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul. -- And that the
blessings of it were promised to this holy obedience. This was one clause of
the covenant, Exodus 20.6. Showing mercy unto thousands of them, that love me,
and keep my commandments. And thus it was afterward explained. Deuteronomy. 11.22.
For if ye will diligently keep all these commandments which I command you to do
them, to love the Lord your God, to walk in all his ways, and to cleave unto
him, then will the Lord drive out all these nations from before you, etc. etc.
And if any man will read the first eleven chapters of Deuteronomy. he will see with
what plainness and fidelity Moses explained the covenant to the Israelites: or
rather let the whole book be read through, from beginning to end in this (...).

5. The same, kind of faith in GOD, as their conductor through the wilderness to
the promised land, which was a type of the heavenly Canaan, was required of the
whole congregation of Israel in their covenant, as is required of every
believer, under the gospel dispensation, in Christ Jesus, the captain of our
salvation, on whom we depend to conduct us safe through this world to that rest
that remains for the people of GOD; and this they professed, when they
professed to take Jehovah for their God. And for the want of this faith their
carcasses fell in the wilderness, just as false professors under the gospel
fall short of heaven through unbelief; as is plain from Number. 14, and from the 3d
and 4th chapters of the epistle to the Hebrews. And this, beyond all dispute,
is a saving faith, a faith of a holy nature, and not the faith of devils.

6. Paul understood Moses to include the covenant of grace in his law. This is
so plain, that any may see it, that will read and compare, Romans 10.6 -- 10,
with Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 13.

7. Peter also understood the holiness required in the Sinai covenant to be the
same kind of holiness, which the gospel requires of true saints, and without
which no man shall see the Lord; as is so evident, that none will fail to see
it, that will read and compare, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16, with Lev. 19.2.

Thus it appears, that the covenant externally exhibited, and externally
entered into, in the wilderness, was, not a graceless, but a holy covenant.

Obj. It will follow, that perfect and sinless obedience was what they
prefessed"; for "nothing short of perfection comes up to the demand of loving
GOD with all the heart. -- Although therefore they entered into a covenant which
required them to love GOD with all their heart; yet the profession which they
then made, cannot consistently be understood as a profession that at that time,
there was such an heart in them; but that such a heart was their duty, and
intended as the object of their pursuit. But that an unrenewed sinner can, in
no sense, be said to seek such an heart, is what, to me, wants proof. P. 22, 23.

ANS. Although the Israelites did not profess a perfect compliance with the law
of perfection; yet they did profess a cordial compliance with it, even with the
whole of it; but the unrenewed sinner can, in no scripture sense, he said
cordially to comply with it, in the least degree. But to be more particular,

1. IN this objection Mr. M. grants one main point for which we contend, viz.
That the law, which was the rule of duty in the Sinai covenant, required
perfect holiness. He must therefore acknowledge, that it forbid every sin, the
least as well as the greatest: and that it therefore required nothing but
holiness. And that therefore his unholy graceless covenant was not required by
it, or contained in it.

2 IT will on the other hand be readily granted by us, that the law of God
(considered, as requiring prefect holiness, and forbidding every sin, the least
as well as the greatest) is the rule of life to believers; and as such, is
presupposed and implied in the covenant of grace, which is not designed to make
void, but to establish the Law. Romans 3.31. And therefore whenever the covenant
of grace is complied with in the exercise of faith, the law, in the very act,
is cordially received as a rule of life by the believer: even as Abraham
received that divine injunction, walk before me and be thou perfect, in the
very act of his renewing covenant with God. Genesis 17. -- But I have endeavored
already to explain and prove this at large in an essay on the nature and glory
of the gospel.

3. NONE can consistently pretend, that Moses intended to lead the Israelites
to profess sinless perfection in that covenant; because the daily sacrifice of
a lamb, the great type of the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
world, which was to be offered, morning and evening continually, as well as a
great variety of others sacrifices of atonement, were assential parts of the
Sinai covenant. But these had been needless institutions, had perfect holiness
been professedly expected. For it was professedly expected that they would keep
covenant. For they were taken into covenant in that view. Isa. 63.8. For he
said, surely they are my people, children that will not lie.

4. AND yet no fact can be plainer than that Moses led them to receive the
whole law for the rule of their lives, and that they professed to do this.
Exodus, 24.3. And Moses came and told the people all the words of the Lord, and
all the judgments: and all the people answered with one voice, and said, all
the words, which the Lord has said, will we do: Compared with Deuteronomy. 26.17.
Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, to walk in his ways, and to
keep his statutes and his commandments, and his judgments, and to hearken unto
his voice. For they professed, not merely to give the assent of their
understandings to this truth, viz. That the law of God ought to be the rule of
their lives; but, to use the modern phrase, they professed the consent of their
wills: "All the words which the Lord has spoken, will we do." And God declares
that this was "well said." And had there been "such an heart in them"
answerable to their visible professon, they would have been Israelites indeed:
for their hearts would then have been right in the sight of God, and they would
have been steadfast in his covenant. Number. 32.11, 12. Their profession therefore
was full enough, but they lied to God will their tongues. Their profession was
as full as God desired: but there was not such an heart in them. Psalm. 78.36,
37. For,

5. It is the peculiar character of the regenerate cordially to receive the
divine law as the rule of their lives. Heb. 8.10. But it is the universal
character of the unregenerate to be in a state of total contrariety to the
divine law in their hearts. Romans 8.7. Because the carnal mind is enmity against
God: for it is not subject to his law; neither indeed can be. Therefore,

6. As every true believer does cordially receive the law of God for the rule
of his life, so he may understandingly and honestly profess it: but one whose
heart is in a state of total contrariety to the divine law, if he understands
and honestly speaks the truth, must say, I am not subject to the divine law,
neither indeed can I be; yea, so far from it, that I am at enmity against God.
But,

7. None of the religious seekings and endeavors of one, in whom a total
noncompliance with God's holy covenant takes place, are of the nature of a
compliance with that covenant, in the least degree; as is self-evident. For to
say otherwise, is an express contradiction. Therefore,

8. THERE is no way left for a profession of a compliance with God's holy
covenant, to those who know themselves to be unconverted, (without lying) but
to deny the doctrine of total depravity. For since the covenant cannot be
proved to be an unholy graceless one, we must pretend that graceless sinners
have some grace, in order to obtain our end. But,

9. IF unconverted sinners have that grace, which is a compliance with the
covenant of grace, then they are entitled to the blessings of the covenant of
grace, to pardon, justification and eternal life; which to say, is at once to
set aside the whole New Testament. Thus stands the case.

Now what method Mr. M. will take, to get along with his scheme, after time for
reconsideration, is not yet known: or whether a gentlemen of so much good sense
will not rather give it up.

OBJECT. But if these things are true, it will follow, that the covenant with
Abraham, the Sinai covenant, and the gospel covenant are for substance, one and
the same covenant; even the covenant of grace: but this does not agree with
many scripture texts. For the Apostle Paul distinguishes between the Abrahamic
covenant and the Sinai covenant, between the promise to Abraham and the law
which was 430 years after, and calls them two covenants. Gal. 3.16, 17, 18, and
Chap. 4.24. And he represents the Sinai covenant, which he calls the law as
requiring perfect obedience on pain of the curse. Chap. 3.10. And affirms that
by the deeds of the law no flesh can be justified. Romans 3.20. Gal. 2.16. And
that Abraham was not justified by the law, but by faith. Gal. 3.6, 7, 8, 9. And
that the law is not of faith. Ver. 12. but a Schoolmaster to bring us to
Christ, that we might be justified by faith. Ver. 24 Moreover, it is plainly
intimated, that in the Sinai covenant God did not communicate sanctifying grace
to those that were under it; but that in the gospel covenant he does. At mount
Sinai God wrote the law on tables of stone, and obliged the people to keep it:
but did not give them a heart to do so: but in the new covenant God writes his
law on the heart. i. e. by the influences of his spirit gives a disposition of
mind answerable to the law. Heb. 8.8 -- 12. Therefore Paul calls the Sinai
covenant the ministration of death and condemnation, and the letter that
kills in distinction from the gospel, which he calls the spirit which gives
life, the ministration of the spirit, and the ministration of righteousness. 2
Cor. 3.6, 7, 8.

ANSW. As Mr. M. maintains that the Abrahamic, the Sinai, and the Gospel
covenants are for substance one and the same covenant; so the foregoing
objection cannot consistently be made by him or by his admirers; nor has he
taken any notice of it. It may suffice therefore to say;

1. That every self-righteous Jew was disposed to consider the Old Testament as
a covenant of works, and every self-righteous christian is disposed to consider
the New Testament in the same light. They attended the externals of that
dispensation and expected to find acceptance with God, by what they did. Luke
18.11. Romans 9.31.32. And their example is closely followed by too many under
the christian dispensation: neither of them understanding the true nature of
the divine law. Romans 7.8, 9.

2. It is readily granted, that St. Paul taught, that all self-righteous
sinners, be they Jews or Christians, are under a law which requires perfect
obedience on pain of eternal damnation: that this law is holy, just and good;
that they are in duty bound to fulfill this law themselves; that GOD is not
bound to give them any assistance at all; and that it curses every one that
continues not in all things. And it is readily granted, that this law is a
ministration of death and condemnation, and kills. It was ordained to life,
i. e. it promises life to every one that lives up to it; but it is found to be
unto death to every one who makes the attempt. Romans 7.10.

3. It is readily granted, that this law is as different from the Abrahamic
covenant, and the gospel covenant, as the covenant of works is from the
covenant of grace: And that it was the design of the apostle to set this
difference in a clear and striking light, that he might kill all the
self-righteous hopes of the self-righteous sinner; and convince him that there
is no hope in his case, but of mere free grace through Jesus Christ. Gal. 3.10,
24. Romans 3.9 -- 25.

4. It is also granted, that this law was one principal part of the Sinai
covenant: and that every carnal Jew was under it, and held bound by it: Yea,
that it is the peculiar privilege of the true believer to be delivered from it,
and that by being united to and interested in Christ Jesus, the second Adam,
who has completely answered it is demands; Romans 6.14, and chap. 7.4, 5, 6. Gal.
2.19, 20. and chap. 3.10 -- 14. -- And to grant these things is to grant all
that the Apostle says about this law. And yet consistently with all these
things it may be asserted, that

5. The Mosaic dispensation did reveal a way in which pardon of sin might be
obtained: it did exhibit in types a shadow of the gospel way of obtaining
pardon. See the 4th, 5th, 6th, and 16th chapters of Leviticus. And it did
promise pardoning mercy and sanctifying grace to the penitent believer. Lev.
26.40, 41, 42. Deuteronomy. 30.1 -- 6. And the land of Canaan was a designed type of
heaven; and long life and prosperity there, of eternal life and blessedness
above. Heb. 4.1 -- 11. -- But this is the sum of what is intended, when the
Sinai covenant is represented as a covenant of grace.

6. The Israelites when they entered into covenant at Mount-Sinai in words, did
by their unbelief reject the covenant of grace in their hearts. Psalm. 78.36,
37. Heb. 3.19. And therefore notwithstanding they were then visibly married to
GOD in a covenant containing the promises before mentioned, whereby they laid
themselves under bonds to keep covenant; yet GOD was not obliged to give them a
heart to keep covenant, by any promise contained in that dispensation, as he
would have been had they been sincere, and as he is to all who are united to
Christ by a true and living faith. And so it came to pass that they broke
covenant, in an open, public manner; and he regarded them not, but their
carcases fell in the wilderness: Whereas GOD writes his law in the heart of the
true believer, and effectually inclines him to walk in his ways. And thus every
false professor, whether Jew or Christian, will fall short of the heavenly
Canaan; as it is written, Joh. 15.2. Every branch in me that bears not fruit,
he takes away: and every branch that bears fruit, he purges it that it may
bring forth more fruit. -- But,

7. If any, after all, shall insist, that the Sinai covenant was merely a
covenant of works, and that the Abrahamic covenant was not in any sense
contained in it, they ought to consider, that if this be so, then the Sinai
covenant ought to be entirely left out of the account in the present dispute,
and circumcision ought to be considered, as being in no sense a seal of it. For
it was appointed to be a seal of the Abrahamic covenant, and of no other; and
therefore if the Abrahamic covenant was in no sense a part of the Sinai
covenant, then circumcision, was in no sense a seal of the Sinai covenant. For
no new seals to the covenant of works have been appointed since Adam was turned
out of paradise. And as for Mr. M.'s external graceless covenant, it never had
any existence. The bible knows nothing about it, either name or thing. -- We
have already seen that it is not contained in the Old Testament, and we shall
presently perceive, that it is not to be found in the new.

SECT. IV. The Gospel of Christ essentially different from Mr. Mather's
external, graceless covenant.
IT is true, the gospel consists in an external revelation; but then the thing
revealed, is the way of salvation by free grace through Jesus Christ. It is also
true, that the call of the gospel is an external call; but then the thing it
calls us unto, is a belief and compliance with the way of salvation by
free grace through Jesus Christ. The gospel consists in the clearest and fullest
external revelation of the way in which GOD may be just and yet justify and
save sinners; which way of salvation it constantly invites sinners to comply
with, that they may be pardoned and saved; saying, come, for all things are now
ready. Mat. 22.4. This may be called an external covenant, as it is a visible
exhibition of the covenant of grace, with which professors of Christianity
visibly comply in a profession of repentance toward GOD and faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ. But in this view, it is essentially different from Mr. M.'s
external covenant. For the gospel covenant promises pardon and eternal life to
those who really comply with it; but one may comply with Mr. M.'s external
covenant in sincerity and truth* and yet have no grace and finally perish. For
Mr. M.'s external covenant does not require saving grace, and may be perfectly
complied with by one who is dead in sin. For it is an unholy, graceless
covenant; and so it is essentially different from the gospel of Jesus Christ.

JOHN Baptist did not baptize with the baptism of the external covenant, but
with the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. Luke 3.

JESUS CHRIST did not call men to comply with an external graceless covenant,
and be baptized: But to repent and believe the gospel. Mat. 1.15. Having
counted the cost, to deny themselves, take up their cross and follow him. Luke
14.25 -- 33. Promising eternal life to those who did so. Mat. 19.29.
Representing graceless professors by salt that has lost it is savor, and is good
for nothing, but to be cast out and trodden under foot. Mat. 5.13. Luke 14.34,
35. He warned his hearers against professing and not living up to his religion,
as an inconsistent conduct. Luke 6.46. He called them to make such a
profession, as he might own to their honor in the heavenly world, before his
Father. Mat. 10.32. Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess
also before my Father which is in heaven. This is that profession unto which he
invited men, and never invited them to any other. Rather to false professors
Christ declares it will be said, Friend, how came thou in hither, not having
on a wedding garment? Mat. 22.

THE apostles had no commission to preach and baptize upon Mr. M.'s external
covenant; but were expressly ordered to preach the gospel to every creature; a
gospel that promised eternal life: and to baptize those who appeared to comply
with it. Mark 16.15, 16. They were sent to make disciples, not to Mr. M.'s
external covenant, but to Christianity. Mat. 28.19, 20. In a word, they were
sent to preach repentance and remission of sins to all nations in the name of
Christ. Luke 24.47. And they acted up to their commission.

When the three thousand were pricked in their heart, Peter did not tell them
to comply with Mr. M.'s external covenant and be baptized, which they might
have done, and yet have continued impenitent and unpardoned; but, exactly
according to his Master's orders, he said, repent and be baptized in the name
of the Lord Jesus for the remission of sins. Acts 2.37, 38. Repent first, and
then be baptized.

And when Peter went to preach to Cornelius, it was not to preach up an
external covenant, with which a man may comply and yet perish; but to declare
to him the gospel way of salvation, to tell him words whereby he might be
saved, and all his house. Acts 11.14. And accordingly, he preached the gospel,
viz. That through Christ's name, whosoever believes in him shall receive
remission of sins. Acts 10.43. But he said not one word about Mr. M.'s external
graceless covenant. And when the church at Jerusalem heard what had happened,
they glorified God, not that the Gentiles were admitted into an external
graceless covenant, a thing not heard of in the apostolic age; but they
glorified GOD, saying, then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance
unto life. Acts 11.18. For it had been their notion, that an uncircumcised
Gentile could not be saved. Acts 15.1.

PETER, before he began his sermon, was well assured that Cornelius was a real
saint; for Cornelius had known so much about the Jewish religion, that although
born a Pagan, yet he had renounced idolatry, and had become a true and
acceptable worshipper of the GOD of Israel. He was a believer in the same sense
that Nathanael was, who was an Israelite indeed in whom there was no guile, and
who however did not at that time know that Jesus was the Messiah who was to
come. John 1.43 -- 47. For without faith it is impossible to please God. Heb.
11.6. But Cornelius obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of
his gifts, by an angel from heaven, which appeared to him. Acts 10.4. And by a
vision which appeared to Peter, and a voice declaring Cornelius, though
uncircumcised, yet in the sight of GOD to be not unclean, but clean; for that
GOD himself had cleansed him; ver. 9 -- 16. Peter therefore began his sermon
with a declaration, that Cornelius, although uncircumcised, was nevertheless in a
state of acceptance with GOD; ver. 34, 35. It had been mad work therefore now
for Peter to preach up Mr. M.'s external graceless covenant to one, who was
already really in the covenant of grace, and whom Peter had just declared to be
so. But, Peter, far from this, knowing his business well, gave to him and to
the whole company a brief narrative of the life, death and resurrection of
Jesus Christ; exhibiting the evidence there was, that he was indeed the
promised Messiah, and that through his name whosoever believes in him, shall
receive the remission of sins. Ver. 36 -- 43. And it happened to the hearers,
while he was preaching, as Christ said it would to them that believe, even in
the very commission which he gave to his apostles. (Mark 16.15, 16.) The Holy
Ghost fell on all them that heard the word. And that not only in his
extraordinary gifts, but also in his sanctifying influences, and that to a
great degree; for they not only "spoke with tongues," but "MAGNIFIED GOD;" as
the blessed Virgin did, when filled with the Holy Ghost, Luke 1.46. Or rather,
as those, who, on the day of Pentecost, spoke the wonderful works of God. Acts
2.11. -- This appearance struck Peter and all the saints present with
astonishment. Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized,
which have received the Holy Ghost, as well as we? said Peter. And exactly in
this point of light did Peter afterward set this fact, when he gave a
narrative of it to the council at Jerusalem. Acts 15.8, 9. And God which
knows the hearts, bears them witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as
he did unto us, and put no difference between us and them, purifying their
hearts by faith. -- And again,

When Paul had the awakened jailor to instruct, and to prepare for baptism, he
said not one word to him, about Mr. M.'s external covenant, either name or
thing; but preached the gospel to him, saying, believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy house. Acts 16.30, 31. And thou shall
be "saved." He did not preach up an unsaving, graceless faith, the faith of
devils: but a saving faith. To that, and to no other, did he exhort the jailor,
in order to prepare him for baptism. It is not looked upon, among men,
ingenuous, fair and honest to lead any to sign and seal a bond, before we let
them know the contents of it. But the apostles led their converts to set to
their seal in baptism, without saying one word to them about Mr M.'s external
covenant, name or thing. This, therefore, was not the covenant which they led
them to seal. Nay, the apostles themselves do not appear to have known, that
there was any such covenant to be preached up by them, or to be sealed by their
converts.


When Mr. Sandeman says, that "a simple belief of the simple truth," ( the
heart left out of the account) is saving faith; Mr. M. will doubtless agree
with me in saying, "This cannot be saving faith; because the devil has it."
When therefore Mr. Mather (p. 25) represents the eunuch, as entering into
covenant with GOD, by the simple belief of the simple truth, by an ungracious,
unholy faith, and is resolved to make that phrase, "with all thine heart,"
stand for nothing; I beg leave to reply, "this faith cannot bring those into
covenant with GOD that have it; because the devil has it." And I humbly
conceive that no man need be at a loss about the meaning of Philip's words, or
of the eunuch's answer, that will compare them with Romans 10.9. "If thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, that
GOD has raised him from the dead, THOU SHALL BE SAVED." And with 1 John 4.15.
"Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of GOD, GOD dwells in him, and
he in GOD." And chap. 5.1. "Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is
born of God." For just this was the profession which Philip demanded, and which
the eunuch made.

And in this view of things, it is easy to discern the true reason, why the
apostolic churches, were, in the epistles wrote to them, considered and treated
as saints, by the writers, who it is not to be supposed had any personal
acquaintance at all with many of them; and why they were spoken of as beloved
of God, Romans 1.7. Sanctified in Christ Jesus. 1 Cor. 1.2. Chosen in Christ
before the foundation of the world. Ephesians. 1.4. etc. etc. For such they were by
profession before all the world; and such generally speaking they proved
themselves to be by their practice. Indeed it was always expected, that tares
would, more or less be among the wheat. But the apostles did not think it their
duty to sow tares knowingly and on design, as Mr. M. would have us do. In that
age of the church this was thought to be the work of the devil. Mat. 13.39.
And, methinks, he may, now in our age, do enough at it, without any help from
the clergy. -- And if professors in that age lived up to their profession, and
gave abundant evidence of their sincerity, by the holiness of their lives, as
Mr. M. observes they did. P. 31, etc. Then they were indeed the salt of the
earth, and the light of the world, in their profession and in their practice
too, as all church members ought to be. Mat. 5.13, 14, 15. Nor did the apostles
think it a thing of dangerous tendency to treat them as such in the most public
manner, in the sight of the world; as Mr. M. must have thought on his scheme,
p. 51, etc. These were churches of visible saints, who appeared to be the body
of Christ, a living body to a living head. P. 48, 49. And not synagogues of
satan, to which graceless professors are said to belong, in Rev. 2.9. -- To
conclude,

When we read the life of John Baptist, and of Jesus Christ; when we read the
commission given to the apostles, in Matthew, Mark, and Luke; and when we read
the history of their conduct in the Acts; and consider how they treated the
churches which they set up; nothing can be plainer, than that they preached the
gospel, made proselytes to Christianity, set up Christian churches, on the
gospel plan; and not on the plan of an external graceless covenant, a thing not
heard of in that age.

Obj. But there was not time to examine the three thousand on the day of
Pentecost, in order to form a judgment of their gracious state: nor to judge of
them by their fruits. P. 26.

Ans. They professed to comply with Peter's exhortation, repent and be baptized
in the name of the Lord Jesus for the remission of sins. Their profession,
circumstanced as it was, was to all appearance sincere. And this was enough;
for the doctrine of the necessity of an infallible certainty that professors
were what they professed themselves to be, in order to their admission into the
church, was not an apostolic doctrine. And besides, they had as much time to
examine into their grace, as into their moral sincerity.

Obj. How could the character of the apostles be maintained as infallibly
inspired guides to the church, when those they had received, did so often prove
hypocrites, false-brethren and apostates? P. 29.

Ans. By infallible inspiration they were taught, that it was GOD'S prerogative
to search the heart. They never pretended to do it themselves. They preached
repentance toward GOD and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ: Their converts
professed that repentance and faith which they preached: They received them
upon their profession; they expected there would be tares among the wheat. But
they did not mean to sow tares knowingly and upon design: this was the work of
the devil; and is it not fit that the ministers of Christ should take the work
of the devil out of his hands.

Obj. It is true, Peter said of Cornelius and those that were with him, God put
no difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith. But he said
this some years after, in which time they had doubtless given sufficient
evidence: but this is of no weight, to prove that they were admitted to baptism
on that supposition. P. 28.

Ans. If he did say this some years after, and if they had in that time given
ever so great evidence of the sincerity of their conversion; yet Peter says not
one word about this consequent evidence, nor gives the least hint that they had
given such evidence. He mentions not one single fact, on which his charity for
them was founded, but that only which happened before they were baptized, viz.
Giving them the Holy Ghost even as he did unto us. But the Apostles received
not only the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost on the day of pentecost, but
also large effusions of his sanctifying influences, filling their hearts with
love to divine things: And out of the abundance of their hearts, their mouths
spoke of the wonderful works of God. Acts 2.11. And it happened to Cornelius
and his household just as it had to the Apostles on the day of pentecost, and
their hearts were filled with divine Love; and out of the abundance of their
hearts their mouth spoke, MAGNIFYING GOD, extolling and praising him for the
glorious display of his perfections in the work of redemption by Jesus Christ.
Acts 10.46. By which Peter and the saints who were with him perceived to their
full satisfaction, that these Gentile converts had the same holy views, and
holy affections, which they themselves had; which led Peter to say, God bare
them witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us; and put no
difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith. This is the
plain and natural sense.

SECT. V. Baptism and the Lord's Supper, are seals of the covenant of grace,
and of no other covenant.
MR. Mather says, p. 36, Seals are rites of confirmation. -- Nothing is
confirmed by the seal, but what is expressed in the written instrument to which
it is annexed. And thus, GOD confirms and ratifies nothing by the sacraments,
but what is contained in the declarations of his word." And, p. 37. "These
seals with respect to us, confirm the profession which we make, and the
engagements we come under." So that if the written instrument is the covenant
of grace; GOD, by affixing his seal, ratifies his promise to save those that
comply with it; and this on God's part, is the import of the action of sealing.
And, if the "written instrument" is the covenant of of grace; the professor, by
actively receiving the seal, declares, on his part, that he does comply with
that covenant, and ratifies his engagements to live up to it. For, thus it is,
in all mutual covenants among men, where both parties seal; they do, by
sealing, declare a present compliance with the bargain and mutually oblige
themselves to act up to it for the future. To the bargain, I say, as contained
in the written instrument; to that, and to nothing else. So that when once it
is determined what is contained in the written instrument; it is at the same
time determined, what is sealed, and what is the import of the act of sealing.
But Mr. M. says, "The sealing ordinances; by which the external covenant is
sealed and confirmed, do equally seal and confirm the the covenant of grace."
P. 36. Upon which it may be observed, that, to be consistent, it will follow,

1. That when a graceless man seals the external graceless covenant, binding
himself to perform all the graceless duties which it requires; he does at the
same time equally seal the covenant of grace, and equally bind himself to
perform all the gracious duties which this requires. And whereas these two
covenants require religious exercises of a contrary nature, even as contrary as
graceless and gracious, which in other words, are as contrary as sin and
holiness; so Mr. M.'s unconverted covenanter, in the act of sealing these two
contrary covenants, binds himself to perform all religious duties in these two
contrary manners; and that at the same time; for he binds himself by sealing
both covenants at once, to perform every duty as both covenants require, from
day to day as long as he lives; and every time he comes to the Lord's-table, he
binds himself a fresh. But our Savior says, No man can serve two masters. --
Besides, on this plan, the door of the visible church is shut against all who
know themselves to be graceless. For they cannot make a profession of a
compliance with the covenant of grace; and so the end and design of Mr. M.'s
whole scheme is frustrated.

2. It will also follow from Mr. M.'s own words, that when (a Godly man)
Abraham, for instance, sealed the external covenant, and the covenant of grace
both at once, he equally bound himself all his life long to perform all
religious duties, both in a gracious and ungracious manner, at the same time.
But how could Abraham, at the same time, serve these two contrary masters,
requiring things as contrary as sin and holiness? Or how could he, being a
Godly man, with a good conscience, bind himself by covenant to perform all
religious duties in an unholy manner? Surely he could not do it! and so on Mr.
M.'s plan, the door of the visible church is shut against both the Godly and
the wicked. The Godly cannot come to sacraments, because they are seals of an
unholy covenant, binding them to live in a course of unholy duties; and the
ungodly, knowing themselves to be such, cannot come, because they are seals of
a holy covenant, binding them to live in a course of holy duties. Mr. M.
thinks, that there "was a manifest propriety in choosing Abraham, a man of
eminent holiness," to be at the head of this graceless covenant, p. 9. -- But I
am of our Savior's mind, Mat. 12.33. Either make the tree good, and his fruit
good; or else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt. Let holy Abraham be
at the head of a holy covenant; but let some graceless professor, be at the
head of Mr. M.'s external graceless covenant. For it was contrary to the Jewish
law to yoke an ox and an ass together. And says the apostle, Paul, What
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? 2 Cor. 6.14.
Therefore,

3. Mr. M. must give up the common notion of a seal, as declaring a present
compliance with, and binding both parties to act up to what is contained in the
written instrument, or else he must honestly leave the covenant of grace out of
the written instrument, or he must give up his scheme as wholly inconsistent.
-- To solve this difficulty he says, "In their primary reference they may be
seals of the external covenant; and yet, consistently, in their ultimate
reference, may be seals of the covenant of grace." P. 36. -- But if they, in
fact, really seal both covenants, then the man who comes to the sacraments,
does, in fact, really bind himself to fulfill both covenants. For, let him ask
any lawyer on the continent, and he will be told, that by sealing a "written
instrument," if it contains two or ten covenants, we oblige ourselves, either
to fulfill all of them, or none of them. -- The truth is, Mr. M. had proposed
this objection against his scheme, viz. The preceding discourse represents the
sealing ordinances of the gospel, not as seals of the covenant of grace, but of
the external covenant with the visible church. And he had no way to get rid of
it, according to his scheme, but to run into these inconsistences, or roundly
to deny the received doctrine of the Christian church, that baptism and the
Lord's supper, are seals of the covenant of grace. He has denied it implicitly:
but he did not choose to deny it expressly; but seems to own it; and so runs
himself into these inconsistences.

But if we turn our eyes off from Mr. M.'s inconsistent scheme, to the
New Testament, which was designedly adapted to the capacities of common people,
we shall see not the least appearance of two covenants of which baptism and the
Lord's Supper are the appointed seals; we shall find no covenant but the
covenant of grace; no gospel, but the gospel of Jesus Christ, which promises
pardon and eternal salvation to the penitent believer; and baptism and the
Lord's Supper are represented as seals to no other covenant but this. -- For,
to use Mr. M.'s phrase,

In the "written instrument" GOD promises salvation to the true believer. Mark
16.16. Therefore, if thou believe with all thine heart, thou may be active
in receiving the seal of the covenant, said Philip, divinely inspired. Acts
8.37.

Again. In the "written instrument" GOD promises remission of sins to the true
penitent through Jesus Christ, Luke 24.47. Therefore, repent and be baptized in
the name of the Lord Jesus for the remission of sins, Acts 2.38. (that is,
comply with the covenant, and then be active in receiving the seal;) was the
language of a divinely inspired apostle. -- And, another divinely inspired
minister of Christ, already knowing the man to be a true penitent, and so
prepared to be active in receiving the seal of the covenant, said, arise, and
be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord. Acts
22.16. -- Thus we see what covenant is ratified and confirmed by this seal, on
GOD'S part.

And because the apostolic professors, in offering themselves to baptism, and
in being active in receiving the seal of the covenant, did, on their parts,
thereby bind themselves to live according to all things contained in it,
therefore Paul said, Gal. 3.27. As many of you as have been baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ; not put on the external covenant; but put on
Christ. i. e. put on Christianity: So as to be entitled to the heavenly
Canaan, granting their hearts to answer to their external conduct; for, he
adds, ver. 29. And if ye are Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs,
according to promise. Heirs to what? To all the blessings of the covenant;
particularly, to the heavenly Canaan, of which the earthly Canaan was a type,
and which Paul had just said, was given to Abraham by promise, ver. 18.

And because in baptism, in the apostolic age, men professed a cordial
compliance with the covenant of grace, and bound themselves in all things to be
affected and act accordingly; therefore, when it was objected, that Paul's
doctrine of justification by faith, without works, tended to make men
licentious, and to encourage them to live in sin, that grace might abound; he
thought it sufficient to say, "This can never be, for we have been baptized,
and so we are dead to sin and alive to GOD." Shall we continue in sin, that
grace may abound? God forbid. How shall we that are dead to sin live any longer
therein? Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ,
were baptized into his death? therefore we are buried with him by baptism into
death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life; for if we have been (in
baptism) planted together in the likeness of his death: we shall be also in the
likeness of his resurrection. -- For sin shall not have dominion over you: for
ye are not under law, but under grace. Romans 6.1 -- 14. Which proves, that in
baptism they professed a compliance with Christianity itself, and not with Mr.
M.'s external graceless covenant, with which a man may comply, while under the
dominion of sin.

And, indeed, for men to come to the apostles to be baptized in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, could, consistently, mean
nothing less than a public practical declaration of a present compliance with
what the gospel reveals concerning the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and
an engagement to act accordingly in all future time: in which the whole of
Christianity consists. To believe what the gospel reveals concerning the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and to receive God for our Father, and Christ for
our Mediator, and the Holy Ghost for our Enlightener and Sanctifier; and to be
affected and act accordingly, is the whole of Christianity. But to be active in
offering our selves to be baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost; and in the very act, to refuse in our hearts, and in the
sight of GOD, to have God for our Father, or Christ for our Savior, or the
Holy Ghost for our Sanctifier, is to contradict ourselves, in the sight of GOD.
It is, to lie to the Holy Ghost. It is to renounce Christianity in heart, at
the very moment when we embrace it in our visible conduct. But such wicked
dissimulation is not an appointed means of grace.

As to the Lord's Supper, our Savior teaches us, that it is the seal of the
new covenant, in which remission of sins is offered through the blood of Christ.
Mat. 26.28. For this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many,
for the remission of sins: Which is essentially different from Mr. M.'s
external covenant, by which no remission of sins can be obtained.

At the Lord's-table, Christ, by the mouth of his minister, says, this is my
body, take ye, eat ye all of it. This is my blood, take ye, drink ye all of it.
Hereby sealing to the truth contained in the "written instrument." But it is
therein written, in so many words, I am the living bread, which came down from
heaven; if any man eat of this bread, he shall live forever: and the bread that
I will give him is my flesh, which I give for the life of the world. He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. John
6.51, 56. Thus it is written, and thus it is sealed on Christ's part. -- On the
other hand the communicant by his practice declares, "I take his flesh, and eat
it: "I take his blood, and drink it," -- and seals the covenant on his part --
and thus the "written instrument" is externally and visibly sealed, ratified
and confirmed on both sides, with as much formality as any "written instrument"
is mutually sealed by the parties in any covenant among men. -- And now, if
both parties are sincere in the covenant, thus sealed; and if both abide by and
act according to it, the communicant will be saved. For salvation is promised
in the "written instrument" to those who eat his flesh and drink his blood.
Joh. 6.51. This promise is sealed by Christ at the Lord's Table. The condition
of it is externally complied with, in the sacramental actions, by the
communicant, who visibly eats his flesh and drinks his blood. And if the
exercises of his heart answer to his external actions, the covenant is on his
part complied with, sealed, ratified and confirmed. And if the gospel is true,
he will be saved.

But if the communicant's heart does not answer to his external sacramental
actions; but on the contrary, if when he visibly and sacramentally eats his
flesh, and drinks his blood, even at that very time, in his heart and in the
sight of God, he rejects his flesh and his blood, his atonement, and all the
blessings purchased by his death, his visible actions are a lie: and lying is
not a converting ordinance.

An impenitent sinner under legal terrors may forsake bad company, lay aside
the practice of uncleanness, of drunkenness, of backbiting, of lying and
cheating, etc. he may make restitution to those whom he has injured in name and
estate: he may spend much time in hearing and reading the word of God, in
meditating on death and judgment, heaven and hell, in comparing his thoughts,
words and actions with the law of God, and with the gospel of Christ: and he
may spend much time in secret prayer, and in trying to get his heart deeply
affected with eternal things, etc. etc. without lying. -- And thus reforming
his life and attending these means may be useful to promote a conviction of his
sinful, guilty, helpless, ruined state: But lying tends to sear his conscience
and harden his heart in sin. -- To make a profession of a compliance with the
covenant of grace with his mouth, when he knows he does not comply with it in
his heart; and to renew this covenant at the table of the Lord in visible
actions, while he continues to reject it in his heart, and knows this to be the
case with him, is wilful lying, and tends directly to the eternal ruin of the
sinner's immortal soul.

OBJECT. By my sacramental actions I mean to acknowledge, that the gospel is
true; but not to profess a compliance with it. P. 41.

ANSW. Should your neighbor treat you thus, in any covenant depending between
you; should he say, "I own the things contained in it are true, but I do not
mean to bind myself to fulfill covenant, by signing and sealing it before
evidence;" you, and all the world, would look upon him as a dishonest quibbler.

OBJ. But I mean "to have the truths of the gospel deeply impressed upon my
heart by the ordinance." P. 41.

ANSW. This end might be as well obtained, if you tarried as a spectator. Those
who stand by as witnesses, when a bond is signed and sealed may know what is
done, as well as those who are parties, and who bind themselves. Men that mean
not to bind themselves should not sign and seal the bond. No one seals a bond,
unless he means to bind himself to fulfill it. Sold a man offer to sign and
seal a bond, which he did not mean to bind himself to fulfill, in order to get
his heart affected with what is contained it, his neighbors would think him
delirious.

OBJ. But I mean to bind myself to "endeavor" to fulfill it; i. e. to
"endeavor to conform my practice to the rules of it." P. 21.

ANS. Should you offer your house and farm to your neighbor upon the most
reasonable terms, which, if he had a heart, he might fulfill with ease and
pleasure, Mat. 11.28, 29. Prove. 3.17. And should he plainly tell you, that at
present he could not find it in his heart to comply with your offer; nor could
he promise that he ever should comply; but however he was willing to bind
himself to "endeavor" to comply, and no more; you would doubtless think best
to put off the bargain till you should find him of another temper. And what our
Savior thinks best in the present case is most plainly expressed in Luke 14.25
-- 33.

SECT. VI. It cannot be determined what Mr. M's external covenant requires, and
wherein a real compliance with it does consist, so that any man can ever know
that he has complied with it.
NEGATIVELY, Mr M. has determined with great exactness, what it does not
require, and what is not necessary in order to a perfect compliance with it:
viz. holiness. For it requires no holiness at all: no, not the least spark of
true grace. So that, if we could know what it did require, it might be
perfectly complied with, by one, who is quite dead in sin. This is very plain.

POSITIVELY, he has not determined, what it does require, so that any man can
ever know, that he has complied with it: nor can it be determined by him, or by
any other. -- For it cannot be determined from scripture: for the scripture
knows nothing about such a covenant, either name, or thing. -- And it cannot be
determined from reason: for it is supposed to be a matter of pure revelation.

Indeed, Mr. M. has attempted to settle this matter, he says, p. 21. I will
allow, that none but such as profess the christian religion, and will endeavor
to conform his practice to the rules of it, ought to be admitted into the
church. Upon which, it may be observed,

1. That Abraham made no profession at all, of any faith, but of a saving
faith. He believed in the Lord, and it was counted to him for righteousness.
And if Abraham is to be our pattern, as Mr. M. insists, then we must make a
profession of this faith, or of none. To set aside Abraham's faith, which was,
as James asserts, a living faith; and to introduce into it is room a dead faith,
which James calls the faith of devils; and to substitute this in the stead of
the faith of Abraham, and to put God's seal, which belongs to God's covenant,
to this new invented covenant of human device, is not "to conform our practice
to the rules" of God's word; nor so much as to "endeavor" it. -- Besides,

2. Mr. M. says, p. 7. That by which ANY ONE was to enter into this" external
"covenant was an external mark in the flesh. But faith, although a dead faith, is
an internal thing, and is as much invisible, as any other mental qualification
whatsoever: and therefore is not necessary on his scheme, to be in the heart of
the professor: nor need he profess it to be in his heart. For "to require more
of the person to be admitted into the church, than is made necessary by the
covenant on which it is framed, is really absurd." p. 22. -- For, to imitate
his manner of reasoning, it may be said, to set this matter in the clearest
light, an Infidel, or an Atheist, with a fair profession of the external
covenant, when he is received into the visible church, on Mr. M's scheme, is in
the sight of God either a member of it, or he is not. If he is a member, then
the faith of devils is not necessary. If he is not, then on Mr. M's scheme
there can be no visible church. This is Mr. M's manner of reasoning, p. 49.
These are Mr. M's words. To set this matter in the clearest light; an
unregenerate man, with a fair profession of religion, when received into the
visible church, is in reality, either a member of it, or he is not: If he is a
member, his union must be constituted by something besides the covenant of
grace, which extends to none but such as have true grace in heart: but if he is
not in reality, a member of the visible church, then there can be no such thing
as a visible church, that has a real existence. -- Answ. The visible union of
the visible church is constituted by a visible credible profession of a
compliance with the covenant of grace: just as their real union is constituted
by a real compliance with the covenant of grace.

To set this matter in the clearest light; in a Spanish milled dollar there is
a certain quantity of silver, the stamp, etc. -- Silver is essential to a real
dollar. If there is no silver in the seeming dollar, it it not a real dollar,
but a counterfeit one. So here. If a body of men profess friendship to Christ,
they are a visible church of Christ: but if there is no friendship in their
hearts, they are like the counterfeit dollar.

Should any one object, "a pewter dollar, with a good stamp, and well washed
over, is a real dollar, or it is not: if it is a real dollar, then silver is
not essential to a real dollar: If it is not a real dollar, then there is no
such thing as a visible dollar in the world:" Would any man by such logic as
this, be induced to receive pewter dollars, professedly such, in pay for his
whole estate?


I hope this may show the inconsistence of excluding a living faith, because it
is an invisible mental qualification; and yet retaining a dead faith, which is
equally an invisible mental qualification. To make Mr. M's scheme consistent,
no mental qualification ought to be professed. Nothing but baptism, which is
substituted in the room of circumcision, is needful. Baptism alone, without any
profession at all, is the only requisite to constitute any man a member of Mr.
M's visible church. But in the apostolic age no man was ever received into the
visible church by baptism alone, without a profession. Mr. M. is obliged
therefore to allow of the necessity of a profession. But this supposes the
necessity of some mental, invisible, internal qualification to be professed:
But this is inconsistent with the notion, that nothing is necessary but what is
external and visible. So his scheme cannot hang together. -- Besides,

3. To have no other faith than the devil has, and to profess no other faith
than he has professed, is not to enter into covenant with God, unless the devil
is in covenant with God. Therefore let the articles of faith to which
professors give their assent be ever so orthodox, and their profession be ever
so true; yet if they profess only "a simple belief of the simple truth," it is
not a visible entering into covenant with God. It is not a covenanting
transaction. Where there is no consent of the will professed, there is no
covenant visibly made, in any case whatsoever. But if they profess not only to
believe, but to love the truth, this is what no ungodly man can understandingly
and honestly do. For to receive the truth in the love of it, is the scripture
character of a true saint. 2 These. 2.10. And so did Abraham the father of all
believers -- So again,

4. "To conform our practice to the rules of the christian religion," is to be
real christians. This therefore must not be professed. But without this, there
is no compliance with the gospel covenant. He who does conform his practice to
the rules of the gospel, does really comply with the gospel. And he who does
not, does really reject it. The one will go to heaven, and the other will go to
hell. In this we are all agreed.

5. But Mr. M. says, they must profess, that they "will endeavor" to conform
their practice to the rules of the christian religion. -- But, pray, how much
must they endeavor? Not so much as actually to conform: for in this real
christianity consists. How much then? Can any man tell? Will you say, "as much
as they can?" What! quite as much? What, every day, every hour of their lives?
This is what no ungodly man ever did, or ever will do. Will you say, "they must
sincerely endeavor?" But how sincere must ungodly men be? "As sincere as they
can?" What, quite as sincere as they can, every day and every hour? This is
what no ungodly man ever was, or ever will be. -- Will you say, "they must
endeavor so much, and so sincerely, as to keep from open scandal?" But is this
enough? What if they live allowedly in secret sins, in enmity to God, in enmity
to their neighbors, in stealing, in adultery, in sodomy? Will this do? Is this
enough in the sight of God and conscience, that they are free from open
scandal, while they live secretly in such and such like sins? -- Will you say,
"No, they must endeavor to forsake all sin and to conform their practice to
all the rules of the christian religion?" -- But the question still returns,
how much must they endeavor? Not so much as to get free from the dominion of
sin. For this is peculiar to the godly. Romans 6.14. How much then? No son of
Adam can ever tell!

IT can be determined what that repentance toward GOD, and faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ is, which the gospel requires; and a man may know when he
complies with the gospel covenant; but it cannot be determined what Mr. M.'s
external covenant requires; nor can any man know when he complies with it.

THE lowest degree of true grace is a real and saving compliance with the
gospel covenant. This is life eternal to know thee, the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Joh. 17.3. Where saving grace begins, it
shall end in glory. It Is special nature can be as certainly determined, as the
nature of the gospel way of salvation can; for it consists in a compliance with
the gospel. But this external covenant is neither law, nor gospel.

No man will say, that "the least degree of endeavor," which ever takes place
in an ungodly man, is all that is required, to bring men into the external
covenant. Nor will any man say, "that the greatest degree of endeavor" that
ever takes place in an ungodly man, is necessary to this end. Nor can any man
fix upon any certain degree, between the least and the greatest, that is the
very degree necessary to bring a man into this covenant. It is a blind affair,
and is adapted only to a blind conscience.

Every ungodly man, whose conscience is thoro'ly awakened to know the truth
about himself, knows that he is dead in sin, an enemy to God, "utterly
indisposed, disabled and opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all
evil;" as Mr. M. will allow. And therefore, were such men to make a profession
of the truth, they would profess this* and confess themselves to be altogether
helpless and undone, under the wrath of God, the curse of the law, and
condemned by the gospel; (Joh. 3.18, 36. Gal. 3.10.) and incapable of entering
into covenant with God, (Ps. 50.16.) and coming into the kingdom of Christ,
until they are born again. Joh. 3.5. -- And how much soever pains such may
take, to escape everlasting burnings, they can never think, that this labor of
their's brings them into covenant with the holy One of Israel, so long as they
find themselves dead in sin, enemies to God and rejecters of Jesus Christ. But
rather, in the midst of all their diligence and endeavors, they do, as Mr. M.
elsewhere observes, Sermon on Romans 9.14, 15. p. 28.
"in their own apprehensions grow worse and worse."

Yea, the best saint on earth would not dare, with his eyes open, to enter into
covenant with the holy One of Israel, without a Mediator; or in the neglect of
him whom God has provided, on the foot of his own righteousness. No saint can
have impudence enough, with his eyes open, to offer such a thing to God. For
such know no way to come to the Father but by the Son. Joh. 14.6. But
self-righteous sinners, with stupid consciences, are good enough to come nigh
to God in their own names, and enter into covenant with God in their own
strength and in their own righteousness, while, with their whole heart, they
reject the Mediator and the Sanctifier revealed in the gospel. But that baptism
and the Lord's Supper should be so degraded and prostituted, as to become seals
to this self-righteous, graceless covenant of works, must be not a little
shocking to many pious minds. Nor indeed can sinners under deep and genuine
conviction come into this scheme. For,

This external covenant is not adapted to the state of a sinner under genuine
and deep conviction. For it is with such agreeable to Romans 7.9. The commandment
came, sin revived, and I died. Rather, it is suited only to the hearts of
secure, self-flattering, self-righteous sinners, of blind and stupid
consciences; and is of no use but to build them up in their self-righteous
ways; to lead them to cry, "We have Abraham to our father, yea, we have one
father, even God." When in the language of Christ, the meek and lowly Jesus,
they are the children of the devil, and the wrath of God abides on them. Mat.
3 9. Joh. 8.39 -- 44. Joh. 3.36.

SECT. VII. Various distinctions stated, to render the subjct more easy to be
understood by Christians of the weakest capacities, and to enable them to
answer the usual objections, at least to their own satisfaction.
1. WE are to distinguish between objections, which are taken from the nature
of the covenant, as contained in the written instrument, and those objections
which are taken from the character of many that have sealed it. If there was
not one unholy graceless duty required of Abraham, in that covenant, Genesis 17.
With which he complied, and which he sealed, Mr. M. must lose his cause, although
the names and seals of thousands of graceless hypocrites are found annexed to
it. For the nature of a written covenant is to be determined from the contents
of it, and not from the hypocrisy of the men that have signed and sealed it. As
for example, suppose we have a bond of L. 1000, signed and sealed by a man not
worth a groat; it alters not the case, the bond is a bond of L. 1000, as much
as it was signed and sealed by a man ever so rich. For all mankind are agreed
in this, that the nature of the bond is to be determined from the contents of
the written instrument, and not from the poverty or knavery of the signers and
sealers.

If the covenant with Abraham was the covenant of grace, yet possibly thousands
of graceless men might be active in sealing it. Or if the covenant with Abraham
required only freedom from open scandal, yet possibly it might be sealed by
thousands who lived in open scandal. The ten tribes, for ought that appears,
practiced circumcision without one exception; and yet they lived in open
idolatry from the time of their revolt to their captivity: That is, about 250
years. And if we are to determine the nature of the covenant from the character
of the sealers; then, from this, it will follow, that freedom from open
idolatry was not required of the Israelites, in the covenant which they were
under, and of which circumcision was a seal.

2. We ought to distinguish between fact and right, and to understand, that
there is no conclusive arguing from the one to the other. As for instance. It
is fact that there were tares sowed in the field; but it does not follow, that
it was right that the servants should sow them there: this was the work of the
devil. -- It is fact, that there was a man who came into the visible church
without a wedding garment; but it does not follow, that it was right for him so
to do. -- It is fact, that there were false professors, who unawares crept into
the apostolic churches. But it does not follow, that it was right, that they
should creap in thither. -- It is fact, that the net gathered bad fishes as
well as good; but it does not follow that the fishermen were employed to gather
any but good fish. -- It is fact, that in the apostolic age, some impenitent
hypocrites made a profession of faith and repentance, and were baptized; but it
does not follow, that it was right in them to make such a false profession. --
It is fact, that the Israelites at Mount Sinai made a false profession, that
they lied to GOD with their tongues, and flattered him with their lips; but it
does not follow, either, that it was right for them to do as they did, or that
it is right for us to imitate their wicked example. -- It is fact, that there
have been in all ages graceless men in the visible church; but it does not
follow, either, that they had a right to be there, or, that we ought to lay
aside the covenant of grace and to introduce a graceless covenant merely in
order to open a door for their regular admission. -- It is fact, when the
doctrines and discipline of the gospel are brought down to the taste of carnal
men, that they appear to be better pleased with both; but it does not therefore
follow, that it would be right for ministers to combine to set aside truth and
strictness and to introduce error and looseness, in order to please a wicked
world.

3. There is a distinction to be made between an adult person's really entering
into covenant, and visibly entering into covenant. He who complies with the
covenant of grace, really enters into it: but he who professes to comply with
it, visibly enters into it. The former is peculiar to the godly; but ungodly
men may do the latter; for none but the godly comply with the covenant of
grace; but many ungodly men profess to comply with it. And these are like dry
branches.

4. There is a difference between being in the covenant of grace, by a
compliance with it; and being under the bonds of the covenant of grace, without
a compliance with it. The former is peculiar to the godly; and from this state
of grace none fall away; the latter is true of the most scandalous professor.
An adultress woman may be under the bonds of the marriage covenant; and that
even while she persists obstinately in her adulteries; but this gives her no
right to the peculiar privileges of a virtuous wife. In this sense the
idolatrous Israelites, were in covenant with GOD, notwithstanding their
obstinacy in that most scandalous practice of idolatry. Jer. 3.14 But this gave
them no right to covenant blessings. For it is our compliance with the covenant
of grace, which gives an interest in it is blessings; and not our being under
the bonds of it. -- For, the ten tribes, who are said, in Jer. 3.14. to be
married to the Lord, and who had lived in idolatry ever since the days of
Jereboam the son of Nebat, for thus playing the harlot had been put away, ver.
1. and a bill of divorce had been given to them. ver. 8. They had been turned
out of the promised land and sent into captivity, above an hundred years ago. 2
Kin. 17.6. And so had not only forfeited, but were actually dispossessed of all
the external privileges of the Abrahamic covenant: and yet they were still
under covenant bonds. And so an excommunicated person may, in this sense, be
said, to be in covenant, even in the covenant of grace. For the engagement he
came under to live according to that covenant all his days, when he made a
profession of religion, is as binding in the sight of God as ever. But being in
covenant in this sense, although it may increase obligation and guilt; yet
entitles to no covenant privileges.

5. We are to distinguish between the means which God uses to bring us to
comply with the covenant of grace, and our consenting to seal it in token of
compliance. Those who have not complied with the covenant of grace may attend
the former without lying: but we ought in all cases to consent to a covenant in
our hearts, before we are active in sealing it with our hands. For to seal a
covenant with our hands, when we reject it in our hearts, is in the sight of
God to lie: but lying is not a means of grace.

6. We are to distinguish between the man's rule and the church's rule of
judging concerning his fitness publicly to enter into covenant, and publicly
to seal it. The man himself makes his judgment by looking into his own heart;
but the church make their judgment by looking only to what is visible. Just as
it is when men swear allegiance to the king and renounce the pretender. The man
who takes the oath of allegiance and abjuration, sees his way clear to do so,
by looking inward, and finding such an heart in him; but he who administers the
oaths, judges concerning the propriety of his own conduct in so doing, only by
what outwardly appears. And thus it is also when persons enter into the
marriage covenant; they see their way clear to act, by looking, each one, into
his own heart, and finding such affections in themselves, as are answerable to
the external transaction before them: but he who leads them to enter into the
marriage covenant, judges of the propriety of his conduct only by what is
visible. A man by looking into his own heart may be certain, that he believes
and loves the doctrines of the gospel; but the church by outward appearances
can be certain of neither. Peter was certain he believed. Mat. 16.16. And as
certain that he loved. Joh. 21.15, 16, 17. And it is the duty of all to believe
and love as he did. The blame is wholly in ourselves, if we do not. But we
ought not to profess faith and love, till we see our way clear; so as that in
professing we may act an honest and conscientious part: even as it would be a
wicked thing, for persons to enter into the marriage covenant, if the
prevailing judgment of their own minds, were, that they were not in a proper
state for such a transaction. -- However, it must be owned, that not to love
Christ above all things, not to be willing to forsake all for his sake, and not
to espouse his cause and interest heartily before men is most inexcusable
wickedness.

Therefore,

7. We are to distinguish between things not at all commanded to any man; as
eating blood: and things certainly commanded to some men; as to confess Christ
before men. It is wrong to eat blood, if we at all doubt of the lawfulness of
it, because it is not a commanded duty to any man. So he that doubts is
damned if he eat; i. e. is self-condemned, because in such a case as this he
ought not to eat. But it will not hence follow, that we shall be
self-condemned, if we confess Christ before men without full assurance. For, by
the command of Christ we are bound in duty, if we are on his side in our
hearts, openly to confess him before men. If we neglect it, in this case, we
sin. And if we do it in hypocrisy, we sin. A man's conscience in all such like
cases will lead him to act according to his prevailing judgment. It is in fact
thus, with the conscientious part of mankind, in all doubtful matters; if they
are obliged to act one way or the other; they make conscience of acting
according to prevailing evidence.

8. We are to distinguish between objections, which appear to be equally
against both schemes, and other objections: and are to look upon the former as
of no weight to settle the controversy. If they say, it is difficult to know
whether we comply with the covenant of grace; we may answer, that it is as
difficult, and more so, for any man to know whether he complies with the
external covenant. If they say, the church cannot be certain that any man has
saving grace; we may answer, neither can the church be certain that any man
believes in his heart, the doctrines which he professes with his mouth. If they
say, assurance of our right to come is necessary on our scheme; we may answer,
that it is no more necessary on one scheme than on the other. Besides,
assurance of a right to come is attainable by true saints; but no man can know
that he has a right on Mr. M's scheme. Because no man can know what his
external covenant requires. If they say, Peter had not time to examine into the
gracious state of the three thousand converts on the day of pentecost; we may
answer, that he had as much (...) for this, as to examine into their doctrinal
knowledge and moral sincerity. -- So also, those objections ought to weigh
nothing, which are taken merely from the wickedness of mankind, and which would
vanish of themselves, should the Spirit of God be poured from on high, as it
was when the first christian church was set up. For there is no more reason,
that the discipline of Christ's house should be brought down to suit our
corruptions, than that the doctrines of the gospel should also.

9. We ought to distinguish between an appeal to reason, and an appeal to
corruption. For example, these words are contained in the marriage covenant,
unto which we oblige the woman to give her consent, viz. "You take this A. B.
for your married husband, and promise to be a loving, faithful and obedient
wife to him," etc. Should a few women object against this covenant, and
publicly propose an alteration, saying, "We pray, that the words, loving,
faithful and obedient may be left out, for the sake of some young women of
tender consciences, who cannot see their way clear to use them." The only
question would be this, "ought the alteration to be made in the marriage
covenant, or in the young women?" Or in other words, "which is wrong, the
woman's heart, or the covenant?" A question, which may easily be decided, if we
appeal to reason or to scripture: but if we appeal to corruption, the more we
wrangle, the more we may, some might say, If the covenant is not altered, no
woman can be married without full assurance. For it is not lawful to enter into
this covenant in doubt. For he that doubts is damned. An infallible assurance
therefore is necessary. But who has this? Or what woman, on this plan, can be
married, with a good conscience? And, besides, what priest can be able to
judge, whether any are fit to be married? By what rule shall it be certainly
known, when a woman is really disposed to be a loving, faithful and obedient
wife, and when she is not? Moreover, it will only tempt bad women to make a
lying profession, while women of tender consciences will be kept back; and
those who are married will grow proud because they are judged to be qualified.
Mean while, the failings of married women will be more taken notice of, to
their dishonor, for using this covenant. Upon the whole, it is a very bad plan,
and a thing of a very dangerous tendency; therefore, we propose, that in all
future times, these words, loving, faithful, obedient, be left out of the
marriage covenant. -- How ridiculous would any woman make herself, that should
advance such stuff! But if this class of women were the majority, they might
make a shocking noise, but there would be no more sense in it, than if but one
single woman was in the scheme.

10. We are to distingush between that character which the Israelites gave of
themselves, when Mount Sinai was covered with a thick cloud, and the Lord
appeared in the flame of a devouring fire on the top of the mount, and it
lightened and thundered, and the voice of the trumpet was exceeding loud, and the
people trembled under a sense of the greatness and majesty of the holy One of
Israel, and every one, even all the people answered with one voice, and said,
all the words, which the Lord has said, will we do; (such manifestations of
God, and a people under such deep religious impressions, never had been before
heard of, since the world began: so that even God himself, judging according to
appearances, was ready to say, Surely, they are my people, children that will
not lie. Isa. 63.8.) -- And that character, which they afterward gave of
themselves, by their conduct forty years in the wilderness. -- In the former,
they appear heartily disposed to comply with God's covenant. In the latter,
they appear a rebellious generation, whose hearts were not right with God,
neither were they steadfast in his covenant. Psalm. 78.37.

11. We are to distinguish between that character which the Israelites gave of
themselves, by their conduct forty years in the wilderness, by which it
appeared, that they had not eyes to see, nor ears to hear, nor a heart to
understand; (for they made a calf even before the Mount of God. And rebelled at
Kadesh-barnea; and at Taberah, and Massah, and at Kibroth-hattaavah, they
provoked the Lord to wrath. So that Moses might well say, Ye have been
rebellious against the Lord, from the day that I knew you. Deuteronomy. 9.7 -- 24.) --
And that character, which that pious generation gave of themselves, who, in the
plains of Moab, heard Moses rehearse all God's ways to that nation, and their
ways to God, forty years in the wilderness, and now on a review of the whole,
manifested a disposition unitedly to become God's people, to enter into God's
covenant anew, and to bind themselves to him, as their God, to love him, and to
walk in all his ways, and to keep all his commandments. -- Concerning the
former character, more severe things are spoken in scripture, than of any
other, which that people ever gave of themselves, under that dispensation; and
concerning the latter, more good things. The piety of this new generation God
remembered many ages after, Jer. 2.2. Thus says the Lord, I remember thee, the
kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals -- ver. 3. Israel was
holiness to the Lord. See also Judge. 2.7. And the people served the Lord all
the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that out lived Joshua. So
that they transmitted the true religion to the next generation, and kept it up
all the days of their lives. -- And if these things are well considered, and
the great comparative darkness of that age of the world, and the abundant pains
which Moses took in the plains of Moab to explain the covenant, and to render
them deeply sensible of their obligations to comply with it, with all their
hearts, no man will find cause to say, that Moses acted an unfaithful part, in
leading that people, to enter into that very covenant, in the manner he did.

OBJECT. But it was the design of Moses to charge in a public manner, as what
visibly and publicly appeared to be the truth of the case, those very
individual persons with being unregenerate, on that very day, in which he led
them to enter into covenant. For he says, the Lord has not given you an heart
to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day. Deuteronomy. 29.4. p.
18.24.

ANS. It is evident, that in the public speech which Moses made to the
Israelites, in the plains of Moab, of which these words are a part, he
constantly addresses them in their national capacity, and not as individuals.
Thus, in the paragraph in which these words are contained, ver. 2. Moses called
unto all Israel, and said unto them, ye have seen all that the Lord did before
your eyes, in the land of Egypt, etc. Whereas every one in the congregation,
who were but one month under forty years of age, which was doubtless by far the
greatest part of the congregation, never were in Egypt, for they were born in
the wilderness, since their fathers left Egypt. And instances of the like
nature are to be observed through the whole speech. Thus, we know, that the
carcasses of the men that sinned at Kadesh barnea, on the return of the spies,
were all of them fallen in the wilderness; and yet he speaks to the present
generation, who personally had no hand in that sin, as though they were the very
individual persons, that had committed it. Chapter 9.23. Then you rebelled against
the commandment of the Lord. See also Deuteronomy. 1.19 -- 35. Whereas there was not
one of those rebels alive; no not so much as one. Number. 26.63 -- 65. And this is
precisely the truth of the case, with the text under consideration. For,

Moses brought in no public charges against the nation, but for public crimes,
not an instance can be produced from the beginning of Deuteronomy to the text
under consideration. But this new generation, which were grown up, and which
were now about to enter into covenant with God, had not been guilty of any
public crimes, to give themselves a bad character. It does not appear from the
whole story, that Moses had any public grounds, for a public charge against
them, as being an ungodly generation. Nay, the fact is, that they always
behaved so well, both before and after, that they were by God himself, after
they were dead and gone, represented as a very religious and godly generation,
Jer 2.2, 3. Jud. 2.7. Compared to a choice vine, Isai. 5.2. Wholly a right
seed, Jer. 2.21.

To suppose Moses charged them in a public manner, as an unregenerate, ungodly
generation, unjustly, without ever mentioning one single fact to the
disadvantage of their character, is very unreasonable: especially as the sense
before given to the words under consideration is an easy and natural sense, and
removes all difficulties, and renders the speech and conduct of Moses perfectly
consistent. For, as to all the instances of public conduct contained in the
long narrative, which Moses had given, from the time they left Egypt, to that
very day, which were evidences, of blind eyes, deaf ears, and hard hearts, this
present generation were not active in them. Those facts, those public crimes,
although committed by that nation, were not done by the individual persons, which
made up the present congregation, who entered into covenant with God, but by
the old generation, whose carcasses were fallen in the wilderness; as any man
may see that will read all the preceding chapters of the book, We ought not,
by giving a wrong sense to the words of Moses, to render his public speech and
his public conduct inconsistent; and then to charge him with acting a dishonest
part, in leading that people to enter into covenant, in the manner in which, in
fact, he did: or to deny the fact, under a pretense of saving his character;
when indeed his character cannot be saved this way, because the fact is
undeniably true.

If it should be enquired, why did Moses speak thus, to this present
generation, as they had not been personally guilty of that course of rebellious
conduct themselves; but were themselves a godly generation? -- The answer is
easy. -- He did it to give them a clear view and humbling sense of their
national sins, and the justice of God in the national judgments which he
brought upon them; that they might know, that it was not for their
righteousness, that God did bring them into that good land; but merely of his
great goodness, and because he had promised it to Abraham. Deuteronomy. 9.5. to the
end they might so reflect on the depravity of their own hearts, and be so
deeply abased before God, as to be thereby prepared for that holy and solemn
transaction before them, of entering into covenant with the holy One of Israel:
that having in view, how their fathers had entered into covenant at Sinai, and
had broken covenant, so that all their carcasses had fallen in the wilderness,
they might take warning thereby, and remember and keep the covenant of the Lord
their God; that it might be well with them, and with their children after them.

12. We are to distinguish between the character which the three thousand
converts on the day of pentecost, gave of themselves, in that deep conviction
of sin and guilt which they manifested, when they appeared to be pricked at the
heart, and in that repentance toward God and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ
which they openly professed, when they appeared cordially to comply with
Peter's exhortation, Repent and be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, for
the remission of sins, by gladly receiving his word, and offering themselves to
baptism, and to join with a persecuted party, whose master had lately been put
to a most shameful and scandalous death, in the most public manner, on the most
public occasion, at the risque of every thing dear to them in the world: -- And
the character which men ordinarily give of themselves, in offering to join with
the church, without any special concern about their souls, when it is esteemed
no small honor, to be church members, and enjoy church privileges. -- The
former, to a judgment of charity, appeared to be true converts, whatever may be
thought of the latter.

13. We are to distinguish between what is visible, and what is real: Many in
the eyes of men are reputed godly, who in the eyes of God as searcher of hearts
are not so. The former have a right in the sight of the church to enter into
the covenant of grace, in a public profession, and to seal the covenant: but
the latter only have a right in the sight of God. For the former appear to be
godly; but the latter only are really so. The former have a visible, the latter
have a real right.

14. There is a distinction to be made between a right to sealing ordinances on
our own account, and a right on the account of another. Thus pious parents have
a right for sealing ordinances for themselves, on their own account, as being
themselves really in covenant with God, by a compliance with it: but their
infant children have a right to baptism, not on their own account, but simply
on that of their parents, considered as parts of their parents, branches grown
out of the old root: and so may be baptized without respect to any internal
qualification, at present, inherent in them, either moral or gracious.

Object. If, in infant baptism, no respect is had to any internal qualification
in the infant, then the seal is set to a blank.

Answ. Then the seal is set to a blank, when there is no covenant entered into:
but when there is a covenant entered into, and sealed, there is no room for the
objection. But in infant baptism there is a covenant entered into. For God says
to the pious parent, "I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed." And the pious
parent replies, "I choose thee for my God and the God of my child." So that
here is a covenant entered into between God and the pious parent, in behalf of
himself and his infant, in the very act of offering it to God in baptism. And
baptism is a seal, not to a blank, but to this covenant, which, in fact, takes
place between God and the pious parent.

15. We are to distinguish between covenanting with God actively, in a visible
manner, as a pious parent does, when he dedicates his child to God in baptism,
and promises to bring it up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; and
being laid under the bonds of the covenant passively, as is the case with the
child. God speaks to the pious parent in that ordinance, saying, I will be a
God to thee, and to thy seed, i. e. if they will take heed to walk in my ways.
The pious parent answers, in the act of offering the child to baptism, "I
choose thee for my God, and for the God of my child. And I promise to bring up
my child for thee. And, Oh, that it might live in thy sight, be thy child, and
walk in thy ways!" The parent is active; but the child is merely passive. We
may bring ourselves under the bonds of the covenant, by our own act and deed,
as the adult did in the plains of Moab when they renewed covenant there: or we
may be brought under the bonds of the covenant, by the act of another,
authorized by God so to do. Thus Moses laid all the infants in the
congregation, in the plains of Moab, under the bonds of the covenant. And thus
parents, in offering their children to baptism, lay them under the bonds of the
covenant.

16. IF no one is to be baptized, till, by his own act and deed, he enters into
covenant with God, be it the covenant of grace or a graceless covenant; then no
infant is to be baptized on either plan: because no infant, by his own act and
deed, enters into any covenant of any sort; or so much as knows, that there is
any covenant of any sort, to be entered into. -- If the child has a right to
baptism, on it is parents account, and not on it is own, infant baptism, can be
vindicated, as well on the plan of a gracious covenant, as on the plan of an
ungracious one; but if the child's right to baptism is founded on it is own
personal compliance with the covenant, infant baptism must be given up on the
plan of a covenant of moral sincerity and a right doctrinal belief; for no
infant was ever thus qualified: But some infants have been sanctified from the
womb, and so in this sense have been in the covenant of grace. Luke 1.15.

17. IT must apparently be an unspeakable advantage, to be under the watch and
care of a godly church, who have a real spirit of fidelity in them; and, like
Abraham, will command all, under their care, to fear the Lord. Genesis 18.19. And
it is equally evident, that it can be of no advantage, to be under the watch
and care of an ungodly church, who will neither walk in the ways of God
themselves, nor bring up those committed to their care for God. God put
confidence in Abraham, I know him, that he will command his children and his
household after him, etc. But there is no confidence to be put in an ungodly
man, that he will be faithful to God, with respect to his own soul, or the
souls of his children. Hos. 6.4. Mat. 7.16, 17, 18.

SECT. VIII. Mr. Mather's scheme inconsistent with itself.
THERE are three things in Mr. M.'s external covenant, viz. The conditions
required, the privileges promised and the seals; and his ideas concerning each
of these, as expressed in his book, are inconsistent.

I. As to the conditions required, in order to a covenant right to all covenant
privileges, his ideas are inconsistent. -- For,

1. Sometimes he makes circumcision the only condition. "For that by which,"
says he, any one was to enter into this covenant, was an external mark in the
flesh. This is my covenant, which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy
seed after thee; every man-child among you shall be circumcised. But that by
which any one enters into the covenant of grace is the circumcision of the
heart. p. 7. "That by which any one enters into the covenant of grace is the
circumcision of the heart:" and yet he is obliged to deny this p. 21; and to
affirm that the circumcision of the heart intends no more then entering into
his external graceless covenant, in order to get rid of that plain text Ezekiel.
44.9. Thus says the Lord God, no stranger uncircumcised in heart, etc. shall
enter into my sanctuary; which is a prophecy of the glorious state of the
church spoken of. Isai. 2.3, 4, 5, Chap. 11.1 -- 9. and 60.21. When Satan will
be bound agreeable to Rev. 20. and when Mr. M.'s external covenant will be no
more practiced upon in the whole earth for a thousand years. For in that day,
Thus says the Lord God, no stranger uncircumcised in heart (...) shall enter
into my sanctuary. i. e. none shall be admitted but such who in their
profession, life and conversation appear to be Godly. For in that day right
doctrine and right discipline will universally take place, and then all will be
agreed: For they shall see eye to eye. Isai. 52.8.
So that the circumcision of the flesh brings men into the external covenant,
and gives them a covenant right to all it is privileges; just as the
circumcision of the heart brings men into the covenant of grace, and gives them
a covenant right to all the blessings of that. But the circumcision of the
heart as the phrase is used in scripture, is a real compliance with the
covenant of grace, and is connected with eternal life. Romans 2.29. And
accordingly he speaks of the circumcision of the flesh as a compliance with the
external covenant, p. 8. "This covenant remained to be complied with: --
Abraham must needs be circumcised."

And, indeed, if Mr. M. was disposed to turn the covenant with Abraham into his
external covenant, of necessity the circumcision of the flesh must be the only
condition of it; because there was nothing else external which took place in
that covenant recorded in Genesis 17. to which Mr. M. could with any color lay
claim, for Abraham made no profession, but a profession of saving faith. But
this was a visible compliance with the covenant of grace, and not with the
external covenant. If, therefore, he did any thing at all, by way of compliance
with Mr. M.'s external covenant, it was only, merely and simply making 'an
external mark in the flesh.'

2. And as Mr. M. thus sometimes represents the circumcision of the flesh, to
be a compliance with the external covenant with Abraham; so he sometimes
represents baptism, as entitling to all the privileges of his external
covenant, under the gospel dispensation. For according to him, all who are
baptized "are Abraham's children, and heirs according to the promise." p. 13.
"For a child baptized in infancy," he says, is thereby as really brought into
covenant, as one that is baptized in riper years. -- It conveys the same
privileges to the one as to the other. p. 16. But the adult, having made a
profession, were, in the apostolic age, by baptism, received into full
communion with the church, in complete standing, as is evident from Act. 2.37
-- 47. -- And in this view, Mr. M. considers infant baptism, as "a valuable
privilege" -- "as it entitles to the appointed means of grace," p. 54, 55. that
is, to all church privileges. And insists, that those, who are baptized in
infancy should be told, that they are really in covenant with God, that they
are members of the visible church, and are entitled to the privileges of it.
And as they have a title to the privileges, so "they are in duty bound to seek
the enjoyment of and attend upon these privileges." p. 55, 56. For, according
to Mr. M. a child dedicated to God in baptism, is thereby brought into covenant
with God, and has a promise left to it, of the means of grace, and the
strivings of God's holy Spirit, in order to render them effectual for
salvation: but an unbaptized child is left in the kingdom of darkness. p. 59,
60. And he adds it is but trifling to say, that although baptized persons may be
styled members of the church universal; yet they are not members of any
particular church. p. 56. -- So that, upon the whole, it appears, that by
baptism alone, infants are made members of the church, in such sort, as to have
a divine right and title to all church privileges: which is full as much as can
be said of any, who are in full communion, in complete standing. -- And thus we
see what Mr. M's scheme is, in this view of it. And here let us stop a moment
or two, and look round, and consider where we are now. For if these things are
true, it will follow,

1. That no internal, mental qualifications are now, or ever were requisite, in
order to a right to all church privileges in the sight of God; neither moral,
nor gracious; neither faith, nor practice, of one sort, or of the other; no,
nothing at all, but only "an external mark in the flesh," or water baptism. The
land of Canaan was one chief external blessing of the Abrahamic covenant. Genesis
17.8. A compliance with that covenant gave a covenant right to a possession of
it. Number. 32.11, 12. The Israelites who came out of Egypt were all circumcised.
Josh. 5.5. If in circumcision, they fully complied with that covenant, on their
part; then their carcasses did not fall in the wilderness, because they on
their part broke covenant, but because God broke covenant on his part. They on
their part fulfilled the only condition on which the land of Canaan was
promised, but God was not true to the covenant on his part. So the fault was
not in them, but in him. And in this view, Lev. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28. are entirely
inconsistent with the Abrahamic covenant. And so also is the divine conduct in
the expulsion of the Jews out of the land of Canaan by Nebuchadnezzar formerly,
as well as in their present dispersion. For they, on their parts, have always
kept covenant. For they have always circumcised their children, from the time
they took possession of the land of Canaan to this day. Nor can Psalm 50.16.
Isa. 1, 10 -- 1^. Ezekiel. 44.9. Mat. 5.23, 24. Heb. 3.19. and an hundred other
texts be reconciled with this scheme.

And if baptism alone, without respect to any mental qualification, gives a
covenant right to all the external privileges of the visible church of Christ;
then no consistent meaning can be given to these texts, Mat. 18.17. Mat. 22.12.
Cor. 5.11. and Chap. 11.28, 29. Tit. 3.10.11. Rev. 2.4, 5. etc. etc. -- The
truth is, by sealing a covenant we are bound to fulfill it: but it is an actual
compliance with a covenant, that entitles us to its blessings. Lev. 26. Deuteronomy.
28. Romans ^.13. Mat. 3.9, 10.


And, therefore

2. In order to our being satisfied, in our own consciences, that we have a
right in the sight of God to come to the Lord's-table, we are not to examine
ourselves of our knowledge to discern the Lord's body, of our faith to feed
upon him, of our repentance, love and new obedience as the assembly of divines
imagined an hundred and twenty years ago: Nor are we to examine ourselves of
our doctrinal knowledge, orthodoxy, moral sincerity, or of any thing else, of an
internal, mental nature. For a right to the Lord's Supper has no dependence on
any thing of this nature. For, but one thing was needful to satisfy the
conscience of the Jew, viz. "The external mark in the flesh," which might
easily be known. And the christian has nothing to do, but to procure and keep
by him, a well attested certificate of his baptism, to give him a full
assurance of his right to come to the Lord's-table. For,

3. No crime, although of the most scandalous nature, could vacate this right, in
the sight of God, or in the sight of conscience; because this right was not
founded in any moral qualifications whatsoever, but only in "an external mark
in the flesh," or water baptism. But the idolatry of the Jew did not at all
take away "the external mark in the flesh;" nor can the open infidelity and
debauchery of the christian prove, that the certificate, which he has, of his
baptism, is not authentic. Let the idolatrous Jew look on "the external mark
in the flesh," and let the infidel and immoral christian look on his
certificate, and their consciences may be confirmed, in a full assurance of
their divine right and title to all covenant privileges. This is a short and
easy method for dishonest, cheating, promise-braeking professors to come to the
Lord's Table with a good conscience; and for those who live in the neglect of
family prayer, and who instead of bringing up their children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, train them up to live after the flesh, in chambering
and wantonness; while they themselves live in malice and envy toward their
fellow professors. -- Mr. M. is of opinion, that it is of very bad and
dangerous tendency, for those who are admitted into the church to make a
profession of Godliness, lest by their ungodly lives they should disgrace their
profession, and tempt others to turn infidels. p. 53.54. And for the same
reason it is not best that any of the professed followers of Christ should
pretend to be honest men, left their dishonest practices should sink the holy
religion of Christ into contempt, and promote infidelity in the world. For
indeed, it is come to this already, that among the Mohometans, it is a common
thing when men are charged with cheating, or suspected of any dishonest trick,
to reply with indignation, "what! do you think I am a christian?" --

Nor can it be justified, in Mr. M.'s way of reasoning, for the church to
require a profession of moral honesty, of those whom they admit to full
communion. For every one of his objections against a profession of Godliness
are of full force against a profession of a disposition honestly to pay our
debts; and act up to our word and promise in our dealings with our fellow-men
-- For (1.) such an honest disposition is an invisible qualification, and we
cannot be certain the men have it in their hearts; and therefore on this plan
there can be no visible church p. 48. -- Besides, (2) according to this, the
design of God must have been to have made a visible distinction between honest
and dishonest men. But this is contrary to scripture, which represents the
visible church like a net which catches all sorts, good and bad. P. 49, 50 --
(3.) Admission to full communion on this plan will do hurt to men's souls, tend
to make them think they are honest when they are not, and to blow up pride in
their hearts, and to make them say with the pharisee, God I thank thee, I am
not as others are, extortioners, unjust. etc. P. 52.53. -- And (4.) it will
tend greatly to wound religion, when afterward they neglect to do as they say,
and are not honest to pay their debts. P. 54. Besides, (5.) This scheme makes
infant baptism a mere nullity. For if moral honesty is a necessary
qualification for sealing ordinances then infants cannot receive the seal. For
the church can have no positive evidence that they have an honest disposition.
The Anabaptists therefore are right in rejecting the baptism of infants. P. 54.

These are Mr. M.'s "most weighty and material objections, an answer to which
he has never yet seen attempted." P. 48 -- But it so happens, that they are of
equal weight against himself, unless he will say, that moral honesty is not a
qualification necessary for church membership.


Therefore,

4. No public profession of any kind, nor freedom from public scandal are
necessary in order to a visible right to all church privileges, in the sight of
men. For, if our real right, in the sight of God, does not depend on any
internal qualification, either moral, or gracious; no pretense need to be made,
to any such qualification, in order to a visible right. The Jew had nothing to
do, in order to prove his right, but only to make it appear, that he had been
circumcised. And the christian has nothing to do, in order to prove his right,
but only to make it appear, that he has been baptized. Nor can the church
consistently demand any thing farther, on Mr. M's scheme. For what he says, p.
22. is the plain, simple truth: To require more of the person to be admitted
into the church, than is made necessary by the covenant on which it is framed,
is really absurd. But if all these things are true, then it will follow,

1. That Mr. M. is inconsistent with himself, in putting "an outward
profession" along with "an external covenant relation," as he does, in p. 9.
and for saying as he does, in p. 21. I will allow, that none but such as
profess the christian religion, and will endeavor to conform his practice to
the rules of it, ought to be admitted into the church; and for asserting, p.
44. that "the disorderly and vicious should be debarred." For, if baptism alone
is all that is necessary to a covenant right to all church privileges; then
baptism alone is all that ought to be required in order to an admission into
the church. Nor is a public profession, or freedom from public scandal, at all
requisite. If baptism alone gives a covenant right to all church privileges, if
there is "a promise left" by God to those who have this; no man, nor any number
of men under heaven have a right to require any thing else. So that to insist,
that "none but such as profess the christian religion and will endeavor to
conform his practice to the rules of it, ought to be admitted into the church;"
and that disorderly and vicious persons ought to be debarred:" -- And to keep
such back from enjoying the privileges and means appointed for the good of
their souls, is a very strange affair. p. 59. And, therefore, to use Mr. M's
own words, and to apply them to his own conscience; p. 58. I would request such
as have thought and acted upon this scheme, impartially to examine what I have
offered. It is surely no small matter to shut the kingdom of heaven (as the
visible church is often called) against men, and not to suffer such to enter as
would. A horrid crime indeed! And yet the very crime, of which Mr. M. stands
publicly convicted out of his mouth. For he shuts the kingdom of heaven
against all baptized persons, and will not admit one of them into the church,
but such as profess the christian religion, and endeavor to conform their
practice to the rules of it: although, according to his own scheme, they are as
much in the church as he is, and have as good a right to all church privileges
as himself. Therefore,

2. Mr. M. may be publicly called to an account, and admonished out of his own
mouth, in his own words, for making infant baptism "a mere nullity, a thing of
naught." -- And what is a baptized infant to be accounted of? Is he a member of
the visible church, or is he not? p. 54. And to be rebuked for his conduct, for
practically representing and treating such as are baptized, as if they were not
really in covenant, p. 56. by refusing to admit them to covenant privileges,
without a profession, when, according to his own scheme, he ought to tell all
baptized persons, that they are really in covenant with God; that they are
members of the visible church; and are entitled to the privileges of it, p. 55,
56. merely by their baptism, without any profession at all, and without any
endeavors at all, even all of them, "old and young, moral and immoral." p. 42.
For,

3. To say, that "the disorderly and vicious ought to be debarred," p. 44. and
so "to require more than is made necessary by the covenant, on which the church
is framed, is really absurd." p. 22. For if baptism gives a covenant right to
the Lord's Supper nothing else is necessary.

4. To say, that "the disorderly and vicious ought to be debarred," by the
church, is to say, implicitly, that such ought to debar themselves; their own
consciences ought to pronounce sentence upon them. But what if a man's
conscience should happen to be convinced of this plain scripture truth, that to
rise in rebellion against the great God is one of the most "disorderly" things
a creature can be guilty of; and that to continue obstinate in this rebellion
after all the external means which God has used to reclaim us, is one of the
most "vicious"? Must not his own conscience debar him on Mr. M's scheme? Or
will it do, to tell such a man, had you been guilty of stealing but five
shillings from one of your neighbors, for this sin if considered only as
against man, your conscience ought to have debarred you, 'till you had come to
repentance and made restitution; but your conscience ought not to debar you for
being an obstinate, impenitent rebel against the God of heaven, the great
Sovereign of the universe? Or might we not for telling a man thus, be in danger
of that rebuke in Mat. 23.24. Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and
swallow a camel. For, to rise in rebellion against king George, would be
esteemed, more "disorderly and vicious than barely to steal five shillings from
our neighbor. And to rise in rebellion against the great God is doubtless more
"disorderly and vicious" than to rise in rebellion against an earthly monarch.
-- In a word, if baptism alone does not entitle to all church privileges, both
"young and old, moral and immoral," p. 42. without respect to any mental
qualification whatsoever, it will not be easy to find a place where a man may
set his foot down, and be consistent with himself, unless we return back to the
good old way, to the apostolic plan, according to which, not baptism, but
saving faith is considered as the condition of the covenant, and that which
entitles to all it is blessings. Gal. 3 26, 29. For ye are all the children of
God by faith in Jesus Christ. And if ye are Christ's, then are ye Abraham's
seed, and heirs according to the promise.

Mr. M. says, p. 42. as to baptized children, I allow they have a right to the
sacrament of the Lord's Supper, but not a right of immediate possession;
according to the apostle's representation in Gal. 4.12. Now, I say, that the
heir as long as he is a child, differs nothing from a servant, though he be
lord of all, but is under tutors and governors, until the time appointed of the
father. -- But the child, though ever so young, eats bread at his father's table,
and no one disputes his right. And when the child is of age, and his father is
dead, and the estate is to be divided among the heirs, the child has nothing to
do, in order to prove his right to a share in his father's estate, but to bring
a certificate from the town clerk, in order to prove from the town records,
that he is the child of the deceased. Nor is such a child obliged to make any
profession, or to enter into any covenant before the court of probate, in order
to come to a possession of his right. The law gives him his right without any
such prerequisites. For his right is not founded upon any thing of such a
nature, but simply upon his being the child of such a father. This therefore is
the only point to be proved. And just the same, to be consistent, must be the
case on Mr. M's plan. The only point, which one who was baptized in infancy,
has to prove, when he becomes adult, in order to take possession of his right,
is that he was baptized. Let him therefore produce a well attested certificate
of this, and nothing farther can be demanded.

If it should be said, that all that Mr. M. means is, that baptism gives a
conditional right to the Lord's Table. i. e. a right upon condition of a
profession of religion and freedom from scandal; it may be replied, that the
unbaptised have a right to sealing ordinances upon these conditions, according
to Mr. M.'s own scheme, and therefore, this cannot be his meaning. For this, to
use his own words, would be to make baptism "a mere nullity, a thing of
naught." -- But this brings us, in the next place, to observe,

II. THAT Mr. M.'s ideas of the peculiar privileges of his external covenant
are also inconsistent. -- For, if it should be enquired, what advantage has
Mr. M.'s graceless covenanter, or what profit is there in baptism administered
upon a graceless covenant? He has no right, upon his scheme, to the Apostle's
answer in Romans 3.1, 2. Much every way etc. For.

1. As to the oracles of God, which he claims for one of the chief privileges
of his external covenant, p. 9. he will grant, that they are common to the
unbaptized. i. e. the unbaptized have as good a right to read and hear the word
of God, as the baptized have; and as good a right to believe and embrace the
gospel. For, by Christ's last commission, the gospel is to be preached to all
nations, to the uncircumcised Greek as well as to the circumcised Jew: yea, to
every creature: and that, previous to, and in order to prepare men for baptism,
Mar. 16.15, 16. So that, there is not the least need of being in his external
covenant, in order to have as good a right, to hear and believe and be
justified by the gospel, as any man on earth has. For there is no difference.
Romans 3.22. compare Mat. 10.5, 6. Mar. 28.19.

2. As to sealing ordinances, he is full in it, that baptism alone, gives no
right to them, for our selves, or for our children, which can be enjoyed,
without a profession of the christian religion, p. 21, and freedom from
scandal, p. 44 and one who never was baptized, may, on his scheme, he admitted
to sealing ordinances, for himself, and his children, upon the same terms; no
higher, nor lower, being required. So that there is no advantage, in this
respect, in being in his external covenant. -- And

3. As to the influences of the spirit, whereby the means of grace are rendered
effectual to the salvation of sinners, he holds, that no unconverted man has a
covenat right to them; but that God has mercy on whom he will have mercy: and
has been at the pains to publish a labored sermon on the subeject, to prove
the point, and to answer objections; which was printed but six years ago. And
if this be true, the baptized cannot claim a covenant-right to these influences
of the spirit, any more than the unbaptized. And therefore, although in the book
now under consideration, p. 59, 60, he says, a child dedicated to God in
baptism is thereby bro't into covenant with God, and has a promise left to it,
of the means of grace, and the flrivings of the Spirit, in order to render them
effectual for salvation: But an unbaptized child is left in the kingdom of
darkness; yet it is true, on his own scheme, that such a baptized child, while
in a Christless state, is under the wrath of God, the curse of the law, a child
of the devil and an heir of hell, and is dependant on God's sovereign mercy, as
really as any other child. Yea, he declares, in his sermon on Divine
sovereignty, p. 5, 6. that, sometimes those who to an eye of reason are the
most likely to partake of the blessings of the gospel are passed by; and others
of whom we have little or no hope, are recovered by Sovereign Grace, and
enriched with Saving Mercy. Thus we should have thought, Judas, who was one of
Christ's disciples, and his constant follower, was more likely to obtain the
blessing of saving mercy than Saul, who was a fierce, zealous and open enemy to
Christ: but we see God ordered it otherwise." And he adds, p. 7. "this was not
a thing peculiar to that generation: but it is the Sovereign Grace of God, by
which, any one, at any time, is brought to obey the truth to the saving of his
soul.

4. As to the advantage of church discipline, Mr. M. grants, what every body
knows to be too true, that the baptized are taken no more care of, generally,
than the unbaptized. p. 56. Nor will it mend the matter, if we should all
embrace Mr. M's scheme, and fill up our churches more and more with ungodly
men. For gospel discipline never was, and never will be maintained by ungospel
churches. For so long as men are themselves at heart enemies to the religion of
Christ, it is doctrines and duties, they will not themselves be cordially
subject to it is doctrines and duties; much less join heartily to bring others
to be in subjection to them. As it is written, Mat. 7.16, 17. Do men gather
grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree brings forth
good fruit; but a corrupt tree brings forth corrupt fruit.

III. Nor are his ideas of the seals of the covenant any more consistent. --
For,

His notion of a seal is, that it is a rite of confirmation, whereby, in a
mutual covenant, both parties bind themselves, to comply with the covenant
contained in the written instrument. But he grants, that in the written
instrument, in the present case, the covenant of grace is contained, and is the
principal thing, and yet, by sealing this instrument, we do not pretend to a
compliance with the covenant of grace in our own consciences, or profess any
such thing before the world. Nay, we do not profess to have, in the lowest
degree, a heart to comply with it, nor mean that the act of sealing should have
this import; although in all other matters execpt those of religion; this is what
is meant by ing. But instead of a compliance with the covenant of grace, which
is the principal thing, according to him, contained in the written instrument,
we only profess a compliance with his graceless covenant, and bind ourselves to
such religious exercises and endeavors, as are consistent with a total
rejection of the covenant of grace in our hearts: even such a total rejection,
as God threatens with eternal damnation. p. 36, 37. But of this, we have spoken
before. Sect. V.

Thus inconsistent are Mr. M's notions of his external covenant, it is
conditions, it is peculiar privileges and it is seals.

To mention but one inconsistence more in Mr. M's scheme: The external
covenant, is, according to him, the appointed means; and saving faith and
conversion, or a compliance with the covenant of grace is the end. p. 10, 11.
And yet he says, p. 8. Although a person was in a state of grace, and was
consequently included in the covenant of grace, yet this covenant remained to
be complied with: Abraham was a true believer before, yet he must needs be
circumcised. But if Abraham was converted and justified before he was
circumcised, then circumcision was not instituted as a means of his conversion,
or as a prerequisite to his justification. Mr. M. adds, p. 12. that his
external graceless covenant is also to be a means to train up believers in
holiness. -- That is, holy Abraham, instead of those holy exercises in which he
had lived above 20 years, even ever since he began a holy life, was in Genesis 17.
by God Almighty laid under covenant bonds, to enter into a course of unholy
religious exercises, such as take place in impenitent self-righteous sinners,
to the end that he might "be trained up in holiness." Gal. 3.3. Are ye so
foolish? having begun in the spirit, are ye now made perfect by the flesh?
Besides,

That believers should be under the bonds of two covenants, of a nature as
contrary and inconsistent, as sin and holiness, is what cannot be made to hang
together. -- And to say, that this external covenant is neither sinful nor
holy, is, either, to say, that there is a whole system of religious exercises
of heart, which are neither conformable nor unconformable with the holy law of
God: which is to deny, that the law of God is a universal rule of life,
contrary to the whole tenor of scripture. Gal. 3.10. Mat. 22.37 -- 40. 1 Cor.
10.31. Or, which is equally absurd, to say, that no exercise of heart is
required in his external covenant; nothing but bodily motions, unconnected with
the heart.

Indeed, the very notion of two rules of duty, a holy, and an unholy one, which
is essential to his notion of two covenants, is an inconsistence. For two
contrary laws, instead of binding, both at once, must mutually destroy each
other, and can, neither of them, bind to any thing. -- That law which is a
school master to bring us to Christ, requires sinless perfection on pain of
eternal damnation. Compare Gal. 3.24. with verse 10.

And thus I have finished the remarks, which I design to make on Mr. Mather's
book. There are other things contained in it equally exceptionable; but if his
external covenant, which is the foundation of his whole scheme is proved to be
an unscriptural and inconsistent thing, his whole scheme is sufficiently
confuted. Besides, while the whole controversy is reduced to one single point,
the common people will be under better advantages to make a judgment for
themselves. But now the only point which the reader has to determine, in order
to settle the whole Controversy, in his own mind, is this, viz. Are baptism and
the Lord's supper seals of the covenant of grace, or of a graceless covenant?

Therefore to conclude,

THE CONCLUSION.
LET it be remembered, that "the Westminster confession of faith," which is
adopted by the church of Scotland; and the Savoy confession of faith," which is
adopted by the churches in the Massachusetts and in Connecticut; declare that
"sacraments are holy signs and seals of the covenant of grace." And let it be
remembered, that these confessions of faith know nothing of Mr. M's external
graceless covenant, either name or thing. And let it also be remembered, that
"the heads of agreement" which were assented to in England in the last century,
by those called Presbyterians and Congregationalists, and which are adopted by
the churches in Connecticut, declare, that none shall be admitted as members,
in order to communion in all the special ordinances of the gospel, but such
persons, as are knowing and sound in the fundamental doctrine of the christian
religion, without scandal in their lives; and to a judgment regulated by the
word of God, are persons of visible holiness and honesty, credibly professing
cordial subjection to Jesus Christ. Ezekiel. 44.9. Romans 10.10. -- And further, let
it be remembered, that this is the plan, on which, these churches are
professedly founded.

For the general council at Say-Brook, A. D. 1708, came unanimously into this
result, viz. As we assent to the foregoing heads of agreement, so we
unanimously resolve as the Lord shall enable us to practice according to them.

Now the question is, whether this plan is agreeable to the word of God, or
not. For we are all agreed, that the word of God is the only standard by which
all creeds and confessions, of human composure, are to be tried. Mr. Mather has
offered what he thought proper on the one side, and I have offered what to me
appears needful on the other, and now it belongs to ever reader to judge for
himself.

And now, therefore, Oh, reader, as this grand and important question, in which
thy soul is deeply interested, as well as the souls of many thousands of
others, is referred to thee, that thou may make a judgment for thyself, so I
entreat thee, before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels, who
are spectators in this controversy, to set aside all carnal affections and
worldly considerations, and to view the whole in the light of God's holy word,
and to make up a judgment for thyself, as in the presence of God, and with the
same uprightness and impartiality, as though the last trumpet was to sound on the
morrow, concerning this question, viz. Whether baptism and the Lord's Supper
are seals of the covenant of grace, or of a graceless covenant? For on this
single point turns the whole controversy. -- And now may God Almighty, the
Father of lights, grant unto thee a discerning mind and a sound judgment, of
his infinite mercy through Jesus Christ. AMEN.

THE END.

