Dr. Chauncy's DISCOURSE Occasioned by the DEATH of the Reverend Mr. Foxcroft.

A DISCOURSE OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF THE REVEREND THOMAS FOXCROFT, M. A.
LATE COLLEAGUE-PASTOR OF THE First Church of CHRIST in BOSTON: WHO DEPARTED
THIS LIFE On Lord's Day Forenoon, June 18. 1769. IN THE 73d YEAR OF HIS AGE.
Delivered the LORD'S DAY after his Decease.

BY CHARLES CHAUNCY, D. D. SURVIVING PASTOR OF SAID CHURCH.

BOSTON: Printed by DANIEL KNEELAND, at his Printing-Office, in Hanover-Street,
for THOMAS LEVERETT, in Cornhill.

MD,CC,LXIX.

A FUNERAL SERMON.
2 PETER I.12, 13.14. "Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in
remembrance of these things; though ye know them, and be established in the
present truth: Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to
stir you up by putting you in remembrance; knowing that shortly I must put off
this my tabernacle, as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me."


DEATH is the common lot of all a men. Whether we sustain a public, or private
character in life, we shall, in a little time, go the way whence we shall not
return. And the thought, that we must certainly and shortly leave this present
world, is powerfully adapted to awaken our powers, and excite us to diligence
in doing the work that is respectively assigned us, in the providence of God.
Said our blessed Savior, while on earth, "I must work the work of him that
sent me." And why? the reason follows in the next words, "for the night comes,
wherein no man can work." To the like purpose, it was the resolution of the
apostle Peter, in my text, to be ever diligent in his duty, as a minister of
our Lord Jesus Christ; and upon this motive, "knowing that shortly I must put
off this my tabernacle."

HE spoke these words with a more immediate referrence to himself: But they are
equally applicable to all, whom it has pleased God to entrust with the ministry
of the gospel of his Son Jesus Christ. And in this accommodated view, the two
following things are observable in them.

I. THE duty of gospel ministers, intimated in those words, "I will not be
negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things."

II. THE motive by which this duty is enforced; "knowing that shortly I must
put off this my tabernacle, as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me."

ACCORDINGLY, these are the particulars to employ your thoughts, and then to be
applied to the present occasion.

I. THE first thing observable in the text is, the duty of gospel ministers;
suggested in those words, "I will not be negligent to put you always in
remembrance of these things; though ye know them, and be established in the
present truth: Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to
stir you up by putting you in remembrance."

THE persons, to whom the apostle Peter was now writing, had, for a
considerable time, made a profession of the christian faith; for which reason,
he was rather concerned to refresh their minds with a "remembrance of the
things which they knew already," than to tickle their ears with new notions
which they had never heard of before. Accordingly, having exhorted them, in the
foregoing part of this chapter, not to rest satisfied with their having "faith"
in the gospel revelation, but to "give diligence to add to their faith, virtue,
and knowledge, and temperance, and patience and godliness, and brotherly
kindness, and charity," and to "abound" in these graces; assuring them "that so
entrance should be ministered to them abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of
our Lord Jesus Christ:" I say, having thus exhorted them, he resolves in the
words of the text now under consideration, to repeat his exhortations "to these
things;" and to go on so doing "as long as he lived," not allowing him self to
be ever "negligent" to put them in mindof such important points, in the
business of their salvation. Not that he hereby intended to suggest, that they
were ignorant of these great truths of religion: He rather supposed they were
"knowing" in them; yea, that they were "well established" in the faith of them.
But yet, he judged it "meet" to reiterate the enforcement of these truths;
frequently bringing them to their "remembrance," and, by this means, keeping
them, as it were, perpetually present in their minds for their spiritual
advantage.

AND we may herefrom learn much of the duty of the present ministers of the
gospel. They have to do chiefly with those, who may reasonably be supposed to
be well instructed already in the principles and duties of christianity. And
their business is, not to gratify their curiosity, by telling them new and
strange things; but to "stir up their minds" by way of recollection; to revive
in their memories the actual presence of old truths, and to do it in such a
manner as that they may, if possible, be quickened and excited by them to the
purposes of spiritual edification.

IT may possibly be an objection with some, to giving their attendance on the
word publicly preached, that they shall be instructed in nothing new. The
preacher, say they, will have nothing to say but what has been often said
already. And why should we trouble our selves to go to hear that, which we have
heard, and know before?

THE apostle Peter did not think there was any weight in objections of this
kind. For he spoke very pressingly to the gentile christians concerning the
things, which they "knew already;" yea, and he resolved to go on repeating
"these things," though they were "established" in the belief them, as long as
he lived.

AND it is, in itself, a "meet," fit thing, that ministers should repeatedly
call people's attention to the things which they "already know" For they really
need to have the great truths of God, and religion, urged upon them by
reiterated exhortations. It Is not enough, that they are speculatively acquainted
with gospel doctrines; but these must be made present to their minds, by a
frequent and continued "stirring up" of your memories: Otherwise, though they
"know them," they will receive little spiritual benefit from them. For, it is
worthy of our notice, the truths of religion, however great and important, can
operate upon men, to the production of corresponding effects, in no way but by
their presence in the mind, and its being actually employed in exercising its
thoughts, with reference to them. And in order to this, it is highly proper, in
true reason, that they should be frequently made thus present by the ministers
of the gospel. Many people would otherwise, it may be, scarce ever attend to
those things which they knew to be truths, and truths too of the greatest
importance. For however apt men may be to keep in mind the things that concern
their outward, and temporal welfare, they are certainly very forgetful of
those, which relate to their souls, and their spiritual and everlasting
welfare. It is therefore no small part of the work, and duty, of gospel
ministers, to bring the great truths of christianity frequently before the view
of their people; calling their attention to them, and repeatedly fixing their
thoughts upon them, if possibly they may have a suitable operation upon their
hearts and lives.

THIS was certainly the practice of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ. The
apostle Peter, in my text, "thought it meet" to enforce the same truths upon
the christians he was concerned with, and to be "always diligent" herein. And
the apostle Paul applies to the christians at Philippi, in such language as
that, (Phil. iii.1.) "Brethren to write the same things to you, to me indeed is
not grievous, but for you it is safe." And our Savior's character of a wise,
and faithful steward of the mysteries of the gospel is, "that he brings out of
his treasure things that are old as well as new," Matt. xiii.52. And thus our
Savior did himself. If we look over the accounts of his preaching, as they are
recorded in the four gospels, we shall find that he often urged upon his
hearers "the things pertaining to the kingdom of God;" reiterating his
instructions from time to time, and refreshing their memories by calling them
to attend to the "same truths;" and all, that He might fasten them in their
hearts, so as to be powerful principles of action.

IT IS true, our Savior, in his day, and his apostles in theirs, endeavored to
render the "same truths" agreeable, by the various manner in which they proposed
and urged them. Hence the many parables in which our Savior has set forth the
same divine truths. And hence the many similies and metaphors, that are used to
express the same thoughts, both by our Lord himself, and his apostles after him.

THOSE, who are entrusted with the care of souls, would do well to place their
master, and his apostles, before their view, and to copy after the pattern they
have set them. It is proper, I may rather say necessary, we should say the
"same things", repeating them over and over again; yet, we should endeavor to
do this, not in a round of the same words, but by an agreeable variety in
phrase, metaphor, and arangement of thought. It should be our study to "find
out acceptable words", so to express ourselves as that, what we deliver may be
handed to our people in a manner as little tedious, and as well-pleasing as may
be. And we shall now, in the best adapted way, lay our selves out to preach to
them so as that, if it be not owing to themselves, they may be profited, even
when their attention is called to those truths, in point of faith or practice,
which they knew before, and had been often inculcated on them. -- But I must
proceed to the

II. SECOND thing observable in my text, and this is, the motive by which the
duty mentioned is enforced. It is contained in those words, "knowing that
shortly I must put off this my tabernacle, as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed
me."

THE apostle, you observe, here speaks of his body figuratively; calling it
"his tent, or tabernacle:" and with great propriety and beauty. For the human
body is, in its present condition, a frail feeble structure, easily taken down,
and designed but for a short continuance. We are "pilgrims and strangers here
on earth, as were all our fathers before us", and dwell in tents of clay, from
which we shall soon be removed; though blessed be the God of all grace, the
time is coming, when these our "vile bodies" shall, if we are "faithful to the
death," be fashioned into fixed, durable, glorious buildings, "houses not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens."

"PUTTING off" a garment is a common mode of diction; but we do not speak of
"putting off" a tent. "Taking it down, or going out of it," is the usual form
of expression. Yet the Holy Ghost has been pleased, while comparing the body to
a tabernacle, to consider death as "putting off" one's cloths; blending
together different metaphors: unless it should be supposed, which, perhaps, is
the truth, that the original word (apothesis) here translated "putting off,"
might as properly be rendered "laying aside", "laying down," as a thing to be
used no more; and then there will be no varying of figures.

THE apostle says, "he knew that he should lay aside his tabernacle," or, in
other words, that he should die. Nor could he have been ignorant of this most
certain truth. "The living know that they shall die." They know it from the
appointment of God, which is of universal extent; taking in the whole human
race, without exception or limitation. And they knew it also from the universal
empire of death over all the sons and daughters of Adam, whether rich or poor,
wise or foolish; or however discriminated from each other by their stations in
life.

HE adds, that he knew that he should "SHORTLY lay aside his tabernacle, as our
Lord Jesus Christ had showed him." Some of the ancient fathers have said, that
the precise time of his death, which was now near at hand, was made known to
him by a vision from heaven; and that, in this way, he knew from Christ, that
his continuance here would be "short." But this is nothing more than mere
conjecture. It Is true, God acquainted Moses with the approach of his death, and
made it certain to the apostle Paul that he should soon be martyred. And he
might, by vision, or a voice from heaven, or in some other way, reveal it to
Peter that he should "shortly lay aside his earthly tabernacle." But there is
no need of any such supposition. And it is most probable, he collected the near
approach of his death from those words, in John xxi 18.19. which our Lord spoke
to him, while he dwelt in flesh. "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, when thou
wast young, thou girdedst thy self, and walkedst whither thou would; but
when thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thy hands, and another shall
gird thee, and carry thee whither thou would not". The inspired evangelist
adds hereupon, in the following verse, "This spoke he (that is Jesus)
signifying by what death he should glorify God". It Is certain, and very
obviously so, from those words of our Lord to Peter, that he should die a
martyr in his cause, when he was grown old; and being now a man advanced in
age, he "knew" by what "our Lord Jesus Christ had showed him," many years
before, that he must "shortly" die. He firmly believed what he had been told by
his Lord, and collected herefrom that the time of his departure was at hand,
that he should "shortly" be "girded," and carried to execution for his
adherence to the religion of Jesus. And that he did, according to this
prediction of Christ, suffer martyrdom, and about the time that he here says he
"knew" he should, we have the testimony of Clement of Rome, of Lactantius,
Eusebius, and others.

THE composure of mind, the truly christian fortitude, with which he here
speaks of his approaching death, is worthy of special notice. He was, in the
first days of his discipleship, shamefully intimidated in a time of danger;
insomuch that, through the influence of fear, he was overcome to "deny his
Lord," affirming with great vehemence, "I know not the man." But, being
recovered by repentance, and growing "strong in faith," and in the grace that
is in Christ Jesus," he became fearless of death, yea, of death by the violence
of persecutors; as knowing the truth of christianity, and that, by quitting his
tabernacle on earth, for the sake of his master and savior, he should be fixed
in a building of God that would be gloriously incapable of being ever pulled
down by men, or devils.

INSTEAD of being discouraged, or affrightened, at the knowledge of the
nearness of his death, and by the hands of violence, he is rather influenced
and quickened to greater zeal and diligence in pressing important, though
well-known, truths. He esteemed the "shortness" of his continuance in life a
cogent reason, why he should be more laboriously active, if possible, than
ever, in urging upon the christians he had opportunity to preach to, a due
regard to the religion of Jesus, they had been already instructed in. And in
the doing of this, he mentions that tender and affecting circumstance, "his
being to die shortly", because the words of a dying friend are will not ordinarily
to come with greater force, and to make the deepest impression on the mind.

AND the consideration of the "shortness" of the time he had to live excited
his zeal to "write" as well as to preach, that he might promote the interest of
the kingdom of Christ. So we read in the verse immediately following the text,
"moreover, I will endeavor that you may be able, after my decease, to have
these things always in remembrance." These things he would endeavor they
should "always have in remembrance," were, the necessity of practicing the
virtues of the christian life, mentioned, v.5. and onwards; and that, if they
did so, they should "have an abundant entrance into God's everlasting kingdom."
More important truths they could not remember. "These things" the apostle Peter
had preached; and, not thinking this sufficient, he committed them to writing
in the two epistles that go under his name, that they might be remembered after
he was dead and gone. As one justly observes, "He thought writing "much
preferable to oral tradition, for preserving the exact knowledge and
remembrance of truths of the last consequence. And he judged well. For what
have we of certainty from "oral tradition?" whereas these two epistles have
already continued above 1600 years, and are as able to put us "in remembrance
of these things," as ever they were to do the like to christians of former
ages. And I doubt not but they will continue to the end of the world, and be of
service, wherever they are carefully attended to". The same excellent author
adds, those who are heartily concerned for truth and purity, will do all they
can to promote them while living, and that truth and righteousness may continue
in the world when they are in their grave. St. Peter had the same regard for
the christian church, that Laelius expressed for the commonwealth, when he
said, "I have no less concern for the commonwealth after my death, than for
its prosperity at this present time."

But the "motive" in my text, is not peculiar to the apostle Peter. It is
adapted, in its nature, to operate powerfully upon all whom it has pleased God
to put into the ministry. It Is true, we do not "know," the same way in which
Peter did, that we shall "shortly lay aside these our tabernacles"; we may not
presume to say, the time of our removal to another world has been "revealed" to
us. We know not the day, or hour, or indeed the general period of life, when
our Lord will call for us. But this notwithstanding, we certainly know, because
"our Lord Jesus Christ," in the sacred books of scripture, "has showed us,"
that our continuance here is short; that, at longest, it will not be long,
before the places that now know us will know us no more. Says the apostle Paul,
speaking in the name of Christ, and as authorized by him, "the time is short."
And this is the exact truth, should our time be protracted to the utmost length
of human life. The sacred penmen, who wrote as they were influenced and guided
by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, are repeatedly express in their representations
of the brevity of our continuance here on earth; and to impress our minds with
a just and deep sense of it, they not only affirm it as a truth, but make use
of the strongest metaphors to convey it to us in the most striking manner. They
compare the duration of life here to "a shadow, which abides not;" and to "a
vapor, which appears for a little while, and then vanishes away." They
resemble the speed with which our days pass away to the haste of "a riding
post;" to the "swift motion of a ship under sail;" yea, to the much swifter
motion of an "eagle in her flight toward her prey." With such speed do we pass
from one period of life to another, till life comes to an end, and we are here
no more. Should "the days of our years" extend to "threescore years and ten;
yea, should they, "by reason of strength," reach to "forescore years;" yet
would they "soon be cut off," they would spend away "as a tale that is told",
as the language is in the 90th Psalm.

WHAT more powerful motive, now, can be laid before gospel ministers, to engage
their concern, and influence their endeavors, to stir up their people to "keep
in remembrance" the great things that pertain to the kingdom of God, and of
Jesus Christ, they may have been already instructed in? Must we "shortly" go
out of these earthly tabernacles? Has "our Lord Jesus Christ," by the most
lively and affecting descriptions, "showed us," that our continuance here will
be but a little while, at longest? Oh! how can we, in this view of life, idle
away our days in sloth, or that which is worse; neglecting to keep present in
our minds, and in the minds of our people, the momentous truths of God and
religion! Ought we not rather to be zealous, active, constant and diligent, in
doing the work that is proper to our office as the ministers of Jesus Christ?
Is not this infinitely reasonable? Can any thing more important be proposed to
us, and urged upon us? Is not the honor of God, the interest of Christ, and our
own eternal well being nearly and closely connected herewith? Is not Christ our
Judge, as well as master? And will he not, when he "appears a second time in
his own glory, and in his fathers, with the holy angels," reckon with us for
our conduct in the ministerial life? We shall assuredly be called to render an
account of the improvement of the great trust that has been committed to us.
And if we have approved our selves "faithful to the death," that is the
language, in which our Lord will say to us, in the audience of the general
assembly of angels and men, "well done, good and faithful servants, enter ye
into the joy of your Lord:" But if we have loitered away our days in sloth and
negligence, that will be our awful doom, from his mouth, "cast ye the
unprofitable servant into outer darkness; there shall be weeping, and gnashing
of teeth."

THUS gospel ministers, in common, "know," by what "our Lord Jesus Christ has
showed them," that they shall "shortly lay aside these their tabernacles," from
whence they should be excited to the most vigorous exertions in working the
work which has been committed to them as their special charge. But there are
some, among the ministers of Christ, to whom he is "showing" that they will
still more shortly leave these "houses of clay," whose "foundation is in the
dust." So feeble is their make, so weak their constitution, and so many the
infirmities they are groaning under, that it is evidently made known to them,
that they shall not abide long in the flesh." And this is eminently the case of
those, who are advanced in years, approaching toward, or having already
reached, the general period, the wisdom of God has fixed for the duration of
life. As for such, they know, because it has been "showed" to them by the
revelation of Jesus Christ, that the time of their departure is at hand. They
are ignorant, it is true, of the precise time, when they must leave this
present world; but they certainly know, in general, that "the earthly house of
their tabernacle" will shortly, very shortly, "be dissolved". And what a
powerful motive is this to make them diligent and faithful in "stirring up"
their people, by "putting them in remembrance" of the great and necessary
truths of christianity? These ought to have a most lively and affecting
presence in their own minds. Their nearness to another world renders it
eminently proper, I may say absolutely necessary. And if they have upon their
own minds an impressive sense of the infinite importance of the great truths of
God and religion, how can it be but that they should zealously endeavor to
awaken, and keep alive, in the minds of their people, the like serious and
affecting sense of these things? They must now bestir themselves, or they never
will. For their time is short. In a little while, at longest, their sun will
set, and the night come on, when they can no more employ themselves in services
for their own souls, or the souls of those whom Christ has made their peculiar
charge. They should therefore "do with their might whatsoever their hands find
to do;" remembering, that there is "no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom in the grave, whither they are going," and where they will shortly be
laid.

THIS I would consider as particularly applicable to my self. I am now
approaching toward the time, beyond which "the Lord Jesus Christ has showed
me" in the sacred books, that I cannot dwell in this my fleshly tabernacle,
unless I had "great strength," which I know I have not. It was far from my
thoughts, some years ago, that I should have lived to bear a part in that
special service, which may be expected this day. But, having obtained help from
God, I am continued to you, notwithstanding all my unworthiness and sinfulness,
and with some ability, according to the measure of the gift of grace bestowed
on me, to go on with the Lord's work among you. May a sense of his great
goodness sutably ^^^ect my heart! And may I from the consideration, that I
shall shortly be called from you, be powerfully constrained to the greatest
zeal, activity, diligence, and fidelity in my ministerial labor for the good of
your souls. Brethren, "pray for me." Your so doing will be for your own
advantage, as well as mine. If the good God, in answer to your constant,
fervent supplications before his mercy-seat in heaven, shall be pleased to be
present with me, with the aids of his grace, enabling me to be faithful; at the
same time, succeeding my faithful endeavors, so as that the gospel may have
its saving effect upon you, I shall then, of the abounding mercy of God,
through the atoning merit of the great Redeemer, receive the "crown of life;"
and you will be "my crown and joy," in the day of the appearing of Jesus Christ
"without sin unto salvation."

AND I would the rather "beseech you, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for
the love of the Spirit, to strive together with me in your prayers to God for
me", as it has seemed good to the alwise, righteous, and holy sovereign of the
world, to take to himself, by sudden death, "my companion, and fellow-laborer,
in the kingdom, and patience of Jesus Christ".

HAD he been permitted to live till the 23d of Oct. next, we should have
continued your colleague Pastors the full space of forty two years. It cannot be
supposed, I should want an inclination to do justice to the memory of one to
whom I have been so long, and so nearly related. And I may, perhaps, from my
intimate acquaintance with him, be thought to be the most proper, and best
qualified person, to delineate his character. -- But should I do this; it
might, perhaps be contrary to what he would have chosen.

You all know, he restrained himself from services of this kind. He never
attempted, in my day, so far as I can recollect to give a funeral character,
but once. It was upon occasion of the death of president WADSWORTH, who had,
for several years, been a joint-labourer with him in the pastoral care of this
Church. This he called "an extraordinary case," and made it his apology for
doing that, which, with him, was so unusual a thing. The present case is as
"extraordinary"; and will as well justify me, as it could him, and upon the
same principles, should I endeavor to take some notice of the qualities, in my
deceased brother, which rendered him so valuable a servant of Jesus Christ.

IT pleased the former of the spirit of man within him to send him into the
world with intellectual powers, much beyond the common size; and his advantages
in childhood and youth for their culture by education were such as gave
occasion for their enlargement in a still more noble degree. Not many exceeded
him in quickness of apprehension, clearness of perception, copiousness of
invention, liveliness of imagination, strength of memory, soundness of
judgment, and the faculty of reasoning. Of these natural accomplishments,
strengthened by improvement, his publications are a specimen; and they will do
honor to him, as they have already done, in the opinion of all capable judges.

HE was a friend to liberty, especially that "liberty wherewith our Lord Jesus
Christ has made his churches free." In his younger years, particularly while at
college, and under the prejudice of education, his father being an episcopalian
by profession and principle, he entertained so strong an opinion of the
"English ecclesiastical establishment," that it was his full intention to take
orders in the church of England, and would scarce be persuaded to read any
authors but those of that communion. But* after he had proceeded bachelor of
arts, in consequence of diligent study, and free conversation, he altered his
sentiments, professing a firm adherence to the mode of worship and government
practiced in the New England churches. And though he always retained a candid
charitable opinion of those members of the Episcopal church whose behavior was
as becomes godliness; yet it was his full persuasion, that the church it self
was defiled with the inventions of man, and laid an undue restraint upon true
christian liberty. I know of no one that was, upon principle, a more zealous
friend to the manner of worship and discipline in these churches, and that more
earnestly deprecated those innovations with which we have been threatened He has
in as masterly a way, and with as comprehensive knowledge, wrote in defense of
our "ordination by the hands of the presbytery," as any one I could name.

HE was also a fast friend to our college at cambridge, sought its welfare, and
laid himself out, within his proper sphere, to do it all the service in his
power.

HE was young when ordained a pastor of this church; but well qualified with
gifts, and had, I trust, before that time, been made a partaker of the "grace
that is in Christ Jesus." He was, in that day, much applauded for his
ministerial accomplishments. Multitudes flocked to hear him. No minister in
town, or country, was accounted either a more polite and elegant, or a more
devout and edifying preacher. And this was the general voice concerning him,
till disorders, we are all liable to, weakened the vigor, perhaps, of his mind,
as well as body. This was undoubtedly the case, in some of his later years. And
if that christian candor, which might reasonably have been expected from those
especially who had enjoyed the benefit of his former more vigorous labors, had
been in due exercise, it would have been no hindrance to their spiritual
edification. Had he lived till the 20th of November next, he would have been
your fixed pastor for the long space of fifty two years. I bear him witness, he
had an affectionate concern for your spiritual welfare, to which it was owing
that he exhorted, rebuked, comforted, and charged you as a father does his
children; being willing to impart to you not only the gospel of the blessed
God, but his own soul also, because you were dear to him. Should I call you to
it, you would openly declare, that he had been an "example to you in word, in
conversation, in charity, in faith, in purity," and in all those other virtues
which adorn the christian's and the minister's character. Brethren, "you are
witnesses, and God also, how holily, and justly, and unblamably, he behaved
himself among you;" approving himself "a minister of God, in much patience, in
labor, in watchings, in fastings, by pureness, by knowledge, by longsuffering,
by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the
power of God, by the armor of righteousness on the right hand, and on the
left."

I may go on, and say, those acquainted with Mr. Foxcroft must have observed
his laudable behavior in the various relations of life. When an husband, how
faithful and kind! As a father, how careful to instruct, guide, and govern his
children! As a master, how just and equal! As a neighbor, how ready to all the
offices of christian goodness! As a minister, how diligent, constant, and
laborious in doing the duties of his calling! How skilful a divider of the word
of truth! How pungent in his applications to the souls of his hearers! How
careful to adapt his discourses to the various occurrences in providence that
they might, by this means, be the more seasonable, and profitable! How fervent
was his zeal for the cause of God and religion! How resolute his boldness in
testifying against vice, and apprehended error! fearing the face of no man,
while persuaded in his own mind he was doing that, which would be acceptable in
the sight of God. He shone with great brightness as a preacher, while in the
full enjoyment of health and strength. He was indeed a thorough divine. He had
a general knowledge of most of the learned arts; was a good grammarian, well
acquainted both with latin and greek, especially the new testament greek, in
which his criticisms were frequent, and just; and such, as if collected
together, and placed in one view before the public, would give him an high
reputation in the learned world. But he excelled in his knowledge of divinity.
This was his principal study; and he has left few who were equal to him.

HE was, by bodily constitution, liable to suddenness, which was heightened by
the ill state of his health; but he made it his care to govern his resentments,
keeping them under the restraints of reason and religion. He was himself a
stranger to all the arts of intrigue and dissimulation, and detested them in
others. His conversation was serious, but not affected; pleasant and affable,
but not light and vain. He had a turn for satyr, which he could express with an
emphatical air, but was always cautious that he did not needlessly give offense.

HIS religion, though spiritual, was substantial; not tainted with
superstition, not made ridiculous by the influence of enthusiasm. He was, in
the judgment of all who were acquainted with him, a real good christian; a
partaker of the Holy Ghost, and of that faith in the revelations of God which
purified his heart, wro't by love, and influenced his whole conduct in life. He
was uniform and steady in his walk with God, in the way of his commandments:
though, instead of "trusting that he was righteous" in the eye of strict law,
he accounted himself an "unprofitable servant"; fixing his dependence, not on
his own worthiness, not on any works of righteousness which he had done, but on
the mercy of God, and the atoning blood, and perfect righteousness, of Jesus
Christ the Savior.

HE had upon his mind, for some time before his death, a prevailing
apprehension, that he should soon go the way of all the earth; which he more
than once signified to his children, and to a friend going a long journey,
taking his final farewell and saying, "She would see him no more". Whether it
was from this apprehension, or the general seasonableness of speaking to his
people upon such a subject I know not; but it may be worthy of notice, the four
last Sermons he preached was from those words, in the book of Job, "all the
days of my appointed time I will wait, till my change comes." It may naturally
be supposed, he was, in some of the last weeks of his life, particularly
thoughtful of the great change by death, and diligent in his preparation for it.

THE manner of God's calling him out of the world was sudden and violent. He
was so deeply struck, as, in a few minutes, to be deprived both of his reason
and his senses; and, in this lethargic state he continued about twenty eight
hours, when he fell asleep in Jesus; with whom, we trust, he is now present, in
the paradise of God, resting from his labors, and enjoying the happiness that
is proper to the "spirits of just men made perfect."

YOU, his dear relatives, I know, think thus concerning him; and while this is
your faith, you can have no reason to "weep for him", however you may "weep for
your selves."

WE wish for you all the aids of divine grace, whereby you may be enabled so to
improve this dispensation in the alwise government of God, as that it may be
for your spiritual profit here, and eternal well being hereafter.

WE particularly unite in our supplications before the throne of mercy for the
children, from whom it has pleased God to take an affectionate father. Be
thankful he was so long continued to you, and that you enjoyed so great a
blessing in him. And take it not amiss, if I, who was joined with him, and so
long lived his fellow-worker in the kingdom of Christ, do now in his stead, and
in God's name, seriously and solemnly give it in charge to you, "to know the
God of your father* and to serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing
mind". And let me assure you, "if you seek him, he will be found of you; but if
you forsake him, he will cast you off forever." The language of the bereavement
you are visited with is that, "will thou not from this time, cry unto me, my
father! Thou art my guide." And if you thus choose God for your father and
friend, you will reap the comfort of so happy a choice all along in life; and
may triumph in those comforting words, "this God is our God -- he will be our
guide unto death, and through death, and our portion forever." We wish for the
surviving son a double portion of that good Spirit which rested on his father;
and may he long be continued a rich blessing to the church of Christ in
general, and to that flock of his in special, over which the Holy Ghost has
placed him!

I NEED not, my brethren, recommend to your kind regards the children of the
deceased, who lived in his family. You not only made seasonable provision for
the decent, respectful funeral of their father, but have done generously for
them also. Forget not still to do them good, as there may be occasion; for
"with such sacrifices God is well pleased."

AND now, "dearly beloved in the Lord", shall it not be your care to make a
wise and good use of this article in the conduct of heaven toward you? will
you not adore before the dread Sovereign of the world, who is "righteous in all
his ways, and holy in all his works"; giving him the glory of a profound
submission to his alwise pleasure?

HAS your now dead pastor been a spiritual father to any of you, having
begotten you to Christ, through the gospel, under the influence of the Holy
Ghost? You will surely remember him in love! You can never forget him, who,
under God, has been salvation to you. -- Have any of you, by his public
ministry, or private conversation, been supported under trials, enlightened in
darkness, comforted in tribulation, or strengthened to go on with speed and
vigor in the way toward heaven? you cannot but speak of him with thankfulness
to God -- His memory, with you, will be always blessed. But if any of you,
instead of harkening to the counsels, admonitions, exhortations, and warnings,
which God dispensed to you by his mouth, have stopped your ears, and hardened
your hearts, and are to this day secure in sin; "walking in the way of your
heart, and in the sight of your eye", you have infinite reason for deep
humiliation. You have cast contempt on God, by not paying a suitable regard to
the messages sent to you by this his servant; and unless you repair to gospel
mercy, in the exercise of unfeigned repentance, he will appear a swift witness
against you in the day, when "God shall judge the world by the man Jesus," whom
he has ordainned to transact this important business.

AND may all, who are members of this ancient society, "remember what you have
heard, and hold fast" the profession of your faith. I beseech you, brethren,
and exhort you, by the Lord Jesus Christ, "that as ye have received" of your
deceased pastor "how ye ought to walk, so that we would abound more and more.
"Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain that are ready to die." He
that "walks in the midstof the golden candlesticks, and holds the stars in
his right hand," has "somewhat against us, because we have left our first
love." Let us "remember from whence we are fallen, and repent, and do the first
works." Our blessed Lord, I trust, has yet a "a few names in this his Sardis,
who have not defiled their garments: and they shall walk with him in white, for
they are worthy." May the number be increased into a great multitude! We are
the first christian church that was ever formed in this town. May we be the
first in spiritual glory! May it please the great head over all things to add
to our numbers, and to our graces! And may we go on shining in all the beauties
of holiness, till we are "presented a glorious church, without spot or wrinkle,
before God, even the father," in that kingdom which shall have no end!

I SHALL not think it a digression, if I say, that the death we are solemnising
is a loud call in providence to the ministers of the Town, the associated ones
in special. He was one of our number, often with us in consultation for the
interest of the kingdom of Jesus, and an ancient venerable, and highly valuable
member. And, by his removal into the other world, we are taught by our Lord,
that we also shall "shortly put off these our tabernacles." May we hear his
voice, and, in imitation of him "work" with zeal and diligence "the work of him
that sent us"; remembering that "the night comes when we cannot work! May
those among us, in particular, attend to it, who have been permitted to live
till we are far advanced in years! Of the eleven associated pastors in this
town, one has exceeded four-score years; another threescore years and ten; four
have reached beyond threescore years; one is above fifty, and another above
forty years old. Three only of our number are young men. But they may die in
the strength and vigor of life. A serious thought! and it should quicken their
zeal, and animate their resolution, to be faithful and diligent in fulfilling
the ministry they have had committed to them. But, for us who are grown into
years, "our Lord Jesus Christ has showed us" by his word, and is "showing us"
in his providence, that we must shortly depart. May our hearts be duly
impressed with a just sense of this momentous truth! And may it influence us to
the most arduous endeavors, that we may finish our course with joy!

There will, my brethren, in a few years at longest, come on a great change of
ministers in this Town. Most of the present ones will, according to the course
of nature, very shortly be laid in their graves. May their be a succession of
those, who shall be eminently instrumental in serving the Redeemer's interest
in these churches! Perhaps, there never was a town, in any part of the world,
since the days of the apostles, more signally blessed than this has been, from
its beginning, with skilful, able, faithful gospel ministers. Instead of those
that are gone, and going, off the stage of life and action, may that God, with
whom is the residue of the spirit, raise up, and qualify, others to supply
their places, and to do more worthily for him in their day and generation!

IT were to be wished, that both ministers and people would continually
entertain in their minds the thought, that they dwell in weak feeble
tabernacles, that will shortly be broke to pieces by this or the other disease,
or disaster, in the providential government of God. Ministers would then
preach, and their people would then hear, as becomes dying men. And such
preaching, and such hearing, would, under the blessing of God, be effectual to
the salvation of ministers themselves, and those that hear them.

NOW to the only living, unchangeable, immortal God, be given all glory, honor,
majesty and Dominion, by the church of Christ, throughout all ages, in this
world; and throughout eternity, in the coming one. AMEN and AMEN.

Appendix. From the Massachusetts Gazette, of June 22. 1769.
LAST saturday morning, the Reverend Mr. THOMAS FOXCROFT, senior Pastor of the
first Church in this Town, was suddenly struck with a disorder, partly
apoplectic, partly palsaic, which deprived him of his reason, locked up his
senses, and put an end to his life the following day, about eleven of the
clock, in the seventy third year of his Age.

HE was born in Boston, but in early childhood became an inhabitant of
Cambridge, the seat of Harvard-College; where he was favored with as good an
education as could be had in the country, in that day. This, together with the
superior intellectual powers, the Father of spirits was pleased to bestow on
them, laid the foundation for those learned accomplishments, which
distinguished him from most of his brethren in the ministry. He took his
degrees of Bachelor and Master of Arts in the years 1714, and 1717. His Father,
FRANCIS FOXCROFT, Esquire a Member of the Church of England, though candid in his
sentiments of other denominations of christians, which he signified by statedly
joining in worship with the Congregational Church at Cambridge, where he
resided, the remaining part of his life, after he left Boston: -- His Father
intended he should be an Episcopal Clergyman. And this was his own intention,
till, by diligent study, and free conversation with that great Reasoner, and
eminently pious Man, the Rev. Mr. NEHEMIAH WALTER, (then Pastor of the Church
at Roxbury, in which place he was called to be at the head of a Grammar School
for a few years,) he was obliged to think, that the mode of worship and
government in our Churches, was more agreeable to Scripture Rule than that of
the English Church. In the year 1729, he published, in answer to "Mr. T.
Barclay's Persuasive," which had been distributed in New England, his work
entitled, "the ruling and ordaining Power of Congregational Bishops, or
Presbyters defended;" in which he showed himself a master in this controversy.
The Power of Presbyters, or Scripture Bishops to ordain and govern, is here set
in a strong point of light: Few have wrote upon the subject with greater
clearness, more accuracy, or fuller extent of knowledge. This highly valuable
performance has received no answer to this day.

IN the Month of March, 1717, he was called to the pastoral office of the first
Church in this Town, and on the 20th of November following was ordained their
Minister in partnership with the Rev. Mr. BENJAMIN WADSWORTH. Perhaps, no
Minister in Boston, upon his first settlement, was ever more universally
admired. He was then held in high reputation, as one of the best accomplished
preachers; and this continued to be the general opinion of him, till there came
on a change in the taste of people, and in the vigor of his constitution by
repeated disorders of one kind or another. His published Sermons, upon a great
variety of occasions, and in all the periods of his ministerial life, will do
honor to him as long as there are any capable judges of justness of thought,
copiousness of invention, elegance of style, strength of reasoning, enlivened
with a spirit of piety running through the whole. He was in sentiment a strict
Calvanist; though catholic in his disposition toward others who did not think
just as he did. And, what ought to be mentioned to his honor, he was no
TRIMMER, but steadily and uniformly adhered to the Calvinian principles, which
he took to be the true Scripture ones; making them the chief subjects of his
pulpit discourses, as he thought he should hereby "please God," if he did not
always "please Men." It may be justly said of Mr. FOXCROFT, that he was a good
scholar, an able critic, both in Greek and Latin, and considerably acquainted
with most of the arts and sciences; though Divinity was his favorite study, in
which he excelled; not having left many, if indeed any superior to him. But the
best and greatest thing that can be said of him is, that he was, as we have
abundant reason to believe, a good christian, and a faithful minister of Jesus
Christ, in whose service he labored, as a fixed pastor, nearly fifty-two years.
He was called, in this period of time, to pass through a variety of trials, as
well as services, which gave opportunity for the exercise and establishment of
many virtues, both private and social, by which he honored God, did good in his
generation, and was formed to a greater meetness for the enjoyment of the upper
world, to which he was admitted, as we trust, of the free rich mercy of God
through Jesus Christ, at the day of his departure hence.

He has left behind a Son and five Daughters, for whom we wish the guidance and
blessing of him who has styled himself "the father of the fatherless."

He was buried yesterday with all decent respect; the Church to which he had
long ministered bearing the expense of the funeral.


