THE CASE OF GREAT BRITAIN AND AMERICA, ADDRESSED TO THE KING, AND BOTH HOUSES
of PARLIAMENT.

The Colonies of every popular, mixed, and free Government, preserving their
Duty, have a Right to be free.

Mr. CANNING'S Letter to the Earl of HILLSBOROUGH. -- Dare do all that may
become Men,
Who dare do more, are none. --
LONDON: Printed, PHILADELPHIA, Reprinted by WILLIAM an THOMAS BRADFORD, at
the LONDON COFFEE HOUSE. MDCCLXIX.

THE CASE OF GREAT BRITAIN AND AMERICA.
THE affairs of Great Britain and her Colonies are at a crisis. If our justice
or our moderation dictate to us the making any concessions, they should be made
whilst they can yet be imputed to our moderation or our justice. The present
Session of Parliament should determine upon some permanent system in this
point. Great Britain should fix the Pretensions which she will never
relinquish, and the Colonies should have certain information of those claims
which they must submit to. Until such a system be resolved upon, there will be
irresolution on the one side, and repugnance on the other; and no system can be
stable that is not founded upon equity and wisdom.

IT is the resolution of the present Ministry, it is said, to impose taxes upon
the Colonies, by the authority of the British Parliament, and to compel the
Colonies to submission. To examine the justice and the policy of those
measures, and to suggest others, which appear to me less exceptionable, in each
of those particulars, is my object.

THE Colonies, by their respective Charters, have not uniformly the same
privileges, or the same constitution. But though they differ in many
particulars, they are alike in the following; namely, That the inhabitants of
every one of them have a right to tax themselves by their representatives, in
their provincial assemblies; that none of them vote for representatives in the
British Parliament; and that all of them are to enjoy the freedom of British
subjects. In the search for arguments against the Americans, the validity of
those charters has not passed unquestioned. I shall say, however, but a little
in their support, as the attacks have been very weak and very few. From the
earliest times down to the present, the disposition of foreign territory
belonging to Great Britain has always been vested in the Executive. It is a
power which the Restoration and the Revolution have left unshaken. From the
cession of Tangier to that of Guadaloupe, how frequently has it been exercised?
And in the particular instance of Gibraltar, it was necessary to pass a law to
restrain it. At present it is unalienable from Great Britain.
If then the Crown, at the time when it granted the charters, could have ceded
the territory of America to a foreign power, could it not have fixed the terms
on which its present and future inhabitants should continue the subjects of
Great Britain? Where it could have relinquished all the authority possessed by
Great Britain, certainly it could relinquish a part of that authority. Where it
could make a total alienation to enemies even, surely it could make a modified
grant to subjects. But suppose that the Crown had not been legally possessed of
that power, is there not a term after which uninterrupted possession confers a
right? Have not the Colonists possessed their charters much longer than that
term? Have they not dedicated their lives and fortunes to the improvement of
that country, from a dependence upon the validity of their title? Have not the
British Parliament seen and acquiesced in their doing so? Has not
Great Britain, in her exclusive trade, received a valuable consideration?
Surely then it would be monstrous injustice to deprive them of rights so
purchased and so confirmed. It has also been urged by some, that the Parliament
can revoke these charters when it shall think proper; for that it can take away
from any city or corporate town, in England, its charter, notwithstanding any
length of time it may have enjoined it. I answer, that if an English city or
corporate town had so purchased their charter, as the Colonists have purchased
theirs, and had so long possessed it, it would be unjust in the Parliament to
rescind or violate it. But the comparison is totally unfair; for the charter of
an English city or corporate town, and those of the Colonies, besides other
material differences, have this essential one, that the former give a Right of
representation in the British Parliament and that the latter do not. If
therefore the charter of a British city or borough be rescinded by Parliament,
it is rescinded in an assembly which is the representative of that city or
borough. Where a part of England only is concerned, the legislature of England
may claim unlimited power, as a body to which all the rights of Englishmen are
made over and entrusted. But the charters of America are agreements made
between England on the one part, and the Colonies on the other. The House of
Commons of England is the representative of one of the contracting parties
only, namely (...); and therefore cannot act for both. They have none of them
any share in electing it; it cannot therefore legislate for them. It is a
party, and cannot therefore be a judge.

THE opponents of the Americans admit, that they are entitled to the privilege,
of British subjects; that they are a free people. Could we determine what these
privileges are, and what this freedom, the dispute would be at an end. The
American asserts, that he is deprived of the most essential privilege of a
Briton, and a free man, if the colony to which he belongs can be taxed by an
assembly in which it is not represented. The advocate for administration,
answers, that there are many natives of Great Britain herself who are not
represented; for that there are many who have not votes in the choice of
representatives, and that the Colonists have no cause to complain, when they
are in the same condition as many of the natives of Great Britain. Would a
Colony pretend to a better constitution than the mother country, from whence
she derives it? As this argument has been frequently repeated, I suppose it to
be a favorite one with administration; and as it is the only method that has
been tried to reconcile their assertion, that "the British Parliament has a
right to tax the Colonies," with their concessions, that the Colonies have the
privileges of Britons, and are a free people; let us listen to (...) American
pleading his own cause, in answer to (...) argument: I do not claim a better
constitution than my mother (...): you have misrepresented my claims. I have
said that a right of suffrage in the choice of our representatives is the (...)
of British privileges; but I have (...) said, that (...) Briton enjoys that
Right; nor do I require that every Colonist should enjoy it. There are many
Britons who have no vote in (...) of the House of Commons, so are there many
Colonists who have no vote in the election of our provincial representatives;
allege, if you will, that in being taxed by your Parliament, you are taxed by
an imperfect representative; in being taxed by our provincial assemblies, we
are taxed by a representative as imperfect. Our freedom therefore, in point of
(...), when we are taxed by our own assemblies, is not greater than yours; it
is only equal to it; our constitution is an image of your. But if we are to be
taxed by your Parliament, our constitution no longer resembles yours, and our
freedom is annihilated. If there be many Britons who have not a vote in the
choice of their representatives, there are also many that have. The possession
of a 40 s. freehold, in Britain, confers the privilege of a vote: the
possession of the whole continent of America, does not confer that privilege.
Do you not know the infinite difference between a nation where all have not the
power of voting for their representatives, and a nation where (...) have that
power? The (...) is your condition, and therefore you are a free people; the
former is what we claim; the latter is the condition of slaves, and that is
what you offer. We claim the right of suffrage, as the privileges of Britons,
and you tell us we have it, because we are like those Britons who have it not!
We claim the same constitution as Great Britain, and you offer us only the
defect of that constitution, but deny us its advantages. England cannot be
taxed but by an assembly, where her land is represented by Knights, her monied
interest by Citizens and Burgesses, and therefore she is a free nation. Is then
America on a par with England, in point of Freedom? If she can be taxed by an
Assembly, to which her freeholders send no Knights, and her cities no Citizens.
You say that your right of suffrage is partially distributed, in Britain; give
us then a right of suffrage as partially distributed in America. For this
representation, partial and imperfect as you call it, your Magna Chartas have
been demanded, your patriots have bled, and your monarchs have been dethroned.
Was this for nothing? yet this you deny to the Americans, though you say to us,
Ye have the privileges of Britons.

BUT there is yet another defect in your argument. For it is not true that we
are in as good a condition as those Britons whom you call unrepresented, and
who are not electors: for even they have this great advantage, that both the
representative and the electors pay a part of the tax, as well as those who
have no suffrage: whereas if the House of Commons of England should tax the
Americans, neither the representatives nor the electors would pay any
proportion of what they imposed upon us; they would not tax, but untax
themselves. The condition therefore of an Englishman who has no suffrage, when
taxed by the British legislature, and of an American taxed by the same
authority, are totally dissimilar. Place them in situations which bear any
similitude, and it will show in the strongest light, the injustice of the
present measures. Suppose then that the Parliament of Britain should impose a
tax, from which themselves and those who voted for them should be exempted, and
which should be paid entirely by those who had no suffrages; this would bear
some resemblance to their taxing the Americans; and would not this be
unparalleled injustice? But if even this (unjust as you must esteem it) were
the practice of your Parliament, the condition of a non-voting Englishman would
still be infinitely preferable to ours; for even such a tax as I have stated,
would fall upon the relations, the friends, the dependants, the (...), the
manufacturers, the laborers of British (...). The legislator would feel its
effects, almost instantaneously, he would find his own interest immediately
concerned he would therefore use some moderation. Besides, he is (...) of their
(...), he can judge of their abilities, (...) wounded at the sight of their
distresses. But he cannot see our misery, he cannot judge of our abilities; and
his tenants and his manufacturers will feel the immediate effects of our ruin,
not in their distress, but in their exoneration. If therefore the legislature
of Britain should adopt such a system of unparalleled injustice, with respect
to the non-voting inhabitants of Britain, yet, even the sufferers by, and the
objects of that injustice, would be happy, in comparison of us. Suppose, for a
moment, if you can bear the thought, suppose for a moment, that your House of
Commons were not elected by you, that they were an hereditary body, in no wise
indebted to your choice; would you not be an enslaved and an unhappy people:
but even then you would be happier than we are. A body of 500 men, situated in
the midst of seven millions, and taxing those seven millions, would surely be
more bound to moderation, by fear, if not by principle, than the same body,
assisted and supported by those seven millions, in taxing two millions who are
at a distance. To oppress, in one instance, would at least be infamy, if it
would not be punishment; in the other they might find it popularity, they might
think it patriotism. Mr. P -- tt said, (if I mistake not) that every man in
England could huzza at an election: even that method of expressing one's
wishes, is some satisfaction, and has some influence; the shoutings of the
people have had great effects; and the very murmurs of Englishmen, had perhaps
more share in the repeal of the stamp act, than the united voice of America. We
cannot even huzza at a British election!

THE right of presenting petitions to parliament was deemed of so much
importance, that it was inserted in the Bill of Rights. In this fundamental
right, the bulwark against parliamentary oppression, as well as every other,
under what disadvantages should we labor, if you were to make laws for us? How
different is the effect of a petition presented by the hands of the injured,
enforced by their assiduity, and recommended by their tears, from that of our
paper-representations? They are subject to be misrepresented in a thousand ways.

THEY come cold, and you do not feel them; often too late, and you cannot
comply with them, and what was done by you through inattention and mistake,
must be maintained for dignity; in a word, they do not strike home, either upon
your caution or your kindness, your affections or your fears. In this
particular, the very women and children of England, have an influence upon
parliament, of which the Americans are destitute. How different is your lot
from ours! In the character of an American, to the people of England I speak.
Your frequent elections are a valuable privilege to you; what privilege are
they to us? At the close of a parliament, you expect popular measures, from the
sears and the hopes of your representatives. But who will find it his interest
to be a friend to America? They will wish to gain the favor of their
countrymen, and therefore will burden America, in order to disburthen England.
What to you is a valuable privilege, will be to us a source of repeated
oppression. We are worse even than your Papists. In being excluded from the
right of suffrage, they are like us; and as they pay double land tax, in that
additional payment the resemblance continues; for it is a tax imposed by men
whom they had no share in electing, and it is a tax which those who impose it
do not pay. But this disability in point of suffrage, and this additional
payment, are penalties inflicted on your Papists; and why? Allegiance as by law
required is a quality essential to being a subject. Your Papists are defective
in that quality. They are considered as not completely subjects, and, as such,
penalties are inflicted on them. Your only justification for inflicting these
penalties on them, is that you doubt their being subjects. Your only pretense
for inflicting the same penalties on us, is that we are subjects. Same
penalties, did I say, nay worse; for as they are inflicted on us, without
offense, we cannot by a discontinuation of offense, exempt ourselves from these
grievances. The Papist, by becoming a Protestant, can free himself from this
disability, and this double taxation: but we cannot free ourselves from this
misery, but by ceasing to be Americans. Besides, in every other case, except
that addition of land tax, your Papists are in as good a situation as any of
the rest of your inhabitants who have not votes: but in every tax you lay upon
us, we are in as bad a situation as your Papists are in that one. Besides, your
Papists are connected with their legislators, by relationship, friendship,
neighborhood, or dependence. Their possessions too are British, and they must
have influence, though they have not votes. And the great right of petitioning,
they possess, with all its advantages, and can enforce their petitions by their
presence, their assiduity, their numbers, and their tears. In how much worse a
situation are we than your Papists, whom for their obstinacy in an
unconstitutional and persecuting religion, you have made the outcasts of
legislation. What then is the freedom, and what are those Britith privileges,
to which you confess we are entitled? What are those rights which we have
possessed above an hundred years, which we derived from solemn compact, which
we have purchased by an unshaken allegiance, and by the profits of our trade?

IN this reply, which I have put into the mouth of a Colonist, I have examined,
pretty minutely, the real extent of American liberty, under the present
measures. I have shown the dissimilarity of their condition to our own, and to
that of a free people. I shall now show the similarity of their condition to
that of those nations whom we call slaves. The author of the Letter to Lord
Hillsborough, says, "Libertas recipit magis et minus, that there are degrees of
freedom." I allow it. In what does perfect political liberty consist? Some
authors define it to be, "the power of doing what the laws permit." If I do not
mistake the meaning of this definition, it is clearly erroneous. To do what the
laws of Turkey permit, certainly is not liberty. Perfect political liberty
consists rather, -- in the not being subject to any laws, but such as we have
consented to by ourselves, or by our representatives. If Britain is but
imperfectly represented, it has but an imperfect freedom. But considering the
imperfection of every thing human, it may well boast of the excellence of its
constitution. There are other nations, the lives and fortunes of whose
inhabitants are dependant upon the will of some person whom they do not elect,
and whom they cannot remove; or upon some other country, in the government of
which they have no share, France, Spain, and Turkey are instances of the first;
Corsica, while it was under the yoke of Genoa, of the second. All such
governments are absolute or despotic, and the people subject to them we call
enslaved. Between their situation and our own, there are indeed many degrees.
But I defy the author of the letter to Lord Hillsborough, to show, that any of
those degrees would be enjoyed by the Americans, if measures should be carried
to the extremes which we now hear of. I do not say that there is not a medium,
between a good constitution, and simple despotism; but I say the Americans
would not possess that medium. He objects to the advocates for America, their
asserting, "That if dependence be enforced in any the least degree, the
Colonists are slaves." Let him not object it to me; my assertion is that they
are slaves, if the British Parliament assumes unlimitted power over them, in
every particular whatsoever. If a people can be deprived of their lives and
their property, by another person, or another nation, is it not evident that
such a people is not free? whether it be by a nation, or by a monarch, is not
material. The masters indeed are disserent, but the government is equally
despotic. The Helots of Sparta were as much slaves, as the subjects of the
Grand Signior. Now I defy any person to mention one single power, which the
Spartan Republic assumed over the Helots, which England does not assume over
her Colonies. I would not insinuate that Great Britain will not govern with
greater humanity: but if her power be mildly administered, it will indeed be a
milder despotism, but it will not therefore be the less a despotism. Should we
thus address ourselves to a colony of France or Spain: You live under an
absolute government; transfer your allegiance to us, and you shall enjoy those
privileges which Great Britain diffused through all her dominions. Might it not
answer us in these words; "I am not burdened with taxes in near so great a
proportion as your Colonitis, but I would consent to pay more than I do, if I
were to enjoy a greater degree of freedom. What then are those privileges which
you offer to me? We might say to them, One of the principal privileges shall be
this, that you shall not be taxed, except by your own representatives, or else
by the parliament of Britain. Might they not then reply to (...)? I find then
that my representatives are not to be a part of that British Parliament which
is to tax me; were I subject to the absolute dominion of an assembly elected by
the provinces and cities in France, should I be one whit more free, than in
being subject to the absolute dominion of its monarch? When you spoke to me of
privileges, I imagined that you meant that right of suffrage, which is the
boast of the British constitution. You give it to me indeed, in one place, but
you will tax me in a place where you will not give it to me. When our own
Sovereign has taxed his subjects as much as he thinks proper, he will scarcely
refuse them the privilege of taxing themselves again, in any manner they
please. If you can demonstrate to me that our monarch assumes one single power
over us, which you do not assume over your colonies, I will hearken to your
proposals, but if you cannot, your government is as arbitrary as that of
France, we are less taxed, and as free as your Colonies.

HAVING examined the real condition of the Colonists, under the present
supposed measures, with as much attention as I am capable of, I can find in it
no circumstance, which should prevent my asserting that they would be as
destitute of freedom, as any nation ever was, or ever can be: now whatever
those rights and privileges may consist in, which confessedly belong to the
Americans, they certainly do not consist in slavery, which is the want of every
right, and the deprivation of every privilege.

I HAVE shown that the comparison between the Americans and those Britons who
have no suffrages, is false; and that if it were true, it would not be
argumentative. I have shown what the freedom of the Americans does not consist
in, and I will now endeavor to show what are those privileges which for our
own sakes we must allow them. I cannot help observing in this place, that every
one who has written against them, has confined his endeavors to the proving
which of the British privileges they ought not to possess; but not one of them
has mentioned those privileges which they ought to enjoy. It is a little
suspicious that those authors whose professed design is to convince and to
conciliate the Colonists, have never once enumerated those advantages which
they are still to enjoy under parliamentary government. Surely nothing would be
so likely to pacify them, as a recital of the blessings which are still to
remain to them.

BUT to return; in order that the Americans should enjoy British freedom, it is
not sufficient that they should adopt that part only of our constitution, which
departs from the principles of British liberty. They must possess that part
which is excellent, as well as that part which is defective, or their liberty
is not an image of ours. It is not therefore sufficient that an American
land-holder should be on a par with a Briton who has no landed property, or
with a British Papist. But that an American freeholder should have the same
power over his own property, as a British freeholder has over his own. If any
man shall object to me, that I have placed the Colonists in a situation too
equal to their mother country; I answer him, that I have done so, only with
respect to their own vested and acquired property The Americans must relinquish
many rights of property; that is, many rights of acquiring property; for they
must be subject to British navigation laws, and trade-regulations: but the
right of granting property already acquired and verted, should be sacred. This
should be theirs safe and entire.
; and that Americans have as much right to the property of America, when once
acquired and vested, as Britons have to the property of Great Britain.

IN order that taxation and representation may not be united in America, the
adversaries of America deny that they were united in Britain. And attempts have
been made to produce instances of their disunion, taken from different periods
of the British constitution. It is not material to my cause, to examine whether
those attempts have succeeded. If America be entitled to English privileges,
the English constitution, she is entitled to that constitution, as it stood at
the time when the colonies were planted. She is not to have the constitution
that existed in the time of William the Conqueror, or of the Saxon heptarchies,
or of the Roman government. If England communicated to America her constitution
and her privileges, we communicated them such as she herself at that time
enjoyed. It was the constitution of England at that period, that every man
possessed of 40 s. a year, by that free tenure which we call a freehold, should
have a vote in electing a member of that assembly which alone could tax his
property; besides certain persons invested with privileges in cities and
boroughs. This was and is the bulwark of English liberty; without this we
should be slaves. This then is the constitution which is communicated to
America: let not therefore her property be taxed, except in an assembly to
which her freeholders and electors send a representative. In the Saxon
constitution, the privilege of voting was diffused much more universally; it
belonged to all who held by a free tenure; that is, to all the subjects of
England; for those who hold by other tenures were not subjects, but vilani, or
slaves. So entire was the union at that time, between representation and
taxation: but to this constitution the Colonists have no pretension, as it was
not the constitution of England at the time of their establishment. By the 8th
of Hen. VI. the right of voting was confined to such freeholders as had 40 s. a
year, and thus the more opulent freeholders were entrusted with the rights of
all the rest. It appears to me that England by this change had two kinds of
representatives. The richer freeholders represented the others, and the House
of Commons represented them. Thus the opulent freeholders were representatives
of election constituted by their circumstances; and the knights were
representatives of legislation, appointed by suffrage. If there be any justice
in this opinion, all the subjects of England were either actually or virtually
represented. But if there be not, and if it be admitted that England was and is
partially represented -- Give a representation as partial to her Colonies. If
Britain be imperfectly repesented, she has but an impersect freedom; but if the
Colonies have no representation, they have no freedom at all. If Britain has
not the best constitution, which human invention could have suggested; is it a
reason that America should have the worst?

IN the memorable contest with the II -- e of P -- rs about the right of
originating taxes, the C -- ns urged with great force their exclusive right to
that privilege. They thought it unreasonable, even that any part of the taxes
should be increased or diminished, or that the rates should be examined by the
P -- rs, "whose proportion in all taxes, in comparison to what the commonalty
pay, is very inconsiderable." I believe the same assembly think these words to
contain good sense at this day; and it is undoubtedly very reasonable, that
those who give the most, should have the greatest share in modelling the gift.
Such were the maxims that were formerly adopted by that great assembly, and
such were the reasonings on which their greatest privilege is established. Why
then do they now think it reasonable, that those who pay not an inconsiderable,
but no proportion, should not only originate a tax, but pass it into a law
Compare the spirit of their former maxims, with that of their present. "It is
unjust in you, my L -- ds, to begin a taxation, of which you pay only a small
proportion." Yet we will impose a tax upon America, of which we pay no
proportion at all. "It is unjust that you, my L -- ds, should even originate a
tax upon men, of whom you are but the lesser number, though the rest may
afterward refuse it if they please." But is it just for us to enact a tax-law
for the Colonists, which they shall not have a power to refuse, although we are
not any part of them? "The right of proposing taxes belongs to us as
representatives of the people who pay them, and yet we will tax a people of
whom we are not representatives." Bills of supply are looked upon, not only as
laws, but as free gifts; and, on account of this difference in their natures,
they are subject to different forms. The lords cannot originate them, although
they also are legislators. And it is not the royal assent, which is given, but
the royal thanks. The 9th of Henry 7th, enacts, that the King shall thank both
Lords and Commons; but if our Parliament shall tax the Colonists, to whom are
the r -- l thanks to be addressed? Is he to thank his British subjects, for
giving him the property of the (...) Is he to thank the English, for money
which they do not pay, or the Americans, for a free gift, wrested from them
against their will? Which of these mockeries would be most unworthy the great
scene on which they are to be acted?

MUCH declamation has been used, on both sides. The English speak of the blood
and treasure they have expended. The Americans, that they have encountered an
inhospitable climate for the purposes of Great Britain, and have dedicated
their lives and fortunes, to her service. There is no weight in any of these
declamations. Whatever was done by either of them, was done for their own
advantage. If Britain has protected the property of America, it does not
constitute her the owner of that property. She has, for her own sake, protected
in their turns, almost every country in Europe, but that does not make her the
proprietor of those countries, or give her a power of taxation over them. If
America, in pursuing her own interest, has advantaged Britain, we owe her no
obligation. Whilst we each possess those benefits for which we expended our
treasure, and for which they encountered that climate, we owe nothing to each
other but reciprocal affection. To extend their commerce, our ancestors
encouraged the emigration of British subjects. Their industry abroad was
thought more advantageous, than their residence in Britain. As an inducement to
forego those privileges which they possessed, or might acquire at home, it was
agreed that they should carry English privileges along with them. And as an
inducement to become the carriers, and the laborers of England, they were
endowed with a desert territory, useful only by the industry they should bestow
upon it, and this was given to them, as their wages. Let not a compact, founded
in our interest, puchased by their labor, and confirmed by time, suffer any
violation. Let us be content with our commercial advantages, and those
superiorities which they willingly submit to. Let us make them labor for us;
but let us not take from them their wages, also.

HAVING considered the justice of the present measures; let us now examine
their policy; and in this examination, let our sentiments of equity forget to
operate. Let us forget that they have rights, or that we have humanity. Let us
suppose ourselves entering into an agreement, with a free and a considerable
people, and settling the terms of an everlasting union. Or if any one should be
of opinion, that neither of these circumstances is applicable to the Colonies;
let us suppose them in their numbers inconsiderable, unaccustomed to liberty,
overawed by fear, or humiliated by conquest, and ready to receive any
constitution, we please to impose upon them. In such a situation, what
reflections should our own interest suggest to us? Though this people be weak,
at present, their strength and their numbers may increase It is whimsical that
Mr. Canning mentions the probable increase of the Americans, as an argument for
meatures, that must exasperate them.
; though we ourselves are strong, our strength may decline; though their spirit
is depressed, it may revive. They are placed at a great distance from us. We
have formidable enemies Their affections therefore, are of the utmost
importance, and there is no method so certain of securing their affections, as
the making it their interest to be our friends. We ourselves have a free
constitution: if we grant liberty to them, they will be steady to us, because
they cannot change for the better; if we assume unlimited and absolute
authority, they will wish to change, because they cannot change for the worse.
The tyranny of a despotic commonwealth is infinitely worse than that of a
despotic prince. But it is vain to endeavor to deceive them; though they never
have tasted liberty, they will soon become acquainted with its nature. They
will perceive the misery of their situation, by the happiness of ours. While
their garrisons are filled with our soldiers, their harbors with our fleets,
and their employments with officers of our appointment, and while they derive
from us a degree of freedom, we shall be secure, both by our own power, and by
their affections. They are weak, by their circumstances, let us not make them
strong, by their despair. The gradual increase of numbers and of opulence, may
add to their force, but that force will sleep, unless it be awakened by injury:
and while we retain an absolute power over their trade, that very increase will
depend upon our regulations. Whilst they are happy under our government, their
strength and their opulence will be strength and opulence to us; but, if we
oppress them, they will be our weakness, and our danger. The numbers of a
people are not so formidable, as their union, their hatred, their fury. If
there ever should come a time when they shall be able to shake off our
sovereignty, it will pass unheeded, by a grateful and happy people. But if our
dominion be founded only in our strength, it will subsist no longer than their
weakness. It is therefore evident that we shall hold America, by a better
security, if we do not enslave it. But will it afford us as much present
emolument? This surely is a consideration, much inferior to the other; it may
have more weight with a short-lived and a short-sighted administration; but can
never have so much with a thinking nation. Yet let even this be considered; we
know that this nation has paid considerable taxes, without any compulsion; and
we know that free nations can support greater burdens, than nations equally
opulent, that are enslaved. No power, no management, has ever succeeded to tax
the latter, as highly as the first; and the efforts of despotism have produced
only depopulation or rebellion. Thus it is by no means certain, that even our
present emoluments would be the less, if we extort nothing from them against
their own consent In the last war they incurred a debt of (...). Would they
have done this, for an (...)?
. Besides, with how much less expense can we secure the allegiance of the
willing, than of the unwining. Amongst the first, a militia would be
serviceable; amongst the latter, it would be formidable to ourselves. Let us
also consider with how much greater eagerness our manufactures will be
purchased, by a grateful, than by an exasperated people. We are now at peace
with the world; the most rigorous measures may succeed, for the present; but
such measures are not the most eligible in themselves, when conducive neither
to present advantage, nor future security. The greatest man of his age has told
us, that two millions of fellow subjects, deprived of their liberty, would be
fit instruments to make slaves of the rest. Surely there is justice in his
observation; those whom we reduce to slavery, cannot wish well to our freedom.
Let us also consider that without assuming that despotic authority, which is
intolerable to human nature, we may yet retain a power amazingly extensive. A
power over the commerce of a nation, affects the merchant, the landholder, and
the manufacturer. Though we cannot dive into their purses, to wrest from them
what they have already acquired, we can prevent their future acquisitions. Nay,
we can do more; we can make what they possess already, less valuable by its
stagnation. Though the power of granting, belongs solely to themselves, they
will yet have but little power to refuse. Let this content us: that the sea,
the common benefit of mankind, may be denied them, that the labor of their
hands, the strength and the ingunuity which nature has bestowed upon them,
shall be converted to our purposes; but, for our own sakes, let us not
discourage that industry which is to benefit ourselves: what we permit them to
acquire, let that be their own.

THUS, on every present, and every future consideration, I should think myself
an enemy to Great Britain, should I propose to give worse terms to a people
unendeared by former connections, unacquainted with liberty, and destitute of
any claim upon our justice, than those which are demanded for our fellow
subjects. But it must not therefore be forgotten, that they have long been our
friends and brothers; and that another system cannot be established, without a
violation of national faith, a departure from our justice, and, at one time
perhaps, the shedding of their blood. We should be well assured of the
rectitude of our cause, we should advance to the utmost limits of negotiation,
before we draw the sword, against our brothers. We shall prevail, with
certainty, indeed, but we may not prevail, without a contest. And though the
force of terror only, may give temporary establishment to our authority, the
sword and the executioner only, must maintain it. From men deprived of every
thing that they hold most dear, and deprived of it by their friends, what may
not be expected? Any thing should be expected, except their submission. What
then are the ultimate objects of the most oppressive laws, and most sanguinary
councils? Will they restore us to that brotherly affection, which infused the
same soul into every part of our empire, or procure us an certain quiet, a
disaffected submission? Let France expect such a submission, from Corsica; by
our supineness she will obtain it, and she may well be contented with it. She
is accustomed to govern by fear; and over a people where heretofore she had not
authority, even that in^^uence will become acquisition. But neither her
numerous armies, nor her mighty power, nor her vicinity to that devoted island,
nor the paucity of its inhabitants, can insure to her a quiet and an useful
possession, while she finds an enemy in the hearts of the people. But by us, if
possible, still less is to be expected: with less disproportioned force, we may
encounter a more rooted antipathy. The Corsicans never tasted freedom, under a
French administration; she has only prevented their emancipation from the
tyranny of Genoa, and will receive them under a milder oppression. But the
Americans will be deprived of a liberty which they have already possessed many
years, under the tutelage of Great Britain. A more violent change, a more
intolerable perdition. And are these measures wise, whose very success has but
this for their object, and whose failure is ruin? Are these the principles, by
which free men should govern free men? Is this that invincible union, and that
firm establishment, by which Britain shall hold the West Indies, in her right
hand, and the East, in her left! Or is this the wisdom which must heal public
credit of a thousand wounds, and support the weight of a tottering empire?
There may come a time when the distresses of Great Britain may require the
utmost efforts of a grateful people, and our posterity may find, by a fatal
experience, that the sword was but an ill interpreter of charters; and that the
characters of freedom, will not be less indelible in the breasts of the
Americans, if they be written in the blood of their forefathers. What shall I
say of these measures? That they are so impolitic, that we should reject them,
though justice did not condemn them; that they are so unjust, that we should
reject them, were they ever so politic.

THESE considerations I have presumed to dedicate to the greatest assembly in
the world, and to the best of princes. If they carry any conviction along with
them, the consequences naturally follow. First, that we should leave the
Americans to tax themselves: Secondly, that we should retain to the British
Parliament, every power that is not inconsistent with our justice and their
liberty: That a law should be passed, immediately, repealing every act, that
taxes the Colonies. I do not propose that it should contain any
counter-declarations, or that the power should, in terms, be disclaimed. It
will be sufficient that they be repealed, and that we do not revive the claim.
These words were made use of, upon a different occasion, by Mr. Flood, the
brightest ornament of the Irish Parliament.
Let it be buried in oblivion; let it hang between the constitutions of both
countries, as belonging to neitheir. Let it be suspended, like the sword of the
murderer, in the Grecian law, which was deposited in their temples, as unfit to
be handled; and consecrated, as it were, not for its merit, but offense. And
lest, at any time hereafter, it may be disputed where the line is drawn,
between American liberty and British jurisdiction, perhaps it might not be
improper to declare, in the same law, the supremacy of Britain, and its
absolute dominion over navigation and commerce. Can we assert the dependency of
the Colonists, in stronger terms than those of Mr. Otis, a Gentleman who is
certainly well informed of their sentiments, and who has probably a
considerable share in forming them, That the Parliament of Great Britain has
undoubted power, and lawful authority, to make acts for the general good, which
by naming the Colonies, shall, and ought to be equally binding, as upon the
subjects of Great Britain within the realm. Should the Colonists complain, that
if this power be reserved, they have not the same degree of freedom, or all the
privileges that are possessed by their British Brethren, I shall readily
confess that they have not: but it was not intended, by their original compact,
that they should. If Britain does not reserve to herself an absolute authority,
over the trade of her Colonies, not one of the ends will be answered, for which
those Colonies were planted: they will not be subservient to the commerce of
their mother country; they will rival and destroy it. And surely we shall not
be deemed enemies of their freedom, in adopting the sentiments of its able and
interested defender. The power of regulating their commerce, and the right of
prohibition, have indeed a most extensive dominion, over the wealth and
prosperity of America; and those demands must be exorbitant, indeed, which can
be refused to an assembly possessed of so mighty a prerogative. But there is a
material difference, between stopping the acquisition of riches, and the taking
away what is already acquired. They have all but a bitter alternative; but
bitter as it is, they have an alternative, says Mr. Otis, in the true spirit of
liberty, I had rather see this (right of prohibition) carried with a high hand,
to the utmost rigor, than have a tax of one shilling, taken from me, without
my consent.

IT is so much the interest of Britain, to promote the commercial welfare of
her Colonies, that they may form a reasonable expectation, that these interests
are safely deposited. But on this self-interest, on the wisdom and equity of
the British legislature, and on the conciliating moderation of their own
conduct much, very much, of their prosperity will depend. Of this moderation we
have as yet made no trial. When we desisted from actual oppression, we laid its
future foundations, and the repeal of the Stamp Act, was attended with the
strongest assertions, of our right of taxation; assertions which an upright
administration never intended to carry into experiment, but an unhappy
compliment, which wisdom and virtue paid to the temporization and prejudice. If
impressed with a conviction of their freedom, the Americans have a sense of
injury, let not Britons resent the sentiments they have communicated. Let us
maturely consider whether we ourselves were not the aggressors. If force is
justifiable in destroying those rights, which are derived from time, from
compact, and from nature; what is not justifiable for their maintenance and
support? If the cause of the Americans be just, their firmness is virtue.

THE END.

