A NARRATIVE Of Part of the LIFE and ADVENTURERS of JOSEPH ANDREWS,
Particularly of his PIRACY and the MURDER of Capt. DURYEE and his Company, for
which he was tried on the 17th Instant, and condemned to be hanged this Day,
the 23d of May, 1769, on the Shore between the Air Furnace and the Town, and
his Body afterward hung in Chains on Bedlow's Island.
JOSEPH ANDREWS, the unhapy Criminal who is this Day to suffer Death, was, we
hear born in the Island of Madeira, and is now about 40 Years of Age. The
Particulars of his Life, we have not been able to obtain as he was much upon
the Reserve, and as we hear has not made any Confession, except of the Crime
for which he is this Day to suffer; but as a dying Man, solemnly denies having
been guilty of or concerned in any other Murder.

A Neglect of Religion, and all Christian Duties, and a free Indulgence of
every vicious, Inclination, particularly in keeping bad Company, led him from
one Degree of Wickedness to another, till his Heart was hardened against
Remorse, and became capable of harboring and devising the most horrid Thoughts
and Designs.

In the Month of August 1766, he entered himself on board the Sloop Polly,
Roluff Duryee Master, bound from New York to the West Indies. The other Persons
on board were, Peter Demelt, jun. Mate, Nicholas Johnson and William Harris,
Mariners -- Cobbs, a Cabin Boy, and two Gentlemen, Wells Caverley and his Son,
Passengers. Soon after leaving New York, observing the Captain and Passengers
had a good deal of Money, He and Johnson formed the Design of gaining
Possession of it by murdering the People. This Design they concluded to put in
Execution as soon as they should make the Land, accordingly about 8 Days after,
the Night before they expected to get to St. Christopers, about Midnight,
William Harris being at Helm, and the Captain a sleep on a Hencoop on Deck,
Johnson with one Blow of an Ax killed him, and he expired without a Groan or
Struggle. They then in like Manner between them murdered the two Passengers,
and Mate with the Ax, and threw the Boy overboard alive. One of them made a
Stroke with the Ax at Harris, who ran to the End of the Bowsprit with a Knife
and declared he would kill the first Man that approached him. They then told
him if he would join them and swear to be secret and faithful, he should be
safe, and share the Plunder with them, for Johnson having formerly sailed with
him, pretended to have a Regard for him; but it was previously agreed between
Johnson and Andrews to kill him before they got ashore. Harris then came into
the Vessel and assisted in throwing the Bodies overboard; after which they
broke open the Captain's and Passengers Chests and Lockers, got a Bottle of
Wine, and drank Damnation to themselves and each other if they discovered the
Secret. They then got a Bible and made Harris swear upon it that he would not
betray them; 3 or 4 Days after this, being in Sight of Land, and several
Vessels appearing, they got out the Boat, put into it two Chests, with whatever
they thought proper to take, scuttled the Vessel, left her, and sailed toward
the Land, telling Harris to steer clear of the Shore. But he telling them if
they did not get pretty near the Land the Current would drive them to the
Leeward of all the Islands, they left him to steer as he thought best, -- but
intended to throw him overboard before he got to Land. After some Time Johnson
and Andrews both fell asleep, when Harris stripping himself, took the
Opportunity to throw overboard, without Noise, both the Oars and his Clothes,
when unhanging and dropping the Rudder overboard, he gently let himself down
into the Sea and swam on Shore at St. Kitts, where he gave a blind suspicious
Account of himself, being afraid to say any Thing that might break his Oath of
Secrecy; but at last he applied to a Minister for Advice how a Man ought to act
in a Case similar to his own. The Minister convinced him that such Kinds of
Oaths were to far from being binding, that it would be highly criminal to keep
them. He then went before the Judge Surrogate of the Admiralty and gave his
Deposition of all the Circumstances he knew of the bloody Affair. Soon after he
quitted the Boat, the irregular tumbling of it waked the two Criminals, who saw
their desperate Situation, and were enraged they had not an Opportunity to
satiate their Revenge upon Harris. They at first endeavored to steer with
their Hate, but aftewards did it more effectually with their Sprit, and by that
Means got to Eustatia, where they sold the Boat.

Some Days after their Arrival, the St. Christopher's Gazette with Harris's
Deposition, made its Appearance in Eustatia, Andrews happening to see it,
immediately left the Island, in a Vessel bound to Casco Bay. The Governor of
St. Eustatia, on seeing the Deposition, published by Proclamation an Order for
a deligent Search, and that no Person should carry the Criminals off, under the
Penalty of 50,000 Pieces of Eight: He also dispatched a Vessel after Andrews,
with a proper Notification of the Charge against him, and Description of his
Person. Johnson was soon taken up at Eustatia, confessed the Facts, and was
executed on the 15th of November, 1766, by being broke a live on the Rack, he
was stretched naked on a Cross, where the Bones of his Arms, Legs and Thighs
were broken with an Iron Bar, and he afterward received upwards of 20 Strokes
on his Breast, before he expired. Andrews, the present Criminal was soon after
his Arrival taken up, and imprisoned some Time at Boston, when he attempted to
cut his own Throat, but was prevented by the Care of his Attendants. From
Boston he was sent here, where he arrived the Twenty-sixth Day of May, 1766,
and has remained a Prisoner ever since.

On Wednesday last, the 17th Instant, by Virtue of a special Commission, he was
tried by a Court of Admiralty held for that Purpose, consisting of his
Excellency the Governor president, the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Council, the
Judge of the Admiralty, the Commander of his Majesty's Ship Deal Castle, the
Deputy's Secretary, and the Receiver General and Collector of the Province.

Richard Nicholls, Esquire, Register of the Court of Vice-Admiralty, at
New York, and John M'Kesson, Esquire, Deputy Register of the said Court, and a
Notary Public, in the said Province, exhibited five several Charges in the said
Court, against him -- During the Course of the Trial, fourteen Witnesses were
examined on the Part of the Crown, and two on the Part of the Prisoner -- The
greatest Part of the Clothing found with the Prisoner in his Chest, and by him
claimed as his own, in the Presence of the Court, were very fully and
circumstantially proved to have belonged to Captain Duryee, and his Mate, or
some of the Persons who were murdered on board the said Sloop, and also many
other Things found in the Chest and owned by the Prisoner, -- Many of them were
marked with the initial Letters of the Names of their former Owners, and many
others of them with the plain Marks of those initial Letters remaining, though
the Silk of the marking was taken out, and they were marked J. A, the initial
Letters of the Name of the Prisoner. -- Several Things said by the Prisoner,
during the Course of the Trial, and in his Defense, militated much against him.
-- -- The Trial lasted from Ten of the Clock on Wednesday, until One of the
Clock on Thursday Morning, during all which Time, his Excellency never left the
Bench. -- -- The Evidence was full, clear and particular, and the Prisoner
found guilty,

He is to be executed this Day, between the Hours of Ten in the Morning, and
Two in the Afternoon, on the Strand, at the East Side of Hudson's River, near
Domini's Hook, between the ebbing and flowing of the Tide: And his Body to be
afterward hung in Chains, on the most conspicuous Part of the Pest-Island in
New York Bay, as a Spectacle to deter all Persons from the like Felonies for
the future.

On Friday the same Court of Admiralty met for the Trial of Stephen Porter,
Mariner, for the Murder of Capt. John Westcot, and sundry others, on board a
Bristol Ship on the High Seas on the Coast of Guinea, in the Year 1766, -- But
on the Officers going to bring him up from the Prison, they found him hanging
to one of the Window Bars, quite dead, he having made Use of a String he
usually kept up his Irons with: -- The Coroner's Inquest brought it in
Self-Murder, and he was sentenced to be buried in the Highway, at the further
End of the Bowry-Lane, and have a Stake drove through his Body.


