THE APPEAL DEFENDED: OR, THE PROPOSED AMERICAN EPISCOPATE VINDICATED, IN
ANSWER TO THE OBJECTIONS AND MISREPRESENTATIONS OF DR. CHAUNCY AND OTHERS.

By THOMAS BRADBURY CHANDLER, D.D.

There are some Spirits in the World, who, unless they are in actual Possession
of Despotism themselves, are daily haunted with the Apprehension of being
subject to it in others; and who seem to speak and act under the strange
Persuasion, that every Thing short of Persecution against what they dislike,
must terminate in the Persecution of themselves.

Let. to the Author of the Confessional. NEW YORK: Printed by HUGH GAIN, at
the Bible and Crown, in Hanover-Square, 1769.

"THE Church of England is, in its Constitution, Episcopal. It is, in some
Plantations, confessedly the established Church; in the rest are many
Congregations adhering to it; and through the late Extention of the British
Dominions, and the Influence of other causes, it is likely that there will be
more. All Members of every Church are, according to the Principles of Liberty,
entitled to every Part of what they conceive to be the Benefits of it, entire
and complete, so far as consists with the Welfare of civil Government; yet the
Members of our Church in America do not thus enjoy its Benefits, having no
Protestant Bishop within 3000 Miles of them; a Case, which never had its
Parallel before in the Christian World."

Answer to Dr. Mayhew's Observat.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author of the following Defense begs Leave to inform his Readers, that it
was his Design not to reply to the Writers against the Appeal, until they
should have offered all they had to say upon the Subject, as he intended his
Defense should be general. With this View he continued long silent, waiting
patiently for his Turn to be heard, and expecting that a Year's Opposition and
Abuse would satisfy his most zealous Adversaries. But before the Year was
completed, he was called upon by some of his Friends, and told, that many were
impatient to see the general Defense that had been promised, and that to wait
any longer upon the American Whig, who discovered no Signs of coming toward a
Conclusion, would be considered as a Piece of very needless Complaisance --
especially as it was pretty well known what he could say, from what he had said
in near 50 Papers, and as an Answerer was ready to reply to every Thing worthy
of Notice that he should say. Upon this Representation the Author proceeded to
prepare the following Sheets. He soon found that his chief Difficulty would
consist, in confining a Reply to so many Particulars within a moderate Number
of Pages. This Difficulty he counteracted as much as he could, consistently
with his Intention of doing Justice to himself and his Cause; but still he is
much dissatisfied with the Length of his Performance, which he hopes may be
forgiven him.

THE Author considers it as his Misfortune that he is brought into such a
Dispute, in this turbulent Season. While the Minds of Men are agitated with
Contests and Jealousies about political Rights and Privileges, it is not a Time
to enter into Controversies relating to Matters of Religion. It may be said,
who but the Author of the Appeal has introduced the Controversy about American
Bishops? He confesses he has occasioned it; but he is not convinced that he has
given any just Cause for the Outcry that has been made. He meant no Injury to
any human Creature, and foresaw no Opposition to what he knew was, in its
Nature and Intention, altogether harmless and inoffensive. Moreover, when the
Appeal was drawn up, the Colonists were in high good Humor; and when it was
published, he was not apprehensive of the general Discontent that soon
followed. Conscious therefore of his Innocence in this Respect, he doubts not
but the sober and candid will acquit him; and as to the Censure or Condemnation
of others, although he could wish to avoid it, it will not greatly distress him.

THE Writers against the Appeal have endeavored to avail themselves of the
present Troubles; representing that the Taxation of the Colonies, and the
Proposal of sending Bishops to America, are Parts of one general System; and
that the latter is as unfriendly to our religious, as the former is to our
political, Privileges. But their Success appears to have been inadequate to
their Wishes. Very few, it is thought, have been so far blinded as not to see,
that, although these Things, in the present Controversy, have been artfully
blended together, they have in Reality no Manner of Connection. And it is well
known, that the Dissenters in general would not answer to this Spur, when it
was closely applied to them, in several Counties, in the late Elections.

CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTORY Observations, p. 1 The Reasonableness of the proposed Episcopate
allowed, by Dr. Chauncy and the American Whig, p. 5 The Design of the present
Defense, p. 9 Dr. C's Confidence, p. 11 -- and Complaint, p. 12 The Church of
England's Belief of the Doctrine of Episcopacy justifies the Plea for American
Bishops, p. 15 Dr. C. following the Irenicum, misrepresents the Principles of
our Reformers, p. 17 That the Reformation in England was settled upon episcopal
Principles, proved from the Preface to the Ordinal, p. 1^ -- from the
Institution of a Christian Man, etc. p. 21 The Principles of Cranmer and our
other Reformers particularly considered, and proved to be episcopal, p. 24 The
Reformation re-established by Q. Elizabeth upon the same Principles, p. 31 The
Doctrine of Episcopacy not disputed in the former Part of the Queen's Reign, p.
32. When this Doctrine was afterward attacked, it was vigorously defended, by
Whitgift, p. 33 -- by Ban^ft, p. 36 -- by Hutton, p. 37 -- by Bilson, p. 38 --
by Hooker, Saravia and many others, p. 40 Why we hear not of Reordination in
that Reign, p. 42 -- the Case of Whittingham, Travers, etc. p. 43 The Church of
England reproached by Dr. C. p. 47 -- after the Example of Papists and
Infidels, p. 48 The Nature of the Supremacy stated, according to the Articles
and the Queen's Injunctions, p. 49 -- according to the Tenor of the Commissions
granted by the Crown, and an Explanation of Hen. VIII. p. 53 -- and a
Declaration of James I. p. 58 Of an uninterrupted Succession, p. 59 An
Assertion of Mr. Petoy confuted, p. 64 The Case of the foreign Protestants,
etc. p. 66 Dr. C's Objections to an uninterrupted Succession answered, p. 73
Why the Author chooses not to enter into the general Controversy concerning
Episcopacy, p. 76 The Opinion of Chillingworth, Usher, Burnet and
Stillingfleet, concerning Episcopacy, p. 78 Aerius and Colluthus the first
Presbyterians, p. 86 A remarkable Instance of D. C's Assurance, p. 89 The
Waldenses always Episcopalians, p. 91 The Charge against the Author, of
unfairly quoting Acts xix.6. refuted, p. 93 The Dissenting Gentleman's
Objections to the Office for Confirmation, fully answered from Mr. White, p. 95
The American Church without Bishops, necessarily destitute of a regular
Government, p. 100 -- and of Ordination, p. 101 The State of Discipline in the
Church at Home, p. 103 Of the Discipline proposed for the Church in America,
under an Episcopate, p. 112 Of those who have lost their Lives in going Home
for H. Orders, p. 120 Of the Expensiveness of such a Voyage, p. 123 The Want of
Clergymen in America chiefly owing to the great Difficulty of obtaining
Ordination, p. 126 A Passage in the Bishop of Landaff's Sermon vindicated, p.
129 The Character of the American Clergy, p. 131 The Sufferings of the American
Church have no Parallel, p. 137 The Characters of the Archbishops Parker,
Whitgift, Bancroft and Laud, p. 140 Of the Ministers ejected by the Act of
Uniformity, p. 143 -- their Sufferings not to be compared with those of the
loyal Clergy during the Usurpation, p. 145 What is meant by natural Rights, p.
148 The Loyalty of Dissenters in America not impeached in the Appeal, p. 149
The American Church has not the same Privileges with the other religious
Denominations in the Colonies, p. 153 The Charge of Ingratitude and
Undutifulness refuted, p. 154 How the proposed Episcopate will operate in
New England, p. 158 Of the external Circumstances of the proposed Bishops, p.
160 The Case of Paul of Samosata, p. 165 A Decree of the 4th Council of
Carthage considered, p. 166 For what Reasons the Appeal was judged to be not
unseasonable, p. 171 Of the Number of American Episcopalians, p. 174 An
American Episcopate a proper Monument of national Gratitude, p. 179 Savages
must be civilized, previously to their Conversion, p. 185 The Conversion of the
Heathens not the primary End of the Society's Incorporation, p. 189 Of the
Indian Missions in New England, p. 192 The Design of the Non-Episcopalians in
Boston for the Conversion of the Indians, not defeated by episcopal Influence,
p. 196 That any Members of the Church should be averse to the proposed
Episcopate, incredible, p. 199 That the Plan for American Bishops was legally
settled, p. 201 That this Plan is no Violation of the 73d Canon, p. 204 Dr.
Chauncy's formal Objections to it answered, p. 206 -- 220 His Extract from Dr.
Mayhew answered from Mr. Apthorp, p. 220 -- 228 Dr. C. willing the American
Church should have the Episcopate proposed, but denies it to be a Right, p. 229
That this Episcopate is not proposed on the Footing of an Establishment, p. 230
The Testimony of Dr. S. Chandler, p. 231 Why the Petition of the Presbyterians
in New York for a Charter, was rejected, p. 233 Dr. Benson's Testimony in Favor
of the Moderation of the Church of England vindicated, p. 235 The Opinion of
the most eminent Reformers and foreign Protestants, concerning Episcopacy, p.
237 -- and the Church of England, p. 241 That the Two popular Objections of
Tithes and spiritual Courts are now acknowledged to be impertinent, p. 244 That
the Members of the Church in America do not desire an Establishment of Tithes
for the Support of the Clergy, p. 248 That it has never been proposed to
support American Bishops by a Tax upon Americans, p. 249 That the proposed
Bishops should hereafter be invested with civil Authority, improbable, p. 251
That Reasons of Policy favor the proposed Episcopate, p. 255 Dr. Chauncy called
upon to produce some Evidence, that the Episcopate aimed at, corresponds not
with our public Declarations, p. 258 That the proposed Episcopate is
practicable, p. 261 The Conclusion, p. 264
ERRATA.
Page. Page. Line. Line. Page. 3. Line. 6. for was, r. were. Page. 14. Line. 6.
for Dyers, r. the Dyers. Page. 18. Line. 15. for INSTRUCTION, r. INSTITUTION*
Page. 19. Line. 9. after conceive, add of. Page. 20. Line. 8. for be, r. have
been. Page. 31. Line. 30. for although it is there, r. where it is. Page. 55.
Line. 21. after Family, add or not, Page. 6^. Line. 4. for to London, r. for
London. Page. ^^. Line. 12. for whithered, r. withered. Page. 100 Line. 27 for
if, r. of. Page. 153. Line. 14. for Persusions, r. Persuations. Page. 160.
Line. 1. after Church, add there. Page. 188. Line. 20. for v^g^nt, r, vagrant.
Page. 210. Line. 18. for the* r. this. Page. 216. Line. 33 for on the Church,
r. of the Church. Page. 230 Line. 30. for expects, r desires. Page. Ibid Line.
32 after Establishment, add, in the Sense wherein it is objected. Page. 258. In
the Note, for Elyls Tracts, r. Ellys's Tracts. Page. 259 Line. ^11, for
over-act, r. over^ act.
Other literal Errata, of less Consequence, need no^ pointed out.

Introductory Observations.
IT is common for those who are engaged in public Disputes, to profess their
Aversion to Controversy. If this Profession were needful, I could make it with
great Truth and Sincerity. For my natural Disposition inclines me to comply
with, and conform to, the Sentiments of others, as far as I can consistently,
and with a good Conscience, rather than to oppose them. To this Disposition,
however, I find that my present Situation is very unfavourable; since it
obliges me to enter into a public Debate; -- a Debate which will probably be
of long Continuance, -- and with a Number of Opponents at the same Time, --
especially with such Opponents as have hitherto exhibited, in Opposition to the
Appeal to the Public in Behalf of the Church of England in America.

WHEN this well-meant Appeal was made, the Proposal for an AMERICAN EPISCOPATE
as therein explained, appeared to me to be so reasonable, and entirely
unexceptionable, that I could then as easily believe that the Dissenters in
this Country, who of late Years had disclaimed the Principles of Into^^^nce,
would generously and publicly declare their Approbation of our Plan, as that
they would oppose it with Violence. But knowing that I might possibly be
biassed in my Judgment, and that Things might not appear to others in the same
Light wherein I viewed them myself; I intimated ( Page 2) my Readiness to
attend any Objectors, that might arise, in a fair and candid Debate; and
requested ( Page 118) that they would propose their Objections, in such a
charitable and Christian Way, that I might be the better for them, and They not
the worse. A Debate has been brought on; how 'fair and candid' on the Part of
my Opponents, the impartial Reader can judge: -- Objections have been offered;
but whether in such a charitable and Christian Way, that the Objectors 'are not
the worse for them', a small Degree of Self-Examination will enable them best
to judge for themselves.

BEFORE I reply to the Particulars objected, it may be proper to make a few
general Introductory Observations, relating chiefly to the Manner wherein I
have been opposed; which has been different from what, in my humble Conception,
I had a Right to expect, in these several Respects.

1. As the Appeal was a serious Performance, and its general Subject
confessedly of Importance, serious Answers, if any, ought to have been given
it. But it may be said of some of my Opponents, that instead of giving serious
Answers, they have endeavored to place the whole Matter in Dispute in a
ludicrous Light, and have condescended to act the Part of Buffoons, for the
Amusement, rather than of sober Reasoners, for the Instruction, of the
good-natured Reader: -- That, instead of applying themselves fairly to convince
the Judgment, they have used all their Address to engage the Prejudices, and
inflame the Passions, of the Populace, against the Residence of Bishops in
America.

2. In Order thereto, the proposed Episcopate has been grossly misrepresented,
the Appeal has been perverted, and the Author and his Friends abused, with an
unsparing Hand. If the Plan for the Settlement of Bishops in America, as
published in the Appeal, was inconsistent with the Rights or Liberties of any
Denomination of Christians, its Inconsistency should have been fairly pointed
out; and if this had been done with Temper and Decency, it would have had so
much the greater Effect, with all reasonable and considerate Persons. But every
one can see that this has not been done; and it is one of the first
Observations that must occur to the Reader, that the Episcopate of my
Opponents, is not the Episcopate of the Appeal. The Character assumed by them
requires them to oppose the latter; whereas they have imposed upon their
Readers, instead of it, an Episcopate of their own, contrived for the Purpose
of supporting a Clamor. They have loudly and vehemently declaimed, against the
Establishment of ecclesiastical Tyranny in this Land of Liberty against
depriving Men of their religious Freedom and worldly Property, and even of
their natural Rights; as if these Evils were constituent Parts of the
Episcopate in Question, or at least must result from it by necessary
Consequence. And yet I see not how it is possible, that they should not know in
their own Consciences, that nothing they have said in this Strain, militates
either against me, or the Bishops proposed. Indeed Passages from the Appeal
have been quoted, to enable them to carry on the Illusion; but before such
Passages could answer the Purpose, it was found necessary to put them to the
Torture, and to wrest them from their plain and obvious Meaning. As to any
personal Abuses I have received from these Writers, I truly despise them, and
shall silently pass them over with the Contempt they deserve. They affect not
the Merits of the Cause in Debate, and are of no Consequence to any but
themselves. I never expected much Fame as an Author; and as to my private or
moral Character, I do not conceive, that in the Estimation of a single Person
whose Opinion is worthy of Regard, it has really received any Injury, from the
malevolent Impeachments of my literary Adversaries.

3. I ESTEEM it no small Proof of the Want of Candor in some of my Opponents,
that they have brought on their Attacks in the Weekly Papers; by which
Contrivance, any Defense that I can make, will have no Chance to be seen by
many of their Readers. But, not contented with a single Impression of their
Publications, they have caused them to be reprinted in several of the Colonies.
No sooner were the Harangues of the AMERICAN WHIG addressed to the Inhabitants
of New York, than they were reverberated from the Gazettes of Philadelphia and
Boston. The false Alarm sounded in Philadelphia by the SENTINEL, was also
immediately echoed from the Presses of other Places. By this Management, all
the bitter Things, and all the unfair Things, as well as all the ludicrous
Expressions, which they have uttered against the Church, have been widely
circulated amongst the People; many of whom are ignorant, some of them greatly
prejudiced against us, and perhaps not one in a Hundred of them has ever had an
Opportunity, of hearing what is said on the other Side. Such Conduct is artful,
and has a Tendency to raise and inflame a Party; but it can never promote the
Interests of Truth and Condour. I may appeal to Dr. CHAUNCY whether this is
generous and fair; who ( Page 6) pronounces it to be Matter of Complaint, when
Men are prevented from making a Judgment upon an impartial hearing of the Case,
and are led to give Sentence, upon hearing one Side only. Had indeed the Nature
of the proposed Episcopate been honestly explained, and the Arguments in Favor
of it fairly represented; in that Case, these periodical Gentlemen might have
objected and declaimed, and have published their Objections and Declamations in
every Paper upon the Continent, and still their Readers might have been capable
of judging of the Matter in Dispute. But such Impartiality is seldom to be
found in the Writers of Controversy; and I am sorry to say, it has not shown
itself in the Whigs and Sentinels of America.

4. I HAVE another most material Observation to make, of a different Kind, and
I request of every Reader that he will attend to it; namely, that
notwithstanding all the clamorous Opposition that has been made to the Appeal,
the grand Point which was therein submitted to the Consideration of the Public,
has been fairly given up by my Opponents. The true State of the Case is as
follows. After a Plan, for the Introduction of an American Episcopate, for the
sole Purpose of relieving the spiritual Wants of the Church, had been agreed
upon by many of the Bishops at Home -- after it had been made known to, and had
received the Approbation of, several Persons of the highest Rank in the
Kingdom, -- and had been cordially consented to, by the American Clergy in the
northern Colonies; as the utmost Care had been taken to render it
unexceptionable to all Manner of Persons, it was thought, that, in Return for
the visible Abatement of Prejudices against the Church in the Minds of
Dissenters, and with a View of removing all possible Suspicions of Evil, it
would be received by them as a Mark of Friendship, and as a Proof of our candid
and generous Disposition toward them, if we should unreservedly explain this
Plan to them before it should be carried into Execution; declaring at the same
Time our Willingness to attend to their Objections, should there be any,
against it. With this Design the Appeal to the Public was undertaken; and
therein the PROPOSED EPISCOPATE was fairly and fully explained, and frankly
submitted to a public Examination and Discussion. Whoever will be at the
Trouble of reading the Appeal may see that this was the Design of it, and that
the only Point offered to be debated was, whether it is reasonable that the
American Church should have SUCH AN EPISCOPATE AS IS THEREIN EXPLAINED AND
PROPOSED; and not, whether any Form of an Episcopate that was not explained nor
proposed, might be liable to Exceptions. For some Months after this Explanation
and Proposal were offered to the Public, there was a dead Silence. Not the
least Intimation was given in the public Papers, or, so far as I could learn,
even in Conversation, that any were dissatisfied. But at length it was
discovered, that a Number of Persons had entered into a Combination to run down
the Appeal, and vigorously to oppose, at any Rate, the Residence of Bishops in
America; and agreeably to the general Plan of Operations that had been settled,
within the Compass of a few Weeks, Dr. Chauncey, the American Whig, and the
Sentinel, made their Appearance. Dr. Chauncey, from whom the chief Execution
seems to have been expected, brought on what may be called, in some Sense, a
regular Attack upon the Appeal, openly appearing in his proper Person. The
American Whig and the Sentinel undertook to make as great a Diversion as they
could, in weekly Skirmishes -- a Number of Volunteers being invited in the mean
Time to assist them by occasional Sallies. The Operations were carried on with
as much Spirit and Warmth as the Friends of these Adventurers could wish; but
notwithstanding all their Resolution, Alertness and Caution, they have been
obliged to give up the grand Object of the Contest, as above explained.

DR. CHAUNCEY declares for himself and his Brethren ( Page 180) in the
following Words: We desire no other Liberty, than to be left unrestrained in
the Exercise of our religious Principles, in so far as we are good Members of
Society. And we are perfectly willing Episcopalians should enjoy this Liberty
to the full. If they think Bishops, in their appropriated Sense, were
constituted by Christ, or his Apostles, we object not a Word against their
having as many of them as they please, if they will be content to have them
with Authority altogether derived from Christ. The good Doctor here speaks
immediately to the Point in Question, and grants us all that we desire; in
Return for which Generosity, I heartily wish that he and his Brethren may
always continue to be left unrestrained in the Exercise of their religious
Principles, in so far as they are good Members of Society; and I have never
heard that the Doctor is a bad one. The same liberal Sentiment he again
expresses, but more laconically, in Page 200; Whoever objected, says he,
against this complete Enjoyment, upon the Footing of a perfect Equality? So
again in Page 189, It is not SIMPLY the Exercise of any of their religious
Principles that would give the least Uneasiness, nor yet the Exercise of them
under as many PURELY SPIRITUAL Bishops as they could wish to have; but their
having Bishops under a STATE ESTABLISHMENT. And he introduces ( Page 177) the
late Dr. Mayhew, as approaching very far toward the same Concession.

WE are under the like Obligations to the American Whig, who says (Numb. 1.) in
his own peculiar Phraseology, wherein every Man should be allowed to express
himself: It Is true, the Pamphlet (meaning the Appeal) is specious, and appears
to ask nothing but what is highly reasonable; and could any Man, above the
Capacity of an Idiot really persuade himself, that the Dr. and the Convention
would content themselves with a Bishop, so limited and curtailed as he is
pleased to represent his future Lordship; it were manifest Injustice to deny
them what in their Opinion their eternal Salvation so greatly depends upon. He
repeats the same Concession (Numb. XXI.) Did they (the Clergy) really desire,
or was there the least Probability of obtaining such an ideal Bishop as they
hold up to public View, in Order to lull us into Security, while themselves are
prosecuting their Scheme, for procuring a true modern Prelate, no other
Denomination ought in Justice to give them any Opposition. And again (Numb.
XXII.) The Colonists have not as yet that I know of, made any Objections
against the Episcopalians having primitive Bishops. Such I believe would give
no Umbrage to Persons of other Denominations.

THE Sentinel indeed has not declared himself so openly and generously in our
Favor; but yet from sundry broken Hints and Intimations interspersed up and
down his Papers, as well as from the whole Tenor of his Writings, it may be
concluded, that he differs not from his Fellow Laborers above quoted, in so
essential a Point.

NOW from these Declarations it is evident, that such an Episcopate as is
proposed in the Appeal, will give no Umbrage to the Dissenters in this Country,
and that all the Opposition that has been made against the Settlement of
American Bishops, has been made on the Supposition of their being different
from what we have held up to public View. So far as they shall be the same, we
cannot now doubt but the Dissenters will be satisfied. The Subject has been
taken into the closest Examination by the Champions of their Party, without the
least Disposition to make us unreasonable Concessions; and they have declared
that they object not a Word against our having Bishops, if they are not to be
invested with temporal Authority, -- that it were manifest Injustice to oppose
them -- that no other Denomination ought in Justice to give us Opposition, and
the like. So full and authentic a Determination of the Dissenters in Favor of
the Episcopate proposed, it is hoped, will not fail of having its proper Effect
on all Sides, both here and at home.

THE Matter being brought to this Issue, I might give up all farther
Controversy; were it not that I am thought bound, in Justice to my own
Character, to make a more particular Defense of the Appeal -- and in Duty to
the Church of England, to vindicate her from those injurious Aspersions and
Reproaches, which I have, although very innocently, occasioned. In Compliance
therefore with these Obligations, I shall go on to consider the most material
Things that have been objected to both, by the Writers with whom I am
concerned; and, notwithstanding that Recrimination is generally allowed to be
just, I shall carefully avoid returning Railing for Railing, as it is but a
poor Expedient at best, and as I am not apprehensive that I shall have any
Manner of Occasion for it.

WHEN the American Whig made his first Exhibition, I promised in an
Advertisement to the Public, that, although Dr. Chauncey would propably be
entitled to my principal Attention, yet any other Writers who should think fit
to animadvert on the Appeal, should have such Notice taken of them, as they
should be found to deserve. From this Promise, it is very possible that the
American Whig and the Sentinel may be disappointed, in finding they make no
greater Figure in the following Defense. But as they have offered very little
which has not been as well said by Dr. Chauncey, and as they have both received
particular Answers -- the former, in a weekly Paper, entitled, A WHIP for the
American Whig; and the latter, in another weekly Paper, entitled, The Anatomist
-- I believe I shall not be charged by others with any criminal Neglect.
However, Notice will probably be taken of them on some particular Occasions. As
to the Authors of two anonymous Pamphlets aimed at the Appeal; one, in the Form
of a Letter, addressed to the Ruler of St. John's Church, and signed an
Antiepiscopalian; and the other, in the Name of a Presbyter in Old England; I
know of no Laws of Justice, or Honor, or Decency, that require me to take
particular Notice of them. The Antiepiscopalian appears to me to be such a
rambling, ignorant, petulant, pedantic Writer, and his Piece, through the
Blunders of the Printer and those of the Author The following cannot be called
a Blunder. In Page 10, he says: When, where, or by whom, has Jones on the Heart
been refuted, or answered, when he has proved at large That the English Bishops
cannot be traced up to the Church of Rome as their Original? Here the Marks of
Quotation are dropped, and he goes on: Does he not prove that the Successors of
Austin the Monk, being almost entirely extinct, A. D. 668, the greater Part
were of Scottish Ordination by Aidan and Finan, from the Culdee Monastry of
Columbanus, who were the same with Presbyters, etc. Now this Passage is
transcribed from Dr. Doddridge's LECTURES ( Page 501) without giving him the
least Credit for so important Information. But the Cream of the Jest is yet to
come. In this very Passage, which he has privately transcribed, Dr. Doddridge
refers to a Note in the Margin, in which Note he says, that Jones on the Heart
has been answered by the Bishop of St. Asaph.
, is in some Parts so unintelligible, that I never can consent to enter into
any public Debate with him. And as to the Presbyter in Old England, he seems to
know too little of the Matters in Debate, to entitle him to a Hearing. By this
Time the Reader sees that my chief Business is with Dr. Chauncey; and this
Business I shall now proceed to settle.

BY Way of Contrast to that Diffidence of himself, wherewith the Author of the
Appeal introduced himself to the Public; the Doctor comes forward, in an
Advertisement, with gigantic Confidence; telling his Readers, that the
Performance which followed was entirely his own, -- that he had not undertaken
it in Virtue of any voted Appointment by a Convention of the Clergy, -- and,
that he was not assisted in it as to Method or Management, by Directions from
so learned and able a Body of Men. And, to increase the Reputation of his
Abilities, his Friends have given out See the American Whig, Numb. VIII.
, that, although he is an old Gentleman of Seventy, yet he wrote it in less
than two Months. Now what are we to infer from these high Compliments paid to
the Doctor, by himself and his Friends? If any Thing farther was intended by
them, than that we should consider him as an able Writer, and a ready Writer,
it ought to have been explained. His being possessed of these Two literary
Accomplishments, I have no Inclination to dispute. But I am sorry, that, at the
Age of Seventy, he could find no better Way of displaying them, than in abusing
the Church of England, and in endeavoring to disgrace the Appeal.

IN his INTRODUCTION the Doctor complains, that the Arguments made Use of in
Support of our Petitions for American Bishops, had been kept secret, and says,
although an authentic Knowledge of them was desired, it could not be obtained
at first, and I know not that it ever has been since. He seems here to refer to
some formal Application that had been made to our Clergy for this Intelligence,
which had been unkindly rejected; but I know nothing either of such an
Application or Rejection. On the contrary, we have generally been desirous of
explaining the Reasons for our requesting Bishops, to every one, as we have had
Opportunity; and have frequently mentioned the Subject to Dissenters, long
before any Petitions for that Purpose were transmitted or prepared. But the
Doctor seems to think that we ought to have published our Reasons before we
sent our Addresses. Others may think it sufficient that they were made known in
Conversation, and that all the curious and inquisitive might satisfy themselves
by having Recourse to the proper Persons. But the Complaint is altogether
groundless. For the Plan upon which it was proposed that Bishops should be sent
to America, and the Arguments afterward made Use of in Support of our
Petitions, actually were published, a considerable Time before the Petitions
were sent, in an Answer to Dr. Mayhew's Observations, etc. And as many Copies
of the Answer were sent to Boston, and Dr. Mayhew rejoined to it, and
especially as that Controversy engaged the public Attention, it is very
surprising that Dr. Chauncey should have been so great a Stranger in Israel, as
not to have some Knowledge of it. Afterward, upon observing that many Persons
in the Colonies were still unacquainted with the Nature and Design of our
Application for Bishops, in which State they were liable to unfavourable
Suspicions and Jealousies, it was voted by our Convention, that more particular
Information should be published, and the whole Matter explained, for the
Satisfaction of all Parties; in Consequence of which, the Appeal was drawn up
and published.

THE Doctor's Method of answering the Appeal, by taking into Consideration the
several Sections one by one in their Order, I have no Objections to; and
therefore will pursue the same Method in defending it. But before I proceed, I
think it but fair to advertise the Reader, that I shall be obliged to
controvert some Things which have no more Relation to the proposed Episcopate,
than the Dispute between the Two famous puritanical Leaders, Ainsworth and
Broughton, whether the Color of Aaron's Linen Ephod was of blue, or a
Seawater green; which, as the Historian observes, threw their Followers into
Parties and Factions, and puzzled all Dyers of Amsterdam.

The APPEAL Defended.
SECTION I.
THE First Section of the Appeal contains a Sketch of the Arguments in Favor
of Episcopacy; SECT. I.
which was marked out, with a View of enabling the Reader to judge the better
of the Situation of the Church of England in America, from a general
Acquaintance with her Principles, and the Grounds that support them. But
although it was not thought to be improper, nor altogether foreign from the
general Design of the Appeal, to give a summary View of the Evidence in Favor
of Episcopacy; yet, as was observed, we maintain that the Validity of our Plea
for American Bishops depends not upon the absolute Truth, but upon our Belief
of the Truth, of those Principles. The Plea of Dissenters for a Toleration in
England, was never founded, I presume, on the absolute Truth and Certainty of
their respective Tenets; at least, it was never admitted, on that Footing, by
those in Authority. It is sufficient that Men believe the religious Systems
they have adopted to be true, and that they hold no Doctrines that are
inconsistent with the Safety of the State, to entitle them to a Toleration from
the civil Government: And a Toleration implies, in the very Notion of the Word,
a Liberty for Men to enjoy the free, open and undisturbed Use of such Methods
of public Worship, and such Forms of ecclesiastical Government, as belong to
their religious Systems. If therefore the Church of England in the American
Colonies has a Right to be tolerated, i. e. unless she has forfeited the common
Rights of Christians, she has a Right to an Episcopate; it being, as was showed
in some of the first Sections of the Appeal, an essential Part of her
Constitution.

AT my Entrance upon the Subject, I made the following Observation, That the
Church of England is episcopal, and consequently holds the Necessity of Bishops
to govern the Church, and to confer ecclesiastical Powers; and for Proof of it,
refered to 'her public Offices,' and to the whole System of her Conduct with
Regard to her Clergy. The Truth of the Observation Dr. Chauncey is pleased in
one Sense to allow, and in another to deny. But if it be true in any Sense, it
is sufficient for my Purpose. If it be, according to the Doctor's Notion, by
Virtue only of the Jus humanum of Episcopacy, that Bishops are necessary; still
the Ends for which they are necessary cannot be obtained without them, so long
as we are subject to the Authority that requires them. We complain of the
Hardship of being obliged to go 3000 Miles for Ordination, with great Hazard
and Expense: Will saying that the Obligation of Episcopacy in the Church of
England, is founded only on the national Authority, relieve us, while we look
upon ourselves to be bound in Duty and Conscience to obey that Authority? Or,
will it prove that we ought not to be relieved? If it will do neither, we are
still in the same Condition, and have the same Reasons for Complaint.

BUT I humbly conceive the Doctor is greatly mistaken in his Opinion of the
Matter, and that, in the long Account he has undertaken to give of the
Principles of our Reformers, if he will be so good as for once to lend me his
favorite Expression, he does not speak the Truth of Fact. As the Substance of
this Account has been copied from the Irenicum The following just Account of
the Irenicum has been given by one of our periodical Writers. I do not scruple
to declare, that I look upon the Irenicum to have been a hasty, indigested and
partial Account of Principles and Facts. And in this the good Bishop would not
have blamed me; for when he had examined Matters more thoroughly, he looked
upon it in the same Light himself. His Design in writing it appears to have
been a good One; which was, in general, to assist in composing the religious
Differences that then tore the Nation in Pieces, and particularly, in Order
thereto, to demolish the Jus Divinum of Presbytery. But his Zeal carried him,
as it often carries others, into an Extreme. It represented Things to him
through the Medium of Prejudice; but it was not long, before he was able to
correct his Mistakes, and to form a very different Opinion, both of Principles
and Persons. He wrote his Irenicum at the Age of 24, and did not scruple to
condemn it himself afterward, declaring that there are many Things in it,
which if he were to write again, he would not say; some, which show his Youth,
and Want of due Consideration; others, which he yielded too far, in Hopes of
gaining the Dissenting Parties to the Church of England. A Whip, etc. Numb.
XXXIV.
, by a Succession, I had almost said an uninterrupted Succession, of Writers
against the Church, including Writers against Christianity, down to the Whigs
and Sentinels of the present Day; and as I look upon it to be very partial and
unfair, as well as injurious to many excellent Characters, and to the Church of
England in general -- I beg Leave to examine it. The Subject, I fear, may be
unentertaining to some of my Readers; on which Account, their Indulgence will
be esteemed a peculiar Favor.

THE Doctor excepts against the Preface to the Book of Ordination, as a Proof
that the Church of England is episcopal, in the common Sense of the Word;
because, as Professor Wigglesworth had observed, there is Reason to conclude
the Compilers of it were of Opinion, that Priests and Bishops are by God's Law
one and the same. This was certainly, says Dr. Chauncey, the Doctrine of the
Church of England in the Beginning of the Reformation, and of the Generality of
its pious and learned Divines for a very considerable Time afterward. (Page
8.) He refers to a Book published in the Reign of King Henry VIII, entitled,
"The INSTRUCTION of a Christian Man", afterward altered and reprinted with a
somewhat different Title.

LET us first see what the Preface to the Ordination Offices, says. The Words
are these: It is evident to all Men diligently reading Holy Scripture, and
ancient Authors, that from the Apostles Time, there have been these Orders of
Ministers in Christ's Church; Bishops, Priests and Deacons. Which Offices were
evermore had in such reverend Estimation, that no Man might presume to execute
any of them, except he were first called, tried, examined, and known to have
such Qualities as are requisite for the same; and also by public Prayer, with
Imposition of Hands, were approved and admitted thereunto by lawful Authority.
And therefore, to the Intent that these Orders may be continued, and reverently
used and esteemed, in the Church of England; no Man shall be accounted or taken
to be a lawful Bishop, Priest or Deacon, in the Church of England, or suffered
to execute any of the said Functions, except he be called, tried, examined, and
admitted thereunto, according to the Form hereafter following, or has had
formerly episcopal Consecration, or Ordination.

IF the Reader now will carefully consider this Passage, let him say, whether
it is easy to conceive a more direct, positive and complete Testimony in Favor
of Episcopacy, than is here given by the Compilers of the Ordinal. The
Distinction of the three Orders, of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, is in this
Preface fully asserted; -- the Antiquity of this Distinction is deduced from
the Apostles Time; -- the Evidence in Favor of it is said to be contained in
"holy Scripture and ancient Authors," -- and the Clearness of this Evidence is
such, that it must appear to all Men diligently reading holy Scripture, etc. In
Consequence of this Doctrine, no Man is to be accounted a lawful Bishop,
Priest, or Deacon, in the Church of England, or suffered to execute any of the
said Functions, except he be admitted thereunto, according to the Form then
established; with a farther Exception in Favor of those only, who had received
"formerly episcopal Consecration, or Ordination." If the Doctor can discover no
more in these Declarations concerning Episcopacy, than that they may seem to
have an Aspect this Way; such Prejudice will go far toward accounting for the
many Misrepresentations he has made, in his Answer to the Appeal. But to enable
him to make a more impartial Judgment of the Matter, I beg of him to try an
easy Experiment, which is no other than this; whether, with all the
Explanations and softening Interpretations that the Words will admit of, he is
able himself, honestly and consistently, to subscribe to this Declaration of
our first Reformers. If he cannot, he must allow them to have entertained other
Sentiments of Episcopacy, than he has represented them to have had -- unless he
can suppose them to be guilty of the grossest Deceit and Prevarication.

BUT, says the Doctor, that Priests and Bishops were the same, CERTAINLY was
the Doctrine of the Church of England in the Beginning of the Reformation;
(Ibid.) meaning when the Ordination Offices were composed; or it is impertinent
to his Argument. But the Doctrine of the Church of England concerning
Episcopacy, is certainly to be learnt from her public Offices and Acts, rather
than from the supposed Sentiments of Individuals. For how incredible is it,
that different Offices should have been composed for the Ordination of Bishops
and Priests, if they were both considered as being in Reality but one Order? If
every Priest was believed to be already a Bishop, would Men, who had any
Consciences, consent to act the solemn Farce of ordaining such an one to the
episcopal Office, with Prayer and the Imposition of Hands? Would they solemnly
invoke the Almighty for his Blessing upon them in communicating those spiritual
Powers, which they had no Intention to communicate, as the Person was believed
to be fully invested with them already? How injurious to the Characters of our
excellent Reformers, is the most distant Insinuation of such Duplicity of
Conduct!

BUT still the Doctor, it seems, is clear in the Matter; The first English
Reformers certainly were not Episcopalians. If positive Assertions are to be
admitted as Evidence in this Dispute, I can produce, from the most respectable
Authors, innumerable Witnesses on the other Side. Bishop Kennet, as moderate a
Man, as candid a Writer, and as well acquainted with the English ecclesiastical
History, as Doctor Chauncey, says, that the Superiority of Bishops is one of
the Two distinguishing Principles of our Reformation, the Supremacy of Kings
being the other; for both which our conformable Divines have been continual
Advocates. In his Historical Account of the Discipline and Government of the
Church of England.
To this Testimony I will add another from Doctor Mosheim. This learned
Foreigner, speaking of the Church of England in the XVIth Century, amongst
other Things, says, it constantly insisted on the divine Origin of its
Government and Discipline. Eccle. Hist. Vol. II. p. 231.
It is supposed these two Assertions will be allowed to have as much Weight, as
the Doctor's.

BUT let us proceed to Evidence of another Nature. The Book entitled The godly
and pious INSTITUTION of a Christian Man, was published 1537, in the early
Infancy, or rather soon after the first Conception, of the Reformation. It was
drawn up by Cranmer and others, agreed to by both Houses of Convocation,
published with the King's Approbation, and intended as a Standard of Doctrine
for the Bishops and Clergy. The Book itself I have never seen; but Collier has
given an Abstract of the most material Parts of it. In this Abstract there is
nothing like what the Doctor would prove from it; but there is something
extremely unlike it in the following Passage: "They proceed (says Collier,
speaking of the Authors of that Book) to a more particular Explanation of the
Authority of the Clergy, and divide it into two Branches, Potestas Ordinis, et
Potestas Jurisdictionis. Concerning the First, not being contested, they say
nothing; the Latter, touching Jurisdiction committed by God to the Hierarchy,
they throw it into three Subdivisions. By the First, they are empowered to
reprove Immorality and Misbelief, and to excommunicate the Obstinate and
incorrigible. -- By the second Branch of Jurisdiction, BISHOPS are authorized
by our Savior to CONTINUE the SUCCESSION and PERPETUATE the Hierarchy. They
are the Judges of the Qualifications for Priesthood, and may admit or refuse as
they think fit. -- A third Branch of Jurisdiction belonging to Bishops and
Priests, comprehends the Power of making Canons for the Discipline and Service
of the Church. The Historian, at the Conclusion of his Abstract, gives the List
of Subscribers, and takes Leave, with the following Remark: This Book, in the
Sacrament of Orders, declares the Clergy have their Commission from God
Almighty, and by Consequence, that their Authority is no Grant of the Crown.

A FEW Years afterward was published, a necessary Doctrine and ERUDITION of a
Christian Man, to which the King himself wrote a Preface. It was for Substance
much the same with the INSTITUTION, but enlarged and altered in several
Particulars: From whence it is evident that at this Period, the religious
Principles of the Nation were in an unsettled, fluctuating State. In the
Account given of the ERUDITION by the same Historian, there is something indeed
to the Doctor's Purpose; for therein we are told, that after mention made of
the Appointment of Deacons in this Book, it is subjoined, that the Scripture
speaks expressly of no more than the two Orders of Priests and Deacons. Were we
to stop here, we should infer that the Reformers at this Time, were not
properly Episcopalians, but Presbyterians. But in another Passage under the
same Head, they have the Appearance, not of Presbyterians, but of
Episcopalians. Take the Words of my Author: The ERUDITION makes Orders one of
the seven Sacraments, and defines it a Gift of Grace for Administration in the
Church; that it is conveyed by Consecration and Imposition of the Bishop's
Hands; that in the Beginning of Christianity, this Character was given by the
Apostles. The Proof is drawn from the Epistles of St. Paul to Timothy and
Titus. How to reconcile these two Passages, may be difficult; and until this be
done, they can prove but little on either Side. Collier says, that under those
called Priests or Presbyters, this Book supposes the episcopal Character was
meant; for, that these two Orders were distinct and subordinate, is plain from
this ERUDITION. He concludes with observing, that this last Book does not stand
upon so strong an Authority as the former. The INSTITUTION was the Act of the
whole Clergy, and subscribed by both Houses of Convocation. But the "necessary
ERUDITION," was drawn up only by a Committee of the King's Nomination.

BUT the true State of the Case appears to me to have been this: At the Time of
the ERUDITION, Cranmer and his Associates were generally agreed in these two
main Points; that the national Religion was grossly corrupted, and that a
public Reformation was necessary. But how far either was the Case, was the Work
of Time to determine. Luther and Calvin had made great Progress in Germany and
some Places adjacent; but they differed considerably in their Systems; neither
of which could safely be adopted, without a careful Examination. Besides, in
the Heat of their Contest, they were supposed to have run into some Extremes,
which the English Divines judged it prudent to avoid. Our Reformers therefore
were resolved to proceed with the utmost Caution. And the Method they appear to
have pursued was, to consider one Doctrine after another with the closest
Attention, until the whole System should be examined, and placed on the sure
Basis of Scripture Authority. While this slow and important Work was going on,
the INSTITUTION and ERUDITION were published for temporary Use. Some of the
Doctrines in Dispute between the Church of Rome and the German Reformers, had
been fully canvassed and determined by Cranmer and his Friends. Others were not
yet thoroughly discussed; among which must be reckoned that of ecclesiastical
Government. This may fairly be concluded from the Questions proposed to an
Assembly of SELECT Divines, as the Doctor properly calls them p. 9; to which
Questions they gave in severally their Resolutions in Papers, all whose
Judgments were accurately summed up, and set down by the Archbishop of
Canterbury himself. For it was at this Time, and not ten Years afterward, in
the Reign of Edward VI, as Doctor Chauncey, following his blind Guide the
Irenicum, asserts, that those Questions were given out for Discussion, as is
plain from Bishop Burnet.

AT this Stage of the Reformation therefore it is no Wonder, that we meet with
some crude Expessions, relating to Episcopacy; as well as to many other Matters
of the highest Importance. The Prepossessions of a Popish Education still
operated in the Minds of these honest Searchers for Truth; and it was owing
perhaps more to the Force of these Prepossessions, than to any other Cause,
that some of them have used Expressions, which have since been construed to
imply their having some Doubts concerning the Superiority of Bishops over
Presbyters. The Popish Schoolmen and Canonists had been for some Ages
endeavoring to destroy the Distinction between the two Orders; of which Bishop
Burnet gives a particular Account Hist. Ref. Vol. I. p. 366.
, concluding it in these Words: On this I have insisted the more, that it may
appear how little they have considered Things, who are so far carried with
their Zeal against the established Government of the Church, as to make Use of
some Passages of the Schoolmen and Canonists that deny them to be distinct
Orders; for these are the very Dregs of Popery, the one raising the Priests
higher for the Sake of Transubstantiation, the other pulling the Bishops lower
for the Sake of the Pope's Supremacy, and by such Means bringing them almost to
an Equality. The like Observation was before made by an eminent Archbishop, who
says: We may justly ascribe the reviving of the Aerian Heresy in these latter
Days, to the Dispensations of the Court of Rome, who licensed ordinary Priests
to ordain, and confirm, and do the most essential Offices of Bishops. So their
Schools do teach us, a Priest may be the extraordinary Minister of Priesthood,
and inferior Orders by the Delegation of the Pope. Again, The Pope may confer
the Power of Confirmation upon a simple Priest. By such exhorbitant Practices
as these, they chalked out a Way to Innovators. And yet they are not able to
produce a Precedent of such Dispensation throughout the primitive Times
Bramhall's Works, p. 431.
.

BUT to come to the Questions and Resolutions, Extracts from which make so
great a Figure in the Irenicum: The Manuscript is published at large by Burnet
Hist. Re^. Vol. I. Collection, p. 201.
, excepting an Omission to be mentioned presently. Therein we find Cranmer's
Answer to the 10th Question, in the Words quoted by the Doctor; but the Reader
will not forget the Time of his giving this Answer, which was about ten Years
before our present Offices for Ordination were composed. However strange
Cranmer's Opinion may appear to have been at this Time, there is strong Proof
that he altered it immediately. For in the same Copy of Questions and
Resolutions, Dr. Leighton's Answer to the 11th Queston is: I suppose that a
Bishop has Authority of God, as his Minister, by Scripture to make a Priest;
but he ought not to admit any Man to be a Priest, and consecrate him, or to
appoint him to any Ministry in the Church, without the Prince's License and
Consent. And that any other Man has Authority to make a Priest by Scripture, I
have not read, nor any Example thereof. To the 12th Question Leighton answers: I
suppose that there is a Consecration required, as by Imposition of Hands; for
so we be taught in the Ensample of the Apostles. Now Durell in his Vindiciae
says, that having had an Opportunity of examining the original Manuscript, he
found that Cranmer gave his Consent to these two Opinions of Leighton,
subscribing to each Th: Cantuariensis; which very material Information is
omited by Bishop Burnet Lowth, on the Subject of Church Power, p. 484.
. Why Stillingfleet left out this Passage is plain; it interfered with the
Design of his Irenicum: But why Burnet omited it is doubtful. For that he had
no Intention to transmit Cranmer's Character to Posterity as Erastian, is
evident from his Remark in the Body of his History. In Cranmer's Paper, says
he, some singular Opinions of his about the Nature of ecclesiastical Offices
will be found; but as they are delivered by him with all possible Modesty, so
they are not established as the Doctrine of the Church, but laid aside as
particular Conceits of his own, and it seems that afterward he changed his
Opinion. For he subscribed the Book that was soon after set out, which is
directly contrary to those Opinions set down in these Papers. Vol. I. p. 289.


DR. Chauncey proceeds: The Bishop of St. Asaph, Dr. Thirleby, Dr. Redmayn and
Cox, were all of the same Opinion with the Archbishop, viz. that Bishops and
Priests were at one Time, and were not two Things, but one Office in the
Beginning of Christ's Religion. I see no great Heterodoxy in this Opinion, if
properly explained. It is now generally agreed by the Advocates for Episcopacy,
that in the Beginning of Christ's Religion, Bishops, and Priests or Presbyters,
were synonymous Terms: Consequently, they were at one Time, and not two Things.
But the Word Bishop in the 11th Question, seems to have been understood in its
appropriated Sense. The Question is, Whether a Bishop has Authority to make a
Priest by the Scripture, or no? And whether any other but only a Bishop may
make a Priest? To this Dr. Cox answers: Bishops have Authority, as is
aforesaid, of the Apostles, in the 10th Question, to make Priests, except in
Cases of great Necessity. In his Answer to the 10th Question, to which he
refers, he had made this Distinction, Bishops as they be NOW, i. e. as superior
to Presbyters; in which Sense therefore he asserts in this Place, that they
have Authority to make Priests. Dr. Redmayn answers the Question thus: To the
first Part, I answer, YEA; for so it appears, Tit. i. and 1 Timothy v. with
other Places of Scripture. But whether any other but only a Bishop may make a
Priest, I have not read, but by singular Privilege of God. -- As for making,
that is to say, ordaining and consecrating of Priests, I think it specially
belongs to the Office of a Bishop, as far as can be shown by Scripture, or
any Example, as I suppose from the Beginning; and with him agree Thirleby,
Symmons, Robertson, Leighton and others. In short, they generally agree in
answering affirmatively to the first Part, and negatively to the second Part,
of the Question; an Exception being made by some of them for Cases of great
Necessity.

BUT let us return to Dr. Chauncey: In this same Reign (of Edward VI.) in a
public Declaration, subscribed by the Archbishops of Canterbury and York,
eleven Bishops, and many other Doctors and Civilians, it is expressly asserted,
that in the New Testament no mention is made of any Degrees, or Distinction of
Orders, but only of Deacons or Ministers, and of Priests or Bishops; for which
we are refered to Burnet and Neal. I shall not trouble myself or my Reader with
Neal, who generally follows the Irenicum in these Matters. As to Burnet, upon
consulting him I find the Declaration here mentioned, copied-from a Manuscript
in the Cotton Library Vol. I. Addenda, p. 321.
. It is entitled, A Declaration made of the Functions and divine Institution of
Bishops and Priests. But how the Doctor could ascribe it to the Reign of Edward
VI, after examining Bishop Burnet on the Subject, is inconceivable. It has
evident internal Marks of its being of a more ancient Date; and the Bishop puts
it as far back in the Reign of Henry VIII, as 1538 at least, and proves that it
could not have been made later than the Beginning of the Year he assigns. For
it was subscribed by Edward Fox, Bishop of Hereford, who died in May 1538. This
Declaration therefore will not be admitted as an Evidence, that the Reformers
in the Reign of Edward VI, believed differently from what they expressed in the
public Offices.

Our Adversaries have often boasted of late, that our great Reformer Cranmer
was altogether in their Sentiments, concerning the Origin and Nature of
Episcopacy. But I trust sufficient has been said to prove, that they have no
just Reasons for Triumph, on this Account. Time was when Cranmer was a Papist,
and believed the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. This, with the other
distinguishing Doctrines of Popery, he renounced by Degrees; in Consequence of
an honest and faithful Examination of them in Succession, one after another. Is
it then fair, or can it be reconciled with that common Justice which is due to
him as a Man, to say nothing of his eminent Character, to allege against him
in the Reign of Edward VI, after he had firmly settled himself upon protestant
Principles, any Opinions he entertained before he was a Protestant? At the Time
indeed when he expressed himself, in the Manner that has been mentioned, on the
Subject of Episcopacy, he was not a Papist; but it may be said with equal Truth
and Propriety, that he was not yet a complete Protestant. In Regard to some
Points, he was still under the Influence of old Prejudices, and of the
Impressions he had received from the Schoolmen and Canonists; from which
however it was not long before he perfectly disengaged himself. After the Time
of his subscribing to Dr. Leighton's Opinions concerning Episcopacy, I find in
him no Fluctuation of Principles; but many Proofs appear of his settled and
steady Belief that Bishops are superior to Presbyters, by apostolical
Institution. In 1548, he compiled a Catechism, or large Instruction of young
Persons in the Grounds of the Christian Religion; in which, if we may believe
Bishop Burnet, he fully owns the divine Institution of Bishops and Priests. In
this Book the Archbishop also published his Sermon, of the Authority of the
Keys, upon Romans x.13, 14, 15. in which Sermon his Notions of Episcopacy and
Church Government are so high, that even the high-flying Dr. Hicks, as some
have called him, reprinted it at large, in his Preface to The divine Right of
Episcopacy asserted. Now let it be remembered, that this Sermon was published in
1548 -- that the Ordinal was compiled in 1550 -- and that Cranmer was the
principal Person concerned in that Work; and then let it be judged, whether,
according to my Answerer, the Consideration who were the Compilers of that
Work, will in the least contribute to overthrow my Position, that the Church of
England is episcopal, and consequently holds the Necessity of Bishops to govern
the Church, and to confer ecclesiastical Powers.

FROM Cranmer, I might go on to vindicate the Sincerity of the other Compilers
of the Ordinal, from the same injurious Impeachment; but I have already
exceeded the Limits I proposed for this Subject, and I imagine what has been
offered is sufficient to satisfy all reasonable Persons -- and it is vain to
attempt the Conviction of others.

FROM the Reign of Edward VI, the Doctor carries us to the Days of Queen
Elizabeth, p. 11; when according to him, it was only determined, in the
Articles of Religion agreed upon, to be agreeable to God's Word; which seems to
be all that he can discover in Favor of Episcopacy. But does he not speak, in
this very Passage, of Queen Elizabeth's Re-establishment of Church Government?
Now what Form of Church Government did She re-establish, but that Form which
had been before established by Edward VI? And has not this been shown to be
truly episcopal? Is not then the Re-establishment of Episcopacy somewhat more
than a bare Determination, mentioned in the Articles of Religion agreed upon;
although it is there only said to be "agreeable to God's Word?" Neither is this,
as the Author of the Irenicum thought it, a low and diminutive Expression, when
advanced in Opposition to those who denied it to be agreeable to God's Word.
For if Episcopacy be agreeable to Scripture, so far as any Form of
Church Government is directly opposite to Episcopacy, it is contrary to
Scripture. If this were said of that particular Form for which the Doctor is an
Advocate, however diminutive he might esteem it, I fancy he would not consider
it as a low Expression.

BUT we need not have been detained with the foregoing Particulars; for we are
more roundly told, p. 12, that this Notion of the Right of Bishops to govern
and ordain, as being Officers in the Church, superior to Presbyters by divine
Appointment, was, as the excellent Mr. J. Owen says, FIRST promoted in the
Church of England, by Archbishop Laud. This, Dr. Chauncey calls the plain
Truth, and would doubtless have us receive it as the whole Truth, and nothing
but the Truth. But of all plain Truths, this is the most mysterious. There may
indeed be some secret Meaning in the Word promoted, which I do not comprehend;
but until it be unfolded, I must take the Liberty to believe that the national
Establishment of this Doctrine, again and again, and making it a fundamental
Principle of our Reformation, was doing something to promote it. If the Meaning
be, that none before Archbishop Laud, contended for the Superiority of Bishops
over Presbyters by divine Appointment, in their Writings or public
Disputations; still I must deny it, as I am able to produce abundant Evidence
to the contrary. Among the first Set of English Reformers, the Doctrine of
Episcopacy was not disputed, otherwise than in the Way of friendly Enquiry,
which soon ended in a general Consent to the Doctrine. Soon after the Accession
of Queen Elizabeth, it was received and established as a Doctrine fairly
settled by the venerable Reformers of King Edward's Reign, without a particular
Re-examination. When the English Exiles returned, amongst the foreign
Prejudices imported from Frankfort and Geneva, we find no fixed Disaffection
toward episcopal Government. For even Calvin himself had no Objections to a
moderate Episcopacy, such as that of the Church of England. Some of these
Persons scrupled wearing the Habits, objected to the Terms of Conformity, and
caviled about some Parts of the Liturgy. For several Years these were the only
Subjects of Debate between the Church and the Puritans, as they were now
called; and it is not to be expected that, during this Period, we should find
any elaborate Defenses of episcopal Government. But afterward, when the
Hierarchy came to be formally attacked by Cartwright, Udal, Penry, and the
other Whigs and Sentinels of that Reign, it was vigorously defended upon the
Footing of a divine Appointment. Even Mr. Neal allows, that the Validity of
Ordination by Presbyters began to be disputed and denied, toward the Middle of
this Reign. Whitgift, says he, was the first that defended the Hierarchy, from
the Practice of the third, fourth, and fifth Centuries, when the Roman Empire
became Christian; but Bancroft divided off the Bishops from the Priesthood, and
advanced them into a superior Order by divine Right, with the sole Power of
Ordination, and the Keys of Discipline; so that from his Time there were
reckoned Three Orders of Clergy in the English Hierarchy, viz. Bishops, Priests
and Deacons. He also says, the Queen and the later Bishops would not part with
a Pin out of the Hierarchy History of the Puritans, Vol. I. p. 467, Dublin Edit.
. From whence it is evident, that whatever the excellent Mr. J. Owen may have
thought, or Dr. Chauncey may now think, it was not the Opinion of their great
puritanical Historian, that the Doctrine of Episcopacy by divine Appointment,
was FIRST promoted in the Church of England by Archbishop Laud.

THE first regular Attack upon the Hierarchy of the Church of England was made
by the Puritans in 1572, in their Admonition to the Parliament; the Design of
which, among other Things, was to subvert the ecclesiastical Government by
Bishops. Dr. Whitgift, then Vice Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, was
thought to be a proper Person to give "an Answer" to it. Upon this Service he
was put by Archbishop Parker, and he performed it with great Approbation and
Applause. Strype says of his Answer, that it was an excellent Book, containing
a very learned and satisfactory Vindication of the Church of England, and the
Usages thereof, and especially of the Government of it by Bishops Life of
Whitgift, p. 33.
. We also learn from the same Historian, that as Archbishop Parker was the
chief Person that set Whitgift about this Work, so he gave him considerable
Assistance therein, and the several Parts of the Copy, as it was finished, were
sent to him from Time to Time, to review: And Cooper, Bishop of Lincoln,
another of our learnedest Bishops, together with other Bishops and learned Men,
were consulted withal. -- So that this Book may be justly esteemed and applied
to, as one of the public Books of the Church of England, concerning her
Profession and Principles; being of the like Authority, in Respect to its
Worship and Government, in Opposition to the Disciplinarians, as Bishop Jewel's
Apology and Defense, in Respect to the Reformation and Doctrine of it, in
Opposition to the Papists Life of Whitgift, p. 42.
. Upon what Principle he defended the Government of the Church by Bishops, we
may learn from Sir F. Knoliys, a great Patron of the Puritans; who some Years
afterward, speaking of Dr. Whitgift's Writings in this Controversy, complains
that he had claimed, in the Right of all Bishops, a Superiority belonging to
them, over all the inferior Clergy from God's own Ordinance Ibid. 342.
. In 1583 Dr. Whitgift was promoted from the Sea of Worcester to that of
Canterbury, in which he continued for many Years, giving frequent Proofs of his
steady Adherence to the same Principles with Regard to Episcopacy. I will
content myself with laying before the Reader, the following remarkable
Instance. In 1593, he wrote a long Letter to Beza, expostulating with him for
intermedling, in the Manner he had done, in the Disputes between the Church of
England and the Puritans; in which Letter is a Passage, which I will take the
Freedom to recommend to the serious Attention of Dr. Chauncey, as it will tend
to rectify some of his Notions concerning Episcopacy. We make no Doubt, says
the Archbishop to that eminent Protestant, but that the episcopal Degree, which
we bear, is an Institution apostolical and divine; and so always has been held
by a continual Course of Times from the Apostles to this very Age of ours. For
as for what you seem to hint out of Hierom and Augustine; as though Custom
only, and that but latter, prefered Bishops to Presbyters; it is a Wonder to
me, that you should wrest their Sayings to that Purpose; and that you should
not see by other of their Books, what they, as well as other Fathers, thought
of this. And why you bring in the mention of Ambrose, I do not sufficiently
apprehend. For neither what Ambrose says of the first Presbyter succeeding the
Bishop deceasing, nor what of the Elders that were wont before those Times to
be admitted unto the Councils, can by any Pretense look this Way. You may
remember, learned Sir, the Beginnings of that Episcopacy, which you make to be
only of human Institution, are refered by the Fathers, with one Mouth, to the
Apostles, as the Authors thereof; and that the Bishops were appointed as
Successors of the Apostles; especially in certain Points of their Functions.
And what Aaron was to his Sons and to the Levites, this the Bishops were to the
Priests and Deacons; and so esteemed of the Fathers to be by divine Institution
Life of Whitgift, p. 460.
.

AMONGST those who signalized themselves in defending the Cause of Episcopacy,
was Dr. Bancroft, who succeeded Whitgift in the Sea of Canterbury. But I need
no more than to mention this Instance, since it is so plain that even the
Sentinel found himself obliged to contradict the general Assertion of Mr. J.
Owen and Dr. Chauncey, and to confess that Dr. Bancroft in 1588 preached up (by
a small Mistake he says, first preached up) in the Church of England, after the
Reformation, that Bishops were of divine Right, an Order superior to Presbyters
Sentinel, Numb. XII. in a Note.
. As to what he tells us immediately after, that Archbishop Whitgift said, he
rather wished, than believed it to be true; this is incredible in itself, and
seems to rest altogether on Neal's Authority. This Historian, in his Account of
Bancroft's Sermon, refers to no other Evidence than Strype's Life of Whitgift;
and in that Book the Ancedote is not to be met with. But near this very Time,
viz. in 1589, the Archbishop in Answer to the Calumnies of Martin Mar-Prelate,
says, that he was persuaded, that there ought to be by the Word of God, a
Superiority, among the Ministers of the Church; and that it was sufficiently
proved in his Book against Cartwright: And that he was at all Times ready to
justify it by the holy Scriptures, and by the Testimony of all Antiquity Life
of Whitgift, p. 304.
. This clearly shows, in Opposition to Neal and the Sentinel, that the
Archbishop did not wish, but believe Dr. Bancroft's Doctrine to be true.

THE Controversy concerning Episcopacy having been excited and vigorously urged
against the Church, by Cartwright and his Associates, it became the Object of
public Attention. On this Occasion, the Queen's two great Counselors, the Lord
Treasurer Burleigh and Secretary Walsingham, thought fit, in the Year last
mentioned, to have a Conference on the Subject with Dr. Hutton, at that Time
Bishop of Durham. The Bishop wrote a particular Account of the Conference to
the Archbishop, in a Letter, dated October 10th, 1589, which is preserved in
the Appendix to the Life of Whitgift; and therein it appears that he very
earnestly endeavored to promote, with all his Abilities, the Notion of the
Right of Bishops to govern, etc. And as he was known to express the Opinion of
the other Bishops, Strype observes, that in the Doctrine and Arguments he
advanced, we may see and understand, what were the Judgments of the Bishops of
the Realm, and the learnedest Divines in those Times, nearest the Reformation
of this Church, and so best knew the true Constitution of it.

ABOUT this Time Dr. Bilson, afterward Bishop of Winchester, wrote his Book,
entitled, The perpetual Government of Christ's Church, which was published in
1593. The first Edition of this Book is now before me; and from the Author's
own Account of it in his Preface, I will present the Reader with the following
Extracts. In the Apostles, I observe, says he, four things needful for the
first founding and erecting of the Church, though not so for the preserving and
maintaining thereof; and four other Points that must be perpetual in the Church
of Christ. The four extraordinary Privileges of the apostolic Function were,
their Vocation immediate from Christ, not from Men, nor by Men; their
Commission extending over all the Earth, not limited to any Place; their
Direction infallible, the Holy Ghost guiding them, whether they wrote or spoke;
and their Operation wonderful, as well to convert and confirm Believers, as to
chastise and revenge Disobeyers. Without these Things the Church could not
begin, as is easily perceived; but it may well continue without them. -- The
other four Points of the apostolic Delegation, which must have their Permanence
and Perpetuity in the Church of Christ, are the dispensing of the Word;
administering the Sacraments; imposing of Hands; and guiding the Keys to open or
shut the Kingdom of Heaven. The first Two, by Reason they be ordinary Means and
Instruments by which the Spirit of God works each Man's Salvation, must be
general to all Pastors and Presbyters of Christ's Church; the other Two, by
which meet Men are called to the Ministry of the word, etc. there is no Cause
they should be committed to every Presbyter, as the Word and Sacraments are.
For as there can be no Order, but Confusion in a Commonwealth where every Man
rules, so would there be no Peace, but a pestilent Perturbation of all Things
in the Church of Christ, if every Presbyter might impose Hands, and use the
Keys at his Pleasure. Again: Who succeeded the Apostles, whether all Presbyters
equally, or certain chief and chosen Men, one in every Church and City, trusted
with the Government both of the People and Presbyters, I have largely debated,
and made it plain, as well by the Scriptures as by other ancient Writers past
all Exception, that from the Apostles to the first Nicene Council, and so all
along to this our Age, there have always been selected some of greater Gifts
than the Residue, to succeed in the Apostles Places, to whom it belonged, both
to moderate the Presbyters of each Church, and to take the special Charge of
Imposition of Hands; and this their Singularity in succeeding, and Superiority
in ordaining, have been observed from the Apostles Times, as the peculiar and
substantial Marks of episcopal Power and Calling. I have been the larger in
these Extracts, because of the judicious Distinctions contained in them, as
well as on Account of the Scarceness of that valuable Book of which the Authors
of the Biographical Dictionary gives this Character, that it is esteemed one of
the best Books in Favor of Episcopacy.

IN the next Year, viz. 1594, Hooker began to publish his immortal Work, the
Ecclesiastical Polity, wherein the whole System of Church Government is
examined from its first Principles, and the Church of England, particularly its
Hierarchy, is defended with such Force of Argument and Perspicuity of Method,
as are an Honor even to the Age in which he wrote. But this Book is so well
known, that I need not be particular. All that I shall say is, that the Author
was so perfectly satisfied of the Goodness of his Cause, and the Strength of
his Defense, that after he had finished it he called upon his Adversaries in
these memorable Words: We require you to find out but one Church upon the Face
of the whole Earth, that has been ordered by your Discipline, or has not been
ordered by ours, that is to say, by episcopal Regiment, since the Time that the
blessed Apostles were here conversant.

BY this Time a Number of the ablest Pens in the Kingdom were employed in
defending the Church, against the Arguments, and Cavils, and Calumnies, with
which it was fiercely assaulted by its Adversaries. Amongst others that engaged
in its Defense, was the learned Dr. Saravia, formerly a Minister of the Dutch
reformed Church, and then a Prebendary of Canterbury, who also in the same Year
published his Book in answer to Beza, de diversis Ministrorum in Ecclesia
Gradibus; wherein he more particularly pleads the Cause of the English
Hierarchy. He dedicates his Book to the Archbishop, and says in his Dedication,
that in this Dispute he had defended the episcopal Authority to be of divine
Institution, and apostolical Tradition, and that it was taught as well by the
Word of God, as by the universal Consent of all the Churches Life of Whitgift,
p. 422.
.

I MIGHT easily proceed to other Instances of the like Nature; but those which
I have produced are abundantly sufficient for my Purpose, as every single one
in this Collection is of itself, and separately, a full and clear Confutation
of Dr. Chauncy's positive and unlimited Assertion, that the Doctrine of
Episcopacy, upon the Footing of a divine Appointment, was FIRST promoted in the
Church of England by Archbishop Laud. For none of these Instances are later
than 1594; and it was not until Ten Years afterward, in 1604, that Laud made
his first Efforts to promote this Doctrine, in his Disputation at the Time of
taking his Degree of Bachelor of Divinity Cyprianus Anglicus, p. 54.
.

BEFORE I take my Leave of this Subject, it may be proper to remark, that what
I have proved to have been the Doctrine of the Bishops and Clergy in the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, must have been agreeable to the Queen, and to the principal
Persons about her Court. Whitgift, the Leader in this Controversy, on the Side
of the Church, was made Archbishop of Canterbury -- Bancroft was soon promoted
to the Sea of Worcester -- and Bilson, in a short Time, was advanced to the
Bishopric of Winchester. These Promotions were doubtless intended, in some
Measure, by the Queen, to reward them for their Services in the Defense of the
Church, and are manifest Indications that She approved of the Principles for
which those Writers contended.

HAVING shown that the Church of England was properly episcopal from the
Beginning of the Reformation; it is Time to consider another general Assertion,
which is advanced with a View of strengthening the former. The Point of
Reordination, the Doctor tells us, p. 13, did not begin to be urged, until the
Days of Archbishop of Laud. I do not undetrake to contradict him in this Point,
but I will endeavor to place it in a proper Light.

UNTIL the Days of Archbishop Laud, there were but very few Cases, if any,
wherein it was needful to consider the Point of Reordination. It was not until
1572, that the Puritans ventured to withdraw from the Church, and to set up
separate Assemblies; and then, for many Years, their Congregations were
supplied with Ministers who had received Ordination from the Bishops in
England. Afterward, when this Resource was insufficient to answer their
Occasions, they were at the Trouble and Expense of sending over for Ordination,
such Persons as were wanted, to Antwerp and other Places upon the Continent;
still scrupling to set up an Ordination of their own, in Opposition to the
Bishops. As this was the Case, there were but few Ministers in the Kingdom,
before the Days of Archbishop Laud, that had not received episcopal Ordination;
and of those few, I do not recollect a single Person, that regularly conformed
to the Church, and applied for Preferment.

THE foreign Divines mentioned by the Doctor, viz. P. Martyr, M. Bucer, and P.
Fagius, who were admitted, without Reordination, not to ecclesiastical
Preferments in the established Church, (excepting P. Martyr, who had been
episcopally ordained, and was made at last Canon of Christ's-Church) but to
academical Preferments in the Universities; came over upon the Invitation of
Cranmer, and were settled in their respective Places, before the Ordinal was
compiled and established. As to Whittingham and Travers, the two other
Instances pointed out by the Doctor; the former was prefered in the early Part
of Elizabeth's Reign, by the Interest of the Earl of Leicester, the great
Patron of the Puritans. Upon the Accession of that Princess, she found the
Affairs of Religion in a confused, precarious State; and the great Object of
her Attention was, first, to bring about quietly, if possible, the
Re-Establishment of the protestant Religion, as it had been reformed in the
Reign of King Edward; and then, to secure it against the Attempts of the
Papists. All her political Address was requisite for conducting this important
Work, as it was foreseen that innumerable Dangers would attend it. In this
Condition of Things, it was found necessary to encourage and employ all Persons
indiscriminately,who were known to be disaffected to Popery, and were thought
able by writing or preaching to combat successfully its distinguishing
Principles. Wittingham was a Person of this Character, and although not
lawfully ordained, yet by the Connivance of some, and the Interest of others,
he obtained the Deanery of Durham. Travers, a noted Puritan, and a popular
Preacher, one of those who went over to Antwerp for Ordination, finding the
Mastership of the Temple vacant, made Use of all his Interest to obtain it; and
he succeeded so far, that he engaged even the Lord Treasurer Burleigh to
recommend him for the Appointment. But the Archbishop opposed it, alleging his
irregular Behavior, and the Insufficiency of his Ordination. The Event was,
that Travers was set aside, and the Place given to his Competitor, the
celebrated Hooker. His Friends however made a Shift to keep him in as the
Preacher of the Afternoon Lecture.

HAVING shown in what Manner Whittingham and Travers got their Preferments, I
shall go on to observe, that there were in the former Part of this Reign many
Instances of mere Laymen, without any Kind of Ordination, who had the Address
to possess themselves of Livings in the Church. Nicholas, Bishop of Bangor,
says one who was most circumstantially acquainted with the History of those
Times, having this Year (1567) made some Inspection into the Condition of his
Diocese, sent the Archbishop, according to his Order, the Names of all the Dean
and Chapter, and of all the Ministers in his Diocese, with Account of their
Residency and their Hospitality; such also as were not Deacons, nor Priests;
and yet held ecclesiastical Preferments. To the End, as he wrote, that his
Grace might perceive, how Men that were no Ministers had such Livings, to the
utter Decay of learned Men to be Ministers, where others had that Liberty to
hold Benefices, and not to be in Orders Life of Parker, p. 256.
. If then the Preferments of such Men as Whittingham and Travers are a Proof,
that in this Reign the Ordination of Presbyters was allowed to be valid; those
Preferments which were held by the Laity are also a Proof, that no Ordination
at all was thought to be necessary.

BUT neither of these Conclusions ought to be admitted; since we know upon the
strongest Evidence, that it was the Doctrine of the Church throughout the whole
of the Reign we are considering, that Ordination was of divine Appointment, and
that episcopal Ordination was of apostolical Institution; and that it was an
established Law from the very Beginning of it, that no Man should be accounted
or taken to be a lawful Bishop, Priest or Deacon in the Church of England, or
suffered to execute any of the said Functions, without episcopal Ordination.
Yet notwithstanding, it was impossible to prevent Transgressions of it in some
Instances; and such Instances show, not what was approved of, but what was
overlooked or permitted, through the Necessity of the Times. These
Irregularities however were corrected by Degrees, and in a Course of Years they
were entirely removed. In 1586, the Archbishop took Cognizance of the Case of
Travers, objecting to his Ordination at Antwerp, and his denying to receive the
Orders of the Ministry according to the English Book of Ordination. Travers
drew up the Reasons for his Conduct, and presented them to the Lord Treasurer,
who sent them to the Archbishop. The Archbishop returned them with short
marginal Animadversions, some of which I will transcribe, for the Use of Dr.
Chauncy and his Friends. As to that Assertion, that Ministers lawfully made in
any Church of sound Profession in the Faith, were acknowledged such in any
other; and this to be the universal and perpetual Practice; the Archbishop made
this only Exception; always excepting such Churches as allowed of Presbytery
and executed it. Then as to his Examples, this was the Archbishop's
Animadversion -- that he knew no such foreign Ministers executing their
Ministry here; but if there were, their Cause was far differing from his --
That Mr. Whittingham, had he lived, had been deprived, without special Grace
and Dispensation; although his Cause and Mr. Travers's were nothing like. --
That the Laws of this Realm required, that such as were to be allowed as
Ministers in this Church of England, should be ordained by a Bishop, and
subscribe to the Articles before him. Lastly, whereas Travers had said, that
the last Archbishop of Canterbury was acquainted with his Manner of calling to
the Ministry; and so was the Bishop of London, and were contented he should
preach at the Temple (as he had done now almost six Years) and that the present
Archbishop himself had not taken any Exceptions against it; our Archbishop
said, that this was to abuse their Patience, and that he never allowed of his
Kind of calling, neither could he allow of it Life of Whitgift, p. 252.
.

AS to the three Presbyters that were consecrated Bishops for Scotland in the
following Reign; they were not consecrated immediately, without previous
Ordinations, on the Principle that Ordination by Presbyters was valid, but upon
the Belief that the episcopal Character, as it included those of a Presbyter
and a Deacon, might be conveyed by a single Consecration, as in the Instances
of St. Ambrose and Nectarius See this Matter related at large by Collier, in
his Eccle. Hist. Vol. II. p. 701, as well as by Pierce. See also Grey's Answer
to Pierce, p. 143.
. And as to Bishop Morton's Answer to the Archbishop of Spalato, supposing it
to be fairly represented by Pierce, who produces no other Authority than that
of one Hickman; yet the Doctrine of the Church is not to be learnt from the
singular Notions of an Individual.

BY this Time, I trust, it may fairly be judged, whether the Want of Instances
of Reordination before the Days of Archbishop Laud, can in the least affect
the Evidence I have produced, that the Church of England is episcopal.

I MUST now return back to p. 10, to examine the Doctor's other capital
Assertion. It is in Fact true, says he, that both in King Henry the Eighth's
Time, and in Edward the Sixth's, the Bishops took out Commissions from the
Crown like other STATE-OFFICERS, for the exercising their spiritual
Jurisdiction; in which they acknowledge, that ALL SORTS of Jurisdiction,
ecclesiastical as well as civil, flow ORIGINALLY from the regal Power, as from
a SUPREME HEAD. -- Among the Particulars of ecclesiastical Power given them by
this Commission, is that of ORDAINING Presbyters. Now what the Doctor means by
this and more to the same Purpose, may be gathered from p. 57, where he
affirms, without Ambiguity, that as to Authority purely Ecclesiastical, there
is no such Thing in the Church of England. And he intimates p. 11, that such
Authority was never claimed by the Church, until the aforesaid Days of
Archbishop Laud; telling us, again from the Irenicum, that if we come lower to
the Time of King James, his Majesty himself declared IN PRINT as his Judgment,
that the civil Power, in any Nation, has the Right of prescribing what
external Form of Church Government it pleases, which does most agree to the
civil Form of Government in the State. And thus the Religion of the Church of
England is made to be altogether a PARLIAMENTARY RELIGION.

THIS Gentleman must be supposed not to be ignorant to whom he is indebted for
the Weapons of his literary Warfare; but it may not be amiss to observe to
others, that this general Charge against our Reformers was first drawn up by
Bellarmine, Saunders, Doleman, Harding, and other Papists, in Revenge for their
rejecting the Pope's Supremacy; and that the Enemies of revealed Religion have
all along endeavored to support them in the Charge.

THE Point has been strenuously labored by Tindal, the most inveterate of the
deistical Tribe; and some of our late Adversaries have not been ashamed to
follow him as their Leader. Even the good Doctor himself has honored his Book
of the Rights, with a second-hand Quotation. Now, that these two Bands, the
Papists and Deists, should be reinforced by some of the hotheaded extravagant
Writers on the Side of the Dissenters, is not to be wondered at; but that a Man
of the Doctor's Coolness and Prudence should be seen to go down to these
Philistines to sharpen his Mattock, is a little surprising. But without
pursuing so obvious a Reflection, I will proceed immediately to the Doctrine of
the King's Supremacy, as maintained in the Church of England, and inquire
whether it is fairly represented in the above-quoted Passages.

I HAVE already proved that the Church of England has constantly asserted an
Authority purely Ecclesiastical, derived from Christ as its proper Source and
Author; and consequently not from the Crown, or the civil Constitution. Thus,
for Instance, the Power of Ordination, and Authority to administer the Word and
Sacraments, have always been exercised upon the Footing of a divine
Appointment. The Church also claims a farther Power to decree Rites and
Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies of Faith, as belonging to her by
Virtue of this Appointment; which Claim has been acknowledged and supported, by
all our Kings and Queens since the Reformation See the Authority and
Authenticity of the first Clause of Art. XX, clearly proved and defended in A
Vindication of the Church of England, etc. in Answer to Priestcraft in
Perfection. See also Bennet's History of the Articles, and Collier's
Ecclesiastical History.
. Unless therefore the Church is inconsistent with herself, and believes an
Authority to be derived from Christ, which She believes not to be derived from
him, but from another Fountain; She cannot hold that the regal Power and
Supremacy extend to Matters of this Nature, any farther than to control and
regulate the external Exercise of such spiritual Authority.

IN what Sense she maintains the Doctrine of the King's Supremacy, is expressed
with great Clearness and Precision in her 37th Article. The Queen's Majesty
has the chief Power in this Realm of England, and other her Dominions, unto
whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm, whether they be
ecclesiastical or civil, in all Causes does appertain, and is not, nor ought to
be subject to any foreign Jurisdiction. Whereas we attribute to the Queen's
Majesty the chief Government, by which Titles we understand the Minds of some
slanderous Folks to be offended; we give not to our Princes the ministering of
God's Word, or of the Sacraments, the which Thing the Injunctions also lately
set forth by Elizabeth our Queen do most plainly testify: But that only
Prerogative which we see to have been given always to all godly Princes in holy
Scripture by God himself, that is, that they should rule all Estates and
Degrees committed to their Charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, and restrain with the civil Sword the stubborn and evil Doers. More
Power than this, we give not to our Princes; and less, I believe, is not
claimed by the supreme civil Governors of any Kingdom or Republic upon Earth.
In the INJUNCTIONS to which the Article refers, the Queen says: Her Majesty
neither does, nor ever will challenge any Authority, other than that was
challenged and lately used by the said noble Kings of famous Memory, King Henry
VIII, and King Edward VI, which is and was of ancient Time due to the imperial
Crown of this Realm: That is, under God to have the Sovereignty and Rule over
all Manner of Persons born within these her Realms, Dominions and Countries, of
what Estate, either Ecclesiastical or Temporal, soever they be; so as no other
foreign Power shall or ought to have any Superiority over them.

SUCH Power as is attributed to the Crown in the Article, and explained in the
Injunctions, is necessary to preserve the Independency of every State and
Kingdom at all Times; and the vigorous Exertion of such Power was found to be
peculiarly necessary to carry on the Reformation, wherever it was attempted.
JOHN, Elector of Saxony, resolving to rescue himself and his Dominions from the
despotic Authority of the Roman Pontif, and to establish the Doctrine of
Luther, assumed to himself that Supremacy in ecclesiastical Matters, which the
Church of England allows to be the Right of all sovereign Princes. In Order to
secure and perfect this new Establishment, he ordered a Body of ecclesiastical
Laws to be drawn up by Luther and Melancthon, and to be proclaimed by Heralds
throughout his Dominions. This was in 1527, while our King Henry VIII, was in
Subjection to the papal Yoke, and not long after he had drawn his Pen to defend
the Pope's Cause against the Doctrine of Luther. The next Care of the Elector
was to displace all such of the Clergy as were either vicious or illiterate,
and to supply the Churches with such as were most eminent for their Piety and
Abilities. By these wise and spirited Measures, the protestant Religion was
firmly established in Saxony, and became able to support itself against all the
Force and Arts of its Adversaries. The illustrious Example of this Elector was
soon followed by other Princes and States in Germany, and the like Success
attended their Proceedings Mosheim's Ecclesiastical History Vol. II. p. 37.
. The same Example was also followed in England, as soon as the Resolution was
taken to reform the established Religion.

IF we examine our 37th Article, it is evident that the main Design of it is to
guard against the Jurisdiction of the Pope, and to secure to our Princes that
Supremacy in ecclesiastical Matters, which the reformed German Princes and
States had so successfully exerted, and which, by the English Constitution, is
one of the most ancient and undoubted Rights of the Crown. At the same Time it
is farther evident, both from the Article and the Queen's Injunctions, that the
Church was believed to have certain Powers of a spiritual Nature, which this
Supremacy does not include, and which our Princes are so far from pretending to
convey, that all Manner of Right to exercise them in their own Persons is
therein formally and expressly disclaimed. If Queen Elizabeth had believed that
all ecclesiastical Authority flowed from the Crown, contrary to her own solemn
Declarations; there was a Time wherein She could have hardly avoided to betray
these Sentiments: I mean, after the Deprivation of the Popish Bishops, when she
undertook to supply the vacant Sees with Men of other Principles. It was with
great Difficulty that She was able to procure proper Persons to perform the
first Consecration; and had She been of Opinion that She had the Power in
herself, it is more than probable, that, in those Circumstances* She would have
immediately and directly invested Dr. Parker with the archiepiscopal Office.
But to such a Power She had no Pretensions herself; and She believed, that
neither Henry VIII, nor Edward VI, pretended to more, than under God to have
the Sovereignty and Rule over all Manner of Persons, whether Ecclesiastical or
Temporal.

But Dr. Chauncy says, that in both those Reigns the Bishops took out
Commissions from the Crown like other State-Officers. The most exceptionable
Commission of this Nature, in either Reign, was granted to Bonner, in 1539. The
Commission at large is in Burnet's Collection, and the Substance of it, as
translated and abridged by him, is as follows: That since all Jurisdiction both
ecclesiastical and civil flowed from the King as supreme Head, and he was the
Foundation of all Power; it became those who exercised it only at the King's
Courtesy, gratefully to acknowledge, that they had it only of his Bounty; and
to declare that they would deliver it up again, when it should please him to
call for it Hist. Ref. Vol. I. p. 267.
. This, I believe, must be the Commission which the Doctor alludes to. He is
pleased to say that the Bishops (in the Plural) took out such a Commission, and
affirms that it is in Fact true; but Bishop Burnet, after all his Examination,
says, whether the other Bishops took out such a Commission from this King, I
find not. The Language of this Commission, as has been acknowledged, appears to
be exceptionable; but its Meaning may notwithstanding be harmless. What was
intended by it must be learnt from the public Declarations of those Times
relating to the Subject. And it is in Fact true, that it was then the Doctrine
of the King, of the Bishops, of the Nation, that Authority to administer the
Sacraments and to perform other spiritual Offices, is derived, not from the
Crown, but from Christ. This Doctrine was clearly and fully maintained in the
"Institution of a Christian Man," as has been shown from Collier. In the Cabala
or Scrinia Sacra, is published a Letter of Henry VIII, to the Convocation of
the Province of York, explaining the Supremacy; but in Language which may
appear somewhat uncouth at this Day. Herein says the King; If you take
spiritualibus for spiritual Men, that is to say, Priests, their good Acts, and
Deeds worldly; in all this, both we, and all Princes, be, at this Day, Chief
and Head; after whose Ordinance, either in general or particular, they be
ordered and governed. In all those Articles concerning the Persons of Priests,
their Laws, their Acts (whose Persons and Laws he here also, as in the
Statute-Book, calls spiritual) and Order of living, forasmuch as they be indeed
all temporal, and concerning this present Life only; in those we be (as we be
called) indeed, in this Realm, Caput; and because there is no Man above us
here, we be indeed Supremum Caput: As to spiritual Things, meaning by them the
Sacraments, (including Orders) being by God ordained, as Instruments of
Efficacy and Strength, whereby Grace is, of his infinite Goodness confered upon
his People; forasmuch as they be no worldly nor temporal Things, they have no
worldly nor temporal Head; but only Christ did institute them, by whose
Ordinance they be ministered here by mortal Men, elect, chosen, and ordered, as
God has willed, for that Purpose, who be the Clergy; who for the Time they do
that, and in that Respect, tanquam Ministri versantur in his, quae Hominum
Potestati non subjciuntur; in quibus, si male versantur sine Scandalo, Deum
Ultorem habent; si cum Scandalo, Hominum Cognitionis et Vindictae est. -- Such
Things, as although they be amongst Men, yet they be indeed divina, quoniam
supra nos, sunt nihil ad nos The Independent Power of the Church not Romish,
but Primitive and Catholic. p. 137.
. It is therefore evident, that what was meant to be given by the King, in his
Commission to the Bishops, was no more than a Liberty, a legal Authority, to
exercise their spiritual Functions; and a Jurisdiction, relating to Matters
testamentary, matrimonial, etc. which is called spiritual, because it is
committed to spiritual Persons. And such Jurisdiction as this, undoubtedly
flows from the Crown, and it becomes those who are entrusted with it, to
acknowledge that they hold it of the King's Bounty, and to deliver it up when
he calls for it, if they have received it on that Condition. For an
Illustration of this Matter, let it be considered, that every Man is, in some
Sense, a King in his own House and Family; and no Clergyman has a Right to come
into it to perform any ecclesiastical Offices, to administer Baptism for
Instance, without his Leave and Consent. Upon him it altogether depends,
whether the Clergyman shall have a proper and lawful Authority to perform this
Office in his Family. But is it not evident, that the giving him that
Authority, is a very different Thing from investing him with the general Power
to administer the Sacraments? In like Manner, as a Kingdom may be considered as
a large Family, the King is the political Father of this Family, and as such is
supreme over all Persons belonging to it, whether spiritual or temporal. And
without his Consent or Authority, no Bishop or ecclesiastical Person can
lawfully officiate within his Dominions. But the giving this Authority by
Commission, or in any other Way, does not convey to any Man his sacred
Character, but always supposes him to have been previously invested with it, by
Virtue of a Commission from CHRIST.

THE above Explanation of the ecclesiastical Power claimed by Henry VIII, as
belonging to the regal Supremacy, the Words will fairly admit of; and in this
Sense they are easily reconciled with other Declarations that were made, about
the same Time, in Acts of Parliament, and in public Instruments of different
Kinds. Nay, the above Explanation is necessary, in Order to make this very
Commission to Bonner consistent with itself. For besides the Jurisdiction
conveyed by it, from the Crown, it acknowledges another Sort of Power to have
been committed to him by divine Authority, and that this was evident from Holy
Scripture. The Words are: Praeter et ultra ea quae tibi ex sacris Literis
DIVINITUS commissa esse dignoscuntur. In the Reign of Edward VI, from 1548 to
1553, Bishops were commonly constituted by the King's Letters Patent. By these
Letters Patents, it is clear, says Bishop Burnet, that the episcopal Function
was acknowledged to be of divine Appointment, and that the Person was no other
Way named by the King, than as Lay-Patrons present to Livings; only the Bishop
was legally authorized, in such a Part of the King's Dominions, to execute that
Function which was to be derived to him by Imposition of Hands. Therefore here
was no Pretense for denying that such Persons were true Bishops, and for saying
as some have done, that they were not from Christ, but from the King Hist. Ref.
Vol. II p. 218.
.

BUT notwithstanding, Dr. Chauncy has thought fit to say, that among the
Particulars of ecclesiastical Power given them by this Commission, is that of
ordaining Presbyters. Now this Assertion he borrows from the Dissenting
Gentleman, and the Dissenting Gentleman borrows it from Tindal, Author of the
Rights; and Tindal, producing no explicit Form of Words whereby this Power was
ever conveyed from the Crown, only infers it from the Language of the King's
Commission, which has been considered already. The Words of Tindal are these:
The Jurisdiction any Bishop has, and his Right to have a Share in the making of
ecclesiastical Canons, and the Power of constituting inferior Ministers, must
be derived mediately from the Parliament, but immediately from the King, as
having the supreme executive Power. The Reader here sees, that what Tindal, by
way of Inference, had made to be a Power of constituting inferior Ministers,
the Doctor by a farther Inference from his Inference, makes to be a Power of
ordaining Presbyters; and thus his Proposition is established. It would have
been much more to the Purpose, if he, or the Dissenting Gentleman, or the
Author of the Rights, had pointed out to us a single Instance of a Presbyter
ordained by Virtue of the King's Commission only, by Persons who had no other
Kind of Authority. For if the Commission was given for that Purpose, it is
strange that it should not have produced the intended Effect in one Instance;
and if there were any Instances of it, it is strange that the Sagacity of such
Writers should not be able to discover them.

I HAVE now shown from our Articles, and the public Declarations of such of our
Princes as were more immediately concerned in bringing about the Reformation,
that the Supremacy claimed by our Kings, and given to them by the Church of
England, does by no Means exclude a purely spiritual Authority -- an Authority
which is derived only from Christ -- which has distinct Acts and Offices of its
own -- and which is incommunicable by the civil Magistrate. This Account might
be confirmed by Testimonies from a continued Succession of the greatest and
best Writers, which our Nation has ever afforded. I might also produce the
Declarations of our succeeding Princes, down to our own Times; but a full
Treatise upon the Subject is not my Intention, and I fear the Reader has
already been too long detained with it. And yet I must beg Leave to exhibit the
Testimony of James Is It, since the Doctor, from the Irenicum, has introduced him
as speaking the Language, which seems to favor his Side of the Question now in
Debate. This Prince, among other Things, declared, that he always believed, in
Opposition to the Puritans and Bellarmine, who denied that Bishops received
their Jurisdiction immediately from God, that Bishops ought to be in the
Church, as being of apostolical Institution, and consequently of divine
Ordination Stillingfleet pro Juramento Fidelitatis, in Lewis's Apology for the
Clergy, p. 45.
.

SHOULD it now be asked, what is all this to the Purpose of an American
Episcopate? My Answer is, I know not, but -- perhaps Dr. Chauncy does. Should
it be asked again, is it any Defense of the Appeal? To this I must answer, I
can hardly conceive that it is. I said nothing obout the Opinion of our
Reformers, upon the Points of Episcopacy and the King's Supremacy; and
therefore my Vindication of them, can properly be no Vindication of any Thing I
had advanced. It is however intended to vindicate the English Reformation, and
the Church of England from the Charge of Erastianism; which the late Attacks,
occasioned by the Appeal, have made necessary in itself, and a Duty peculiarly
incumbent upon me. But although what has been said, is not properly a Defense
of the Appeal, yet it is in some Degree necessary in Order to prepare the Way
for defending it, against such a Kind of Opposition as has been made to it.

THE Way being thus prepared, I shall now proceed to an immediate Defense of
the Appeal, so far as I find it ought to be defended; but with a Mind open to
Conviction, and with a Resolution to retract, if, upon this Re-examination of
the Subject, I shall find, by the Assistance of my Opponents, or by any other
Means, that I had fallen into any Mistakes of Consequence.

I BEGAN with observing, that it is an essential Doctrine of the Church of
England, that none have Authority in the Christian Church, but those who derive
it from Christ, either mediately or immediately. To which the Doctor replies:
This is not a Doctrine peculiar to the English Church. Every other Christian
Church, of whatever Denomination, holds the same. The Churches in the Colonies,
are certainly of this Opinion. So far then, it seems, we agree; but then he
cannot think that an uninterrupted Succession is necessary to a mediate
Conveyance of this Authority; so that while he owns the Principle, he rejects
its unavoidable and inseparable Consequence. For when a Thing is to be conveyed
from one Person to another, not immediately, but by a successive Communication
through a Number of intermediate Hands; if any one in the Succession fails of
making the Conveyance, the Thing evidently stops, and passes not on to the
Person for whom it is intended. Thus for Example; should any Thing be sent from
Dover to London, and yet be carried no farther than to Canterbury or Rochester,
and perish there, it could never arrive at the Place of its Destination. Again:
Should I claim a Title to any ancient Estate, and it should appear, upon
Inquiry, that the Chain of Conveyances has been broken before it reached me; my
Title will be pronounced to be invalid. Nothing but this uninterrupted Chain of
Conveyances is wanting, to entitle me to the best Estate in the Kingdom. Once
more: If a Man is to receive a Commission mediately from the King; unless the
Person who confers it has been authorized to do so, it is evidently not the
King's Commission that he receives, but one that is spurious. These Cases are
plain, and will hardly be disputed.

LET us see then, whether an uninterrupted Succession is not as necessary to a
mediate Conveyance of Authority from Christ, as from the King or any other
Person. If Authority can be conveyed from Christ mediately, by a Succession
that is interrupted, there must be somewhere in the Succession a Person who can
give that which he has not. If the Authority first given to A, is to pass on
successively to B, to C, to D, and to E; should the Conveyance stop or be
interrupted at C, so that it passes not on to D; in that Case D does not
receive it, and therefore cannot convey it to E, unless D is able to give what
it has not. Supposing the Authority, when it comes down to C, to be annihilated
or to cease; unless it be renewed, E can never be invested with it. The
Question then is, who shall renew it? Now all Authority from Christ, must flow
from Christ; if it begins, and has its Source short of him, it is not HIS
Authority. If he pleases to renew it, he may give it immediately to E, or he
may give it to D, by him to be communicated to E; and in either Way E may be
invested with Christ's Authority. But now let us suppose that any Number of
'Men upon Earth,' or that all the Angels in Heaven should attempt to renew the
Authority of Christ, once interrupted and lost; unless a Stream can have a
higher Derivation than its Source -- unless these Men or these Angels can give
what they have not, the Thing is impossible. They may give what they have --
they may give their own Authority; but Christ's Authority they cannot give,
unless they have received it. And if they have received it, it is not they that
renew the Authority, but Christ himself.

THE Doctor cries out, is this the Doctrine of the Church of England? Whether
it be so or not, he in Effect tells us that every other Christian Church, of
whatever Denomination, holds it -- that the Churches in the Colonies, are
certainly of this Opinion; i. e. they believe a mediate Conveyance of Authority
from Christ, which necessarily implies an unbroken Succession of Conveyers. He
appears therefore to have acted inconsistently, in treating the general
Doctrine of a mediate Conveyance, or, in other Words, an uninterrupted
Succession, as if it were singular, unscriptural, absurd and contemptible. He
may say that he meant to explode such a Succession in the Line of Bishops only;
but this is not clearly expressed. His Words, in some Places lead us to
believe, and the Arguments of some of our Adversaries force us to conclude,
that the Doctrine of an uninterrupted Succession in general, without any
Limitation, is considered by them as absurd and ridiculous. Whether in
particular the Conveyance of Christ's Authority, from the Apostles down to the
present Day, has been made only in the Line of Bishops, is a different
Question; and which Way soever it may be decided, it affects not the common
Principle of an uninterrupted Succession. And whether it has been made in the
Line of Bishops, depends upon the Decision of another Question, which is,
whether the Power of Ordination was originally given to Bishops only, as an
Order superior to Presbyters. That the Affirmative of this Question is
maintained by the Church of England, I have abundantly proved.

THE Doctor in p. 15, says of the Succession for which we contend, that it is
not capable of any good Proof, nor is there any Probability, that so long a
Chain, running through so many Ages of Ignorance, Violence, and all Kinds of
Imposture, has never once been broke. But this Assertion militates as forcibly
against the Succession which the Churches in the Colonies certainly believe, as
against the Episcopal. As to the Succession in the Line of Bishops, I am still
of Opinion, that it is incumbent on the Objectors to prove that it has been
interrupted One of our weekly Adversaries says, that in the Debate between Dr.
Hoadly, then Bishop of Bangor, and the Nonjurors, the Dr. with great Success,
refuted this Whim, viz. of the uninterrupted Succession of Bishops. ( Cent.
Numb. XII.) I am so far from being of this Writer's Opinion, that it appears to
me, that Bishop Hoadly's Notions relating to this Subject were confuted, by
some of his Antagonists, even to a Demonstration. Those who attacked the
Bishop, in what is called the Bangorian Controversy, are here indefinitely
spoken of as Nonjurers; whereas they were, in general, as well affected to the
Government, and gave as good Proofs of it, as any Men in the Kingdom; and I can
recollect no more than one Nonjuror that appeared in the Controversy. What does
the Sentinel think of Archbishop Potter, of the Bishops Hare and Sherlock, and
of the Doctors Snape, Rogers and Stebbing, who distinguished themselves on the
Occasion; to say nothing of the Body of the national Clergy represented in
Convocation, who, by their very learned Committee, complained of Bishop Hoadly,
among other Things, for the Contempt thrown by him upon a regular Succession of
the Ministry, and of the episcopal Order in particular? Were these all
Nonjurors and Jacobites? Such Nonjurors and Jacobites are the American Clergy;
among whom I know not one, who is not firmly attached to his Majesty King
GEORGE'S Person, Family and Government, or who, notwithstanding some sly Hints
to the contrary, looks upon himself to have any more Concern with the
Descendants of James II, if there be any, than with the Descendants of Harold
or Edgar Atheling.
. For we know, by the best historical Evidence, that it has been the universal
Practice of the Church, from the Time of the Apostles to the present Hour, to
acknowledge none for Bishops, who were not ordained by other Bishops. We know,
from the very Nature of the Office, as well as from History, that the
Consecration of Bishops was always a public solemn Act, of which there were
many Witnesses -- that every such Consecration was esteemed to be a Matter of
such Importance, that the Report of it was immediately propagated and carried
even to distant Places -- and that, in disputed Cases, it was easy to discover,
whether the Person was, in Reality, a Bishop or not; or, supposing the
contrary, that no one would receive episcopal Consecration from such Hands. We
know also from Scripture, that if such a Succession is as necessary, as, upon a
speculative Examination, it appears to be, Christ has promised to preserve and
continue it "to the End of the World." With these various Kinds of Evidence we
are abundantly satisfied; and until the Objectors are able to bring positive
Proofs that the Succession has been interrupted, we shall not recede from the
Claim.

THE only Proof of this Nature attempted by the Doctor is in a Note, where he
gives this Information: Mr. Petoy the Historian, says, that the Church of
England, as well as the Scotch Church, was at first planted and governed,
without Bishops until Bishops were sent from Rome. And there cannot be any good
Evidence produced, that there were any Bishops in England, until Austin the
Monk was sent from Rome. But Dr. Burn, a much better Authority, says, The
ancient Britons are believed to have had at least one Archiepiscopal See before
the Times of Austin the Monk, viz. at Caerleon, or (as some will have it) at
Landaff Ecclesiastical Law, Tit. BISHOPS.
. And Dr. Stillingfleet, to whom more Attention may be paid by some People for
the Sake of his Irenicum, having carefully studied the Antiquities of the
British Churches, in his large Work on that Subject, says in p. 77. I see no
Reason to question a Succession of Bishops here from the first founding of a
Christian Church. -- Although, by the Loss of Records of the British Churches,
we cannot draw down the Succession of Bishops from the Apostles Time, yet we
have great Reason to presume such a Succession, when upon the first summoning a
Council by Constantine, three British Bishops appeared; one out of every
Province; as they did in other Parts. Again, to the same Purpose in p. 83.
Although we cannot deduce a lineal Succession of Bishops, as they could in
other Churches, where Writings were preserved, yet as soon as through the
Church's Peace they came to have Intercourse with foreign Churches (as in the
Council of Arles) they appeared with a proportionable Number of Bishops with
those of other Provinces; and their Succession was not in the least disputed
among them, they subscribing to the Sentence and Canons as others did. But
after all, supposing the Case to have been as is represented by Mr. Petoy; it
affects not the Authority of our present Bishops. If they derive their
Succession from the Bishops that were sent over in the sixth Century, their not
having received it from Bishops of the old British Churches is no better Proof
of its Invalidity, than their not having received it from the ancient Druids.

FARTHER Objection is made to the uninterrupted Succession claimed for our
Bishops, on Account of its exposing the Church and Religion of Jesus Christ to
open Ridicule, p. 16. Now I am unable to conceive that the general Doctrine can
appear ridiculous to any that understand it; but should it be otherwise, I
cannot help it. To some Persons, many other Doctrines of the Christian Religion
appear to be ridiculous; but will this be thought a sufficient Reason for
Christians to explode them? Will the Doctor be willing to regulate the System
of his own Belief, by this Standard? Do the Churches in the Colonies establish
Ridicule for the Test of Truth? That the Church of England does not, I am very
certain. But still, that the Doctrine of an uninterrupted Succession in the
Line of Bishops should be more ridiculous, than of such a Succession in the
Line of Presbyters, is to me utterly incomprehensible.

I COME now to consider the great popular Objection, that this Doctrine
unchurches all the foreign Protestants who are without episcopal Government, as
well as the Presbyterians in Scotland, and our own Dissenters; on which Account
the Doctor says of it, that instead of deserving a serious Confutation, it may
reasonably excite the Contempt of all. I suspect he found it much easier to
treat it with Contempt, than to give it a serious Confutation; and yet as it
stood so much in his Way, it might have been well worth his while to have
removed it, if he could, although at the Expense of a serious Confutation.

BEFORE I answer directly to the Objection, I beg Leave to remind him of Bishop
Burnet's Position, that the ill Consequences drawn from Opinions are not to be
charged on all that hold them, unless they do likewise own those Consequences.
Now, if it be a Consequence of the Doctrine of an uninterrupted Succession in
the Line of Bishops, that many of the foreign Protestants are unchurched; yet
it is a Consequence that has seldom been owned by the Advocates for the
Doctrine. Is it then candid in the Doctor to charge us with this Consequence?
Would he be willing to be treated in this Manner himself? He is generally
thought to be calvinistic in his Principles, and to hold the Doctrines of
Election and Reprobation in the Sense of the Assembly's Catechism. Now he need
not be informed, that there are many Persons who believe, the unavoidable
Consequences of those Doctrines to be, that Man is no moral Agent, and of
Course no accountable Creature -- that the Supreme Being is the Author of all
Sin, etc. These Consequences, I dare say, he disowns, and looks upon the
Imputation of them as injurious. Why then will he impute to us a Consequence,
which we neither acknowledge nor believe to be included in our Principle, in
the Sense of our Opponents?

BUT to proceed immediately to the Objection: If there is such a Thing in the
Church as Authority from Christ, not immediately confered, but mediately
derived down to the present Age; the Necessity of an uninterrupted Succession
of Conveyers is as clear, as that the whole is greater than its Parts. That the
Power of Ordination was originally given to Bishops only, as an Order of Men
superior to that of Presbyters, is a Doctrine which we believe upon the
Evidence of Scripture. And that for many Ages this Power was exercised by
Bishops, and was not exercised or claimed by any other Persons, and
consequently had no Existence but in the Line of Bishops, is as certain, as the
Concurrence of civil and ecclesiastical History can make it. Whatever therefore
may be the Consequences of the Doctrine, with Regard to ourselves or others,
our Belief of it appears to us to be founded upon invincible Evidence. And
whenever any Doctrine appears to us to be evidently true, we think we ought to
believe it, whether it be charitable (if Charity may be predicated of
Doctrines) or not.

AS to those protestant Churches which are without Bishops; while this
continues to be their Case, they must be manifestly without that Authority
which Christ has appropriated to Bishops. But then such is our Charity toward
them, that we believe, upon the Evidence of their frequent and solemn
Declarations, that this is rather their Misfortune than their Fault; and
therefore we hope (to use the Words of Bogerman, President of the Synod of
Dort, upon the same Subject) that God will be merciful to them. The Church of
England has always treated all the foreign protestant Churches with a kind and
sisterly Affection. She indeed holds the Necessity of Bishops, but not that
Bishops are necessary to such Churches as are unable to obtain them. In like
Manner, She holds the Necessity of the Sacraments, but not that they are
necessary to every Individual. She esteems the Sacraments to be no more than "
generally necessary to Salvation," and not universally so; or, as She expresses
it in speaking of Baptism, She maintains the great Necessity of that Sacrament
where it may be had. Thus, the Necessity of Bishops is no more than a general
Necessity; or, in other Words, Bishops, according to the Belief of the Church
of England, are necessary only where they may be had. And if they are an
Institution of Christ, intended for the standing Use of the Church, less than
this cannot be believed, unless in a single Case hereafter to be excepted. The
Institutions of Christ we are bound to observe, in Proportion to our Abilities
and Opportunities, and he has promised his Blessing to us in the Use of them;
but where these are wanting, our Desire of obeying him will undoubtedly be
accepted, instead of Obedience. Where Christ has directed us in what Manner to
act, his Direction is the Rule of our Duty; but it is no Rule to himself, and,
whenever he pleases, he may accomplish to us the Ends, without our having made
Use of the Means or Instruments.

WHETHER any of the foreign Churches, although desirous of Bishops, are in
Reality unable to obtain them, is best known to themselves. It might appear
otherwise to us, but they have affirmed it to be true; and certainly it is more
charitable to believe, than to disbelieve, them. To prove the Sincerity of
their Declarations, it is hoped, that whenever the Providence of God shall give
them an Opportunity of obtaining a protestant Episcopate, they will readily and
thankfully embrace it, as one of those Churches has already done, setting
before them an Example worthy of all Imitation. The Protestants of Bohemia, who
were apprehensive that Ordinations in which Presbyters, and not a Bishop,
should create another Presbyter, would not be lawful; and were in Doubt how
they should be able to maintain such an Ordination, either to others when they
opposed, or to their own People, when they questioned it; -- sent Deputies to
the Remains of the ancient Waldenses, upon the Confines of Moravia and Austria,
by whose Bishops these Deputies were consecrated to the epispocal office, which
they have ever since transmitted to their Successors Commenius in Frat. Bohem.
Historia, as quoted by Bishop Else.
.

BUT if any of the foreign Churches have at length formed an Opinion that
Bishops are needless, and are in a Disposition to refuse an Episcopate if they
had it in their Power, which is the Case of the Kirk of Scotland, and of the
English Dissenters; although we cannot but condemn such irregular and
unscriptural Conduct, yet we mean not to exclude them from our Charity, nor do
we desire to degrade them from the Rank of Christians. For besides the Cases of
Inability already mentioned, we believe that the Goodness of God may be also
extended to Cases of honest and involuntary Ignorance. Where Men, through the
Force of Prejudice or of any imperceptible Bias, mistake the Matter of their
Duty, while they are earnestly desirous of knowing and performing it, we hope
that the Integrity of their Hearts will be allowed, in a great Measure, to
atone for the Errors of their Understandings. If a Person, duly qualified for
some particular Office, should endeavor to obtain the King's Commission, but
through a Mistake should receive a fictitious one in its Stead; although such a
Commission is not the King's, and all his public Acts in Consequence of it are
strictly illegal, yet a good King would be disposed to overlook it, and to
ratify those Proceedings which were invalid in themselves. In the same Manner,
although we believe that Presbyterian Ordination does not convey Christ's
Commission, which he was pleased to lodge in other Hands; yet as some Persons
honestly mistake such Authority as is conveyed by it for his Commission, and by
Virtue thereof endeavor to execute his Laws and Purposes relating to his
Church, we hope the Irregularity of the Conduct will be forgiven them.

INDEED Persons of the same Spirit with that which governs some of our American
Writers against the Church, would probably say of it, in the Doctor's Language,
that it is a vile Affront and Abomination to Christ, as it undoubtedly is when
wilful and presumptous; but I cannot believe that, in any Instance, Christ will
receive what is sincerely intended to be an Act of Obedience, as an Affront and
an Abomination. It concerns us to inquire honestly, and with the greatest Care,
after the Will of our blessed Master, and if possible not to mistake it; but
after all, if we should unfortunately still mistake it, we have the Happiness
to know, that he is not extreme to mark what has been done amiss, especially
through Ignorance. We believe the Sacraments to have been instituted by Christ,
as Means "generally necessary to Salvation;" but because the People called
Quakers, through a mistaken Judgment, are without the Sacraments, are we to
conclude, that all the worthy and pious Persons of that religious Denomination,
shall fail of Salvation? And yet if our Opponents believe in the Manner that
they argue, they must look upon the most virtuous Quakers upon Earth, as
incapable of Happiness. The Truth is, whoever believes in Christ, and
endeavors to obey him, however mistaken he may have been in some Instances of
his Obedience, we trust will be accepted. Whoever makes it the Business of his
Life to fulfill the Conditions of the Gospel Covenant, notwithstanding any
apparent or unknown Defects in the Performance of his Duty, may expect the
Blessings of that Covenant, through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ.
There are undoubtedly many such Persons, among Christians of every Denomination.

BUT notwithstanding, Men's Sincerity in the Belief of erroneous Principles and
in Practices formed thereupon, can never be equal to Sincerity in right
Practices established upon just Principles. A sincere Heathen or Mohammedan is
by no Means to be considered as upon a Level with a sincere Christian; and
among Christians, we must give the Preference to those that come nearest to
what we believe to be the true Standard of Faith and Practice, on Supposition
that their Sincerity is equal. A Man who imagines he has the King's Commission,
but has it not in Reality, may endeavor to execute the King's Pleasure, and
otherwise act the Part of a good Subject, and as such he may be treated by his
Sovereign; but still, an authentic Commission is a better Thing than one that
is spurious. And it greatly concerns every Man bearing a Commission, to the
Authenticity and Legality of which Objections are made, to examine carefully in
what Manner, and from what Authority, he has received it.

THUS I have ventured, perhaps more freely than prudently, to express my own
Sentiments on this delicate Subject, and the Substance of them may be reduced
to the following Propositions: The Commission to ordain, etc. in the Christian
Church, can be derived only from Christ -- this Commission was originally given
exclusively to Bishops -- it has been brought down to the present Age by a
regular uninterrupted Succession of Bishops -- those who are without Bishops
are consequently without this Commission -- notwithstanding, where the Want of
this Commission has been fairly owing to the Impracticability of obtaining it,
it will not be imputed as criminal -- and farther, where there is an
Opportunity of obtaining it, and Men neglect it, through a mistaken, but
honest, Belief, that they are already in Possession of it, it is hoped that the
Goodness of God will overlook the Defect.

SHOULD I now be charged with wanting Charity, I must try to bear it as well as
I can. I am conscious that what I have said, has been offered with a
Disposition that is friendly to the whole human Race, by no Means exclusively
of those, upon whom it bears hardest; and I hope it is not inconsistent with
the Charity of a Christian, which does not require us to believe contrary to
Evidence, but only to put the most favorable Construction upon Men's Actions,
which they will fairly admit of. It would be well for the World, if we all
cultivated this divine Temper more than we do. We should then take a Pleasure
in thinking, and speaking, and writing of each other, as well as we can; and we
should be careful not to carry on our Controversies, when they should happen to
arise, especially those wherein Religion is concerned, with the Malignity and
Ferocity of Barbarians. If we were all under the Influence of that genuine
Charity, which the Gospel so clearly explains, and injoins, and inspires, we
should not admire a Writer for saying the bitterest and severest Things of
those that differ from us, however materially; and I much question, whether a
large, ill-natured, abusive Pamphlet, written professedly with the Design of
leading Men to believe, that the Church of England and Church of Jesus Christ,
are Constitutions of a quite different Nature, would have run through so many
Re-Impressions in this Country, and the Author have been so frequently
mentioned with singular Marks of Respect and Approbation.

BUT to proceed: The Doctor objects, that, according to the Doctrine of an
uninterrupted Succession in the Line of Bishops, if the popish Bishops, at the
Reformation, had stuck to their own Principles, and discontinued the Succession
of the Ministry by refusing to consecrate, or ordain any but those of their own
Communion, it would have been the Duty of Protestants to have contented
themselves, without public Worship and the Ordinances of Religion. I believe
the popish Bishops always stuck to their own Principles so far, as not to
consecrate or ordain any but those of their own Communion. The Doctor's
Supposition therefore will not answer the Purpose without another to second it,
namely, that none of the popish Bishops, ordained at the Time of the
Reformation, had turned Protestants after their Ordination; for if they had,
the Succession might have been continued to us by such reformed Bishops,
notwithstanding the Refusal of the popish Bishops to ordain any but those of
their own Communion: And while we are supposing, we may put the Case, upon
other Principles, that all the popish Presbyters had refused to ordain any but
Persons of their own Communion; and it will equally prove, that it would have
been the Duty of Protestants, not to have formed themselves into religious
Assemblies. There is no guarding any Cause or any Argument, against such
Suppositions as these. But why must we have been without a Succession, if we
had not received it from that Quarter? Might we not have applied to the Creek
Church, or to the Waldenses, and have received it from them, as the Bohemians
afterward did?

BUT the worst of the Doctrine of an uninterrupted Succession is still behind;
for it is derived through the Bishops of Rome, who for a hundred Years
together, were, as Baronius confesses, Monsters for Ignorance, Lust, Pride and
Luxury. Now I cannot conceive that Christ's Authority is more contaminated by a
Derivation through the Bishops of Rome, than it would have been, had it been
derived through the Presbyters of Rome, whose moral Characters were as infamous
as those of the Bishops. But it is a strange Conceit, that the personal Defects
of the Ministers of Religion, should invalidate their Administrations. It is
utterly inconceiveable that either the Ignorance, or the Pride, or the Lust, or
the Luxury of the popish Bishops, or all of them together, could render the
Commission of Christ in their Hands ineffectual; provided we mean by it any.
Thing different from their moral Integrity. This Matter is put in a proper
Light by Bp. Burnet. Though we have separated from many Errors and Corruptions
of the Church of Rome, and in particular have thrown out many superstitious
Rites out of the Forms of Ordination, that we might reduce these to a primitive
Simplicity; yet as we acknowledge the Church of Rome holds still the
Fundamentals of the Christian Religion; so we confess She retains the
Essentials of Ordination. -- Therefore we do not annul their Orders, but
receive such as come from that Church, and look upon them as true Priests by
the Ordination they got among them, and such were our first Reformers, from
whom we have derived our Ordination Vindication of the Ordinations, etc. p. 61.
.

I KNEW very well what the Dissenting Gentleman, whom the Doctor calls one of
the best Writers upon the Subject in Controversy, said, about our calling the
Church of Rome in our Homilies, a Harlot, an old withered Harlot, etc. without
the Assistance of his long Extract: and I know very well what Mr. White said in
Answer to it. But to my great Surprise, the Doctor appears to be entirely
unacquainted with Mr. White's Defenses of his Three Letters, against the
Attacks of that Gentleman. I will therefore give him, by Way of Specimen, Part
of his Reply to the Passage under Consideration. We indeed, says Mr. White, for
our Parts are not so nice, as to decline calling her (the Church of Rome) by
her proper Name a Harlot, when there is reasonable Occasion for it. But here,
it is only a scolding Word, and brought in without any Reason, as contributing
nothing toward putting an End to the Controversy between us. For Harlot as She
is, She may bring forth Children, as well as an honest and virtuous Matron, and
sometimes Children far better than their Parent. And if I must derive my
spiritual Pedigree from a Harlot, I had rather it should be an old whithered
one, of an ancient and honorable Line, than a young Strumpet, of no Name and
Family, and who came into the World but Yesterday Second Defense, p. 52.
. In a Word, I see no Reason why Orders derived from the Papists should, on
that Account, be invalid, any more than that Arguments derived from the Papists
should be so: And this very Objection against our Ordinations, appears to have
had a popish Origin. For a very reputable Author, who perhaps was as well
acquainted with the Arts and Schemes of the Papists as any Man of his Time,
informs us, that the Jesuits, popish Priests and Friars condemned our
Ministers, because they derived not their Ordination from the Church of Rome.
Now, says he, they turn the Scales, and affirm them to be no lawful Ministers,
but antichristian and popish upon this false Pretext, that they derive their
Ordination and Ministry from the Pope and Church of Rome Foxes and Firebrarnds,
Pt. 2. p. 152.
.

WE now come to the Doctor's Objections to the Arguments in Favor of
Episcopacy, which were sketched out in the Appeal; but I have already been
detained so long in settling Preliminaries, that I presume the Reader will
freely consent to my passing over, for the present, this Part of his
Performance. At the Time of writing the Appeal, it was imagined that giving a
Summary of the Evidence in Support of the Doctrine of Episcopacy, and an
Explanation of the several Branches of the episcopal Office, would contribute
to place the Plea for an American Episcopate in a fuller and fairer View, than
could otherwise be had; but I am now convinced, that what was said on the
general Subject, however just in itself, or proper in Theory, had been better
omited. Our Adversaries have eagerly laid hold of a Subject, which has been
already debated for almost 200 Years, and will probably be debated for 200
Years to come; and by this Means have kept the principal Object of this
Controversy, which is an American Episcopate, at a Distance, and as much as
possible out of Sight. The Doctor seems to have acted upon this Plan, exerting
himself upon the Subject of Episcopacy, as if it was his chief Business in
answering the Appeal; whereas the Curiosity of the Public called him to pursue
another Object -- an Object, from which therefore I propose to be no longer
diverted, by an endless Dispute concerning Episcopacy. Whether we are right or
wrong in our Notions of Episcopacy, yet that we believe Bishops to have been of
apostolical Institution, and that they are an essential Part in the
Constitution of our Church, is sufficient to entitle us to an Episcopate;
unless Reason can be shown, which it is the grand Business of our Opponents to
show, why the Church of England, in the Colonies, should not be suffered to
enjoy its own religious Institutions, while every other Denomination of
Christians is completely tolerated. I propose therefore, as has been intimated,
to pass over all that has been said on the general Subject of Episcopacy, so
far as it relates to the Evidence of Scripture and the primitive Church. Nor
let the Doctor complain that I decline this Debate; for I mean only to defer it
to a more convenient Time. When we shall have settled the Point of an American
Episcopate, I will endeavor to hold myself in Readiness to answer his farther
Demands.

AN Extract from Chillingworth's Demonstration of Episcopacy concluded the
first Section of the Appeal. This the Doctor does not attempt to confute; but
he discovers half a Mind to get rid of it another Way, by serving it as he
before had served St. Ignatius's Epistles Appendix to the Dudleian Lecture.
. It is, says he, p. 30, strange -- that be should write in the Manner he is
here REPRESENTED to have done in Relation to Episcopacy. Does he then demur to
the Authenticity of the Demonstration, and suspect that Chillingworth was not
the Author of it! If he can make this appear, he will not be obliged to
encounter with the Authority of so great a Name, which is the only Advantage to
be expected from it; but the Demonstration will still remain, and the Argument
in Favor of Episcopacy will be as conclusive, whoever may have been the Author
of it. He confronts the Extract I had given with a Passage from the great Work,
The Religion of Protestants a safe Way to Salvation; in which Passage the same
Author declares, that the BIBLE only is the Religion of Protestants; but this
is not inconsistent with any Thing advanced in the Demonstration. Where he
allows us to appeal to "the Bible ONLY," he is speaking of the Rule of Faith in
its strictest Sense; and he uses no more than the common Language of
Protestants, of Episcopalians, as well as others. But with Regard to Matters of
a different Nature, we find him allowing proper Weight to the Testimony of
Antiquity. Thus in Chap. v.82. speaking of the various Sects of Protestants, he
says, They did best that followed Scripture interpreted by catholic written
Tradition; which Rule the Reformers of the Church of England proposed to
themselves to follow. I might produce from him many other Expressions to the
same Purpose. And although he mentions Popes against Popes, Councils against
Councils, some Fathers against others, etc. yet he is not there speaking of the
pure and primitive Ages of the Church, but of those succeeding ones which had
grossly departed from the original Standard.

BUT notwithstanding the Pretense that Chillingworth is on his Side, the
Doctor, upon the whole, not liking his Sentiments, appeals from him to much
greater Men in the Knowledge of Antiquity, and particularly to that great
Antiquary, the learned Archbishop Usher, who, it seems, in a Letter to Dr.
Bernard, says, I have ever declared my Opinion to be, that Bishop and Presbyter
differ only in Degree, not in Order. The Letter goes on in these Words, omited
by Dr. Chauncy -- and consequently that in Places where Bishops cannot be had,
the Ordination by Presbyters stands valid; yet on the other Side holding as I
do, that a Bishop has Superiority in Degree above a Presbyter, you may easily
judge that the Ordination made by such Presbyters, as have severed themselves
from those Bishops, unto whom they had sworn canonical Obedience, cannot
possibly by me be excused from being schismatical; And howsoever, I must needs
think that the Churches, which have no Bishops, are thereby become very much
defective in their Government, and that the Churches in France, who living
under a popish Power, cannot do what they would, are more excusable in this
Defect, than the Low Countries that live under a free State -- and then come
the other Words cited by the Doctor, with which the Archbishop concludes his
Letter.

THE Reader can hardly avoid remarking here, that, in the Opinion of that
learned Antiquary, although Ordination by Presbyters in Cases of Necessity may
be valid, yet Ordination by Presbyters in other Circumstances is not to be
excused from being schismatical -- that all Churches without Bishops are "very
much defective in their Government" -- and that the Churches in France are in
this Respect more excusable than those in the Low Countries, because they are
less able to remedy this Defect. As so full an Explanation immediately follows
the Declaration of his Opinion, that Bishops and Presbyters differ only in
Degree, we may safely conclude that the Primate was rather singular in his Mode
of Expression, than in his real Sentiments, with Regard to Episcopacy. There is
a Passage in the History of the Council of CONSTANCE By L'Enfant, Vol. II. p.
27.
, which will, in some Measure, account for this Peculiarity of Expression. The
Historian, giving an Abstract of Gerson's Book concerning ecclesiastical Power,
informs us, that Gerson observes there is some Difference between the
Sentiments of the Lawyers and Divines concerning Episcopacy. The Lawyers, says
he, call Episcopacy an Order, because it is above the Priesthood. Though the
Divines agree, that Episcopacy is a hierarchical Power above the Priesthood,
yet they do not say that it is an Order, because it adds nothing to the Power
of the Priest over the true Body of Jesus Christ, therefore it is not a new
Order, but a new Power. From this Account it appears that before the
Reformation although it was the general Opinion that Episcopacy is a
hierarchical Power above the Priesthood, or "a new Power" added to that of
Presbyters, which Power was known always to have been communicated by a new
Ordination; yet in the Language of the Divines, in Contradistinction to that of
the Lawyers, it was not called a distinct Order. Now it is natural enough to
suppose that an Antiquary, one that is conversant in the Writings of those
Divines that lived Ages before him in the Times of Popery, although a sound
Protestant as the Primate was, may have fallen into some Part of their
Phraseology, and consequently that he may have used the particular Words, Order
and Degree in a Sense somewhat different from that wherein they were used by
his Cotemporaries. A real Difference between Bishops and Presbyters he
certainly admitted, and perhaps allowed the Difference to be as great as is
contended for; and in that Case it matters not whether it be expressed by the
Word Order, or Degree. It may assist us in forming a Judgment of the
Archbishop's Opinion concerning this Point, to bear in our Minds that he fully
believed the Epistles of St. Ignatius to be genuine; for it is impossible for
any Man, with this Belief, to doubt, whether in the Beginning of the second
Century, the Church was governed by Bishops, as distinct from, and superior to,
Presbyters.

THIS Reasoning, and the Conclusion to which it leads, are abundantly confirmed
by Dr. Bernard, who was the Archbishop's Chaplain for many Years, and most
intimately acquainted with his Sentiments relating to this Subject, as well as
to others. In Order to prevent any Misinterpretations of the Archbishop's
Opinion concerning Episcopacy, as expressed in the Letter, Dr. Bernard says:
For that Superiority only in Degree which he (the Primate) says a Bishop has
above a Presbyter, it is not to be understood as an arbitrary Matter, at the
Pleasure of Men, but that he held it to be of apostolical Institution, and no
more a Diminution of the Preheminency and Authority of Episcopacy, than the
Denomination of Lights given in common by Moses, to all of them in the
Firmament, detracts from the Sun and Moon, whom he calls the greater, and were
assigned of God to have the Rule of the rest; though the Difference between
them be only gradual, yet there is a derivative Subordination, as the
Preheminency of the Firstborn was but gradual, they were all Brethren, but to
him was given of God the Excellency, or Supremacy of Dignity and Power, to him
they must bow, or be subject, and he must have the Rule over them: And that
this Gradus is both derived from the Pattern prescribed by God in the Old
Testament, and from the Imitation thereof brought in by the Apostles, and
confirmed by Christ in the Time of the New, the Primate has so fully confirmed
in that learned Tractate of his, of the Original of Bishops, which he has
deduced from the apostolical Times, that I know not what can be added The
Judgment of the late Archbishop, etc. p. 127.
.

AS to Bishop Burnet, to whom we are refered; whatever he was inclined to
believe when he wrote his Vindication of the Church of Scotland, his subsequent
Writings afford innumerable Proofs, that he afterward believed the Doctrine of
Episcopacy to be supported, both by the Evidence of Scripture, and the Practice
of the primitive Church. If Stillingfleet, when he wrote his Irenicum, and
before he was 24 Years of Age, was, as the Doctor pronounces, as well versed in
the Fathers as any Man; how much superior to any Man, in this Respect, must he
have been 20 or 30 Years afterward, considering the almost uninterrupted
Application of his great Abilities to Studies of this Nature? Now at, and long
before, that Period of his Age and Inquiries, this celebrated Writer condemned
the whole System of his Irenicum; as indeed he greatly departed from it within
two or three Years of its first Publication. The Doctor may be inclined to pay
more Deference to Stillingfleet Rector of Sutton, than to Stillingfleet Dean of
St. Paul's, or Bishop of Worcester; but others, I believe, will consider such
Partiality as absurd and preposterous.

I HAVE arrived, at length, to the End of this Section. And upon reviewing what
has passed between us, I can honestly declare, that I am now more established
in my Adherence to Chillingworth's Conclusions in direct Contradiction to those
of the Doctor, than at the Time of writing the Appeal; more firmly believing
that episcopal Government having been universally received in the Church
presently after the Apostles Times, there could be "no such Alteration as is
pretended" by Dr. Chauncy and others; and that therefore Episcopacy is not only
"ancient and catholic," but truly "apostolic."

SECTION II.
SECT. II.
THE Objections that have been made to the second Section of the Appeal, wherein
the Powers peculiar to the episcopal Office are shown; as they relate chiefly
to the Evidence of Scripture explained by the Practice of the primitive Church,
so far shall be passed over, they coming not within the Intention of the
present Defense. But a few Things of another Nature have been interspersed with
these Objections, of which it may be proper to take Notice.

THAT the Reader might conceive justly of the true Nature of the episcopal
Office, I had thought proper to make a Distinction between the several Things
that had been added as Appendages thereunto, and those which originally and
essentially belong to it. The Doctor seems to have nothing to oppose to this
Distinction; but yet to carry on the Appearance of differing from me in
Opinion, he takes Occasion from it to object, in p. 33, that it is highly
unreasonable to add such Appendages to the Office, and as much so to expect, if
they are added, that Christian Professors (Professors of what?) Should not
complain of it as an intolerable Grievance. Whether the Addition of such
Appendages be reasonable or unreasonable, is nothing to me; and, which is more,
it is nothing to the Case of such an Episcopate as is proposed for America. I
had said nothing, nor was it my Business to say any Thing, of its being
reasonable that these Appendages should be added; nor is it his Business as an
Answerer to me, to say any Thing of its being unreasonable. Much less was it
his Business to object Appendages of this Kind to an Episcopate, which it
certainly is, and ever was, intended, shall exist without them. And yet both
the Doctor and our weekly Adversaries, have expended a great deal of Time and
Paper in very impertinent Declamation upon this Subject.

I HAD Occasion to observe, that he who has a small Diocese, has the same
episcopal Powers, as he that has a large one; and it Matters not, as to the
Validity of the Act, whether it be performed by one or the other. The Doctor
answers, that it certainly does as to his Capacity to serve the great Ends of
his Office -- and that there is, in Proportion, the same Incongruity in placing
Bishops at the Head of large Diocesses, as in having an universal One. This,
considered likewise as an Answer to me, and in no other Light are we authorized
to consider it, amounts to no more than this; that although what I said is
allowed to be true, yet Something that I did not say is certainly false. The
Thing which I did not say is, that a Bishop is as able to serve the great Ends
of his Office in a large Diocese, as in a small one. And yet if I had said
this, unless the large Diocese is supposed to be larger than the largest in any
protestant Country, or in the primitive Church, to which only I had Reference;
and the small one, smaller than the smallest, it would not have been so very
exceptionable. The larger Diocesses in England have commonly been as well taken
Care of, as the smaller ones; and should any of them hereafter, by an Increase
of the Inhabitants, be found to be too large for the Diocesans, Provision is
made that they may be assisted by Suffragans, in Proportion as they are wanted.
The Doctor seems to judge of the episcopal Charge, upon congregational
Principles, confounding the Office of a Bishop with that of a Parish Minister;
which is like confounding the Duty of a Lord Lieutenant of a County, with that
of a Mayor of a Corporation.

I SHALL now pass on to his Exceptions in p. 42, to what I had said of Aerius
and Colluthus; namely, that they were the first Contrivers of Ordination by
Presbyters. Concerning the former, the Doctor endeavors to console himself
with these Reflections, that Epiphanius was the first that found Fault with
Aerius, and that Aerius was condemned not only and merely for his Opinion
concerning the Parity of Bishops and Presbyters. But as to Epiphanius's being
the first Person that found Fault with Aerius, why might not he have been the
first, as well as any other Person? The Doctor, I hope, knows, that Aerius and
Epiphanius were Cotemporaries; the former broached his Heresy under
Valentinian, who was invested with the Empire, in 364, and Epiphanius was made
Bishop of Salamis, in 366, according to Du Pin. If an Intimation is intended
that Epiphanius was the only Person that, at first, considered the Doctrine of
Aerius as exceptionable, or, in other Words, that the Parity of Bishops and
Presbyters was generally admitted in the fourth Century, the Suggestion is
groundless. The united Voice of Antiquity, and even the Concessions of our most
considerable Adversaries, prove the contrary with invincible Evidence. If the
Meaning be, that Epiphanius was the first that wrote against Aerias; the
Chronology of the Facts ought to be more exactly ascertained, before any Thing
material can be collected from this Circumstance. Epiphanius began to write his
Book of Heresies, according to Du Pin's Account, in 374, but when Aerius first
made himself obnoxious, except in general that it was in the Reign of the
Emperor Valentinian, extending from 364 to 375, I do not find. Perhaps it may
have been but a short Time before Epiphanius wrote against him: -- Or,
supposing it otherwise, perhaps Aerius himself, and the Progress of his
Doctrine, were at first too inconsiderable to deserve Notice: -- and perhaps
there may be Something in the Case, which, at this Distance, we cannot account
for. If the Doctor thinks this last Supposition can be of any Service to him,
he is heartily welcome to it.

IF Aerius was not condemned only and merely, it is sufficient for my Purpose
that he was condemned chiefly, for his Opinion concerning the Parity of Bishops
and Presbyters. And that this was the principal Cause of his Condemnation,
appears from all the Accounts I have met with. The learned Mosheim gives this
brief Account of the Matter: About this Time, Aerius, a Presbyter, Monk and
Semi-Arian, erected a new Sect, and excited Divisions throughout Armenia,
Pontus, and Cappadocia, by propagating Opinions different from those that were
commonly received. One of his principal Tenets was, that Bishops were not
distinguished from Presbyters by any divine Right; but that, according to the
Institution of the New Testament, their Offices and Authority were absolutely
the same. How far Aerius pursued this Opinion, through its natural
Consequences, is not certainly known Ecclesiastical History, Vol. I. p. 202.
.

THE Doctor thinks I had no Need, nor any Reason to join Colluthus with Aerius;
for he did not act in the Capacity of, what Episcopalians would call, a mere
Presbyter, in the Business of ordaining; but as a Bishop. But I thought it a
very sufficient Reason for joining him with Aerius, that he acted in that
Capacity, when he was, in Reality, no more than what Episcopalians would call,
and the Orthodox of that Age did call, a mere Presbyter. The true State of the
Case of Colluthus may be gathered, from the synodical Epistle of the Bishops of
Egypt, Thebais, Lybia and Pentapolis -- and from a joint Letter of the Clergy
of the Province of Mareotis, both preserved in the Works of Athanasius. The
synodical Epistle of those African Bishops, speaking of the Case of one
Ischyras, whom Colluthus ordained, observes: This is the famous Ischyras, who
was neither ordained by the Church, nor reckoned among the Presbyters, ordained
by Meletius, whom Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria, received. How then came
Ischyras to be a Presbyter, and by whom was he ordained? Was it by Colluthus?
For that remains to be said. But Colluthus died a Presbyter, so that all the
Impositions of his Hands were invalid and null; and all those, whom he ordained
in his Schism, are well known to have been reduced to the Laity. The Clergy of
Mareotis give the like Representation of the Matter. Ischyras who calls himself
a Presbyter, is not a Presbyter, since he was ordained by Colluthus, who
assumed an imaginary Episcopacy, and was afterward commanded by Hosius, and
other Bishops synodically assembled, to return to the Order of Presbyters,
whereto he was ordained. And consequently all those, whom Colluthus ordained,
returned to their former Stations, and Ischyras himself became a Layman
Potter's Theological Works, Vol. II. p. 36^.
. I leave it now with the Reader to judge whether Colluthus acted in the
Capacity of a mere Presbyter, in the Business of ordaining, or as a Bishop; and
whether it was improper to join him with Aerius, or not. If after all, the
Doctor chooses to give up the Example of Colluthus, as not favoring the Cause
of Ordination by Presbyters, I certainly can have no Objection.

IT was said in the Appeal, that there is not an Instance of Ordination by
Presbyters to be found in the Church for several Ages. Dr. Chauncy in his
Reply, after remarking that these Words imply that there are numerous Examples
of episcopal Ordination within the same Period, calls upon me in p. 44, very
emphatically to produe ONE Instance, within the long Period of 150 Years from
Christ, of an Ordination by any Bishop, in any Part of the Christian World;
meaning by a Bishop an Officer in the Church of a superior Order to that of
Presbyters. So far all is very fair. But behold, Reader, a Curiosity. This very
same Challenge he made in his Dudleian Lecture, p. 70; to which a formal and
direct Answer has been given by Mr. Leaming. His Words are as follow: I will
comply with his (Dr. Chauncy's) Demand; and I hope he will allow the Authority
of my Author. I might produce many, but for Brevity's Sake, shall mention but
one Instance: And that is the Ordination of Titus by St. Paul. That Titus had
an episcopal Ordination, appears from the Charge St. Paul gave him, Tit. i.5.
For this Cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in Order the
Things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City as I HAD APPOINTED
THEE. St. Paul charged him also to rebuke with all Authority; and again, a Man
that is an Heretic, after the first and second Admonition, reject. Here St.
Paul commits to Titus the whole Power of ordaining Elders in Crete, and of
governing them and all the Christians in that Island. This Authority is clearly
expressed, and the Bounds, in which he was to exercise it, distinctly marked
out. Thus it appears, that this was an episcopal Ordination in our Sense of the
Matter. Our Bishops claim nothing but the very same Power, that St. Paul gave
to Titus over the Island of Crete Defense of the Episcopal Government, p. 61.
. Is not this a fair and full Answer to the Doctor's Demand? Ought he then to
be unsatisfied, when all that he asks has been given him? Is it not very
extraordinary that he should so roundly repeat the Demand, without the least
Notice of Mr. Leaming's Answer? I have sometimes met with Persons who would
allege the Arguments of others that had been answered, and the Objections of
others that had been confuted, without taking Notice of the said Answers and
Confutations; but Dr. Chauncy is the first Man I have found in any of the
Regions of Controversy, that could, without any Symptoms of Perturbation, deal
thus with his own Arguments and Objections, after they had been formally
answered and confuted. As this and some other Things are against him, it is a
Pity he "undertook" the "Work" of answering the Appeal, without consulting his
Brethren; and "that he was" not "assisted in it, as -- to the Management" of
some particular Parts of it, by Direction from so learned and able a Body of
Men. Had he been favored with such distinguishing Advantages, the few
Blemishes upon the Face of his Composition might have been avoided.

THE Doctor, in p. 45, pronounces me to have been egregiously mistaken, in
saying, that from the fourth Century, until the Beginning of the Reformation in
the sixteenth, no Instances worthy of Notice occur, to favor Ordination by
Presbyters: And to convince me of my egregious Mistake, he points out, by the
Assistance of Mr. Daniel Williams and Mr. Thomas Walter, the Example of the
Waldenses. But upon Examination it will be found, that those two Gentlemen
happened to be egregiously mistaken themselves. We have already seen, that the
Bohemians had Bishops consecrated by the Waldenses; which shows that the
Waldenses then really were, and by others were known to be, Episcopalians. They
were moreover such High-Flyers, that they claimed an uninterrupted Succession
in the Line of Bishops, as superior to Presbyters. The Bohemian Church, in
their Preface to the Book called, Ratio Disciplinae, Ordinisque ecclesiastici
in Unitate Fratrum Bohemorum, say: And whereas the said Waldenses did affirm
that they had lawful Bishops, and a lawful UNINTERRUPTED SUCCESSION FROM THE
APOSTLES unto this Day; they created Three of our Ministers solemnly Bishops,
and confered upon them Power to ordain Ministers. For this Account I am obliged
to the Author of the Invalidity of the dissenting Ministry, in Answer to Mr.
Owen; and he farther informs us, that by a Brief read in the Churches
throughout England, for obtaining for the Waldenses charitable Assistance, not
long before his writing, which was in 1717, it clearly appeared, that they were
episcopal Churches, like the Church of England, for which they always pray in
their Liturgy.
One of the most celebrated modern ecclesiastical Historians, who is far from
being partial to the Cause of Episcopacy, giving an Account of the Waldenses in
the twelfth Century, says of them: "The Government of the Church was committed
by the Waldenses, to Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons; for they acknowledged
that these three ecclesiastical Orders were instituted by Christ himself
Mosheim's Ecclesiastical History, Vol. I. p. 617.
. But of all Authors, Dr. Allix appears to have made the most effectual
Examination into the History of the Waldenses, and to have understood it the
most perfectly. This very eminent Writer in his Remarks upon the ancient
Churches of Piedmont, has abundantly proved, that the Waldenses always
preserved, under all their Persecutions and Dispersions, the same Form of
Church Government, from the Time of their Separation from the Church of Rome in
the eleventh Century; and that they distinguished their Clergy into three
Orders, viz. Bishops, Priests and Deacons. He proves this even from the
Testimonies of those Enemies, who endeavored to fix upon them the Reproach of
allowing the Laity to preach and administer the Sacraments. He proves it more
fully from their own Writers, and even from the Example of that very Ledger,
whom Dr. Chauncy, following Mr. Walter, has introduced to give Evidence to the
contrary. For Ledger himself was a Waldensian Bishop for twelve Years before his
Death, exercising all the Powers that belong to the episcopal Office. Thus
having examined all that has been offered on the other Side, I find myself more
firmly established, by the Doctor's Opposition, in my Belief of the Proposition
advanced in the Appeal, that the uniform Practice of the Church for 1500 Years,
may be added to the Evidence of Scripture, in Support of the Necessity of
episcopal Ordination.

WE now come to the Subject of Confirmation. The Doctor passes over what I had
said of its Nature and Usefulness; the Reason for which, is left to the
Reader's Sagacity to discover. But he favors me, in p. 47, with some critical
Remarks upon the Paragraph, wherein I had made an Observation, that the Church
of England declares of Confirmation, that it has been a solemn, ancient and
laudable Custom, continued from the Apostles Time; and wherein I endeavored to
show the Meaning of that Expression. My reasoning upon this Head he styles
eminently curious, and cries out, demonstrably argued! Is Infallibility the
PECULIAR Privilege of the Church? But had he attended to the Paragraph, he
might have seen that my Design therein was, to prove what the Church of England
believes concerning the Antiquity and Origin of Confirmation; and not to
ascertain the Truth of a disputed Fact, by the Authority of the Church of
England's Assertion. However the Doctor has gained this Advantage by his
Mistake; he has shown that he is able occasionlly to enliven and embellish his
Style with rhetorical Decorations. By his interrogating whether Infallibity is
the peculiar Privilege of the Church of England, one would be apt to imagine,
that he claimed the Privilege of Infallibility for other Churches, and
particularly for those of the Colonies; but I hope this was not intended, and
that there is in Reality nothing more in it than a small Slip of his Pen.

IN p. 49, I am accused of unfairly quoting a Text of Scripture; a Crime which
I hold in Abhorrence. Designedly to misrepresent any common Author, is a
Species of Injustice which no honest Man will ever consent to practice; but to
treat the inspired Writers of holy Scripture in this Manner, is impious and
abominable. I am sorry Dr. Chauncy could think me capable of committing such a
flagrant Act of Impiety, knowingly and wilfully; and yet from some of his
Expressions, I conclude that he thought me, or, at least, that he intended his
Readers should think me, capable of doing so. The Text which I am charged with
misquoting, is Acts xix. 6, which he has heedlessly marked Acts xx. 7. The
whole Verse is thus: And when Paul had laid his Hands upon them, the Holy Ghost
came on them; and they spoke with Tongues and prophesied. I am charged with
suppressing the latter Part of the Text, because if I had given the whole
Verse, it would have been, at once, visible to the Reader, that it would have
been nothing to my Purpose. Would not any one from hence conclude, that I
looked upon the latter Part of the Verse, as overthrowing the Doctrine which I
was aiming to establish by the former Part of it? Would he not infer, that I
had carefully concealed from the Reader those Words which made against my
Design? Whereas, in Truth, I neither looked upon the Words at first omited, as
really unfavourable to my Argument; nor did I mean to conceal them, for that or
any other Reason; nor did I, in Fact, conceal them, but soon after produced
them in the Form of an Objection, and gave them all the Consideration I thought
necessary.

TO set this Matter in a proper Light, I must observe, that the former Part of
the Verse in Question, in p. 21, of the Appeal, is introduced as being exactly
parallel with another Text quoted in the preceding Page. Without going on to
the End of the Verse, but only to the End of the Parallel, I made a Stop (the
Doctor says I shamefully stopped short) to point out, how exactly the one
Description answered to the other, and to show that they both manifestly
related to the same Office of Confirmation. I then went on to answer the
Objections that might be supposed to arise, against my Interpretation; and
amongst these Objections, I placed before the Reader those very Words, which I
am accused of having kept out of Sight. Whoever will be kind enough to turn to
p. 23, of the Appeal, will find that I acted fairly with the Objection, and
endeavored to do it Justice. From whence it is evident, that I could have had
no Design to suppress or conceal the Words in Dispute; or else that I failed of
my Design, since I actually did not suppress or conceal them. I might indeed
have quoted them in close Connection with the preceding Part of the Verse; but
I thought it sufficient to quote them, when I should come to consider them.
When I considered them, I supposed no Person would object them, who did not
know their Connection as used by the sacred Historian; the Knowledge of which I
had no Desire to conceal from any one. By this Time I hope the Reader is
satisfied, that I am free from the Guilt imputed to me; and that the Doctor
has, I will not say, shamefully, but however not much to his Honor,
misrepresented the whole Matter.

HE concludes what he has to say on the Subject of Confirmation, with a long
Extract from the Dissenting Gentleman's Answer to Mr. White; the Design of
which is to show, that the Bishop has no Warrant to pronounce, in the
Administration of that Office, a Man's Sins all forgiven, and himself
regenerated by the Holy Ghost. In Answer to this Harangue, it will be
sufficient to give the Words of Mr. White. I have now, says he, only to clear
up one or two Passages in the Office for Confirmation, and to rescue them from
the perverse Interpretation of this Writer. The first is that, wherein the
Bishop declares, concerning those that come to Confirmation, that God has
vouchsafed to regenerate those his Servants by Water and the Holy Ghost, and
given them the Forgiveness of all their Sins. This he is pleased to understand
as a Declaration concerning their present State, and an Assurance that they
are, all, though some of them may be absolute Strangers to the renewing
Influences of God's Spirit, and fast bound in their Sins, in a State of Grace
and Acceptance, and need not doubt of their Salvation. Whereas, it is very
plain, from the mention of Water, and their being regenerated thereby, that it
is only declarative of the State they were put into by Baptism, they having
received therein, or being thereby entitled to the Holy Spirit, and the
Forgiveness of all Sin. -- But though the State which they were put into when
they received their Baptism, was, doubtless, the State which is here meant,
yet, for Argument's Sake, I will admit what this Gentleman begs me to admit
(for he offers no Proof of it) that the Bishop means the State they are
supposed, at present, to be in. And now we will see, if this Declaration from
the Bishop, even in this View, be really such an unwarrantable and presumptuous
one as our Author represents it to be, and is not fairly defensible.

LET it then be observed, that this Declaration is made, not separately to each
Individual, but to the whole Assembly, the whole Multitude of those who present
themselves for Confirmation. And as the far greater Part of these are very
young Persons, whom the Bishop may reasonably, or in the Judgment of Charity,
believe not to be yet defiled with the Pollutions that are in the World through
Lust, and most of the Rest, who are of advanced Years, Men seemingly serious,
and having a Disposition to real Holiness, and he does not know for certain,
there are any amongst them, but can only presume, that, in so great a Number,
there may probably be some of another Character, I do not see but the Bishop is
sufficiently warranted to make such a Declaration concerning them, as he does
here. Nor can I apprehend there is the least Danger that a few Individuals, who
are yet unholy, and in their Sins, getting in amongst them, will take
Encouragement, and conceive false Hopes of the Safety of their Condition, from
any such Declaration; which they cannot but be sensible was never meant to be
applied to themselves, or such Kind of Persons, as they must needs know
themselves to be.

MR. White then goes on to show, in the Words of Dr. Doddridge, that the same
Form of Expression which is blamed in our Office for Confirmation, was commonly
used by Christ and his Apostles. Our Lord, says Dr. Doddridge, though he knew the
Wickedness of Judas, often addresses himself to the whole Body of his Apostles,
as if they were all his faithful Servants, and makes gracious Declarations and
Promises to the whole Society, which could by no Means be applicable to this
corrupt and wretched Member of it. Other Quotations to the same Purpose, from
the same Author, are given us by Mr. White. He then remarks: If this be
admitted (as I fancy it will) by my Answerer; if he grants that Gentleman (Dr.
Doddridge) that our Lord, on diverse Occasions did speak to the Twelve in such
Terms as were, and, which is more, he knew, were no Way applicable to the
Traitor -- how can he think it wrong, and such an unwarrantable Thing, as he
pretends to do, in the Bishops, at Confirmation, to declare, before the whole
Assembly offering themselves to be confirmed, that God had vouchsafed to
regenerate those his Servants by Water and the Holy Ghost, and to give them the
Forgiveness of all their Sins, etc. If indeed he (the Bishop) was to declare to
each individual Person, by himself, that God had regenerated him in particular,
with the Holy Ghost, and forgiven him all his Sins, it would be a different
Case.

IT might have been not amiss, if the Doctor, who so often flourishes away with
Extracts from the Dissenting Gentleman and Mr. Pierce, had carefully attended
to Mr. White's Defenses against the Objections of the former, and to Dr. Grey's
Answer to the latter; in which Case, I cannot but think that some of his
Quotations from those Authors would have been spared.

SECTION III.
THE Design of the next Section of the Appeal was to show, SECT. III.
by a particular Application of the general Doctrine of Episcopacy, that the
Church in America, without an Episcopate, is necessarily destitute of a regular
Government, and cannot enjoy the Benefits of Ordination and Confirmation. This
is a natural Consequence of our Principles; and one would think that no Person
would venture to dispute it. But yet Dr. Chauncy, who seems to have proceeded
upon the Plan of disputing every Thing that is advanced in the Appeal, has
shown that he is able to offer Objections even to this.

I passed over the subject of Confirmation without Enlargement, designedly;
because I supposed, that, with some of my Readers, the Importance of that
sacred Rite would not be acknowledged -- or, in the Doctor's Phrascology, that
the Subject was not suited to the Colony-Taste. It is not a Matter of Wonder to
me, that an Instance of such Complaisance to the Reader, should be disagreeable
to such an Answerer as the Doctor; who hints his Dislike that the more
important Points of Government and Ordination are, as he says, immediately
proceeded to, making a Participle passive from "a Verb neuter -- Liberties of
which Kind, I find him frequently taking without Ceremony.

BEFORE he enters upon the proper Business of this Section, he thinks fit to
make Two Remarks. The first, in p. 56, and running on to p. 59, was occasioned
by my saying, that none but Bishops have a Right to govern the Church:
Whereupon he represents the Church of England as having no Authority that is
purely spiritual, every Thing of that Kind being considered by him as absorbed
in the King's Supremacy. But this Matter has already been placed in so full and
clear a Light, that to enlarge upon it here would be paying but an ill
Compliment to the Reader's Understanding.

HIS other Remark in p. 59, which he confesses to be not essentially important,
relates to the Difference betwixt the Complaint as made at the Head of this
Section, and its Appearance in the Explanation that follows. The Ground of the
Complaint, says he, as there specified, is this, the Church of England in
America, being without Bishops, must for that Reason 'be without Government and
Ordination:' Whereas the Justification of this Complaint does not proceed upon
the supposition either that they have 'no Government,' or can have 'no
Ordination;' but that their Government without Bishops is incomplete and
insufficient, and that Ordination cannot be had without Difficulty, Danger and
Expense, p. 60. By the Head if the Section, I should understand the Title of
the Section, or at least its first Paragraph. But the Complaint as specified in
the Title of the Section is, that without an Episcopate the Church in America
'is destitute of a regular Government;' implying that it might be under a
Government that is imperfect and irregular. If therefore, as the Doctor says,
the Justification of the Complaint proceeds upon the Supposition, that without
Bishops the Government of the Church is incomplete and insufficient, it exactly
answers to the Title of the Section. Indeed in p. 27, I had said that the
American Church, while without Bishops, must be without Government. If he had
this general Expression in his View, he did wrong in saying it was at the Head
of the Section; for few of his Readers, I believe, would ever think of looking
for the Head of a Thing, in the Middle of it.

I TOOK Notice that this general Proposition, that without Bishops the Church
of England in America is without Government, is to be understood in a qualified
Sense: But surely there can be no Inconsistency in this. It is very common, and
agreeable to strict Method, first to lay down a general Proposition, and then
to mark out the Exceptions and Limitations with which it is to be understood.

AS to Ordination, the general Proposition is true without any Exception. For
without Bishops, upon the Principles of the Church of England, 2there cannot be
Ordination in a single Instance. The Doctor here distinguishes; no Ordination,
and Ordination with Inconvenience and Charge, are quite different Things. But
he seems to labor under a great Confusion of Ideas, whenever he talks upon the
Subject of Ordination. The Position which he controverts is this, that there
can be no Ordinations in America without Bishops in America; in Opposition to
which he argues, that we may have Ordinations in America, with Inconvenience
and Charge. But how can we, without Bishops, have Ordinations in America? Why,
says my very logical Opponent, by having them in England. Yet he unluckily
acknowledges in p. 56, as to Confirmation, that we must be in Want of it
without Bishops, because they only can perform this Piece of Service. If so,
one would be apt to think, in like Manner, as to Ordination, that we must be in
Want of it without Bishops, because they only can perform this Piece of
Service. But no: Ordination, it seems, may be had still, with Inconvenience and
Charge; and so say I, may Confirmation. But the Truth is, neither of them can
be had in America, otherwise than by having them in Europe. Let us suppose, for
an Illustration, that the civil Authority should put a Stop to every
Printing-Press in England; and that some Person should complain of the Hardship
of this, that so constitutional a Right as the Liberty of the Press should be
refused to Englishmen: Would not an Objector appear in a ridiculous Light, that
should affirm the Liberty of the Press was not refused, but only attended with
Inconvenience and Charge; and explain himself by saying that a Man might go to
Holland or Russia, and there find a Press that would serve him? And yet I
cannot conceive that it makes any material Difference, whether the Subject of
such reasoning be Ordination, or the Liberty of the Press.

UNDER the Head of Government, I attempted to show, that although Presbyters
may have a subordinate Authority, yet unalienable episcopal Authority was
moreover necessary to answer the Ends of Government in an episcopal Church --
and that the Church of England in the Colonies greatly suffers for Want of this
Authority. The Doctor's Remark is, that if Presbyters may have a subordinate
Authority, the Church is still in a less deplorable State than was represented
by the Complaint, as at first worded. How the Complaint was at first worded,
has been shown; but if the State of the Church here is not so deplorably bad,
with Respect to its Government, as if Presbyters could have no subordinate
Authority at all; yet that is no Reason why we should not endeavor to make it
better than it is, nor is it any Reason why others should oppose the Attempt.

THE Doctor affects to think the Matter would not be much mended, by the
Residence of Bishops. The Church at Home, says he, is in this Respect, in as
lamentable a State as the Church in America. The Liturgy itself supposes their
Discipline to be in a wretched Condition, p. 62 -- alluding, I imagine, to the
Commination-Office. That the Discipline of the Church of England is defective
in some Respects, and below the primitive Standard, She has the Candor to
confess: If others, whose Discipline is by no Means more perfect, would confess
the same, it would be much for their Credit. But the Want of primitive
Discipline in the Church at Home, is no Proof that the Want of it is not still
greater in the Colonies, nor that the Want cannot in some Degree be remedied by
the proposed Episcopate. We think that a strict Discipline, with Regard to the
American Clergy, might be exercised under an Episcopate. This is certainly
expected; it is an important Part of our Plan; and that American Bishops would
disappoint us in this Respect, none have a Right to declare, until the
Experiment shall have been made.

TO show that these Expectations are vain, the learned Dr. Whitby is quoted for
these Words: "the Church of England observes no Discipline." But if it be true,
that the Church observes no Discipline at Home, it will not follow, that, in
very different Circumstances, She will not exercise the Discipline here which
is proposed and expected, when Bishops shall be appointed to reside in America.
But is the Doctor certain, that the learned Commentator says what he ascribes
to him? I ask the Question, not only because Whitby mentions not "the Church of
England" in the Passage refered to, but because it appears to me, that what is
there said of a Church without Discipline, the Commentator says not in his own
Person, but in the Character of a Dissenter, who is introduced as assigning it
for a Reason of his Separation from the Church of England. Whether I am right
in this Opinion, let the Reader judge. After mentioning the Case of a Jew, who
was governed by an erroneous Conscience, Dr. Whitby observes: this is so far
from being an unparallel Case, that it is the very Case of the Romanists, using
still the anointing of the sick -- of the Anabaptists, dipping them that are
baptized -- of the Greek Church, refusing to eat Things strangled and Blood,
out of a Reverence to the apostolical Injunction -- of the Dissenters, using
Prayer by the Spirit, or conceived Prayer, out of Reverence to the Command, to
pray in the Holy Ghost, and abstaining from Communion with that Church which
observes no Church Discipline, out of Respect to the Command, to purge the evil
from among us; for all this is done by them out of a mistaken Reverence to a
divine Authority, which they conceive obliging to them Note on Romans XIV.6.
. Now what is here probably, at least very possibly, intended only to express a
Conceit of the Dissenters, the Doctor, by a Stretch of his Prerogative, after
making the necessary Corrections and Amendments, forms into a positive
Assertion, and puts it into the Mouth of Dr. Whitby, giving it all the Marks of
a literal Quotation. Yet after all, supposing Whitby had taken it into his Head
to assert, what the Doctor, or rather Mr. Pierce, from whom the Quotation
appears to have been taken, makes him to assert; it will only follow, that he
asserted of the Church of England, what is not true of that, or any other
Church in the Universe. For there is no Church but has some Canons and Laws to
regulate the Behavior of its Members, and sometimes, at least, puts them in
Execution; and in so doing, observes and exercises Discipline. Unless therefore
it can be proved, that the Church of England has no Laws, or that none of her
Laws are ever enforced, it cannot justly be asserted that She observes no
Discipline.

IN explaining the Nature of ecclesiastical Authority, I had advanced this
Proposition, the Power of the Church is of a spiritual Nature. The Truth of
this is admited by Dr. Chauncy; but then he immediately rouses himself and his
Readers with the following Exclamation. It is really astonishing, that he (the
Author of the Appeal) should make spiritual Censures the utmost Effect of the
Power of the Church of England! And it is equally astonishing to me, that he
should not see, that, in the Place refered to, I was considering the Church in
its original State, before it was taken under the Protection of the civil
Power. I was not speaking of the Church of England in its present Situation,
supported and established by the Laws of the Kingdom; nor of any other Church,
in similar Circumstances. All Churches, whether Episcopalian or Presbyterian,
which enjoy the Benefit of a civil Establishment, have their Decrees seconded
and enforced, in some Instances, by the secular Arm. And if the Church of
England rejects not the friendly Assistance of temporal Authority; neither does
the Church of Scotland, nor that of Geneva, nor any other, to whom it is
offered. This Observation I beg Leave to illustrate and confirm by an Example
from Geneva, which was produced in the Conference at Hampton Court. One
Balthazar, a rich Widow in Geneva, had a Ball in her House. This Diversion is a
great Crime by Calvin's Discipline. It happened that a Syndick, one of the Four
chief Magistrates, and one Henrick an Elder, were Two of those that danced.
When Calvin understood what was done, he convented them before a Consistory;
and though they were delated by no Body, the Oath ex Officio was put to them to
extort Matter of Fact. -- In short, Henrick the Elder -- was turned out of his
Office, and imprisoned for three Days. The Syndick was likewise suspended from
the Execution of his Office, 'till he had given some Proofs of his Repentance
for being at the Ball. This Man resigned to the Consistory, did Penance upon
their Admonition, and so prevented his Commitment. There were several others,
who being examined by Calvin upon their Oath, confessed they were at this
dancing Entertainment, upon which they were all sent to Prison Collier's
Ecclesiastical History, Vol. II. p. 602.
. We see here that Calvin scrupled not to make Use of that temporal Power
granted him by the Republic, but would depose and imprison Men, as he thought
it would best answer the Purposes of his Discipline. And now, before I return
from Geneva, I will only observe, that the temporal Effects of Excommunication
there, are as dreadful, as the Doctor, in the Words of the Dissenting
Gentleman, has represented them to be in England.

IN speaking of Excommunication and ecclesiastical Censures, I had observed,
that in this Age they have lost much of their Weight; which is owing to certain
Causes that were briefly intimated. The Doctor briskly replies, it is readily
acknowledged the Discipline of the Church is held in Contempt by Multitudes.
But surely he must know, that Men may despise Things that are not in themselves
contemptible, and that they may affect to despise Things, at the same Time that
they really look upon them to be venerable. I have met with Persons who
appeared to hold the Discipline exercised by the Churches in the Colonies in as
great Contempt, as the Doctor, or any of his Party, can hold that of the Church
of England. If Infidels and Libertines laugh to see how it is exercised; we
may, in a great Measure, thank those, who have taken so much ungenerous Pains
to represent it in a ridiculous Light.

IT would be a Shame, says the Doctor, for a Man to speak in its Defense. We
acknowledge the Discipline of the Church to be defective, and so far we
undertake not to defend it: -- I wish some others had the same Ingenuity. But
although we pretend not to defend it in every Respect, yet much may be said,
and has been often said, to excuse it. The Doctor takes for granted that no
Attempt for Redress has been ever made. But in this he assumes more, than we
choose to allow him. He must be a Stranger to our History, who knows not that
some Attempts have been made with this View; and there may have been some
secret ones, of which History does not inform us. Does he think that nothing
can be attempted, without public Noise and Clamor? Or, is it reasonable to be
noisy and clamorous, when it is known that it can answer no valuable Purpose?
May not an indiscreet Zeal, in this, as well as in other Cases, do more
Mischief than Service? We are not ashamed to confess, that we wish for the
farther Improvement of every Thing belonging to the Church; of our Discipline,
of our common Translation of the Bible, of our Liturgy and public Offices;
which we hope in due Time to obtain, in a regular and peaceable Way; until
which Time we shall continue to Use them in their present State: -- Looking
upon the Discipline of the Church, defective as it is, to be equal with that of
our Neighbors -- considering our Translation of the Bible, however erroneous
in in some particular Passages, as tolerable upon the whole -- and esteeming
our Liturgy, although capable of still farther Improvement, to be the best upon
Earth.

THE Doctor spends some Pages more, in displaying the Qualities and Condition
of a Thing, which he professes to believe has no Existence, i. e. Discipline in
the Church of England; but as they consist chiefly of Extracts from the
Dissenting Gentleman, I must refer those, who are desirous of seeing particular
answers to those Extracts, to Mr. White. I shall take Leave of this Subject
with observing, that in this Part of his Performance, the Doctor suffers his
unbridled Imagination to run away with his Reason; and that his whole
Representation is manifestly so uncandid, so partial, so hyperbolical, so
ranting, and, I may add, so impertinent to his proper Business, that it merits
a Rebuke, rather than a Refutation. If he should ever again undertake to give
the Character of the Church of England, or of her Clergy; I recommend it to him
seriously to attend to the Apostle's Direction: Let all Bitterness, and Wrath,
and Anger, and Clamor, and Evil-speaking, be put away from you, with all
Malice Ephesians. iv.31.
.

IN p. 69, I am charged with Inconsistency, and the Charge is thus supported. I
had said; In this State of Things, the Restoration of the primitive Discipline
seems to be a Matter rather to be wished for and desired, than to be rationally
attempted by those in Authority. And yet, says the Doctor, it is proposed, that
this very Thing which cannot RATIONALLY BE ATTEMPTED, should not only be
attempted, but carried into Effect. The Thing that in our Opinion, cannot
rationally be attempted, is the Restoration of the primitive Discipline; the
Thing therefore proposed, according to this Representation, is not only to
attempt, but to carry into Effect (as indeed most Attempts are proposed with a
View of carrying Something into Effect) the Restoration of the primitive
Discipline. And yet, notwithstanding that we are allowed to have proposed this,
we are in the very same Page blamed for not proposing it -- for forming a Plan
not adapted to the Gospel-Institution of Discipline, which we all know was the
primitive Standard. The Task, I own, is somewhat difficult, to justify
ourselves for proposing and not proposing, for attempting and not attempting,
the same Thing; and it is rather unkindly imposed upon us. But if we might be
allowed to proceed in our own Way, we believe we could satisfy all reasonable
Persons. Our Opinion is, that in the present State of Things, the Restoration
of the primitive Discipline cannot be attempted, with any Prospect of Success.
If the Doctor thinks otherwise, let him try the Experiment with his own
Congregation, which I suppose to be not more than commonly intractable; and
when the Attempt is fairly carried into Effect, if he will publish a Narrative
of his Process, so successful an Example may animate and direct others; and
then, if they refuse to follow it, he may blame them with a better Grace. We
are farther of Opinion, that although it is proper and advisable, for many
Reasons, to leave the Discipline of the American Church, so far as it relates
to the Laity, in its present State; yet, that it is necessary, and at the same
Time very practicable, with the Advantage of an Episcopate, to establish a
strict Discipline over the Clergy; and therefore it is intended that the
Bishop's Power over them shall be as full and complete, as the Laws and Canons
of the Church direct.

BUT, is not godly Discipline as needful for the Laity as the Clergy? Some
godly Discipline for the Laity we already have; we can repel from the Communion
those whom we discover to come with an unworthy Disposition; and, in this
Country in particular, we DARE to repel, any Blasphemer the three Kingdoms
afford, even when he comes to demand it as a Qualification for an Office in the
Army or Fleet. Other Acts of Discipline we are able to exercise over the Laity;
and, considering the Provision made by our Laws for the Punishment of many of
those Crimes, which in the primitive Ages had no other Restraint than the
Discipline of the Church, any farther Exertion of ecclesiastical Authority over
the Laity, is perhaps rendered less necessary. These Sentiments are not
contradicted in the Appeal; for therein I did not make it one main Article of
my Complaint, that the People, being sensible of the Clergy's Want of Power,
find themselves free from all Restraints of ecclesiastical Authority; I only
represented this as being in Reality the Case.

BISHOPS undoubtedly, as Successors to the Apostles, are as much vested with
Authority to govern the Laity as the Clergy; but, after the Example of St.
Paul, they may think themselves not obliged to exercise it with Severity, since
it is given them "to Edification, and not to Destruction 2 Cor. xiii.10.
." If therefore they should judge any Plan, for a greater Extension, or a more
vigorous Exertion, of ecclesiastical Power over the American Laity, would tend
more to Destruction than to Edification, they are warranted to reject it; and
if they have a Right to reject it, they may give Assurances of such a
Rejection. But does not this Distinction imply that the Church-Clergy are much
worse than the Laity? All that I can conceive to be implied in it is, that
greater Advantages are expected from increasing the Restraints of the Clergy,
than of the Laity; or, at least, that in the Case of the Clergy, it is more
practicable.

The long Extract from Bishop Burnet, beginning p. 70, shows that the Bishop,
at the Time of writing it, thought there were many Things in the Church that
wanted Amendment; and if he had undertaken, with the same Freedom, to give his
Opinion of the Dissenters, he would probably have presented us with a no less
dark and gloomy Description. The Quotation from Mr. Pierce, about the Right of
Patronage, is as foreign from the Doctor's Business, as an Argument would be
about the Color of Aaron's Linen Ephod. Therefore passing over this, and, for
the same Reason the Quotation from Dr. Croft's Dr. Crofts was answered by
Bishop Burnet, in a modest Survey of a Discourse, entitled, The naked Truth, or
the (...) State of the primitive Church, by an humble Moderator. See a
chronological Account of the Works of Bishop Burnet, (...) fixed to the last
Edition of his History of his own Times, (...) 4 Vols. 8vo.
, which he might have told us he borrowed from the Dissenting Gentleman, I
shall proceed to what more nearly concerns me.

WHETHER we are right or wrong in that Part of our Plan which relates to the
Laity, it might be expected that a Proposal for bringing the Clergy under a
strict Discipline, would meet with no Objections from those, who frequently
reproach us with the Want of it. For certainly it is better that some Part of
any Society should be duly governed, than that no Part should. But we are so
unlucky as to be opposed, as well in our Scheme for exercising Discipline over
the Clergy, as for not exercising it with more Severity over the Laity.

IN p. 75 and 77, the Doctor thinks to incumber us with this Objection, that
our Plan for the Government of the Clergy cannot be executed in the Manner we
propose, unless the established Mode of Discipline should be so changed, as to
be quite different from what it is in England. I am glad to see it granted that
the Church of England has an established Mode of Discipline, so soon after a
Denial that She has any Discipline at all. It shows that the Doctor is not
incapable of seeing and retracting his Errors. But as to the Mode of our
Discipline, he need not give himself any Concern on that Account. It has always
been intended, that the Mode of it here, under an Episcopate, shall be
different from what it is in England. The Essentials will be the same, but the
Manner of Administration will differ, in many Respects. The Bishop's Authority
here, will be purely Ecclesiastical; but at Home, temporal Power, a
Non-Essential, is joined with it. There, many tedious Forms must be attended to
and observed; but here, every Thing may be done in a more summary Way, and no
farther Delay will be necessary, than what will be required for a due
Information, concerning the Facts upon which Camplaints shall be founded.

BUT, says the Doctor, p. 77, if an Alteration is to be made, in the Mode of
exercising Discipline, it is infinitely reasonable, it should first take Place
at Home, where it is most needed. When it is effected there, it will be Time
enough to desire it here. All Changes of ancient and established Usages in any
Country, are found to be extremely difficult; and the Doctor seems not to be
aware, how many Laws must be repealed before such a Plan of Discipline, as may
be easily carried into Effect here, can be executed in England -- nor how
nearly, such an Alteration may be thought to affect the State. The whole System
of ecclesiastical Laws must be new-modeled, and one half of the national
Constitution must undergo a very considerable Change, in Order to which, not
only the Bishops and Clergy, but all the Branches of the Legislature, must be
convinced of the Utility and SAFETY of the Measure -- before this Proposal can
take Place in England. But at the first Settlement of an Episcopate in the
Colonies, the proposed Alteration of the established Mode may be introduced,
without any such Difficulties, and even with as much Ease as the Mode that is
practiced at Home can be introduced. There is therefore no Reason at all for
waiting to see it effected there, before we desire it here; much less is it
infinitely reasonable to do so. If the proposed Mode is eligible in itself, and
may easily be obtained by us, why should we wait for those who cannot easily
obtain it, to set us the Example?

IN speaking of the Clergy under the Distinction of the Virtuous and the
Vicious, it was observed in the Appeal p. 32, that the Want of Bishops to
superintend and govern them, is obvious at first View. If one Sort have no need
of a Bishop to keep them to their Duty, yet some Cases will arise in the
Discharge of it, in which his Direction will be useful -- and many Cases,
wherein his Support and Encouragement will be needful -- and in all Cases, his
Friendship and Patronage will give Life and Spirit to them in undergoing the
Difficulties, and performing the Duties of their Stations. Upon this Passage
Dr. Chauncy makes the following Animadversion. But what is all this to the
Affair of Discipline, the grand Point in View? The Doctor's Business here was,
to show it to be necessary that strict Discipline should be established with
Respect to the Clergy; and he begins his Argument with a Case, wherein it is
not needed at all, p. 76. I have no Objections to being reminded of my proper
Business, when I happen to forget, or mistake it; nor to being called to Order,
when I wander from the grand Point in View. I can take such Interpositions
kindly, even from Dr. Chauncy, although he has forfeited all Right to interpose
in this Manner, by his own frequent Aberrations from the Point in View. I would
only reserve to myself the Privilege of being convinced of my Error, before I
retract it; which in the present Case I am not. If a Person were speaking of
the Necessity and Advantages of civil Government; it would be natural for him,
and not impertinent, to make such Observations as these: That Subjects may be
distinguished into the Virtuous, and the Vicious -- that, although Government
is more immediately necessary to restrain the Latter, it will also have a good
Effect upon the Former -- not indeed in the same Way, but by the Approbation,
Encouragement and Direction they will, in general, receive from their
Superiors; and by this means Benefit will redound to all with whom they are
connected. Now as Discipline in the Church answers to Government in the State,
I see not why the same Method of Illustration may not be equally proper in both
Cases; nor why the Sentence here quoted from the Appeal, may not be pertinent
to the proposed Subject in Debate. If the Word Discipline indeed included only
the Idea of Punishment, the Animadversion would be just; but since, upon the
Authority of the best Writers, it may be extended to Government in general, in
which large Sense I manifestly used it, it is hyper-critical.

BUT, it seems, the Advantages expected from an Episcopate are chiefly
imaginary. For was there now a Bishop in whatever Part of America he would
choose, the Clergy would notwithstanding be variously distant from him some
Hundreds of Miles; insomuch that but few of them could reap much Benefit either
by his Direction, Encouragement or Patronage. I am glad to find it allowed that
some few of them may be near him, and reap the Advantages proposed. I hope also
that some Hundreds of Miles will be found, upon the Trial, not to be equal to
some Thousands. If all the Clergy were to be kept at the Distance of some
Hundreds of Miles, and were to have no Intercourse or Correspendence with the
Bishop, the Advantages expected would be truly chimerical; but according to our
Plan, there will not be a Clergyman within his Jurisdiction, but must be
personally acquainted and maintain an Intercourse, with him, in a greater or
less Degree.

AS to the Effects of the proposed Discipline upon vicious Clergymen, it is
argued in p. 77, that they are not to be expected here, because it is observed
that Multitudes of Clergymen escape Punishment at Home. The Doctor's Multitudes
may perhaps, with more Propriety, be called some; and that some should escape,
that deserve, Punishment, where the Number of Clergymen amounts to twelve
Thousand, is not to be wondered at. Are there not some Instances of this Kind,
under the Presbyterian Discipline? Have there not been some, even in
New England? But supposing the Number to be greater in Proportion in England,
than in Scotland or New England; it may be owing to other Causes, than the
comparative Insufficiency of episcopal Government, or the Inattention of the
Bishops. There are in England some Places that are exempted from the Bishop's
Jurisdiction; and it is greatly owing to the Refuge and Protection which those
Places afford, that some vicious Clergymen escape Punishment. But the Case of
the Clergy here, will always be different from what it is in England in so many
Respects, that it can never be justly argued that the Bishop's Power over them
will be ineffectual here, from any Failure of it there. It is possible that we
may be too sanguine in our Expectations; but if an Episcopate will produce one
half of the good Effects which we expect from it, it must be very desirable;
and we cannot but look upon every Attempt to defeat the Measures taken to
obtain it, as ungenerous and unchristian.

AS to all the Purposes of Government, the Doctor thinks they might be as well
answered by Commissaries; but both Reason and Experience teach the contrary.
Some Branches of the episcopal Authority cannot be communicated to
Commissaries; and where it is otherwise, Power in the Hands of a Delegate of an
inferior Rank, has never that Weight and good Effect, as when exercised by the
Principal. For these and other Reasons, when Trial was formerly made of
American Commissaries, they were found by no Means to answer the Purposes of
their Appointment.

THE Public has been assured, from Time to Time, that none of those Spiritual
Courts, against which there is so general a Prejudice, will be connected with
an American Episcopate. Some have pretended to suspect, that our real
Intentions are different from our Professions; and Dr. Chauncy thinks he has at
last detected us. For he has sagaciously discovered, that if an immoral
Clergyman is to be tried and condemned, there must be Courts for his Trial and
Condemnation. Where, says he p. 78, is the Case to be tried? Can it be tried
any where, conformably to the Mode of the established Church, but in a
SPIRITUAL COURT? We are under no peculiar Attachment to the Mode of Practice in
the ecclesiastical Courts at Home, nor will American Bishops be obliged to
follow it. And as to such Courts as may be erected in this Country, for the
Trial of the episcopal Clergy ONLY, the Doctor, I again say, need give himself
no Concern about them, unless he expects to become an episcopal Clergyman
himself. For none have Reason to object against Things, but upon the
Supposition that they are to be, in some Manner, affected by them. The popular
Objection against spiritual Courts, is altogether founded on the Opinion of
their being injurious, not to the Clergy, but to the Laity; but where spiritual
Courts take no Cognizance at all of the Actions of the Laity, as it is intended
that they never shall in America, this Objection vanishes.

IT is observed, says the Doctor, that the Clergy's being under the Eye of
their Bishop will naturally tend to make them, in general, more regular and
diligent in the Discharge of the Duties of their office. And what Objection can
he make to this? Why, if their being under the Eye of the omnipresent,
omniscient God, will not make them regular and diligent, it is a vain Thing to
expect that their being under 'the Eye of the Bishop' should do it. And with
equal Truth and Propriety he might have said, of all but Atheists, that if
their being under the Eye of the omnipresent, omniscient God, will not restrain
Men from the Crimes of Fraud and Injustice, it is a vain Thing to expect that
their being under the Eye of the civil Magistrate should do it. That the
perpetual Presence and Inspection of the Supreme Being ought to have a greater
Effect upon Men, than the Presence of any earthly Superior, I freely allow; but
that it does not actually produce this Effect, in innumerable Instances, is a
melancholy Truth, and upon one Moment's Recollection, the Doctor must confess
it. What then is to be done? Must Men be left to do "what is right in their own
Eyes," because they will not consider themselves as under the Eye of the
omnipresent, omniscient God? Ought Criminals to go unpunished, because they
will not govern themselves by the great Motives of Religion? Or where these are
ineffectual, is it impossible that Men should be governed by Motives of a
temporal Nature; or can it consist with public Wisdom and the Safety of
Society, that such Persons should not be restrained by human Laws? According to
this Scheme of Politics, it is unreasonable to expect any Benefit, either from
Discipline in the Church, or from Government in the State.

FARTHER Exception is taken at the Expression, that the American Clergy will be
under the Eye of their future Bishop, as highly figurative. But figurative as
it is, it may be justified by common Usage. To say of a Clergyman who is even
in the immediate Presence of his Bishop, that he is under his Eye, is a
figurative Expression; and is never, I believe, understood in a strict literal
Sense. To be under the Eye of a Superior, in common Language signifies, to be
within the Compass of his Observation and Notice. And this will, in some
Degree, be the Case of every American Clergyman, under the proposed Episcopate.
Allowing that a Number of them will be fixed in Cures, some Fifty, some a
Hundred, and some two or three Hundred Miles from the Place of the Bishop's
Residence; yet by Means of Visitations, and a free Correspondence, nothing very
material can arise in a Clergyman's Situation or Conduct, without the Bishop's
having early Notice of it: -- Very early, in Comparison with what it would be,
if he were at the Distance of a Thousand Leagues.

WHAT follows upon the Subject of Discipline, is either of no Consequence, or
has been answered already: I shall therefore now attend upon the Doctor, in his
Objections to what was advanced, under the Head of Ordination.

AMONG the Disadvantages, to which the Church of England in America is subject,
for Want of Ordination, the Danger of crossing the Atlantic, for the Purpose of
obtaining Holy Orders, was represented as worthy of Attention. For an
Illustration of this Point, the following Fact was related. The exact Number of
those that have gone Home for Ordination, from these northern Colonies, is
Fifty-two. Of these Forty-two have returned safely, and Ten have miscarried;
the Voyage or Sickness occasioned by it, having proved fatal to near a fifth
Part of them. The Doctor replies; I have never heard of more than Two to whom
the Sea proved fatal. If Eight more lost their Lives by Sickness, it is no more
than they might have done if they had tarried at Home, p. 81. If he knows but
of Two, to whom the Sea proved fatal, I can tell him of several. Within a Year
of the Time of writing the Appeal, Two perished in one Ship upon the Coast of
New Jersey, almost in Sight of their Port; one of whom left a Wife and Family
of small Children in New York, without any other Means of Support, than the
charitable Assistance of their Christian Neighbors. As to those that lost
their Lives by Sickness, it is true, they might have died if they had tarried
at Home; as those who perished at Sea might have been drowned at Home in fresh
Water. But the Assertion is, not that they died abroad; but that they died of
Sickness occasioned by the Voyage, -- i. e. of Sickness, to which, in all
Probability, they would not have been exposed, were it not for the Voyage. And
this is strictly true of them in every Instance. Perhaps the Doctor may not
think much of our Candidates dying of contagious Disorders, since such are no
more than what are called natural Deaths, and all must die sooner or later. If
he can be of this Opinion after recollecting, that such Persons have been taken
off in the Prime of Life -- just as they were entering into public Stations, in
which they flattered themselves that they should be useful to the World -- that
they died in a foreign Land, at a Distance from their dearest Friends and
Connections -- I will not dispute it with him. But what does he think, of our
Candidates being carried into Captivity -- thrown into noisome Prisons in an
Enemy's Country -- and there languishing, for many Months, under the most
hideous Forms of Distress and Wretchedness? Even this has happened in several
Instances, and may happen again.

BUT be the Danger great or small, says he, there is good Reason to believe,
the going to England for Ordination is rather an Advantage, than Disadvantage
to the Church in Regard to its being supplied with Ministers. If going to
England for Ordination, notwithstanding the Danger and Expense that attend it,
is an Advantage to the Church of England in America; why would not going
thither for Ordination, be also an Advantage to all the Churches of the
Colonies? And why is not this Advantage generally pursued? For although their
Candidates may be ordained here, there is no Doubt but, if they should be found
qualified, they might be ordained in England, as well as ours. The Doctor
declares that HE should esteem it a happy Circumstance in this Case, was he
inclined to take Orders, that he must go to England for that Purpose. If he was
always of this Way of thinking, why did he not go to England to receive such
Ordination as he has? It is no sufficient Answer to say that he could be
ordained here; for if he was at Liberty to go to England, and if his going was
considered by him as a Thing desirable on the whole, it was absurd in him not
to go. Nay, if he is of such a curious or adventurous Turn, why does he not
gratify it by a Voyage now, although he is not inclined to take Orders? For, as
I understand him, he speaks in the present Tense. If a Man desires to go to
England for a Thing which he might as well obtain without going; he must be
equally desirous of going thither, if that Thing were entirely out of the
Question.

BUT all Men have not the same Disposition with the Doctor; and if many, to
whom he has mentioned the Matter, have declared themselves to be of the same
Mind, there are certainly many others, I imagine a great Majority, who have
different Sentiments. When Dr. Cutler, Dr. Johnson and Mr. Brown, declared
their Conformity to the Church, and went Home from Connecticut for Ordination;
it is well known, that an Apprehension of the Dangers of the Voyage, was what
prevented several other Dissenting Ministers of that Colony, whose Names I
could mention, all Men of the like excellent Character with those Gentlemen,
from declaring also their Conformity, and going with them. This is a Fact which
Dr. Chauncy must be supposed to have heard of, and he can hardly have forgoten
it. There have been frequent Instances of the like Nature, of which probably he
has not heard. Now with Regard to all such Persons, it is a great Hardship upon
them, that they cannot obtain what they are desirous of having; as it is a
Hardship upon the Church, to be precluded from the Benefit of their Services,
while they are so greatly wanted.

AGAINST the Complaint of the Expensiveness of a Voyage to England for
Ordination, the Doctor advances an Objection, which carries with it the most
tremendous Appearance. As this Matter between him and me has afforded some
Speculation to the Curious, I will state and explain it with particular Care.

IT was said in the Appeal, p. 34, that the Expense of this Voyage cannot be
reckoned at less, upon an Average, than a hundred Pounds Sterling, to each
Person -- and that it must generally fall upon such, as having already expended
the greatest Part of their Pittance in their Education, will find it extremely
hard to raise a Sum sufficient for the Purpose. In Answer to this, the Doctor
very heartily supposes I had never seen, or, if I had, did not remember at the
Time of writing, the Account of the Society published in 1706, in which they
say, all young Students in those Parts ( the Colonies) who desire episcopal
Ordination, are invited into England; and their EXPENSES in coming and
returning are to be defrayed by the Society, p. 82. Again, he repeats this
Objection in p. 90; the Society, says he, has publicly invited into England
all young Students in these Parts, who desire holy Orders; declaring THAT THEIR
EXPENSE IN COMING AND RETURNING IS TO BE DEFRAYED BY THE SOCIETY. This is the
Fact truly stated. The Complaint made in the Appeal is, that the Voyage is
expensive; the Answer by Dr. Chauncy is manifestly contrived to excite the
Idea, that it is not expensive. The Complaint says, the Expense upon an
Average, is a hundred Pounds Sterling, to each Person; the Answer leads the
Reader to believe, that it is not a Farthing. But this is not the worst of it;
the Answer appears to me to be artfully calculated to lead the Reader also to
believe Something farther -- namely, that concerning a plain Matter of Fact,
with Regard to which it is impossible that any Missionary can be mistaken, I
have published to the World an absolute, wilful Falsehood; a Falsehood, which I
knew might be easily detected by any of our Adversaries; a Falsehood, which was
known to be such, not only by every Missionary on the Continent, but by every
Member of the Society both here and at Home, and by every Bishop in the
Kingdom. So that I fear the Doctor really intended to lead his Readers to
believe me to have been in this Matter, both a notorious Liar, and abominably
stupid. I have freely mentioned what I strongly suspect, and what I know to be
suspected by many others. If he can exculpate himself, I think it greatly
concerns him to do it: Or if any of his Friends can clear him, it is in their
Power to do him a most material Service The Author of a fictitions Letter from
a Member of the Society, which has been published in one of the New York
Papers, has endeavored to vindicate Dr. Chauncy from the Charges of Falsehood
and Insincerity, which had been brought against him on Account of his Conduct
in this Affair. But unless he should have the good Luck to meet with an abler
and fairer Advocate, his Reputation must suffer, wherever the Case shall be
known. The Doctor has received and published the formal Thanks of his Brethren,
for his Answer to the Appeal; it is hoped that they had no particular Reference
to this Part of his Performance, when they paid him the Compliment.
. Nothing less, in my Opinion, can excuse him to the World and to his own
Conscience, than proper Evidence that he himself believes, and has Reason for
believing, that I have actually been guilty of such base and absurd Conduct, as
his Insinuations manifesly imply. But that he believes any such Thing himself,
he does not say: He only says, that the Society HAS, meaning upwards of 60
Years ago, publicly invited over young Students, promising to defray their
Expenses. This, notwithstanding its Appearance, is not in Reality any
Contradiction to my Assertion, which evidently related to the present State of
the Church, and not to the State of it in the Beginning of this Century.

THAT the Society published such an Invitation in 1706, I believe to be true;
but it appears that the Invitation was only occasional, and that none complied
with it. It was not until several Years afterward, that the first Candidates
from this Country went Home for holy Orders, before which Time the Invitation
was recalled, or rather had expired; and neither they, nor any of their
Successors, so far as I can learn, received Benefit from it. If the Doctor knew
this, he must have known that this antiquated Invitation of the Society, which
never took Effect, was no more an Answer to the Complaint against which he
alleged it, than if he had quoted one of the ancient English Statutes against
the Lollards. If he knew it not, he ought to have suspected his own Ignorance,
and to have inquired into the Matter, when he found that it was so publicly
and boldly asserted.

IN a Word; the Truth of Fact is, that the Society are under no Engagements to
defray the Expenses of Candidates in going home for Ordination, and do not
defray them, and, I believe, never have, so much as in one Instance, defrayed
them, either wholly or in Part. In a few Cases they have made Donations to
Candidates, in Consideration of some extraordinary Losses or Distresses
suffered in their Voyage, but never more that I know of, than a Compensation
for such extraordinary Losses; and they make it a Rule to advance half a Year's
Salary to their Missionaries, before their Embarkation for America, to enable
them the better to defray their own Expenses. As this Matter is farther
explained in a late well-received Pamphlet, written in Vindication of a Sermon
of the Lord Bishop of LANDAFF, I need not enlarge upon it.

THE next Thing the Doctor controverts with me, is the following Observation.
Other Reasons may have contributed to this general Want of Clergymen in
America, but it has always been principally owing to the great Difficulty of
obtaining Ordination. This Opinion might be abundantly supported both by
Authorities and Arguments; but it is sufficient to consider what is objected
against it. The Doctor, after telling us that the New England Missions are
generally filled, asks, upon my View of the Case, why should the Difficulty be
so great in other Provinces, and none at all in the New England ones, or so
inconsiderable, as to be easily got over? If it was in itself a real and great
Difficulty, its Operation would be as powerful in these Colonies as the other,
p. 83. I never before heard, that the Difficulty of supplying the New England
Missions with Clergymen, is none at all, or so inconsiderable as to be EASILY
got over. I believe the Missionaries themselves, and the People of their
respective Missions, will agree in telling a very different Story. I will point
out to the Doctor one Case, which of itself is more than sufficient to confute
all that he has said, or can say, about the Easiness of supplying the
New England Missions. The Members of the Church of England at Hebron, in
Connecticut, exerted themselves for near twenty Years, and were at great
Expense in sending home four Candidates successively, before they had the
Satisfaction of enjoying a resident Missionary. They first sent home Mr. Dean,
in 1745, who was admitted to Holy Orders, and appointed by the Society their
Missionary for Hebron; but in returning to his Mission, and to a Wife and
several small Children who depended upon him for their daily Support, he is
supposed to have perished at Sea, neither the Ship nor any Person on board
having been ever heard of. The next, was Mr. Colton; who in 1752, died on his
Passage from London to New England, and was buried in the Ocean. The third
Candidate sent Home by this unfortunate People, was Mr. Usher; who, in his Way
to England, in 1757, was taken by the French, thrown into Prison, and at last
died in the Castle of Bayonne. The fourth was Mr. Peter's; who in 1759, not long
after his Arrival in England, was taken with the Smallpox, from which he had
the good Fortune to recover -- and at length, to the great Joy of the People,
he arrived at Hebron, where he is at present the Society's worthy Missionary
See the Abstract for 1759.
. If any Presbyterian or congregational Society in the Colonies had suffered in
this Manner; much more, if all of them were rendered liable to suffer in this
Manner, through the Want of such a full Toleration as was allowed to all other
religious Denominations; I am much mistaken, if the whole British Dominions
would not resound with, at least, Lamentations and Complaints. And if the
Legislature should not speedily interpose for the Relief of such Sufferers,
these very Writers, who can consider the Matter as a mere Trifle in the Case of
the Church, would, if I know any Thing of their Genius and Disposition, be
found to make endless Outcries of Injustice and Cruelty. But such is the
Blindness of some controversial Bigots, that on one Side they mistake Mountains
for Mole-Hills, and on the other Side, Mole-Hills for Mountains!

AFTER all, should I allow that, according to the Doctor's Representation,
there is no Difficulty, or rather that notwithstanding the Difficulty, the
New England Missions are commonly supplied; it will by no Means follow, that
Difficulties which are surmounted by the People of New England, would not
intimidate and deter others, in the southern Colonies.

THE Doctor, not liking the Reason assigned in the Appeal, for the great Want
of American Clergymen, proceeds to assign Reasons of his own. One is, that the
Society neglect the southern Colonies, that they may be more able to episcopize
those of New England. But this is stale commonplace Abuse, and the Charge has
been confuted over and over. It has been most thoroughly confuted in a very
full and complete Answer to Dr. Mayhew's Observations on the Charter and
Conduct of the Society. A Sentence indeed is quoted from the Bishop of
Landaff's Sermon, to prove that this is the grand Object of the Society; but
the Application of it to that Purpose is a manifest Perversion. The Bishop
says: This Point (the proposed Episcopate) obtained, the American Church will
go out of its infant State; be able to stand upon its own Legs; and without
foreign Help to support and spread itself. THEN the Business of this Society
will have been brought to the happy Issue intended. This last Sentence is what
the Doctor alleges, as a Proof of the Society's Intentions. But let any
impartial Person view its Connection with what preceded, and he will find it
impossible not to see, that the Bishop says no such Thing as he is made to say.
His Lordship mentions a Time, wherein the Business of the Society will be
brought to the happy Issue intended; but when does he say this Time will be? No
other Answer can fairly be given to the Question than this: He says the
Business of the Society will have been brought to the happy Issue intended,
when "the American Church" shall be able to stand upon its own Legs, and
without foreign Help to support and spread itself. But how does Dr. Chauncy
answer the above Question? Let us take it in his own Words: The View indeed of
the Society, says he, has been to episcopize these Colonies, and this they have
made their great Business: Insomuch that should it be accomplished, it will
THEN have been brought to the happy Issue intended, as we are told, in plain
Words, by the Bishop of Landaff. Does then the Bishop of Landaff tell us in
plain Words, that the happy Issue intended by the Society is, according to the
quaint Phraseology lately introduced, the Episcopization of the New England
Colonies? Does he say any Thing that implies it? Cannot the Church of England
in America stand upon its own Legs and support itself, until the Presbyterians
and Congregationalists of New England shall be made Proselytes to it? Do not
the congregational Churches at this Day stand upon their own Legs and support
themselves in the Colonies without unepiscopizing the Members of the Church? In
Order therefore to maintain his Charge against the Bishop of Landaff, even
after an Abatement of what is said about plain Words, will not the Doctor be
obliged to have Recourse to Lord Peter's Invention, of making it out totidem
Literis, since he must fail in the Method of attempting it totidem Verbis, and
even totidem Syllabis? But enough of this.

ANOTHER Reason given by the Doctor for the Want of American Clergymen, is the
Backwardness of the Church People to educate their Sons for this Service. But
if their Backwardness is much owing to the great Difficulty of obtaining
Ordination, as I am persuaded it is, although the Doctor supposes otherwise, it
contradicts not, but coincides with, the general Reason assigned in the Appeal.

HIS last Reason is, the Insufficiency of the Temptation, in most Cases, to
influence Candidates of other Denominations to conform to the Church. They
have, says the Doctor, a better Prospect in continuing with us, than they would
have should they change Sides, and become Episcopalians. This, I believe, is,
and hitherto has been, the Case; and now that it is confessed on the Part of
our Adversaries, I hope we shall no longer be reproached with conforming to the
Church from mercenary Motives. Those Candidates who have given up the better
Prospect in continuing with them, certainly ought not to be considered as Men
of no Consciences, however mistaken they may be thought to have been with
Regard to their Principles. Many such we have already had; others are coming
over to us daily; and had we Bishops in this Country, I should not doubt of a
full Supply for all the Churches in America.

IT was observed in the Appeal, p. 36, that a very glaring Disadvantage, to
which the Church in America is manifestly subject, arises from the
Impossibility that a Bishop residing in England, should be sufficiently
acquainted with the Characters of those who go home from this Country for Holy
Orders. To this it is owing, that Ordination has been sometimes fraudulently
and surreptitiously obtained by such Wretches, as are not only a Scandal to the
Church, but a Disgrace to human Nature. Upon this, and more to the same Purpose
said of such Persons, the Doctor, with his usual Sagacity, observes, in p. 85:
Had such a Charge been publicly exhibited against the Society's Missionaries,
by those of the Presbyterian or Congregational Persuasion, it would have been
disregarded at home, and esteemed by Episcopalians here a sure Argument of
inveterate Enmity against the Church. The Doctor is right here; it would
undoubtedly, and very justly, be so disregarded and so esteemed. But will he
venture to affirm, or does he mean to insinuate, that I had exhibited such a
Charge against the Society's Missionaries, or against the Body of the American
Clergy? Did I so much as mention the Missionaries? In short, did I utter a
single Word that implies, or carries the least Intimation, that I entertained
an unfavourable Opinion of the American Clergy? On the other Hand, did I not
declare my Belief to be, that their general Character is truly respectable --
that they are sound and steady in their Principles, and regular in their
Behavior? But what I said was, that Ordination had been SOMETIMES, or, as it
was expressed in another Place, IN SOME INSTANCES, fraudulently obtained by
Wretches, who, in my Opinion, answered the Description there given of them.
When this was said, it was with Reference chiefly to Persons that never were
admitted into the Society's Service. Indeed there was one Instance among the
Missionaries that could not be overlooked; an Instance, which was the Subject
of common Conversation at the Time of my writing, of a Person then lately
ordained and appointed to a Mission in New Jersey -- said to have been ordained
upon Testimonials from this Country, which Testimonials it was commonly thought
must have been forged, as his Character here was so notoriously infamous. But
before this Person embarked for his Mission, his true Character was discovered,
and the Society immediately discarded him. Now of such Clergymen as these, who
sometimes creep into the Church, those of the Presbyterian or Congregational
Persuasion, may speak as reproachfully as they please, and no Episcopalians,
either here or at home, will esteem it an Argument of inveterate Enmity to the
Church. We think no Description too bad for such Wretches; we never spare them
ourselves; we blame not the Dissenters for any Severity of Language toward
them. But what we blame them for, is, their indiscriminate Invectives against
the Episcopal Clergy in general -- against the whole Body of the Missionaries
-- and, which has been very frequent of late, against all those that have met
together in voluntary Convention. The Doctor has not run the Length of some
others; but I could mention certain periodical Writers, who have signalized
themselves by the most undistinguishing and illiberal Abuse of the Clergy, of
the Bishops, and indeed of every Thing that relates to the Church; and if some
of their Accounts might be taken, the Conclusion would naturally be made, that
there is not a Clergyman in the Colonies who is of a tolerable Character, any
more than a Bishop in the Kingdom who is not a spiritual Tyrant, a lordly
Oppressor, a Friend of Persecution, etc. etc. etc.

AS to the Matter of Testimonials, the Doctor supposes the Case would be the
same was there A Bishop in America, as it is at present; since he could not be
particularly acquainted with the Characters of the Candidates. One Bishop only
is not thought sufficient for all the Colonies in America; but had we Bishops,
they might be personally acquainted, if not with all the Candidates, yet with
all those from whom Testimonials must come; and such an Acquaintance would
enable them to make necessary Distinctions, and to give to each Recommendation
the Weight respectively due to it. One Clergyman's Recommendation is equal to
another's, if they are both considered only as Clergymen; but if they are
considered under their distinguishing Characters, the one being perhaps a
Person of uncommon Penetration and inflexible Integrity, the other but of an
ordinary Capacity, and easily biassed and deceived, their different Testimonies
will have a very unequal Force, with the Bishop who knows them. But as what
might properly be said here, has been anticipated already; I beg Leave to refer
the Reader to it, rather than to repeat it. Upon the Whole, had we Bishops in
this Country, I am firmly persuaded, that with proper Care, and due
Regulations, it would be next to impossible for a Man of an exceptionable
Character to obtain Ordination. One general Regulation, if I might take the
Liberty, I would humbly propose, viz. That, when the proposed Episcopate shall
be settled, the Plan marked out in the Directions of Archbishop Wake to the
Bishops of his Province in 1716, so far as it relates to the Subject of
Testimonials, with a few Alterations, should be an established Rule for the
American Bishops See the Directions at large in Burn's Ecclesiastical Law,
Title ORDINATION.
.

IT is certain, says the Doctor, in p. 87, many notoriously wicked Persons in
England, vastly more in Proportion than in America, have found Ways -- to get
into Orders; and he endeavors in many Places to establish a Belief, that the
Clergy at home, under the immediate Government of Bishops, are worse, than they
are here without an Episcopate. And he leaves his Readers to draw for
themselves this natural Inference, that American Bishops will be more likely to
corrupt, than to reform the Clergy. But what he calls certain, is a Matter
concerning which others may possibly think that he cannot obtain Certainty. But
allowing it to be true, that there are in Proportion more immoral Clergymen
there than in America; unless he can make it appear, that more Persons, in
Proportion, of bad Characters at the Time of their Ordination, are admited from
a common Diocese in England, than from America, the Observation will not answer
his Purpose. The Point under Consideration, is the Case of bad Men's obtaining
Testimonials, and imposing upon the Bishop; but if a Man, of a fair Reputation,
at the Time of his being ordained, afterward relapses and becomes Profligate,
he is not within the Compass of the present Argument. But should we grant all
that the Doctor contends for; it has been already shown, that the Case of the
Church here, under an Episcopate, will be so very different from what it is in
England, with Respect to the Bishop's Superintendency, that the Inference
intended will not follow.

DR. Chauncy closes his third Section with this Observation: Should the whole
of what the Dr. has offered be allowed its full Force, (which, by the Way, is
an Acknowledgment that hitherto he had not allowed its full Force to what I had
offered) without the least Abatement, (and why should there be any Abatement of
the real Force of my Argument or Observation?) There is no other Hardship, or
Difficulty, in the Case, than what naturally results from professed Principles,
and must unavoidably follow upon them, unless an Establishment is purposely
made in their Favor, p. 88. I am not clear that I understand the Meaning of
this Sentence. What an Establishment has to do with the Subject in Debate, I
know not. This has never been requested -- It is no Part of our Plan -- nor is
it necessary to the Execution of it; Ordination by a Bishop no more supposing,
or implying, or depending upon, or being connected with, a civil Establishment,
than the Administration of Baptism by a Presbyter. As to the other Part of the
Sentence, there is something in it that looks extremely ill-favored. There is
no other Hardship, or Difficulty, in the Case, than what naturally arises from
professed Principles! This looks as if, in the Doctor's Opinion, Men were not
to be pitied, when their Sufferings result from their Principles. The most
dreadful Persecutions are no more than Sufferings inflicted upon Men for, and
consequently, in some Sense resulting from, their professed Principles. But
does the Doctor mean that we should be left to suffer, because it is on Account
of our Principles? Or that Men, of whose Principles HE does not approve, ought
to be persecuted? From arguing upon the Matter a priori, I cannot believe that
he means this; from arguing a posteriori, I know not what to believe.

SECTION IV.
THE Design of the fourth Section of the Appeal, SECT. IV.
was to show the unparalleled Hardship of the present Case of the Church of
England in the American Colonies. That for Want of an Episcopate, the American
Church of England is really in a suffering State, the Members of it feel, in
innumerable Instances; and by this Time it must be so evident to others, that a
formal Proof of it is needless. That the particular Species or Mode of this
Suffering is unparalleled, is as evident as that we suffer at all. It is in
this Respect, and not on Account of the Degree of Suffering, that the Word
unparalleled was used. This was sufficiently explained in the Appeal by the
Word unprecedented, and it is inconceivable that any can mistake it, unless
they mistake wilfully.

AGAINST what was said of the Church of England's being in a most wretched and
deplorable Condition in the Colonies, Dr. Chauncy objects: It may, on the
contrary, be affirmed, as a most unquestionable Truth, that the Episcopal
Churches in most of the Colonies, are favored and distinguished far beyond any
other Churches of whatever Denomination on the Continent, p. 92. The Reason
which supports this Assertion immediately follows: They are preserved in being
by a vastly extensive Charity. By the Way, it is no Evidence that a Church is
not in a deplorable Condition, that it owes the Preservation of its very Being,
to Charity. The Charity here meant, is that of the Venerable Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel, of the Greatness of which, we are as sensible as the
Doctor. The Charity of this Society is as unprecedented in Degree, as the
Sufferings of the American Church are in Kind; and whenever we consider it, it
prevents, in a great Measure our sighing out Groans (or groaning out Sighs) as
it presents to us abundant Reason for the most grateful Acknowledgments. But
notwithstanding the Care the Society has taken to provide proper Clergymen for
destitute Congregations, and the Expenses it has been at in supporting them;
without an Episcopate, the Church wants an essential Part of her Constitution,
some of her most important Offices cannot be performed at all, and her common
ones are frequently not performed so well, as might be expected under the
Superintendency of resident Bishops. This, I will venture to say again, is a
deplorable Condition for any Church to be in, whether she has Revenues of her
own, or subsists upon Charity; and none can be more sensible of it, than the
Society itself.

THIS State, which is deplorable in itself, is also unprecedented and
unparalleled. That other Churches have not been as great Sufferers as the
Church of England in the Colonies, was never pretended. Perhaps all really
persecuted Churches have, upon the whole, suffered as much, and many certainly
have suffered infinitely more; while the Members of some, have made loud
Complaints of Persecution, who have not had so just Reason to complain, as we
have. But if the Suffering of the American Church of England is not uncommon as
to the Degree of it, yet all must allow that it is of a very extraordinary
Nature. In what Age, in what Part of the World, can a like Instance be found,
either among Christians or Pagans? Where, and when, did any Nation suffer its
own Religion, the Religion which it had freely chosen and established at Home,
to be upon a worse Footing, than all other Religions, in its Colonies? In
Colonies consisting, not of conquered Enemies, but of Children that had issued
from its own Loins? If an Example can be found, let it be pointed out. We will
then confess that our Case is not unprecedented; but still, that it is not very
hard, we will never confess.

BUT says the Doctor, it is unaccountably strange that he (the Author of the
Appeal) should mention it as 'an unprecedented Case,' and describe the Church
as 'singled out for the first Example of it'. We say, and believe, it is the
first; if he knows of another, let him produce it. Why, says the Doctor, did he
never hear of the infinitely more distressed Condition of the great Numbers
that were deprived, fined, imprisoned, and, in other Ways, most cruelly dealt
with, in the Days of those hard-hearted Archbishops, Parker, Bancroft,
Whitgift, and Laud? Yes, I have heard of these Things; and I assure him, that
whatever I think of Deprivations in some Cases, I am no Friend to Fines and
Imprisonments on a religious Account. But I never heard before, that the Case
here mentioned, was parallel with the present Case of the Church of England in
America, or that it was a Precedent of the like Nature; which it is here his
only Business to show. I have heard also of the Babylonish Captivity; and I
believe it to be a Precedent as much to the Purpose, as the Instance he has
mentioned. But whether the Instance was pertinent or not, seems to have been
thought no Matter of Consequence; it was sufficient for his Purpose, that it
afforded an Opportunity of introducing a Number of Archbishops, in order to
blacken their Characters.

AS to the Archbishops Parker and Whitgift, they superintended and conducted
the Affairs of the Church, during the greatest Part of Queen Elizabeth's Reign.
As they were Men of Firmness and Resolution, so they appear to have been not
wanting in Temper and Moderation at the same Time. The Doctor represents them
under the Idea of Persecutors: But we meet but with few Acts of undue Severity,
and many of exemplary Mildness and Gentleness, in the Course of their
Proceedings, In the Appendix to the Life of the former Book II. Numb. XXIV.
, Strype has given us a Letter from the Queen to him, in which she blames him
and the other Bishops, for their Backwardness in urging Conformity.

AS to Whitgift, even Wilson, who was more than half a Puritan himself, says of
him, that he strove to prevail on the Puritans with Sweetness and Gentleness;
and died -- leaving a Name, like a sweet Perfume behind him See Three Letters
to the Author of the Confessional; Let. I. p. 31.
. We learn from Strype, that his natural Temper was mild, and that he treated
even his great Antagonist, Cartwright, when he had him in his Power, so
courteously and kindly, that the Earl of Leicester, the Patron of the latter,
thanked the Archbishop for his remarkable Civility to him. One of his worst and
most implacable Enemies was the fiery Udal, a Leader of the Puritans: When this
Person was under Sentence of Death for Felony, the Archbishop made Interest in
his Favor, and actually obtained his Pardon, according to the same Historian.
But I need not be particular, as the general Conduct toward the Puritans under
the Reign of Elizabeth, and therein the Behavior of the Archbishops was fully
vindicated by Secretary Walsingham, who was as good a Judge of it as any Man in
the Kingdom, and being always inclined to favor the Puritans, he cannot be
suspected of Partiality against them In his Letter to Monsieur Critoy, in
Burnet's Hist. Ref. Vol. II.
.

BANCROFT was more rigorous in his Measures than his immediate Predecessor, and
the Times required it. Laud was still more severe than Bancroft, and his
Provocations were greater. I undertake not to justify all their Proceedings;
for I abhor every Appearance of Intolerance and Cruelty, even in an Archbishop.
These Appearances are the greatest Blemishes of their Characters; and they are
the general Reproach of the Age in which they acted. There was not a Puritan in
the Kingdom at that Time, nor had there been from the Beginning, who did not
give incontestible Evidence, that if he had been armed with the like Power, he
would have pressed Conformity to his own System, with as unrelenting Zeal, as
either of those Prelates. Not long afterward, the Puritans became possessed of
Power; Conformity then was urged with a Vengeance. In the Collection of Sermons
preached before the long Parliament, Toleration is professedly condemned by
Burgess, Case, Calamy, Baxter, Newcomen, and many others, as one of the
greatest Evils.

BUT to return to the Two Archbishops: If we conceive of them under the Idea
only of rigorous Exacters of Conformity, we do them Injustice. It ought to be
remembered that they were Men of eminent Abilities, of invincible Integrity, of
undissembled Piety, and zealous Advocates for the Protestant Religion.
Bancroft, says Fuller, was a most stout Champion to assert Church Discipline.
But to show that there was something amiable in his Disposition, and that he
could mingle Kindness with his Severity toward such as appeared to be truly
conscientious, he gives the following Instance: An honest and able Minister
privately protested to him, that it went against his Conscience to conform,
being then ready to be deprived: Which Way, says the Archbishop, will you
live, if put out of your Benefice? The other answered, he had no Way but to go
a begging, and put himself on Divine Providence. That, says the Archbishop,
you shall not need to do, but come to me, and I will take Order for your
Maintenance. Fuller's Church History Book X. p. 57.


WHAT I conceive to be the true Character of Laud, I will give in the Words of
a masterly and candid Writer, in Answer to the Confessional. Here, Sir, give me
Leave to pay a Debt due to Truth, and to the Memory of Archbishop Laud, whom
You treat in a Manner very unbecoming his Character and your own. He was
undoubtedly much too vehement in his natural Temper; and the general
Disposition of the Times on both Sides increased his Heat. He was also too fond
of Externals in Religion. But some Regard ought to be paid to his Learning, his
Liberality, his excellent Book against Popery, and the successful Pains which
he so kindly took to recover Chillingworth back from it. His very candid
Treatment likewise of the famous John Hales, and the Esteem of that great Man
for him, who mourned for his Death in a most remarkable Manner, and wished he
had died in his stead, prove him to have had, together with his very blameable
Rigors, no small Merit of the good-natured Kind; to which, Persons in after
Times, who could not know him so well, have by no Means done sufficient Justice
Let. I. p. 46.
.

THE Doctor goes on: Did he never hear of any barbarous Acts passed in the
Reign of King Charles II. subjecting Multitudes of Clergymen and others to
Hardships and Sufferings, not to be thought of without Horror? This Question I
must also answer in the affirmative. I have heard of all those Acts which are
here called barbarous; and I have seen the Reasons assigned for framing and
passing them -- which Reasons, if not altogether sufficient to justify, will go
very far toward excusing, them.

WE are told in a Note, that by one of those Acts (meaning the Act of
Uniformity) no less than Two THOUSAND Ministers, many of them Men of shining
Accomplishments, and ALL of them well spoken of for their Piety, were turned
out of their Livings in one black Day, whereby both they and their Families,
became liable to starve for Want of the Necessaries of Life. The Character of
the ejected Ministers as given by Walker, who made the most indefatigable
Examination into the personal History of those Times, is very different from
what the Doctor here publishes, after Calamy and others. His Account is too
long to be inserted; but the Substance of it, as extracted by Gray, and given
in his Answer to Pierce, is in these Words: But to consider the Number and
Characters of the Persons a little farther, we learn from an Historian of good
Credit, that those who gave up their Livings to the right Owners, which had
been usurped from them, and which in Right and Justice were to be restored, and
the Curates who were prevented having any Preferments, without Conformity, made
up above half of the Number; and amongst them there were not a few Mechanics,
and Fellows bred to the meanest Occupations; many more who had seen neither of
the Universities; several Troopers and others who had served in the Rebels
Armies; besides, some had run in with, and vented many of the distinguished
Enthusiasms, Errors, Heresies, and other monstrous Opinions, not to say
Blasphemies of the Times; many had no Orders at all, nor were there wanting
amongst these, such as had been so far from pretending to any, that they
utterly exclaimed against them; some had a Thousand Times forfeited their Lives
to the Law, by having their Tongues and Hands stained in Treason and Blood, as
well of their Prince himself, as Fellow Subjects. Nay, the same Author informs
us, that to the best of his Remembrance, he had not met with an Instance of
more than one single Person, who had any other Title antecedent to the urgent
Necessity of the Act of 1660, to the Places from which they were removed, than
what Sequestration, Plunder, Usurpation and Rebellion had given them. So that
the Case is not so lamentable, as this Gentleman and his Brother Calamy would
have it; and when they pretend that the Sufferings of these Men will scarce
admit of a Parallel in any Age or Nation, they little consider that the Numbers
of the opposite Side exceeded them at least seven to one, being according to
the most moderate Computation above SEVEN THOUSAND; and taking into the Account
such as Mr. Pierce and Dr. Calamy account sufferers on their Side, fall very
little short of Ten Thousand Answer to Pierce, p. ^
. Archbishop Bramhall, who lived in those Times, gives a similar
Representation. Let Mr. Baxter, says he, sum up into one Catalogue, all the
Nonconformists throughout the Kingdom of England, ever since the Beginning of
the Reformation, who have been cast aside or driven away at any Time, because
they durst not use the old Ceremonies or the new, or rather because they found
it advantageous to them to disuse them. I dare abate him all the rest of the
Kingdom, and only exhibit the Martyrologies of London and the two Universities,
or a List of those who in these late intestine Wars, have been haled away to
Prisons, or chased away into Banishment by his own Party, in these three Places
alone, or left to the merciless World to beg their Bread, for no other Crime
than Loyalty, and because they stood affected to the ancient Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church of England; and they shall double them for Number, and
for Learning, Piety, Industry and the Love of Peace, exceed them incomparably.
So as his Party which he glories so much in, will scarely deserve to be named
the same Day. And if he compare their Persecutions; the Sufferings of his
supposed Confessors will appear to be but Flea-Bitings in Comparison of theirs.
But after all this, the greatest Disparity remains yet untouched, that is, in
the Cause of their Sufferings. The one suffered for Faith, and the other for
Faction Bramhall's Works, p. 643.
. These Things, it must be confessed, have but little Connection with the
Subject. They ought also, if possible, for the Honor of the national
Character, and the protestant Religion, to be buried in eternal Oblivion. But I
have been forced to mention them; and those who have obliged me to it ought not
to blame me; while others who see the Provocation, I trust, will at least think
me excuseable.

AS to the Test-Act, the Doctor need not be told the only Design of it, was to
prevent the Enemies of the Church from geting Power to destroy Her. This
Security it was thought necessary to provide; and Rapin, who was a Presbyterian
himself, has in Effect justified the general Policy of that Act. For he makes
no Scruple to declare, in his Dissertation on the Whigs and Tories, not that
there is a Probability, for he knew it to be more than probable -- but, that
it is certain, if the Presbyterians can ever act without Control, they will not
be satisfied till the Hierarchy of the Church of England be entirely
demolished. That such Persons therefore should be so far controuled, as they
are by this Act, will not, I believe, be pronounced to be unjust or improper by
any, but those who find themselves disappointed by its Operation. But I will
not enlarge upon this Subject, since writing in Favor of the Test-Act, or some
other equivalent Security, is as needless, as writing against it will be
useless, after what has been said in Vindication of it by the late Bishops
Sherlock and Else.

WHAT the Doctor's Question insinuates about the Removal of our Forefathers
from their native Land, may be true of some of them; but it by no Means appears
to be true of all of them, especially of the Settlers of the Massachusetts
Colony, that they were forced abroad by the oppressive Power of the Bishops.
But were it the Case "Observe," says honest John Whiting, in his Truth and
Innocence defended against Falsehood and Envy, the horrid Apostasy of these Men:
Flee Persecution, and yet turn the greatest Persecutors themselves, next to the
Papists! Seek new Habitations, for Want of Liberty, and yet deny it to others!
-- What were those (Sufferings of the Puritants) to the Sufferings they
inflicted on our Friends in New England? If they (the Persons in Power at Home)
whiped any, as they did John Lilborne, the Presbyterians exceeded them; witness
W. Brend, Anne Colman and others: and if they cut off the Ears of some, as
Burton, Bastwick and Prinn, they did not cut off their Heads, or hang them, as
they did our Friends in New England.
, they are, on this Occasion, introduced very impertinently.

THE Doctor concludes this Affair of Precedents in a Strain truly consistent
with his whole Representation. This double Decimation of our Candidates, or the
Loss of so great a Proportion of their Lives, is no more in his Estimation,
than one of the few comparatively small Inconveniences, to which the American
Church of England is subject, p. 94. And as to the Expense of crossing the
Atlantic for Ordination, what is a Hundred Pounds Sterling, says he, for
Fifty-two Clergymen each, in the Course of Sixty Years, in Comparison with the
Hundred Thousand Pounds Sterling, many Times told, that Dissenters have paid,
toward the Support of the episcopal Clergy, besides maintaining their own? p.
95. That what the Dissenters have paid, in the Way of TITHES, toward the
Support of the episcocal Clergy, ought not to be included in this Account, has
been proved in the Tenth Section of the Appeal, which the Doctor, for a certain
Reason, has thought fit not to controvert. After this Deduction, he will find
it difficult to make all his Items amount to the Sum of a Hundred Thousand
Pounds Sterling, many Times told, within the Course of Sixty Years, unless he
takes into his Computation the Posts of Profit in the Kingdom of SOUTH-BRITAIN,
from which Dissenters may have been excluded. As he seems to look upon these as
their natural Rights, it must be confessed, that, in this View of the Matter,
there is no Impropriety in considering all that might have been gained by such
Posts, under the Notion of Loss, and passing it to the Credit of the Dissenters
Account. But this will not be admitted as fair, by the World in general, which
has a different Idea of natural Rights.

NATURAL Rights, when the Expression is used properly, can signify nothing less
than such Rights as Men are born to -- such as they are entitled to upon the
common Footing of Humanity, without any Distinction of Christian or Pagan,
Protestant or Papist. Whatever therefore is the natural Right of one Man, is
the natural Right of another; and if Dissenters may justly complain of being
deprived of a natural Right, in the Case before us, so may Papists, Jews and
Mahometans; their natural Rights being the very same with those of the
Dissenters, and, I may add, of the Members of the established Church. This is
so evident, that all Authors have either asserted or admitted it, a few
Instances only excepted. The American Whig is obliged to confess Numb. XVI.
, that if by natural Right be meant any Right in Contradistinction to municipal
or political Rights, i. e. to such as are not natural Rights, it may with equal
Propriety be predicated of Episcopalians, and of all Men. For no Man has a
natural Right to a political Privilege. What the Dissenters municipal or
political Rights are in England, and how far they entitle them to those
Preferments, from which they are excluded by Acts of Parliament, is not my
Business to inquire.

I AM next led to review a Passage in the Appeal, which uncommon Pains has been
taken to pervert, with a Design of making me appear to have been an Impeacher
of the LOYALTY of the Dissenters in America. The obnoxious Passage is this: We
i. e. the Members of the Church of England, are conscious of no Crimes, with
Regard to the State. On the other Hand, we claim a Right to be considered as
equal with the Foremost (the American Whig, to answer a Purpose of his own,
quotes it, the MOST Foremost) in every due Expression of Fidelity and Loyalty.
We esteem ourselves bound, not only by present Interest and Inclination, but by
the more sacred Ties of our religious Principles and Christian Duty, to
support, to the utmost, the national civil Establishment. Accordingly no
Trumpet of Sedition was ever heard to sound from our Pulpits -- no Seeds of
Disaffection have been suffered more privately to be sown in our Houses. As our
Religion teaches us, in the first Place, and above all Things, to fear God; so,
while we can preserve it, it will be a full Security to the Government for our
honoring the King, and not meddling with them that are given to Change, p. 41.
In this Passage it is evident, that the Loyalty of the Church of England in the
Colonies, is strongly asserted; which Loyalty our Enemies have never pretended
to dispute. The American Whig Numb. II.
is so just as to take Notice of the Author of the Appeal's "professed
Loyalty," and of that Zeal for the Constitution and Government at Home, to
which he and his Brethren avow a warm Attachment. Dr. Chauncy allows the
Loyalty of Episcopalians to be equal with that of other Denominations of Men in
this Country. Now no more than this is directly asserted in the Appeal. But the
former insists In Numb. IX.
that the Author, in the above Passage, plainly intended to insinuate, that
some other Denominations among us are conscious of Crimes with Respect to the
State. The Doctor is not positive as to this Matter, but cautiously says, some
are DISPOSED to think he (the Author of the Appeal) would not have expressed
himself in this Manner, unless he had intended an Insinuation, that something
of this Nature had been done by others. p. 96. The Reader can examine the
Passage for himself, and judge, whether the Interpretation of it, concerning
which the American Whig is positive, and the Doctor doubtful, is not forced and
unnatural. For surely, to say that our Loyalty is equal with that of others,
implies not that it is superior, or that the Loyalty of others is defective,
unless Words are perverted from their natural Meaning: It rather implies, on
the contrary, that the Loyalty of others is not inferior to ours.

THIS seems to be admitted by the periodical Writer last mentioned. But then he
interrogates, why I was not satisfied with simply avering that my Brethren were
as loyal Subjects as others? I doubt not but the candid and impartial have been
able to see the following Reason for it, and that it sufficiently Accounts for
the Mode of Expression. The Paragraph is introduced with this Observation, that
notwithstanding the suffering Condition of the American Church, we, who are
Members of it, are not apprehensive that it can be owing to the Displeasure of
our Superiors. Why not apprehensive of their Displeasure? Because we are
conscious of no Crimes that have deserved it. No Trumpet of Sedition was ever
heard to sound from our Pulpits -- no Seeds of Disaffection have been suffered
more privately to be sown in our Houses. These Crimes, or the Suspicions of
them, are the common Causes of the Displeasure of Government, against
particular Classes or Denominations of Men, in all Countries. But we are
entirely innocent, and such Crimes have never been so much as imputed to us. On
the other Hand, our Interest and Inclination conspire with our religious
Principles, to secure our Loyalty. We consider it as a Matter of strict Duty
and of religious Obligation to honor the King, and not to meddle with them that
are given to Change, as really and essentially as to "fear God." This appears
to me to be the natural Construction of the Paragraph; and it corresponds
exactly with my View in writing it, which was only to maintain, by a short
Induction of Particulars, that we are free from those Crimes and Imputations,
which are commonly assigned as Reasons for the Frowns of Government; and
consequently that we have no Cause to suspect the Government at Home is
displeased with us.

IN transcribing for the Press, I saw what Use might be made of the Passage by
ill-disposed Persons; and therefore, not thinking it necessary to alter the
Structure of the Paragraph, added this Note, to secure it against
Misinterpretation and Abuse. This Declaration is not intended to imply any
Accusation of others; who are able, it is hoped, to make their own Defense,
whenever the Occasion shall require it. His Majesty's American Subjects, of all
Denominations, belonging to the old Colonies, have always professed Sentiments
of Loyalty; and the Author believes they have generally been sincere in those
Professions. I then proceeded to account for some late undutiful Appearances,
in a Manner consistent with the Loyalty professed. Now, does this look like an
Impeachment of American Loyalty? Is it not in Reality, a Defense of it? How
unfair and unrighteous then is it, to endeavor to raise a popular Clamor
against me, on the sole Evidence of this very Passage; a Passage, which proves
that I have acted the Part of a true Friend, where I am abused for having acted
as an Enemy! Upon the whole: If the Words in the Text naturally carried an
Insinuation against the Loyalty of some Americans, which Insinuation was not
intended; the Explanation in the Note entirely removes it, and places the
Matter in the most favorable Light. Nothing worse is said of Americans,
including the various religious Denominations, than that they have always
professed Sentiments of Loyalty Had Numb. V. of the American Whig been
published, I should perhaps have excepted the Author, and the Abettors, of that
Performance, as Persons whose Loyalty is, at least, very questionable.
, and that the Author believed them to have been generally sincere in those
Professions.

THE Doctor will not allow, that the Church of England in the Colonies is
distinguished and stigmatized by a Want of those religious Privileges which are
granted to all other Denominations. His Objection is this: The Truth is,
Episcopalians are allowed the same Liberty with all other Persuasions, and do,
with as much Freedom from Molestation, worship God in the precise Way they
themselves are pleased to choose, p. 97. But can he be serious when he says
this? Or does he mean to insult us? Is it the Truth, that we have the same
Liberty with all other Persusions? Do they not all enjoy their own religious
Systems completely, and in every Part? But can this be predicated of the Church
of England? We complain that we are destitute of the Power of Ordination, and
are not allowed to enjoy several of the Institutions of our Church, which we
hold in great Esteem and Veneration: The Doctor answers that we worship God in
our own Way without Molestation. But does this Answer come up to the Complaint?
Did we ever pretend that the Privilege of worshipping God, according to the
Liturgy of the Church of England, was refused us? Does our Enjoyment of this
Privilege prove, that we are not under those peculiar Disadvantages which the
Complaint specifies? And if we are under Disadvantages which are peculiar to
ourselves, and from which all other Denominations are free, having all of them
the full Use of their respective Forms of ecclesiastical Discipline and
Government, have we not Reason to complain that we ONLY are not permitted the
Use of ours? Why should there be this glaring Distinction? Where our Claims
are, at least, equal with those of our Neighbors, why should a Difference be
made in their Favor?

ALL the Difference, says the Doctor, is, our Principles do not hamper us with
those objected Difficulties, their's expose them to. With equal Candor and
Propriety it might have been said, by the Members of the established Church, in
the Days of those hard-hearted Archbishops Parker, Bancroft, Whitgift and Laud:
Why do these Puritants complain? Are they not treated upon the same Footing
with ourselves? We know of nothing that has been granted to us or others, but
what is equally granted to them: All the Difference is, our Principles do not
hamper us with those objected Difficulties, their's expose them to. And this
the greatest Persecutors that ever existed may have as pertinently said, of
those whom they harrassed and put to the Torture -- they are only hampered by
their own Principles, and they may thank themselves.

I MEET with nothing farther that is worthy of Notice, until we come to the
concluding Paragraph of this Section, in p. 100, where I am charged with having
been ungrateful and undutiful. My Ingratitude, it seems, consists in uttering
Complaints, in Behalf of the Church of England in America, after Thirty
Thousand Pounds Sterling, have been expended in England to promote its Growth.
But by whom has this Sum been expended? Not by the Nation, but by a particular
Society. I know not that the Nation has ever been at any considerable Expense,
to promote the Growth of the Church in the Colonies; and as this was not
expected, so their not doing it has never been mentioned as Matter of
Complaint. But what we complain of is, that the national Religion in the
Colonies has not been made the Object of greater national Attention, in some
other Respects; and particularly, that such Relief has not been given it, as it
was known greatly to suffer for the Want of and as might have easily been
granted, without any public Expense. So much, we think, we had Reason to
expect; and I can see nothing unbecoming or improper in the Complaint. If I had
complained of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, the Doctor then
might justly have branded me with Ingratitude. Our great Benefactors are the
worthy Members of that Society; it is they who have expended the large Sums for
the Support and Promotion of the Church here, which the Doctor has seen fit to
transfer from their, to the national Account. But we shall always remember that
it is to them, that our Gratitude is immediately due; and if the least Symptom
of Ingratitude to that venerable Body can be discovered in the Appeal, I hereby
promise, that I will never attempt any farther Defense of it.

AS to the other Charge of Undutifulness, it is made out in this Manner. It
lies with the King, whether we shall have Bishops or not; therefore to complain
of the Want of Bishops, is to reflect upon the King; and to reflect upon the
King is undutiful. The Author of the Appeal has complained of the Want of
Bishops: Ergo, the Author of the Appeal has been undutiful to the King. I could
wish, says the Doctor, he had expressed more dutiful Reverence toward his
Sovereign, than to charge him as he does VIRTUALLY and in Reality of
Construction, with treating the Church here with unparalleled Hardship, etc. I
assure the Doctor, it gives me the utmost Pleasure to find him so zealous for
maintaining a dutiful Reverence toward our most gracious Sovereign, and so
ready to bear Testimony against every Thing that appears, virtually and in
Reality of Construction, to reflect upon his sacred Person. Let me tell him
however, that he is probably somewhat mistaken, with Regard to the Matter
before us. It has been all along supposed and believed, that the Want of an
American Episcopate has not been owing to any Backwardness in our Kings to
grant it, but to the Neglect of others, whose Duty it was to prepare the Way
for such an Appointment. The Complaint can be a Reflection on those only, who
have neglected their Duty; but as our Kings appear not to have been negligent
of theirs, it is no Reflection upon them: -- Much less, upon our present most
excellent Sovereign, who has condescended to express himself on the Subject, in
the most obliging Terms, and in whose favorable Disposition we have an entire
Confidence.

ALTHOUGH the King can, as the Doctor observes, by Virtue of that Supremacy
which the Constitution allows him, grant an American Episcopate at any Time;
yet a wise King will not choose, and his real Friends will not desire him, to
exert this Prerogative, until the Way is duly prepared, and there is a rational
Prospect of its answering the Purpose. In Order to this, it has been thought
requisite, even by our CONVENTION, as zealous as it has been, still is, and I
trust will be, in the Prosecution of this Plan, that the Nature of the
projected Episcopate should be fully understood, and generally approved of, by
the various Denominations of People in America. And it is one good Effect of
the present Controversy, for which I now return Thanks to my Opponents, that
our Plan has been more attentively considered, and more fully understood:
Another is, that it has produced such Testimonies of Approbation as were
wanted. It was indeed always believed the Dissenters would not object to our
having such Bishops as are proposed for America; but we had no public
Declarations that those of the Presbyterian or Congregational Persuasion
approved of our Plan, until Dr. Chauncy and the American Whig, who have
appeared in their Behalf on the Occasion, were pleased to make them. These
Writers, it is true, still object, in their Names, against an American
Episcopate, supposing it may be different from what has been pretended and
explained to the Public. But as to the Episcopate really intended, concerning
which alone their Opinion was desired, they have clearly expressed themselves,
and said as much in Favor of it as could be reasonably expected. So that now,
whatever may be the Fate of particular Parts or Passages of the Appeal, the
great and immediate Design of it has succeeded, and the Author has no Reason to
repent of his having undertaken it.

SECTION V.
SECT. V.
THE Business of the fifth Section of the Appeal, is to assign Reasons why the
Church in America has been so long neglected. The Doctor confesses he has no
Concern with the immediate Contents of it: However, there are some Matters of
Intelligence, it seems, intermixed with the Reasons assigned, which he thinks
worthy of his Animadversion.

THE first Passage that disturbs him is the following: The Colonies were
generally settled by private Adventurers; and some of them by those who had an
Aversion to episcopal Government. The Propriety of not sending a Bishop to
Colonies of the latter Sort, will be disputed by none ( Appeal p. 47.) He does
not attempt to show that this Observation is unjust, or improper, or
impertinent; but yet he speaks of it as no more than a Rattle to please
Children with, and then asks a Number of Questions relating to New England,
which are not at all to the Purpose, but upon the Supposition that there are,
at this Day, no Episcopalians in those Colonies. For what I had advanced was
this, that the Propriety of not sending Bishops to those who had an Aversion to
episcopal Government, is indisputable. Let us try notwithstanding, whether any
Thing can be made of his Questions and Remarks, however foreign or out of
Place. Quest. If a Bishop is sent, will he have nothing to do in these the
New England Colonies? Ans. Nothing at all, but with such Persons as shall be
desirous of his Administrations. Quest. Will they not be Part of his Diocese?
Ans. Not in such a Sense, as to bring the Dissenters under his Jurisdiction.
Quest. Will not the episcopal Churches in them, at least their Clergy, be under
his Inspection and Government? Ans. They most certainly will; but this can do
no Harm to him, or any others of the Congregational or Presbyterian Persuasion.
He will then, says the Doctor, be as completely settled at the Head of the
episcopal Clergy, within these Bounds, as in the other Colonies, and will have
the same Right of superintending and governing them. Very true; but why should
not the episcopal Clergy of New England be superintended and governed, as well
as those of the other Colonies? They do not desire to be exempted themselves,
and it never has been proposed by others. But attend then to the Consequence:
If his (the Bishop's) Place of Residence should not be here, says he, his Power
will: And it will be the same in all its Exercises, as in any other of the
Provinces. But if the Exercises of his Power are to be confined to the
episcopal Clergy, other People, as has been observed, need not be anxious,
whether even the Place of his Residence should be in New England, or not. It is
really surprising to find a Man of Sense and Reputation caviling at this Rate
-- resolved to be satisfied with nothing -- at one Time blaming us, because,
under the proposed Episcopate, no peculiar Power is to be exercised over the
Laity -- at another, finding Fault that it is to be exercised over the
episcopal Clergy -- and then peevishly declaring that a Bishop, as odious and
detestable as he is, may as well reside in New England altogether, as
superintend and govern the Clergy belonging to the Church. Such invincible
Prejudice is hardly to be met with in the present Age. It reminds me of an
Instance in ancient History: John came neither eating nor drinking, and they
say, he has a Devil. The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say,
behold a Man gluttonous and a Wine-Bibber, a Friend of Publicans and Sinners
Matt. XI. 18, 19.
.

THE next Piece of Intelligence the Doctor takes in Hand, relates to the
Endeavors of the Society to obtain an Episcopate for the Church in America.
But I find not that he is able to say much against it, or to infer much from
it. I sat down to write this Defense, with a determined Resolution to treat
Doctor Chauncy with all possible Respect. Hitherto I have adhered to it with
great Firmness and Punctuality, and have taken Notice of many Things, which I
should have passed over as unworthy of Observation, in many other Writers. But
as I think it high Time to show some Respect also to the Reader, the good
Doctor will excuse me, if hereafter he should not find me so minutely attentive
to him, as I have been. Every Thing however in the succeeding Parts of his
Performance, that appears to me to have either of the two Qualities, Weight or
Plausibility, shall be duly noticed.

THE last Article of Intelligence, says he, relates to the external
Circumstances of the Bishop that is desired to be sent to America. A Seat has
been purchased for his Residence, at Six Hundred Pounds, Sterling, Expense, in
a convenient Mansion House and Lands, situate at Burlington, in the Jersies;
and large Legacies have been left for the Support of an American Episcopate, p.
104. This is the Substance of the Intelligence. Let us now attend to the Use
that is made of it. It is, says he, unquestionable, if a Bishop is sent to
America, that such Provision must be made for his Support, as will enable him
to appear in all the Grandeur of a Bishop in England. The Place of his
Residence (does he mean the City of Burlington?) and Manner of living, must
exceed a common Clergyman's in Proportion to his more exalted Station in the
Church, p. 105. If L. 600 Sterling laid out in the Purchase of a Mansion House
and Lands, for an American Bishop, excites in the Doctor the Idea of Grandeur
and Magnificence, it will probably have a contrary Effect in the Minds of other
Persons. There are several Instances in America of Mansion-Houses and Lands,
or, in other Words, of Parsonage Houses and Glebes, which could not be
purchased for twice the Sum; and I believe that there are but few episcopal
Palaces in England, even exclusive of their Regalia See the American Whig,
Numb. I.
, the Cost of which has not exceeded it. So that it does not follow from the
above Intelligence, that with Respect to the Article of his Mansion House, the
American Bishop is likely to appear in all the Grandeur of a Bishop in England,
or vastly to exceed in Appearance some common Clergymen. Perhaps the intended
Grandeur of the American Bishops is infered, from the large Sums that have been
given for their Support. But until it be known how many Bishops are to be
thereby supported, and how much each is to receive, the Inference is not
conclusive.

AFTER all, why should not a Bishop be supported, in Proportion to his more
exalted Station in the Church? Is it not agreeable to the common Sense of
Mankind, and to the Fitness of Things, that Men in eminent Stations should be
enabled to make a greater external Appearance, than others of an inferior
Degree? Ought not every Office to be respected, according to its Dignity and
Importance? And is not the general Temper and Disposition of Mankind such, that
Respect will be paid to an Office, in some Degree of Proportion to its outward
Figure and Appendages? And is not this in Reality the Case, with Respect to
ecclesiastical Offices, as well as to any other? It ought farther to be
considered, that the necessary Expenses of a Bishop greatly exceed those of a
common Clergyman. A Bishop ought, in a peculiar Manner, to be given to
Hospitality. He ought eminently to distinguish himself by Works of Charity.
These Things will certainly be expected from him; and how can such Expectations
be answered, unless a more ample Provision be made for him, than is requisite
for common Clergymen?

BUT such Bishops were unknown in the Christian World, in its first Days of
Purity. This is not disputed, with Regard to their external Circumstances; and
the same may be said of the Clergy in general. In those Days there was perhaps
not an Instance, of a Clergyman so comfortably situated and so well
accommodated, as I suppose Dr. Chauncy to be in Boston. Now what are we to
infer from this? That the Doctor's Parishioners have done wrong, in providing
for him such un-primitive Accommodations? Or, that he does wrong in accepting,
and making Use of them? Can it be thought the Duty of Bishops and Clergymen, at
this Day, to court "Stripes and Imprisonments," because they were inflicted on
the Apostles and first Ministers of the Christian Religion? Or is it the Duty
only of Bishops, and not of the common Clergy and private Christians, to be in
these primitive Circumstances? One would be apt to infer this, from some Men's
Reasonings; so glaring is their Partiality against the episcopal Order. Julian
the Apostate, as was observed to the same Purpose by Archbishop Whitgift, in
Excuse for some of the Arts he had used to undermine and destroy Christianity,
said in Derision, he did that which was most meet and profitable for
Christians, viz. That they being made poor, might sooner come to the Kingdom of
Heaven: Seeing the Gospel promises the Kingdom of Heaven to those that be
poor, and that Christ says, that none can be his Discples, unless they forsake
all, and follow him Strype's Life of Whitgift, p. 215.
. I do not accuse the Doctor, of having the same inveterate Enmity against our
Bishops, that Julian had against Christians in general; but in some Appearances
there is a striking Resemblance. And in Consideration of that Example, it may
not be amiss in him to examine, whether what he has offered in the like Strain,
be not the Dictate of Prejudice or some evil Passion, rather than of real and
impartial Judgment.

I KNOW very well that the Gospel requires of Bishops, and it as indispensably
requires of all others, not to hold Houses, or Lands, or any worldly Enjoyments
when they come into Competition with a good Conscience: And every Bishop who
does not choose to part with them, rather than to deny, or forsake, or disobey
Christ, is utterly unworthy of the venerable Character. But the Gospel requires
not of its Disciples, not even of Bishops, to renounce the temperate Enjoyment
of these Things, excepting when particular Reasons make it necessary. It allows
us to possess this World's Goods, when they can be obtained honestly; it
teaches us to consider them as the Gifts of Heaven, and to be thankful for them
on that Account, cautioning us only so to use, as not to abuse, them. And what
it makes a Rule for any, it injoins upon all Men, without any Distinction of
Persons or Characters.

NOR do we read of such Bishops, says the Doctor, until Christians had grossly
departed from that Simplicity of living, which was their primitive Glory. In a
State of Persecution, nothing more than what is here called Simplicity of
living, can be expected; and where it is submitted to for the Sake of a good
Conscience, as it was by the primitive Christians, it is undoubtedly Men's
Glory. That Christians, in general, in this Age, have too far departed from a
decent Simplicity of Manners, and are too apt to indulge themselves in
excessive Luxury, is not to be denied, and ought to be lamented. All Orders of
Men seem to be infected with this epidemical Evil, and it is to be feared, even
that the Bishops and Clergy have not altogether escaped the Infection; and
they, in particular, ought to make it their Study to recover themselves, and
all whom they can persuade. But that Nations now ought strictly to regulate
their Manners and Mode of living, by the Customs of any former Age, I do not
believe; and if Individuals should attempt it, it would answer no good End, and
they would appear ridiculous. The primitive Christians, for Instance, had no
Glass-Windows in their Houses; and we are under as strong Obligations to adopt
their Simplicity of Living in this Respect, as in many others. The Bishops in
the primitive Church were very differently situated, from what Bishops now are
in the Church of England; but it does not appear, that, in Case the civil
Powers had been disposed to bestow upon them the like Favors, with those which
are enjoyed by our Bishops, that they would have been unwilling to accept them.
On the other Hand, it does appear, from repeated Trials, that many of our
Bishops have been as ready to give up, and sacrifice, all their worldly
Advantages, when their Duty required it, as any Bishops in the primitive Church.

AT so great a Distance from apostolic Times, says the Doctor, as the third
Century, though Corruption had then crept into the Church, Paul of Samosata,
Bishop of Antioch, was deposed, among other Things for this, that having been
poor before he was a Bishop, he had after that grown very rich, born secular
Dignities, passed the Streets with a Train of Attendants, and erected to
himself a magnificent Seat in the Church. -- For which Eusebius is quoted, p.
105. The Epistle of the Council of Antioch, partly given by Eusebius, in the
Place refered to, does not say that Paul was deposed, among other Things, for
having been very rich; but it charges him with having amassed incredible Wealth
unjustly, by Oppression and Sacrilege. For want of Greek Types, I must produce
to the Reader the Latin Translation by Valesius, Nunc ad incredibilem
Opulentiam pervenit, per Scelera ac Sacrilegia, Fratrumque Concussiones: dum
Injurid affectos decipit, promittens quidem sese illis accepta mercede Opem
laturum: fallens autem ipsos, et ex Facilitate litigantium, qui ut negotio
liberentur, quidvis dare parati sunt, Lucrum inaniter captans, et Pietatem
Quaestum esse existimans. The Complaint goes on specifying, not barely that he
had born secular Dignities, but that he had born them with unbounded Pride and
Insolence: Neque quod Fastu et Arrogantia supra Modum elatus saeculares gerit
Dignitates -- not simply that he had passed the Streets with a Train of
Attendants, but that in thus passing the Streets, he had discovered
unsufferable Arrogance and Disdain, to the Disgrace of the Christian Religion:
-- Stipatusque maxima Hominum Multitudine, partim praeeuntium, partim
subsequentium; adeo ut illius Fastu et Arrogantia incredibilis Invidia odiumque
multorum adversus Fidem nostram conflatum sit. In short, he is here represented
by the Council, to have been the greatest Monster for Wickedness, that ever
disgraced the Christian Church; and I am very certain, that a Bishop of his
Character in the Church of England, at this Day, would not be punished with
less Severity, than this Bishop was in the Third Century. Nor do I believe that
the Council of Antioch condemned any Thing in his Character or Conduct, but
what would be as loudly condemned in an English Convocation. It is evident
therefore, upon the whole, that this Instance will not answer the Purpose for
which it is quoted.

The Doctor proceeds: A good while after this, though the Church had grown
still more corrupt, the Fourth Council of Carthage decreed, That the Bishop
shall have a little Dwelling House near the Church; that he shall have coarse
household Stuff and Diet, and seek his Reputation only by sound Doctrine, and
a good Life; that he shall not spend his Time in caring for his Family, but be
employed wholly in reading, praying and preaching the Word of God, p. 106. Some
Part of what is here decreed, is very commendable. A Bishop ought undoubtedly
to apply himself chiefly to the proper Duties of his Function. He ought to
avoid every Appearance of a vain Extravagance, and of an undue Attachment to
the Pleasures, the Honors, and Interests of the World. But that he should
literally be confined to mean Diet, coarse Furniture, and a small House, if
Piety or Generosity have provided for him better, no unbiassed Person can think
necessary. And so again, if he is to have no Regard at all to the Welfare and
Interests of his Family, he must act an unnatural Part, and become, according
to the Apostle's Estimation, "worse than an Infidel." Nor is it necessary, that
he should never concern himself in public Affairs, as, of late, we have seen
it frequently asserted. Must a Person who knows well the Interest of his
Country, and is capable of serving it, be silent only because he is a Minister
( or a Bishop?) Is he nothing else? Is he not a Subject of his Prince, and a
Member of the Commonwealth? -- Mr. Colman was full of the Sentiments of the
Rev. Doctors Increase and Cotton Mather, his Pastors and Predecessors, on this
Head -- viz. That Opportunities to do good not only legitimate the Application
of our Capacities to do it, but also oblige and require us to do it. That upon
public and pressing Emergencies, Ministers may apply their superior Talents to
some Things of secular Importance. The great Seldom is quoted by them in
Vindication of such a Practice. -- It Is a foolish Thing (says he) to say, a
Minister must not meddle with secular Matters because his own Profession will
take up his whole Man. The Meaning is only, that he must attend his Calling
Turell's Life of Dr. B. Coleman, p. 79.
. If the Council of Carthage intended those Decrees should be understood
literally, allowing of no Exceptions from the general Rule, they contradicted
the Sense of Councils in purer Times, before the Church had grown so corrupt.
Such Injunctions favor not so much of Piety, as of Barbarism and MONKERY, into
which the Church now was beginning to degenerate, and with which this very
Council appears, from other Evidence, to have been infected. For in the 4th
Council of Carthage, there are three Canons immediately following one another
to this Purpose, that they (the inferior Clergy) should provide themselves with
Food and Raiment at some honest Trade or Husbandry, without hindering the
Duties of their Office in the Church; and such of them as were able to labor,
should be taught some Trade and Letters together. And the Laws of the State
were so far from hindering this, that they encouraged such of the Clergy to
follow an honest Calling, by granting them a special Immunity from the
Chrysargyrum, or lustral Tax, which was exacted of all other Tradesmen.
Bingham's Ecclesiastical Antiquities, Book VI. Cap. 4. Sect. 13.
It is evident from hence, that this Council had run far into an Extreme with
Regard to the Clergy in general, as well as to Bishops; so that no Example or
Instruction taken from thence, can be of much Weight in any modern Controversy.
If the Canons of this Council relating to Bishops ought to be regarded, why not
as well those that relate to the inferior Clergy? If these are to be a Rule for
the Clergy of this Day, why does not the Doctor become a Mechanic, and
practice some Trade himself? Or, if his Age exempts him from the Duty of bodily
Labor, why does he not exhort those of his Brethren who are in full Vigor and
Strength, and especially all young Candidates for the Ministry, respectively to
regulate and qualify themselves, according to this African Standard?

THE Extracts from Cranmer and Hooper, with which we are next presented, if
properly understood, are not inconsistent with any Thing for which we contend.
Passages of this Kind are not to be interpreted rigorously, but according to
the known Sentiments of the Authors: And it is well known that those great
Reformers objected not against Bishops being supported, agreeably to their Rank
and Dignity in the Church. Men are too ready, as the Doctor observes, if they
are much raised above others in worldly Circumstances, to grow big in their own
Apprehensions, to be haughty and imperious; treating those below them with
Insolence and Contempt, p. 108. This general Proposition is unquestionably
true, but what Inference are we to make from it? Not, that all Men should be
reduced to the same Level, but that those Persons who are thus situated should
be sensible of this Danger, and guard against it. Affluence and Power, if they
fall into the Hands of ill-disposed Persons, are dangerous Things -- dangerous
to the Possessors, and dangerous to Society; but they are in both Respects
useful, when they meet with a Disposition to employ them for the Benefit of
Mankind. As I hope and believe the Majority of protestant Bishops and
Clergymen, of every Denomination, have such a Disposition; I am free to declare
it my hearty Wish, (and why may not I wish, as well as the Doctor?) to see in
general, especially the worthy Part of them, well supported, i. e. much better
supported than they commonly are in this Country. I wish this, not only in
Regard of the episcopal Clergy, but the Clergy of every Denomination on the
Continent; yea, the whole Christian World. And in particular with Respect to
every American Bishop that shall be hereafter appointed, although I think it
unnecessary that he should appear in all the Grandeur of a Bishop in England. I
am ready to confess, that I should not be sorry to see his Place of Residence
and Manner of Living, exceed a common Clergyman's, in some due Proportion to
his much more exalted Station in the Church.

SECTION VI.
WHEN the Appeal to the Public was drawn up, SECT. VI.
it was apprehended that the Time was peculiarly favorable to an Application
for an American Episcopate; the Reasons for which Apprehension were assigned
and explained in SECT. VI, and are as follow: The Tumults of War have ceased,
and the public Tranquillity is restored, without any reasonable suspicions of a
speedy Interruption -- the greatest Harmony subsists between our Mother Country
and most of the Colonies -- the Plan of an American Episcopate has been
previously settled and adjusted in such a Manner, that the religious Privileges
of none can be violated or endangered -- and, which we should ever acknowledge
with all Thankfulness, we are, at this Time, so happy as to have a Prince on
the Throne, from whose most unquestionable Disposition to promote the general
Interests of Virtue and Religion, from whose sincere Affection for the Church,
and from whose most gracious Declarations on the Subject before us, we cannot
possibly doubt of the Royal Approbation and Concurrence.

IT is the Business of an Answerer to show, that these Circumstances of the
Public were not then real, but imaginary; or that they were not, in Reason, to
be looked upon as favorable to such an Application, or else heartily to confess
the Force and Propriety of the Representation. Dr. Chauncy thinks fit to
dispute the Reality of those favorable Appearances, in the Sense wherein it is
maintained in the APPEAL. He does not indeed deny that the Tumults of War were
then ceased, but shrewdly asks, was this never the Case before? This Question
alludes to the introductory Observation, that the favorable Opportunity -- was
such, in several Respects, as the Circumstances of the Nation had never, until
then, afforded. But it was not pretended that the Temple of the British Janus
had never been before shut, nor that the favorable Opportunity was, in every
Respect, without a Precedent. He goes on: Are there no reasonable Suspicions of
a speedy Interruption of the present Tranquillity? The Question, ought not to
have been put in the present Tense. The Appeal was drawn up in February 1767,
and the Doctor wrote in the Beginning of 1768, it being about a Year
afterward; within which Time the Appearance of public Affairs was greatly
changed. And I can assure him, that, whatever Alarms of a French or Spanish War
had reached him and impressed his Imagination at the Time of answering, I
neither saw nor heard of any Appearances of such a Thing at the Time of
writing. With Regard to the Harmony subsisting between our Mother Country and
most of the Colonies, the Doctor says: It is true the Dispute relative to the
STAMP ACT, has been happily terminated. But has nothing intervened since, that
has disturbed the Harmony? If he will be pleased to review the Chronology of
the doings at Home which relate to the Colonies, he will find that in the
Beginning of 1767, we knew here of nothing that had intervened, after the happy
Termination of the great Dispute about the STAMP ACT, which had the least
Tendency to disturb our Harmony. Indeed before the Appeal was printed, it was
found that the Mother Country had expressed her Resentment of the Proceedings
of one of our provincial Assemblies; and this occasioned a small Alteration to
be made in the Copy, most of the Colonies being inserted, instead of, the
Colonies. The Doctor has some Declamation under this Question, which as it is
founded on a Mistake, I can readily excuse.

AS to the Plan for American Bishops, according to which the religious
Privileges of all Denominations are to be left untouched, the Doctor has the
Curiosity to inquire: By whom has this Plan been settled and adjusted? And then
adds, we have no good Reason to think that it has been done by those who have
any constitutional Right to meddle, of their own mere Motion, with Matters of
this Nature. This Subject will come more properly under Consideration
afterward; in the mean while, I will give him this general Information, that
the Plan for such an Episcopate as is explained in the Appeal, was settled by
those who were warranted by a Royal Commission constitutionally issued.

AS to the King's favorable Disposition, from which we have such Expectations
of Relief, the Doctor thinks it will do us no Service. We can, says he,
cheerfully rely on the impartial Justice and Goodness of the British Sovereign,
not in the least doubting his equal paternal Regard to all his loyal Colonists
of whatever Class. And may not the Members of the Church of England rely upon
him, as well as others? Will impartial Justice and Goodness be partial against
the Church? Will not the equal Regard of our Sovereign, at length raise us to
that Equality with our Fellow-Colonists, which alone we request? Will not a
paternal Regard to loyal Colonists raise those Colonists, whose Loyalty has
been unimpeached, and which it is hoped will be able to stand every Trial, from
the Condition of Aliens into that of Sons? How unkind and ungenerous is it to
tell us of our Equality, when the World sees that our Condition is cruelly
unequal!

AS the Concurrence of many peculiar Circumstances was apprehended to be
favorable to the Scheme of an Episcopate in the Colonies, so it was observed in
the Appeal, that the Arguments for sending Bishops to America, were never so
strong and forcible as they are at present. Under this Head, the Number of
those who belong to the American Church of England, and who will receive
Benefit from this Appointment, was particularly insisted on. This Number was
intimated to be NEAR A MILLION. The Writers against the Appeal, particularly
Dr. Chauncy and the Sentinel, have exerted themselves to prove, that the
Account is aggravated beyond the Bounds of Truth and Probability; and, in my
private Opinion, the most plausible Things that have been written against any
Part of the Appeal, have been offered on this Subject. It may therefore be
proper to lay before the Reader the Evidence upon which the Expression was
grounded.

IF any one will take the Trouble to turn to the Appeal, p. 55, he will find,
that any exact Certainty as to the Number of Churchmen in America was not
pretended to; so far from it, that it was expressly acknowledged, that in a
Country so widely extended and unequally peopled, it was not to be expected.
However, as it had been frequently said by our most sensible Writers, and was
reported to have been assumed as Fact in the Parliament of Great Britain, that
the King's proper Subjects in America amounted to THREE MILLIONS; it was
thought that the Assertion, that the Church of England in America contains now
near a Million of Members, might be justified on the Ground of that general
Assumption. At the Time of writing, I had Reason to believe, and am still of
Opinion, that those who profess themselves to belong to the Church of England
in the American Colonies and Islands, are not less than a third Part of the
Inhabitants, exclusively of the Blacks; and I had Arithmetic enough to know,
that a third Part of what was assigned as the whole Number, was one Million.
But as I suspected that the general Number was exaggerated, an Abatement was
made on the Side of the Church, and it was intimated that the Members of it
amounted, not to a full Million, but to near a Million. Now this, I imagine,
might be said, not improperly, after a Deduction of 500,000, from the Sum total
as currently received, a third Part of which would be upwards of 833,000: And
this was actually the very Number that I had in View. And wherever the
Expression of near a Million has been applied to the Number of American
Churchmen, by the Clergy of our Convention, it has been upon the same View and
Principle.

MY continuing to use the Expression, after having seen the Account of an
actual Survey said to have been made in 1762, which was mentioned in the
Appeal, p. 56, remains to be accounted for. The Number of Inhabitants expressed
in that Account, of which I knew no more than that a Gentleman of Credit told
me it had been carefully taken, fell short of my Expectations, it making the
Members of the Church, not including the Blacks, to be no more at the Time of
the Survey, than between Four and Five Hundred Thousand. But then it was
considered, that the Americans are found to double their Numbers in 25 Years in
the Course of natural Generation -- that five Years had elapsed since the
Survey was said to have been made, and consequently that a fifth Part of the
whole was to be added to the Number, that the Account included not the Colonies
lately ceded, in which there are probably some Thousands of Churchmen -- that
a farther yearly Addition had been made by the coming over of Europeans, and,
as some think, by Proselytes from the Dissenters -- and that of the Blacks, not
less than 600,000 must be the Property of Episcopalians, of which Number it was
conjectured that about a fourth Part might be said properly to belong to the
Church: I say, the above Particulars being considered, I was of Opinion that
the Expression of near a Million, might still be retained, consistently with
the Account of the actual Survey.

SOME of my Opponents have affected to be witty upon what was said of the
Blacks, ridiculing the Notion of their being Members of the Church. But, with
Regard to the Admission of Members, the Church of England, like the Gospel of
Christ, makes no Distinction of Jew or Greek, Bond or Free, Black or White; and
we are not ashamed to confess, that many of those who are doomed to Slavery,
and upon whose Necks we have fastened the Yoke of Bondage, are Members of the
same religious Society with ourselves. Dr. Chauncy says of me, in a Note, p.
112, the Dr. for Reasons best known to himself, did not choose to say, in plain
Words, that NEGROES, knowing nothing of Religion, make a very large Part of his
Million of the Members of the Church of England. But it is evident he has these
in Reserve to save the Truth of his Affirmation. As I did not say in plain
Words, neither did I give the least Intimation, that Negroes, knowing nothing
of Religion, constituted any Part of the supposed Number of American
Churchmen. If I had intended to include such, I should not have spoken of near
a Million, but of many more than a Million, belonging to the Church. Although I
had observed, in p. 57, of the Slaves in general, that they may be said in an
imperfect Sense, to belong to the respective religious Classes of their Owners;
yet I meant not to include in the Account of near a Million, more of them than
were supposed to have been actually admitted, or were desirous of being
admitted, to be Members of the Church by Baptism: And such, it was hoped, might
amount to the fourth Part of the whole Number.

THUS I have accounted for our having said, that the Church of England in
America contains near a Million of Members. After all, I am not positive but we
may have spoken improperly; for which Reason, for my own Part, I shall be
contented hereafter to change the Mode of Expression, and instead of saying,
that the Church of England in America contains near a Million of Members, to
say it contains a third Part of all the Inhabitants of the British Islands and
Colonies in America, without including the Blacks; which Expression, I believe,
can be fairly defended.

THE Doctor, in Order to confute the Account given in the Appeal, is pleased to
spend four or five Pages in Exhibitions of his own political Arithmetic; but he
appears not to be, any more than the Author of the Appeal, a BREREWOOD or a
PETTY. I could easily point out many Mistakes in his Calculations; but I find
it necessary to spare the Reader's Patience wherever I can. The Effect of his
Operations is, in his own Opinion of the Matter, that it is questionable,
whether the Amount of episcopal Professors, in all these Colonies will be more
than about 270,000, p. 115. This Computation, I am persuaded, would be found
greatly defective upon a strict Examination; but even allowing it to be just,
the Number is not contemptibly small. For 270,000 Members of the national
Church in the American Colonies, are too many to be neglected. If any other
Denomination of Protestants in this Country, consisting of but a tenth Part of
that Number, were to be refused the Enjoyment of its own Form of ecclesiastical
Government and Discipline, I doubt not but it would occasion a general Clamor
throughout the Colonies, and perhaps throughout the whole British Empire.

THE deplorable State of the American Slaves was mentioned in the Appeal, and
it was represented, that probably the proposed Episcopate would have a good
Effect upon that wretched Class of our Fellow Creatures, for whose spiritual
Interests we are under peculiar Obligations to be sollicitous. The Doctor
replies: Could he have hit upon nothing but an Episcopate for their Relief?
This, at best, is a far-fetched, round-about Expedient, p. 116. I could
undoubtedly have hit upon some other Expedients; but as the Case of an
Episcopate was under Consideration when these Blacks were introduced, it was
then most natural to hit upon that. And although he seems to think the
Expedient far-fetched and round-about, yet any one may see that I did not go
far, nor much out of my Way, to meet with it. What he proceeds to say upon the
Subject of Slavery, as it is not offered in Opposition to any Thing advanced in
the Appeal, however it may deserve the Consideration of the Public, is no
particular Concern of mine, and therefore I shall pass it over.

IT was represented in the Appeal, p. 58, that another Argument for granting an
American Episcopate, arises from the Obligations of Gratitude; a national Sense
of which, ought, at this Time, to have a peculiar Efficacy in Favor of Religion
in the American Plantations. It is no round-about, but a direct Course, that
leads to this Inference. 'For the divine Goodness having been most eminently
displayed in America, where can it be so proper to erect some suitable Monument
of religious Gratitude for this Goodness, as in America? What Method of doing
this is so natural, as farther to secure and extend that Religion, whereby the
Honor of God is believed to be best promoted? This must be the Religion, which
in the Opinion of the Nation, is the best and most perfect; or, in other Words,
the Religion of the Church of England. But what does he State of the Church of
England in America require to be done, for its Welfare and Happiness? Why, this
Church is, in a Manner perishing for Want of common Necessaries. She has long
been imploring Relief, under such Diseases as must prove fatal to her, if much
longer neglected. She therefore earnestly requests, and She only requests, that
proper Remedies may be provided for her present Sufferings. This Request is
made with full Confidence of succeeding, as She wishes for nothing that shall
be thought inconsistent with the Rights and Safety of others. She asks for
nothing but what has been granted to others, without any ill Consequences; and
She cannot but rely on the common Affection and Justice of the Nation to raise
her to this Equality.' This is the Substance of the Argument as it stands in
the Appeal.

THE Doctor pretends that he cannot easily discern any special Connection the
victorious Success of the British Arms in America has, with the Establishment
of an Episcopate here. But this Connection has been clearly pointed out; and it
is sufficient for my Purpose, if it is visible to others. Is the Religion of
the Church of England, says he, p. 119, the only true Religion on the American
Continent? I shall not now enter into a Disquisition about the Number of true
Religions, nor how far any Thing that contradicts the Truth may be true itself,
but answer directly to the Question: The Religion of the Church of England, is
evidently the purest and best in the national Opinion, or it would never have
been received as such, and established at Home. But is Religion, in none of the
other Forms, to be regarded? In my Judgment of the Matter, Religion under every
Form ought to be regarded, in a greater or less Degree, as perhaps the worst
Form of it is better than none at all; and under all Forms it ought to be
tolerated, as far as is consistent with the public Safety. But as no Man, nor
Society of Men, can be under Obligations to promote or propagate any Religion,
which is believed by him or them to be false; so all Men are obliged to promote
the Interests of what they believe to be the true Religion, and more especially
after any signal Interpositions of divine Providence in their Favor.

WE do not esteem it a Duty, says the Doctor, much less an indispensible one,
in Consequence of these Conquests, to provide for the Security or Support of
the Religion of Episcopalians, any more than the Religion of other
Denominations of Christians in the Colonies. But he, and those of his
Persuasion, ought to esteem it a Duty to provide for the Security of their own
Religion, MORE than for that of the Episcopalians, or of any other
Denominations of Christians in the Colonies. The Case is the same, with Regard
to the Members of the Church of England; it is their Duty, in the first Place,
and more especially, to provide for the Welfare and Security of their own
Religion. A proper Sense of this general Obligation in the Members of the
Church, is all that we require; we claim no Rights for ourselves, but what we
allow to all others. Both they and we ought undoubtedly to endeavor to secure
and promote our respective Religions; but we should all remember, what we are
generally too apt to forget, that it is our Duty to attempt this, only in a
fair and honorable Way, on either Side, and so as not to interfere with the
religious Privileges of those who differ from us. This is putting the Matter
upon a fair and equitable Footing, and is doing to others, as we would have
them do to us. And upon no worse a Footing than this, did the Argument of the
Appeal proceed. It was not pretended that the late Display of the divine
Goodness in America, was any Reason why the Dissenters should support and
propagate the Religion of the Church of England, in America; but it was, and
still is, insisted, that it is a good Reason why the Members of the Church
should: And as those who have the Direction of our public Affairs, are chiefly
Persons belonging to the Church of England, it is a good Reason for them to
engage immediately in Behalf of this Church in America, and even to provide for
it an Episcopate, since it is a Provision so manifestly necessary for its
Welfare and Prosperity.

THE Doctor goes on for some Pages, endeavoring to destroy the Force of the
preceding Argument; but what he has said with this View, appears to me to be
the weakest of all the weak Things he has offered in his Performance. In p.
121, he conceits that I was under the Influence of an undue Warmth of Spirit,
when I urged the Consideration which is now in Question. I confess, I can
hardly write upon, or consider, the "maimed State" in which the American Church
of England is still suffered to continue, without some Warmth of Spirit; but
that I have been influenced by an undue Warmth, I am not conscious, nor do I
believe. A Zeal for its Interests, so far as they interfere not with the just
Right of others, I profess; but no farther. But until it can be proved that my
Zeal has led me to propose unwarrantable Measures for the Relief of the Church,
or that I have not shown a proper Regard for the Principles of religious
Liberty; I shall not be convinced that I have discovered any undue Warmth of
Spirit. But if there can be such a Thing in Nature, it most glaringly and
notoriously shows itself in the Writers against the Appeal; and if it appears,
in any Degree, in the Author of it, they certainly, of all Persons, have the
least Right to be his Accusers. -- First cast out the Beam out of thine own
Eye; and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the Mote out of thy Brother's
Eye.

THE Doctor proceeds: I scarce know how to speak upon the Matter seriously, it
is placed in so ludicrous a Light. He should rather have honestly confessed,
that he scarce knew how to reason upon the Matter justly, or to make any
plausible Opposition to the Argument, it was placed in so convincing a Light.
Whether there was any Thing ludicrous in my Representation, is freely submitted
to the Reader's Judgment. In what Manner it operated on the Doctor's
Seriousness, and how far he could have been in a gay or comic Humor when
oppressed with the Weight of the Argument, may be easily conjectured. That in
this Situation he knew not how to reason upon the Matter justly, appears from
the very next Sentence.

NOTWITHSTANDING the diseased perishing State of the American Church, have not
Praises and Adorations, according to the purest and best Forms of Devotion,
been offered up to Almighty God, in all the episcopal Assemblies on the
Continent, for the mavelous Interpositions of his Providence, in our Behalf,
in the late War? The natural Import of which Sentence I take to be this: The
episcopal Assemblies on the Continent have offered up Praises, etc. and
therefore the American Church is not in a diseased perishing State, as is
pretended. But whether this was really meant, I am not certain. Perhaps the
leading Sentiment was, that the public Thanksgivings at the Conclusion of the
War, were a suitable Monument of Gratitude for the Successes that attended it;
and therefore that there is no Need of an Episcopate, considered as a Monument
of Gratitude. If this was the Meaning, it was improperly expressed; and the
Method of reasoning is as obnoxious as the Manner of expressing it. A Monument
is always understood to be Something that is permanent, and visible to the
World; it must necessarily be a WORK, and not an ENERGY, or transient Act. The
general public Thanksgiving was a suitable Tribute of Gratitude, but it could
be no Monument. But even if it was, it might have been our Duty to raise other
Monuments of Gratitude, and that of an Episcopate among the rest. The Doctor
mentions grateful Hearts and well-ordered Conversations as being suitable
Monuments on that Occasion. I entirely agree with him in this; and I believe
the Obligation to erect them, was not in the least superseded by the Monument,
if we are so to call it, of a public Thanksgiving. The Truth is, as I conceive,
all possible Honor ought to be paid to the supreme Ruler of Events, and EVERY
proper Monument of religious Gratitude ought to be raised, whenever his
Providence calls us to proclaim, and perpetuate, to the World, our Sense of his
great and distinguishing Goodness.

SECTION VII.
THE next Section of the Appeal treats of the Obligations we are under as
Christians, SECT. VII.
to propagate the Gospel amongst the American Heathens, and of the Advantages
that might be expected from an Episcopate, in the Conduct and Execution of that
good Work, whenever it shall be undertaken upon that extensive Plan, which many
worthy Members of the Society propose. As to what was said concerning our
Obligations to this Duty, I am so happy as to find Dr. Chauncy mostly agreeing
with me in Sentiments; but with Regard to the proper Methods of performing it,
and the Usefulness of an Episcopate to that End, we differ, as is usual.

THE first Thing he controverts in this Section, is the Propriety of civilizing
Savages in Order to their Conversion. I had assigned some Reasons, and produced
some Authorities, to support what appears to have become the general Opinion;
namely, that Humanity, or Civility of Manners, is, in some Degree, previously
necessary, that Christianity may have its proper Effect upon the American
Heathens. Against what was offered to this Purpose, the Doctor opposes the
Experience of New England, telling us, p. 125, that many Tribes of them (the
Indians) in the Massachusett' s Province, have, by this Means, viz. The English
Way of Living, been so depopulated, that there are now scarce any Remains of
them to be seen. From whence he seems to be positive in this Conclusion, that
there is not any Need of what is called civilizing them, in Order to their
embracing Christianity. Their being Savages, says he, and living in a Way
different from what we do, is no Reason why their Conversion may not be
expected, if suitable Means were used with them, p. 126.

AS to the Depopulation of some Tribes of Indians within the Bounds, or on the
Borders of New England, it may have been greatly owing to some Vices, which
their Intercourse with the English furnished them with an Opportunity to
indulge. But there is no natural Connection, I hope, between Civility of
Manners, and the Practice of such destructive Vices. I cannot learn that the
Indians thus destroyed were greatly civilized. Barely coming once in a while
amongst the English Inhabitants, disposing of their Peltry, and purchasing such
Articles as they commonly received in Exchange, could not much improve the
Manners of Savages. They must know something of Letters, reside in fixed
Habitations, practice Husbandry and the necessary mechanic Arts, before they
can be said to have come out of their savage State. Now it is inconceiveable
that either of these Particulars, or all of them, can have a Tendency to
destroy any Part of the human Species. If any of the Tribes in the
Massachusetts-Province, which were so far civilized, have been depopulated; it
cannot have been owing to their English Way of living, but to other Causes,
perhaps to such as were accidental or local. I have met with several
New England Writers who differ widely from the Doctor; ascribing the
Depopulation of so many Indian Tribes, not to the Cause assigned by him, but to
the immediate Hand of God, who thought fit to cut off those idolatrous Nations,
to make Room for the Settlement of his chosen People. Be this as it may, the
Nature and Disposition of Savages, of all Ages, of all Countries and
Complexions, are so nearly the same; that all the Trials which have been made
with any of them, as well as what has happened in New England, will afford
Light to the present general Subject.

CHRISTIANITY, as was observed from Dr. Bray, flourished or declined in the
early Ages of the Church, in almost an exact Proportion to Men's Improvement in
Letters and civilized Manners. In modern Ages, the most judicious and
experienced Missionaries, have judged that the Gospel can have but little
Effect with Barbarians and Savages. It was a Maxim with Father Labat, who had
been a celebrated Missionary in the American Islands, that in Order to make the
Americans CHRISTIANS, it was previously necessary to make them MEN Mosheim's
Ecclesiastical History, Vol II. p. 307.
. Hans Egede, a Danish Missionary, who had resided 25 Years in Greenland, was
of the same Opinion. It is a Matter that cannot be questioned, says he, that if
you will make a Man a Christian out of a mere Savage and wild Man, you must
first make him a reasonable Man. -- It would contribute a great Deal to forward
their Conversion, if they could, by Degrees, be brought into a settled Way of
Life See the Divine Legation, etc. Vol. II. p. 71.
. Father Hennepin, for many Years a Missionary in Canada and the interior Parts
of America, among the Obstacles in the Way of converting the American Indians,
mentions their savage Manner of Life. They are not fixed in a Place, tarrying
no longer in their Villages, than till Harvest is over, which is but a small
Time; all the rest of the Year they pass in Wars and hunting: Then they carry
all their Families with them, and are absent eight or nine Months; their
Children then forget all, and return to their former Manner of Living Miller's
Propagation of Christianity, Vol. II. p. 262.
. These are the Sentiments of some of the most famous Missionaries of these
latter Ages, in different Parts of the World. The most celebrated Writers, both
at home and abroad, have joined in the same Opinion. The very learned Mosheim
says: As to those Indians, who live more remote from the European Settlements,
and wander about in the Woods without any fixed Habitation, they are absolutely
incapable either of receiving or retaining any adequate Notions of the
Christian Doctrine, unless they be previously reclaimed from that vagarant
Manner of Life, and civilized by an Intercourse with Persons, whose humane and
insinuating Manners are adapted to attract their Love and excite their
Imitation Ecclesiastical History, Vol. II. p. 306.
. The more learned Author of the DIVINE LEGATION of Moses, says: Christianity,
plain and simple as it is, and fitted in its Nature for what it was designed by
its Author, requires an Intellect above that of a mere Savage to understand.
Something then must be previous to it. And what is that Something but CIVIL
SOCIETY Divine Legation of Moses, Vol. II. p. 70.
. Again, he complains that some Men, "having taken it into their Heads" (like
Dr. Chauncy) that the Vices of improved Life would more indispose the Indians
to the Precepts of the Gospel, than their present Brutality incapacitates them
from comprehending the Doctrines of it, have concluded it best, upon the whole,
to keep their Eyes shut to the Advantages of civil Life Divine Legation of
Moses, Vol. II. p. 70.
. I might easily produce the Authority of many other great Names, to the same
Purpose; but the above, I apprehend, are sufficient to counter-ballance the
Weight of Dr. Chauncy's, who barely gives his Opinion, without offering his
Reasons.

THE next Thing he controverts, is my Account of the Society's Plan for a more
general and vigorous Attempt to convert the American Heathens. Not that the
Fact is denied, or the Propriety of the Resolution disputed; but it is
pretended, that this Account contradicts what had been before asserted, namely,
that the Support and Propagation of the Gospel among our own People in America,
was the immediate and princpial Design of their Incorporation. Whether the
Conversion of the Heathens was, or was not, the Object primarily and more
immediately in View, when the Society was incorporated, may be easily seen. The
Charter of Incorporation, and an authentic History of the Rise and Progress of
that charitable Institution for near thirty Years, are extant, and Copies of
them are in many Hands. It would be very extraordinary indeed, if the Charter
should have mistaken its own immediate and primary Object; and equally
extraordinary, if the original Members, who applied for it, should not have
known their own Intentions. The Charter mentions the great End in View to be no
other, than to promote the Glory of God, by the Instruction of OUR PEOPLE in
the Christian Religion. In the Preamble it speaks no less than thrice of the
King's LOVING SUBJECTS, as the great and immediate Object of the intended
Charity; and says not a Word of the American Heathens. And it appears from the
History of the Society, from their yearly Abstracts, and anniversary Sermons,
that the Members of that venerable Body, never understood, or imagined, that
the Conversion of Heathens was to be their principal and more immediate Work.
The Case is so uncommonly plain, that even Dr. Mayhew, was compelled by the
Force of Evidence, contrary to his own Inclination and the Scope of his
Argument, to confess, that it appears that the British Plantations, etc. were
really the primary, more immediate Object of this Institution, or the King's
SUBJECTS Observations, etc. p. 18.
. But at the same Time it is farther evident, although not from the Charter as
Dr. Mayhew pretended, that the Conversion of the American Heathens was
notwithstanding an Object more remotely in View, with many of the original and
principal Members, and very probably with the Royal Founder himself. And, from
the Beginning to this Day, the Society have always understood that they have a
discretionary Power of employing such a Part of the Donations entrusted with
them, as their more immediate Duty to the King's American Subjects would admit
of, for the Propagation of the Gospel amongst the Indians bordering upon our
Settlements. Accordingly they have always employed some Persons in this
Service; and I believe it may be truly said, that they have never neglected any
fair Opening to introduce the Gospel amongst the American Heathens, especially
if proper Persons could be found, to engage in such a Mission. Where now is the
Inconsistency in all this? May not the Conversion of the Indians be properly an
Object constantly aimed at by this worthy Society, although not its primary and
immediate Object? Is not primary a relative Term, supposing Something that is
secondary, or to follow it? Has it ever been said on the Side of the Church,
that the Society, so far as they have engaged in propagating the Gospel amongst
the Savages, have acted improperly? Or, that they undertook what was not their
proper Work? And, now an Episcopate is in View, is it said or insinuated, that
it is their primary and immediate Object? Where then is the Contradiction that
is pretended? And how utterly groundless is the following Reflection? The
Writers on the episcopalian Side, have the Advantage beyond all others. They
can make Use of the same Argument, with a good Grace, to contrary Purposes, p.
127.

AS to the Advantage here mentioned, if it had been really claimed or made Use
of by the Writers on the episcopalian Side, it cannot justly be said that they
claim, or make Use of it, BEYOND all others. I can point out an Example that is
equal to it, which has been Matter of common Observation. The Doctor well knows
that the Writers on the anti-episcopalian Side, for several Years before the
Publication of the Appeal, had asserted and strenuously contended, that the
Church of England has no general Establishment in the American Colonies. But,
now an Episcopate is in View, they can tell us a different Story, -- arguing,
that the proposed Episcopate must operate here in the same Manner that
episcopal Government operates in England, because of its general Establishment.
They do not indeed commonly go so far as to say, directly and in plain Words,
that the Church is thus established in the Colonies; but their Way of reasoning
manifestly implies it. So that, we see, the Writers against the Church have
also the Advantage of making Use of the same Argument, to contrary Purposes, or
rather, of opposite Principles to the same Purpose; but I cannot say that they
do this with a good Grace.

INSTEAD of the Advantages expected from carrying on the Attempts to proselyte
the American Heathens, under the Direction of a resident Bishop, the Doctor
says, this superintending Business might, to better Purpose, be put into other
Hands, p. 128. He then introduces the Society in Scotland, for the Propagation
of Christian Knowledge, and the honorable Company for the Propagation of the
Gospel in New England, who manage their Affairs by Commissioners, consisting of
the Laity as well as Clergy, as Instances to prove, that the Superintendency of
a Bishop would be no Advantage to our Society, with Regard to the Conversion of
the Indians. It might as well be proved, from the Example of the Churches in
the Colonies, that a Bishop is not necessary for the Purpose of Ordination,
since, with them, that End is also obtained without a Bishop. But it should
have been remembered, that although a Bishop in neither Case is necessary on
their Principles, yet in both Cases he may be necessary on ours.

THE Example of those two Societies can be expected to have but little Effect
upon the World, until their Conduct shall be better known to the Public. An
Account of their Constitution, of the Condition and Management of their Funds,
of the Persons employed in their Service, and the Places and State of their
particular Missions, is a Desideratum which has been long looked for; and until
it is obtained, many Persons will entertain unfavorable Suspicions. The Doctor
tells us, in general, that they have, at this Day, within the
Massachusetts-Province -- Sixteen Clergymen, English and Indian, statedly
laboring, either as Pastors of so many Indian Churches, or as Preachers to
Assemblies of Indians that meet together for divine Worship; Nine English
Lecturers, and Seven stated Schoolmasters, besides occasional ones, p. 129.
But this general Intelligence is by no Means satisfactory; it rather raises our
Curiosity to know how Twenty-five Pastors, Preachers and Lecturers are
employed, as well as where, to what Numbers, and to what Purpose, they are
respectively sent. For according to Mr. Hutchinson's Account Hist. Mass. Vol.
I. p. 169, in a Note.
, the Indians in the Massachusetts and Plymouth, are so greatly wasted away,
that they amount to no more than about 80 Families at Mashapee, the same Number
at Martha's Vineyard, 70 Families at Stockbridge, and 15 at Nantucket, besides
a few scattered Families in different Parts of the Province. But how
Twenty-five Pastors, Preachers and Lecturers can be properly employed, only in
the four Places of Mashapee, Martha's-Vineyard, Stockbridge and Nantucket,
containing about 245 Families of Indians, requires some Explanation. It might
be not improper also to inform the Public, what the Difference is between their
Preachers to Assemblies of Indians, and the English Lecturers employed in the
same general Work of ministering to the Indians; for at present it is
unintelligible to many People. In saying this Information is wanted, and has
been long expected, I do not mean to condemn the Conduct of those two
Societies. From the respectable Characters of some who are said to be Members
of them, I cannot believe them to be guilty of any sinister Intentions. But why
is the Light of a good Example concealed from the World? Why do they not
publish an Account of their Proceedings, that all injurious Suspicions may be
obviated or removed?

AS to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, the Doctor fears whether,
in what is proposed to be done by them, a Regard to the Church, as established
in England, may not be too much mingled with the common Cause of Christianity.
A friendly Caution of this Nature would undoubtedly be well accepted, as all
Christians are more or less liable to mingle the Interests of Party with the
common Cause of Christianity. But this Society is as irreproachable in this
Respect, as any Society that can be mentioned, without Exception. Its Members
hitherto appear to have acted as disinterestedly, and to have mingled
Considerations of a private Nature with their public Proceedings as little, as
can be expected from the best of Men. They are disposed to be upon friendly
Terms with all Denominations of Christians in the Colonies; and if there is any
Danger of their acting contrary to such a Disposition, it must arise, not from
themselves, but from those who make it in some Degree necessary, by an
unreasonable Opposition to all their Measures. It is natural for Men to defend
themselves; and so far as Self-Defence shall oblige them to regard the peculiar
Interests of the Church of England, they may be expected to be cautious. But I
dare risque all my Interest and Reputation upon it, that they will never be
backward to cultivate, on their Part, a friendly Correspondence with every
Denomination of Protestants, whether here or elsewhere.

As America is the Region wherein the divine Goodness has been more remarkably
displayed in Favor of the British Nation, the Doctor concludes that Americans
are the proper Persons to erect 'some suitable Monument of religious
Gratitude,' on that Account, p. 130. But if that Goodness was not displayed in
Favor of Americans, Americans are under no Obligations of Gratitude on Account
of it. If it was displayed in Favor of the British Nation, the British Nation
is under Obligations to erect some suitable Monument of religious Gratitude.
The Truth of the Case is, as the British Nation in general, and the Americans
in particular, were remarkably favored by divine Providence in the late War,
the Duty is incumbent upon both; and saying that the Americans are obliged, is
not proving that the Nation is not obliged, to perform it. The Doctor seems to
allow of my Position, that America is the very Ground, on which some suitable
Monument of religious Gratitude ought to be erected; and he differs not greatly
from me, when he says, what more suitable one, than a visible perpetually
standing Testimony of their pious Concern, and earnest Care, to spread the
Knowledge of their only Lord who has done such great Things for them? The chief
Difference between us is, that he seems, in this Passage, to make that to be
the whole of the Testimony of their pious Concern and 'religious Gratitude,'
which I would have to be but a Part of it.

HE goes on to complain, that the Endeavors of the non-episcopal Clergy and
Laity in the Massachusetts-Province, to do something in this Way, upon the
Conclusion of the late War, were defeated at Home. For he tells us, that after
a large Subscription was made in Boston for a Fund to support Missionaries in
the Mohawk Country, etc. Upon Condition that there might be an incorporated
Society among ourselves (says he) for the conducting and managing this
important Affair: An incorporating Act was prepared, and passed by the several
Branches of the Government here, and sent Home for the Royal Sanction, without
which it could not continue in Force. But it soon met with a Negative, by which
Means this whole Money was lost. And he intimates that the Disappointment was
occasioned by EPISCOPAL Influence. What he means here by episcopal Influence,
in his REMARKS on the Bishop of Landaff's Sermon, he must be supposed to
explain in the following Words: It is hoped, says he, the Accounts we have had
are not true, that the Negative upon this Act, was principally owing to the
Influence of some of the most important Members of the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel. Now to the Accusation evidently implied in these
Words, the very sensible Author of A VINDICATION of the Bishop of LANDAFF's
SERMON, has thus replied: The Doctor may be assured that his Hope is well
founded, and the Accounts he had, not true. Besides the utter Improbability
that a Number of eminently pious Men who have the Conversion of the Savages
much at Heart, would oppose such a Measure for that Purpose; I will here
subjoin an Extract of a Letter from one of the most important Members of the
Society to his Friend in this Country, dated Oct. 1762, and which confutes that
Calumny. Speaking of this Affair, he says -- The Plan as presented, was liable
to several Objections; particularly that the Members were to be accountable
only to themselves. However the Society made NO OPPOSITION TO IT Vindicat. p.
74.
. The Letter here quoted I have seen, and from an Acquaintance with the
Handwriting, know it to be genuine. The Author of it was no less a Person, a
no less important Member of the Society, than their PRESIDENT at that Time;
whose eminent Integrity, Abilities, and Attention to the Affairs of the
Society, leave no Possibility of suspecting that he could either misrepresent,
or mistake, the Matter. And from his short Account, these Things appear, viz.
That the Plan was not so properly rejected, as the Draught that was presented
-- that the Draught was rejected, not because the Design of it was disliked,
but because it was improperly framed -- and, that the Rejection, whether
justifiable or not, was not owing, in any Degree, to the Society. Mr. Apthorp,
another Member of the Society, after inquiring upon the Spot, goes farther, and
says: I can affirm, on very good Authority, that neither the Society nor any
Episcopalians, as such, opposed the Act of the Boston Assembly for the Purpose
here mentioned. It was rejected merely on political and commercial Reasons,
which arose from the Manner of drawing it up, and were represented by the Board
of Trade to the Privy Council, who unanimously disapproved it, when there was
not one Bishop present; as appears from the Council-Books Review of Dr.
Mayhew's Remarks, p. 39.
. Now that Dr. Chauncy should take no Notice at all of so clear and full an
Evidence of the Society's Innocence, with Regard to an Accusation that bore so
hard upon the Reputation of that most respectable Body -- an Evidence, that
carries double Conviction to those who are acquainted with Mr. Apthorp's
excellent and amiable Character, to which the Doctor can be no Stranger; but
that notwithstanding, he should still go on, from Pamphlet to Pamphlet,
intimating black Suspicions of Guilt, and throwing out Reproaches, founded at
best upon distant hearsay, as if the Balance of Proof were against the
Society; is one of those strange, modern American Phoenomena which admit not of
an easy Solution. The most natural and favorable Way of accounting for it
perhaps, is to suppose that the Doctor wrote in such a Hurry, both against the
Bishop of Landaff's Sermon and the Appeal, as not to give himself Time to
recollect many Things which materially concern his Subject. But I forbear.

SECTION VIII.
THE next Section of the Appeal contains the Plan on which alone American
Bishops have been requested, fairly stated, SECT. VIII.
with Expostulations on the Reasonableness thereof. Dr. Chauncy, in his Answer
to it, begins with taking Notice of what he calls, a Copy of the Petition that
was sent, by a Number of the episcopal Clergy, to the University of Cambridge,
which had lately appeared in one of the public Papers at Boston; in which Copy
there are several Expressions which he looks on as highly exceptionable. This
Copy I have seen; its Editor and Annotator pretended that it was the Transcript
of an Address drawn up and sent, by a Convention of the episcopal Clergy of
New York, and New Jersey. But the Doctor must have since heard that the
Convention disclaims it; and I can and do assure him that it is fictitious and
false, and that the Convention sent home no such Address, nor any that
contained similar Expressions with those which he censures.

HE informs us, in p. 135, that some of the most respectable Episcopalians in
New England -- have declared it to be their Opinion, that Bishops would be of
no Service here, and that they did not desire they should be sent. Whether he
has any Thing peculiar in his Idea of respectable Episcopalians, and of a
steady Attachment to the Interest of the Church of England, which he makes to
be part of their Character; and what we are to understand by the indefinite
Word some, whether Two or Two Hundred, is impossible for me to say. He may have
met with, or heard of, some, i. e. Two or more respectable Episcopalians, who
were not desirous of having Bishops in America, meaning Bishops with such
temporal Powers as they exercise in England: But I much question whether there
is an Episcopalian upon the Continent, either of a more or less respectable
Character, including in it some Degree of Attachment to the Interest of the
Church, that has objected against an Episcopate upon the Plan of the Appeal. If
there be any such, I will venture to affirm, that they have acted a very
unnatural, inconsistent Part. For how absurd is it for a Man, who is attached
to the Interest of the Church of England in America, not to wish it Soundness
and Health? But how can it be sound and healthy, while its Constitution is
broken, and deprived of that which is essential to its Well-being? Where can be
the Harm of having episcopal Ordination administered in the Colonies? What is
the Fear, from having the Clergy brought under a stricter Discipline? "What the
Danger," in giving an Opportunity to such as are desirous of Confirmation, to
receive it in this Country? These are the ONLY Ends proposed by an Episcopate;
and every Episcopalian must allow that these are real Advantages. And since the
Power of American Bishops is to be confined to the Clergy of our own Church,
and will bring no Burden or Expense upon any Part of the Country, or upon
Individuals; it is inconceivable that any Episcopalians should not desire it,
excepting such clerical Delinquents as fear, by Means of such an Episcopate, to
be brought to Punishment. For my Part, I have met with no such Episcopalians,
nor have particularly heard of any such: But on the other Hand, I have been
told by many of the Dissenters, and by several of their Clergy, and even by
some of their Clergy belonging to New England, that they thought it
unreasonable that any should object to our Proposal.

I MEET with nothing farther worthy of Notice, after what has been already
animadverted on, until we come to p. 138. The Doctor there objects to our Plan,
because he thinks it has been illegally settled. He takes it for granted, that
what has been done by our Friends and Superiors at Home relating to it, has
been done without the King's Approbation. And he argues that it is inconsistent
with the Constitution of the Church, and the established Doctrine of the King's
Supremacy, to take such a Step; and that even the CONVOCATION, when convened by
the King's Writ, has no Authority to settle any Plan without his Consent, nor
indeed so much as to ATTEMPT to form one without HIS LICENSE. What the Rights
and Powers of an English Convocation are, is not my Business to enquire; as it
is not pretended that the Plan in Question was settled in Convocation. Allowing
that the two Houses of Convocation, according to the Declaration of the upper
House in 1702, as quoted by the Doctor, without a royal License, have no
Authority to attempt, enact, promulge, or execute any CANON by whatever Name it
might be called, which is the Language of the Statute of the 25 Hen. VIII; yet
notwithstanding, the Clergy, even in Convocation, are still in several inferior
Instances, left prefectly free Atterbury's Rights, etc. of an English
Convocation, p. 132. See also Wake's State of the Church, p. 85,
. The two Houses of Parliament, cannot, without a royal License, attempt,
enact, promulge or execute any Statute, more legally than the two Houses of
Convocation can enact a Canon; but I hope the Members both of Parliament and
Convocation, whether legally convened, or not convened, as they happen to meet
with one another, may confer upon and propose Plans for the public Good, and
agree to carry them into Execution, as soon as the royal License shall permit
them to act in their legislative Capacity. Every Association of disaffected
Persons ought to be suppressed; but Consultations for the public Happiness,
held by Persons of the utmost Fidelity, with a due Deference and Submission to
the Wisdom of Government, will always be encouraged by prudent Princes, and
under wise Administrations. If nothing farther than this, could be said in
Favor of those who settled the Plan for an American Episcopate, it would be
sufficient to justify them: And the Doctor would have no Reason to cry out, as
he does, p. 139, in the following supercilious Language: Is this Manner of
Conduct, in any Degree, conformable to the constituted Order of the Church of
England? Dare Bishops, or even Archbishops, at home, venture upon a Method of
acting so repugnant to the SUPREMACY in all ecclesiastical Matters, with which,
by repeated Acts of Parliament, the CROWN has been vested? That he is much
mistaken in his Notion of the King's Supremacy, as maintained by the Church of
England, has been already proved; that he is also mistaken in his Notion of the
general constituted Order of that Church, is too plain to require any Proof.

HE has pronounced all Consultations of our Bishops for the Interest of
Religion, to be, in general, an Infringement of the King's Supremacy, unless a
License for that Purpose is formally granted by the Crown. But can any Man
believe this to be true, in the Sense wherein it is affirmed; and without any
Exceptions? Supposing the King were made acquainted with the particular Subject
of any such Deliberation, and privately consulted upon it, and he should give
undoubted Proofs of his Approbation of the Measure; would the Doctor still call
it an Infringement of the Supremacy? If not, neither should he thus speak of
the Plan in Question, as it has been honored in this Manner, with the royal
Approbation. And here it may be proper to explain what has been before said;
namely, that the Plan was settled by those, who were warranted by a royal
Commission constitutionally issued. The Charter granted to the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel, has the Nature and Efficacy of a royal Commission.
By this Charter or Commission, the Members are warranted to concert Measures
and to settle Plans, for carrying on the Design of their Incorporation in the
most effectual Manner. The Society soon saw, that an American Episcopate was
highly expedient to this Purpose; they therefore sketched out a general Plan
for sending Bishops to America, which Plan was publicly approved and
patronized by her Majesty, Queen ANNE. Many Causes concured to delay the
Execution of it, at that Time, and through the Two succeeding Reigns; but Marks
of the royal Approbation were not wanting in either of them. Of late Years the
Plan has been resumed and digested with peculiar Attention, and our present
most gracious Sovereign has given it particular Encouragement. Surely, after
this Explanation the Doctor will not say, a Plan for an Episcopate thus formed,
settled and published, ought to have no great Regard paid to it. For were it
inconsiderable in itself, it is still respectable on Account of its honorable
Origin.

IN p. 140, he goes on, fulminating against the Audaciousness of those Persons,
who ventured to form and encourage the Plan; and (Risum teneatis?) construes it
to be a direct Violation of the 73d CANON. The Canon injoins, that no Priests,
or Ministers of God's Word, nor any other Persons shall meet together in any
private House, or elsewhere, to consult upon any Matter or Course to be taken
by them, or upon their Motion, or Direction by any others, which may any Way
tend to the impeaching, or depraving of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
or of the Book of Common Prayer, or of any Part of the Government or Discipline
now established in the Church of England, under Pain of Excommunication ipso
Facto. Whoever knows any Thing of the History of the Times in which the Canon
was framed, must be sensible that it was designed against a very different Sort
of Persons from those venerable Prelates, who formed and settled the Plan for
an American Episcopate. And as it was designed against a different Sort of
Persons, so the Words of it clearly point out a very different Conduct. I know
not but the Doctor may laugh at me, for seriously replying to what is evidently
in itself so highly extravagant, I might rather say, to a great Degree
ludicrous; but yet I am really unable to determine, whether he was, or was not,
serious himself, at the Time of his writing. However, on the favorable
Supposition that he was serious, as I presume he ought to have been, I will
proceed to observe, -- That what the Canon condemns, are factious Combinations
and Consultations which tend to impeach and deprave the Doctrine, Liturgy or
Government of the Church of England. If therefore the forming of the Plan for
an American Episcopate has no such Tendency, it comes not within the Words, any
more than within the Intent of the Canon.

BUT, says the Doctor, it is a Plan for altering the Government and Discipline
of the Church of England in the Colonies. Does he then believe the Canon was
intended to secure the Government and Discipline of the Church of England in
the Colonies? Without this Intention, the Proposal of any Alteration of the
Form of ecclesiastical Government here, can be no Violation of the Canon. But
what is the Nature and Tendency of the Alteration proposed? Is it to deprave
the Government of the Church of England at Home? No, it is in Reality to honor
it, by endeavoring to bring the Government of the Church here much nearer to
her Pattern and Example, than it is, or can be, while destitute of Bishops. Nor
is the Plan for a different Mode of an Episcopate for the Church of America,
any Impeachment of that under which it exists in England. As to such Externals,
the Church of England has always allowed them to be Things that are alterable,
and that they ought to be altered, according to the Circumstances and Opinions
of different Countries, or even of the same Country in different Ages. To say
therefore that Circumstances in America require, or make it expedient, that the
Externals of an Episcopate should be under a Regulation peculiar to this
Country, is saying no more than the Church of England has always, in Effect,
said and implies no Reflection upon the Establishment at home, which also may
be best fitted for a Church situated as the national Church is in England.

IN p. 141, the Doctor, although he is of Opinion that he might be reasonably
excused from taking any farther Notice of this Plan, as it is, not only
destitute of all Authority, but comes HANDED TO CONSIDERATION, in evident
Contradiction to it; yet, upon the whole, thinks proper to go on, and
distinctly mention the Objections WE have, says he, to make against it. Here
then the most essential Business of his Publication comes forward; in which, he
not only lays out his own Strength, but calls in to his Aid what was POWERFULLY
offered by the late excellent Dr. Mayhew. His own Objections he distinguishes,
ranges and numbers, as follows.

OBJECT. 1. THE Government and Discipline of the Church of England under the
proposed American Episcopate, is injurious, both to the Church, and the Bishops
that are to preside over it. But how is it injurious to the Church? Why, it
seems, by the Limitation of the Bishops Authority to the Clergy, so that it
shall not operate on the Laity. But if the Laity are not to be affected by the
Bishops Authority, they are certainly not to be injured by it; that which does
not operate at all, producing no Effect, either injurious or beneficial. With
Regard therefore to the Exercise of Discipline over the Laity, no Benefit is
proposed, and no Injury is to be feared; but with Regard to the Government of
the Clergy, much Advantage is proposed, expected and foreseen; so that in this
Respect, and upon the whole, the Plan is not injurious, but beneficial, to the
American Church. Why no farther Discipline is to be exercised over the Laity
when Bishops shall be appointed, has been shown in a former Section, and need
not be repeated here. It is thought by much better Judges than either the
Doctor or myself, that it will be more advantageous to the American Church, to
leave the Laity as they are, than to introduce any Degree or Species of
Discipline over them, with which Americans are unacquainted.

THE proposed Plan is represented as injurious to the Bishops themselves,
because thereby they are, in a mere arbitrary Manner, restrained in the
Exercise of that Authority, which properly belongs to them, both by the
apostolic Appointment, and the Constitution of the Church of England, p. 143.
But if such a Restraint is not injurious to the Church, it will be difficult to
prove that it can be injurious to the Bishops. Are we to consider the Authority
of Bishops as so much private Property, which belongs to them, and every
Limitation of it as so much Damage sustained by the Bishops? And yet, unless we
consider it under some such Idea, I see not how it can be made out, that any
prudent Restraints of their Authority can be an Injury to them. He that is fond
of exercising Power for the Sake of exercising it, without regarding whether it
tends to Edification or Destruction, is unworthy of it.

OBJECT. 2. THE Bishops in this Plan, are so widely different from the Bishops
of the Church of England, that it is not reasonable they should either be
desired, or sent, p. 144. The Bishops in this Plan, are essentially the same
with the Bishops at Home, how widely soever they may differ in some
Circumstances. But let them be never so different, if such Bishops as are
proposed are fitter for the Colonies than such Bishops as are in England, and
the Doctor will hardly say that they are not; then, it may be reasonable that
they should be both desired, and sent. This I take to be a full and sufficient
Answer to the Objection as it stands; and what has been before said, I take to
be a sufficient Answer to all the Doctor has offered under this Head, excepting
one Consideration, in p. 146, which may require more particular Notice. The
Consideration is this: That if Bishops should be sent to the Colonies with
these restrained Powers, undesirable Consequences might be naturally feared,
both here, and at home. The Consequence to be feared here, he tells us, is,
that our Bishops would be uneasy under such a Restraint, and be disposed to
throw it off as soon as might be. But was it ever before offered as a Reason
why exorbitant Power should not be limited, (and such the Doctor esteems to be
the Power of Bishops in England) because the Persons curtailed would endeavor
to throw off the Restraint, as soon as may be? But why are we to suppose, that
the American Bishops will be uneasy under such a Limitation of their Power, as
the Plan specifies? Those who have been in actual Possession, or even in
Expectation, of any great and extensive Power, will naturally be uneasy under
any remarkable Abridgment of it; but this will not be the Case of our American
Bishops. Whatever Powers or Privileges they shall once possess, by Virtue of
their Office, they will continue to hold, as long as they shall remain in the
Office; and as they will know the Terms before they accept of it, there can be
no Disappointment. And why should they be uneasy, because the Bishops at home
are invested with civil Authority? The Bishops at home may as properly be
uneasy and restless, because they are not, like some of their Order on the
Continent of Europe, sovereign Princes. Perhaps the Uneasiness of the American
Bishops may be supposed to arise from the Reflection, that destitute as they
are of civil Power, they are Bishops of the same Church with their Brethren in
England. But they will not be able to avoid the farther Reflection, that they
are Bishops of the same Church in different Countries, and under different
Circumstances; which essentially alters the Case. And no better Reason can be
given, why they should not be contented with less Power than belongs to the
Bishops in England, than why the other Bishops in England should not be
contented with less Power than belongs to the Bishop of Durham. This same Kind
of reasoning would operate as strongly against episcopal Clergymen in America,
as against Bishops. The Clergy of the Church of England, at home, are, in a
great Measure, supported by Tithes; therefore, it may be said, if Clergymen of
the Church of England are once admitted in this Country, under whatever
Restrictions and Limitations, they will not be easy, until they shall have
secured to themselves the Tithes of our Estates.

THE Doctor also mentions Two ill Consequences to be feared at Home: One is,
that the People there who dislike the present Power of the Bishops, will be apt
to be clamorous, and to make Disturbances, when they shall find that an
Episcopate is settled here in the Form that they desire, while they are refused
the like Indulgence in England. The Reader can hardly avoid remarking, that
here, and in many other Places, the Doctor forgets his proper Business and
Character. His Business is to answer the Appeal upon the Principles of the
Dissenters; but instead of this, he frequently endeavors to raise Difficulties
and Objections, which cannot properly be made but upon Principles opposite to
his own, and of those whom he represents in this Controversy. This shows the
Disposition with which he undertook to oppose the Episcopate in Question, and
that he came prepared with a Resolution to object at any Rate, rather than not
to object at all. It will never be admitted as an Objection coming from the
Dissenters here or in England, that many at Home will grow more clamorous
against the present Power of the English Bishops, in Consequence of the
Settlement of such an Episcopate here as is proposed for the Colonies. But
should the Objection be made by any who have a Right to make it, it is
sufficient to refer them to what has been already said to the Purpose, viz.
That such an Episcopate may be erected here with Ease; but it cannot be
effected in England, without subverting an Establishment, and making a very
visible Alteration in the national Constitution -- a Work never to be
undertaken but in the greatest Extremity, and even then, not without a
trembling Hand.

THE other ill Consequence suggested is, that the Bishops in England will be
jealous, that an Invasion of their Authority is farther intended. In Reply to
which, I will only remind the Doctor of one Circumstance which he happened to
forget; namely, that this very Plan has been formed and introduced by those
Bishops themselves, and consequently, should they be jealous that any Invasion
of their Power is therein intended, they must be jealous that they have
intended to invade it themselves.

OBJECT. 3. THE Church of England knows no such Bishops as are specified in
this is Plan, nor can they in Consistency with its Constitution, be sent to the
Colonies, p. 149. This Objection, and all that has been offered to support it,
has been fully answered already.

OBJECT. 4. WE are, in Principle, against all civil Establishments in Religion;
and as we do not desire any such Establishment in Support of our own religious
Sentiments, or Practice, we cannot reasonably be blamed, if we are not disposed
to encourage one in Favor of the episcopal Colonists, p. 152. If by WE, the
Doctor means those of the congregational Persuasion in New England in general,
the Objection contains an Article of Intelligence that is to me NEW. That some
particular Writers among the various Denominations of Dissenters, both in
England and in this Country, have expressed a Dislike of all religious
Establishments, I well know; but I have been of Opinion, that a large Majority
of those several Persuasions, excepting the People called Quakers,
notwithstanding the Declamations that have been published against
Establishments in the gross, had always a Reserve in Favor of the Establishment
of their own Religion. The Puritans, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth did not
desire a Toleration, but the Establishment of their own Scheme; such an
Establishment of it as would have kept all others, in particular the Lutherans,
and the Friends of Edward's Reformation, out of the Church; and as they did not
desire a Toleration for themselves, so they would not grant it to others. The
full Establishment of their own Plan, absolute and universal Compliance with
it, without any Favor or Indulgence, was what they wrote for, and earnestly
endeavored to obtain Maddox's Answer to Neal, p. 110.
. In the last Century, when they were able to seize upon the Power of the
State, they pressed it into their Service, and according to the Doctrine of
their Fathers, an Establishment without a Toleration was urged and practiced,
as a Matter of indispensible Duty. The Doctor's Ancestors and mine, who planted
themselves in New England, brought with them the same Principles; upon which
they made farther Improvements, not suffering even those of their own
Persuasion, except they were in full Communion with them, to enjoy some of the
most essential Rights of Englishmen. The Presbyterians in Scotland, and the
Calvinists in Geneva, Holland and other Places, have always been Friends to
religious Establishments, and strenuous Advocates for the Magistrate's
Protection of the true Religion. And I imagine, from certain historical
Accounts and authentic Anecdotes in my Possession, that it must have been
within a very few Years only, that the Doctor's PRINCIPLE, against all civil
Establishments in Religion, has been generally adopted New England, if it has
been adopted at all.

I ENTIRELY agree with him, that if he, and those of his Persuasion, do not
desire an Establishment in Support of their own religious Sentiments, they
cannot reasonably be blamed, if they are not disposed to encourage one in Favor
of the episcopal Colonists. They are not desired to do this; nay, when it shall
appear that the American Episcopalians endeavor to introduce any farther
Establishment of the Church in the Colonies, than it now has, I will not blame
them if they oppose it, provided the Opposition be made fairly, and they
confine themselves within the Limits of Truth, Candor and Decency. After all,
what has the Case of religious Establishments to do with the Plan for an
American Episcopate, which has been offered to the Public? Does this Plan
propose an Establishment of the Church? Will the Execution of it imply, or
amount to, any such Thing? Will the Introduction of Bishops, who shall have no
Authority, but purely of a spiritual and ecclesiastical Nature, such as is
derived altogether from the Church and not from the State -- whose Authority
shall operate only upon the Clergy of the Church, and not upon the Laity, nor
upon Dissenters of any Denomination -- who shall not interfere with the
Property or Privileges, whether civil or religious, of Churchmen or Dissenters
-- who in particular, shall have no Concern with the Probate of Wills, Letters
of Guardianship and Administration, or Marriage-Licences, nor be Judges of any
Cases relating thereto but who shall only exercise the original Powers of their
Office, i. e. ordain and govern the Clergy, and administer Confirmation to
those who shall desire it; I say, will the Introduction of such Bishops as
these (and no others are proposed in the Plan, or intended by its Advocates)
amount to an Establishment? Nay, can it have any more Effect against the civil
or religious Privileges of the Colonists, than against those of the Crim
Tartars? If not; then whatever has been offered upon this Subject in Answer to
the Plan, by the Doctor or others, and much has been offered by all that have
written against it, is absolutely foreign from the Point, and has no Manner of
Connection with it.

FOR this Reason I shall pass over what is said, in p. 153, about the general
Right of States to make religious Establishments, with this Observation; that
the same Argument, with which the Doctor endeavors to overthrow it, is as
forcible against the Right of private Judgment. This will evidently appear from
the following Experiment. If a Person in England has this Right, must it not be
owned, that a Person in China, in Turkey, in Spain, has this Right also? What
should make the Difference in the Eye of true Reason? Have Persons in England
been distinguished by Heaven by any peculiar Grant, beyond Persons in other
Countries? If they have, let the Grant be produced. If they have not, all
Persons have, in common, the same Right. And as they must severally be supposed
to exert this Right, in forming their own Sentiments in Religion; what can the
Consequence be, but infinite Damage to the Cause of God and true Religion? And
such in Fact has been the Consequence of this pretended Right of private
Judgment, in all Ages, and in all Places. What Absurdities in Sentiment, and
ridiculous Follies, not to say, gross Immoralities in Practice, have been
occasioned by the Exercise of this Right; in some or other Nations of the
Earth? Thus the Reader sees the Force of the Doctor's Argument against
Establishments; if he chooses to see what can be said in Favor of them, let him
consult, among other Authors, Bishop Warburton' s, Alliance between the Church
and the State, Dr. Stebbing 's Essay concerning civil Government, Dr. Rogers' s
Vindication of the civil Establishment, Bishop Else on spiritual Liberty,
Tract III, and a late elegant Essay on Establishments in Religion, in Answer to
the Cofessional.

OBJECT. 5. THE Church of England in the Colonies, in its comparative low
State, instead of an Episcopate, upon this Plan, or any other, needs rather the
charitable Assistance of its Friends to support its present Ministers, and
others that are still wanted, p. 154. The Doctor forgets, that the Church of
England in several of the Colonies, is not in that comparative low State he
here speaks of; but is able to support and does support, its Ministers in
general, as amply as any Set of Clergymen are supported in the British
Dominions. But supposing it were otherwise, and that the Church throughout the
Colonies needed the charitable Assistance of its Friends to support its
Ministers, as is assumed in the Objection; yet this would be no Proof, that it
does not also need an Episcopate. The deplorable Sadness of the religious State
of Things in North Carolina, where there are so few Clergymen, instead of
answering the Objector's Purpose, is, on the contrary, a strong Argument to
prove the Necessity of American Bishops.

BUT, says he, that Charity, which might be sufficient for the Maintenance of
as many Missionaries as would be needful there, would be swallowed up by one
Bishop only. And would this so much tend to the Honor of God, and the Good of
Souls, as if it was expended in Support of Missions that are really necessary?
It is surprising to see what Advantages are claimed by some People; how they
can make Use of the same Argument to contrary Purposes! When other Ends are to
be answered, the Writers against the Church can tell us, that the Society have
no Power to apply their Funds to other Uses than were intended by the Donors --
that the Money given must be looked upon as strictly appropriated by the pious
Donors to particular Uses; and may not on any Pretense, be diverted to other
and different Uses, though those other Uses may seem to have Something pious
and charitable in their Nature Hobart's Second Address, p. 117.
-- that the Society are Stewards, and that Stewards are not allowed to use the
Goods or Money with which they are entrusted, but for those Ends and Purposes
for which they are committed to them. If they knowingly apply them to any
others, however good in themselves, they are unfaithful in their Trust Mayhew's
Observation, etc. p. 140.
. But now an Espiscopate is in View, it is thought reasonable and just, that
the Society should alienate a Fund, more strictly appropriated to a particular
Use than any other in their Power, (for this may be truly said of the Fund for
the Support of American Bishops) and expend it upon Missionaries to be sent to
Carolina, or other Places, provided always that such Places be at a due
Distance from New England. But as the Society have never acted the Part of
unfaithful Stewards in other Cases, we can be under no Apprehensions that they
will in this.

IN p. 155. the Doctor represents the Church of England in the Northern
Colonies, as having grown but little in Comparison with the other Denominations
of Christians. If this were really the Case, it would not be strange, since it
might naturally be accounted for, from the peculiar Disadvantes to which the
Church in the Colonies has always been subject; and whether it is the Case or
not, the Plea for an Episcopate is exactly the same, it being not founded on
the comparative Increase on the Church, but on its present State, with Respect
both to the Numbers it now contains, and the Necessities it is under. But I
conceive he must be mistaken, as to the Fact. In Pennsylvania, New Jersey and
New York, I will not be positive that the Church has increased beyond the
Proportion of other Denominations, for 50 Years past. In some particular Towns
and Districts it undoubtedly has, but perhaps in others it may have
proportionably decreased. But in the New England Colonies, it appears from good
Accounts, that the Church has considerably increased, and that the Number of
its Professors at this Day bears a greater Proportion to the Number of
Inhabitants, than it ever has before. I may be mistaken with Regard to some of
the New England Colonies; but my Opinion is founded upon credible Report,
strengthened by this Argument -- that it is a common Thing there, for Families
of Dissenters to conform to the Church; whereas it seldom happens that a Family
is known to leave the Church, and join with the Dissenters. But as to
Connecticut, of which I can judge from my own Observation, the Church has
increased there most amazingly, for 20 or 30 Years past. I cannot at present
recollect an Example, in any Age or Country, wherein so great a Proportion of
Proselytes has been made to any Religion in so short a Time, as has been made
to the Church of England in the Western Division of that populous Colony;
unless where the Power of Miracles or the Arm of the Magistrate was exerted to
produce that Effect. This Progress of the Church has greatly alarmed the more
rigid Dissenters in New England; and however the good Doctor may affect to
despise it, I think that I can discover, in some of his late Writings, that he
is not a little alarmed by it himself.

IN p. 157, he intimates, that it is not prudent yet a while for us to desire
an Episcopate, since it will be attended with a vast Charge, which must be
defrayed some Way or other. If Americans were to support the Episcopate, and
are not yet able, it were wrong in them, I will not say, to desire, but to
request it. But this is not to be the Case. And since there is an appropriated
Fund for this Purpose, which will go far toward defraying the Charge -- since
there is no Reason to doubt but it will be sufficiently augmented by voluntary
Donations -- and especially, since the Doctor and his Friends are not to be
taxed to raise it to a sufficiency; they have no Cause to be uneasy on that
Account. Under this Head he argues against an Episcopate, from the American
Church's being yet in its Infancy -- in such a feeble State as not to be able
to stand upon its own Legs -- and, in short, as being so far from a State of
Maturity, as not to make it WORTH WHILE for a Bishop to come here. But infant
and feeble as She is, he has allowed that She my be 270,000 strong in the
Colonies, exclusive of the Islands, after reducing her Numbers as low as
possible. Now can he possibly think, when he allows himself Time for
Consideration, that the Church of England in America, containing 270,000
Members (besides many Thousands more in the Islands) in which are included most
of the Governors and principal Persons in the Colonies, is so inconsiderable,
that it is not worth while for a Bishop to take Charge of it? Would he look
upon an equal Number of any People upon Earth, however low in their
Circumstances, or however light when weighed in the political Balance, in so
contemptible a Light?

DR. Chauncy's other Objections, it seems, coincide with what has been
powerfully offered by Dr. Mayhew; he therefore thinks proper to bring that
powerful Objector upon the Stage, and to retire himself, during a Scene of 17
Pages. But before he makes this Exit, he complains that I suffered what was
wrote in Answer to this very Plan, by Dr. Mayhew, to lie unanswered, without
having lisped a Word in Reply to him. This Appearance is against me, I freely
confess. It was the professed Business of the Appeal to obviate and remove
Objections against an American Episcopate, and Dr. Mayhew was too considerable
a Writer to be overlooked. But the DEFENSES of his Observations I had not then
seen; and although I made much Inquiry, and sent as far as into Connecticut, I
was unable to procure them. I was told however by one that had read them, that
they contained nothing material upon the Subject, but what had been
sufficiently answered by Mr. Apthorp, and nothing but what I had considered in
the Course of my Papers; upon which Information I proceeded to publish. This
Excuse I now offer to the Public, not doubting of its being heartily accepted.
But what Excuse can Dr. Chauncy make, for taking no Notice of what was
powerfully offered by Mr. Apthorp, in Answer to these very Objections of Dr.
Mayhew, and for not having lisped a Word in Reply to him? Was it treating his
Readers generously, or fairly, or honestly, to present them with Dr. Mayhew's
Objections, broadly hinting, although not directly asserting, that they had not
been answered; when he must have known, that they had not only been answered,
but that no Reply had been made to the Answer? Unless some satisfactory Account
shall be given of this Conduct, he must bear the Reproach of it, as well as he
can.

BEFORE he introduces Dr. Mayhew, he suggests an Expedient to compromise
Matters between Episcopalians, and other Denominations, in the Colonies, p.
158. The Expedient is, that the King should grant a Commission to some of the
episcopal Clergy here, to perform all the Offices of a Bishop. Every plausible
Expedient for compromising Differences between the various Denominations of
Christians, ought to be attended to; but Plausibility cannot be predicated of
this. It can neither answer the Ends of the Episcopalians, nor even those of
the Projector and his Adherents. The Powers wanted by the American Church are
purely of a spiritual Nature, which therefore the King cannot give; such
Authority as can be given by the King, is altogether temporal, which is the
very Thing that the Dissenters dread: So that neither Episcopalians nor
Dissenters, can possibly acquiesce in the Expedient.

I SHALL now lay before the Reader Mr. Apthorp's Reply to what has been
produced from Dr. Mayhew on the Subject; first begging that worthy Gentleman's
Pardon, for making free with his Property.

"THE Doctor affects to doubt, says Mr. Apthorp, whether the Scheme proposed by
his Answerer, be not merely his own; instead of being, as is asserted, the real
and only one that has been in View; and says, that if this Assertion be true,
he and others have been misinformed. Therefore, let his or their Informers say
on what Grounds they have ever affirmed a different one to have been framed; or
else let them take Shame to themselves, for inventing Falsehoods, or venting
Imaginations for Facts; and let the Doctor set a Mark on them, and be more
cautious whom he believes hereafter."

"SUCCESSIVE Proposals for American Bishops have been made at different Times,
through a long Course of Years, by Men of high Rank and Character in the
Church; and are ready now for the Perusal of any worthy Person, who shall
declare himself unsatisfied in this Point: All which agree with what the
Answerer has avered. One of them perhaps may have peculiar Weight with the
Doctor; I mean that made in the Year 1750, by the excellent Bishop BUTLER, in
the Doctor's own Judgment a great Ornament of the Episcopal Order, and of the
Church of England. This Scheme, with which the Writer was favored by a
Gentleman of Distinction in Boston, is in the Bishop's own handwriting, of
which the following is an exact Transcript."

I. THAT no coercive Power is desired over the Laity in any Case; but only a
Power to regulate the Behavior of the Clergy who are in episcopal Orders; and
to correct and punish them according to the Law of the Church of England, in
Case of Misbehavior or Neglect of Duty, with such Powers as the Commissaries
abroad have exercised.

II. THAT nothing is desired for such Bishops, that may in the least interfere
with the Dignity, or Authority, or Interest, of the Governor, or any other
Officer of State. Probates of Wills, License for Marriages, etc. to be left in
the Hands where they are: And no Share in the temporal Government is desired
for Bishops.

III. THE Maintenance of such Bishops not to be at the Charge of the Colonies.

IV. No Bishops are intended to be settled in Places where the Government is in
the Hands of Dissenters, as in New England, etc. But Authority to be given,
ONLY to ordain Clergy for such Church of England Congregations as are among
them, and to inspect into the Manners and Behavior of the said Clergy, and to
confirm the Members thereof.

"THIS Plan is so exactly similar to that in the Answer to Dr. Mayhew' s
Observations, that it cannot be doubted, they are the same, and that it is the
only one intended to be put in Execution. And it is such a simple and beautiful
Model of the most ancient and moderate Episcopacy, that it should, not only
remove all the Doctor's Apprehensions, but the Scruples of every rational and
learned Dissenter against that apostolic Form of Government."

"SUPPOSING this to be the real Scheme, the Doctor owns that it sets the Matter
in a less exceptionable Point of View, than he had seen it in before. Yet he
cannot forbear going 50 Years back, to ridicule some harmless, though
ill-chosen, Phrases, in which the Substance of it is expressed; and expose to
scorn, with burlesque Gravity, what he calls a Matter so sublime, mysterious
and sacred, as the Imposition of the Bishop's Hands. Yet, he well knows, or
easily may, that we ascribe no more Efficacy to the laying on of Bishops'
Hands, than his Brethren do to the laying on of Presbyters' Hands. And if we
apprehend ourselves bound to admit it in one Office, which they have rejected,
I mean Confirmation; we may indeed be mistaken in it, but surely cannot be
Objects of Derision for it. The same is the Case of episcopal Ordination, and
episcopal Visitation of the Clergy of our Church. We think them all appointed,
and useful to us: We are sure they are injurious to no other Persons. And
therefore according to those Principles, for which the Doctor avows the warmest
Zeal; we are entitled to have these Offices performed for us by Persons of that
Order, to which we conceive they are committed: Else, we do not enjoy that full
entire Liberty in religious Matters, which the Doctor desires for himself, and
which all Men, whose Principles or Practices are not inconsistent with the
Safety of Society, he says, have a Right to enjoy. He tells us indeed, that we
do enjoy it without American Bishops, "though under some Inconveniences," as he
gently calls them. The BUFFOONERY that immediately follows, in Order to prevent
any Compassion for our Case, I omit. So he thinks we are possessed sufficiently
of the whole Exercise of our Religion, because our young People may be
confirmed, and Clergymen ordained for us, and properly inspected afterward;
provided they will all go from America to Europe for these Purposes. Can the
Doctor say with a good Conscience, that Liberty like this is all that he should
desire for himself and his Brethren? Let me entreat him to read over again some
Words of his Answerer, to which he has made no Reply: Whether, because they
deserve none, or because they admit of none, let others judge. The American
Dissenters from our Communion, would think it insupportably grievous to have no
Ministers but such as received Ordination in England or Ireland; or to be
withheld from the Use of any religious Rite, which they esteemed as highly as
we do Confirmation; or to have their Churches destitute of a Superintendency,
which they conceived to be of apostolical Institution. I should in such a Case
be a zealous Advocate for them, as not yet enjoying the full Toleration to
which they had a Right. And surely they ought to ask their Consciences very
seriously, why they oppose our Application for such Indulgence, as they would
claim for themselves; and whether indeed such Opposition is not downright
Persecution; and that, in a Matter merely spiritual, without the Mixture of any
temporal Concern. Ans. p. 60.

"THE Doctor, still flying to Ridicule in Defect of Argument, intimates, how
much the Episcopalians in America need to be well ruled and governed, -- how
much the Clergy need to be united, and reduced to Order. On which I would only
observe, that the American Clergy are known to be unanimous in their Wishes to
be under the immediate Inspection of Bishops resident among them: Which
Concurrence implies quite the contrary to a present disorderly State of that
Clergy; who are perhaps, as faithful to their Trust, and as blameless in their
Manners, as any Body of Men in the Christian Ministry."

"HE says, that great Inconveniences are likely to follow from the sending
Bishops to America. But he says also, It is readily owned that our Apprehension
of what may possibly or probably be the Consequences of it, ought not to put us
on infringing the religious Liberty of our Fellow Subjects and Christian
Brethren. Nay, he adds, neither have we any Power to do so; if we were
unreasonable and wicked enough to desire it; our Charter granting such Liberty
to all Protestants. Therefore, Bishops may, by that Charter, settle even in
New England. And if the having Bishops among them be Part of the religious
Liberty of the Episcopalians, as it evidently is; the Dissenters ought not to
oppose it on Account of apprehended Consequences: Much less ought they to
oppose the Settlement of them in other Provinces, totally independent on
New England; or their resorting to the New England Episcopalians occasionally.
For any Thing of this Kind would be doing evil on Pretense that good may come
Romans III.8.
."

BUT why are bad Consequences apprehended? Bishops, he tells us, are ambitious
and unquiet. But so are Presbyters, and all Sorts of Men too often. Bishops
partake of just the same Nature with the Rest of the Species: And the Doctor
will own, that they are now, and long have been, as quiet an Order of Men, as
any in his Nation. But who knows whether they will continue so? And who can
know with Certainty any such Thing concerning any Persons whatever? Who knows
whether the New-Englanders will not hang Quakers See the excellent and truly
Honorable Mr. Hutchinson's Hist. of the Massachusetts Bay, p. 187, 196, 320.
and Witches again? But why should either be suspected? The Clergy of England
are in general Friends to religious Freedom: The People of England, Whigs and
Tories, are unfavorable to clerical Power; and a far greater Danger, than the
Doctor's imaginary one, is, that of their laying aside all Regard to the
Christian Ministry, in every Shape, and to Christianity itself. Surely then,
there never was so little Prospect, that a Spirit of religious Intolerance
would revive here. Or if it should, it might not extend to New England; for it
did not, in the Reigns of JAMES and CHARLES the First. But even supposing it to
reach thither, its Effects would be very little diminished by the Circumstance
of no Bishops being already placed in America. They might soon be sent, and
with much greater Authority than is asked for them now; and perhaps with some
RESENTMENT at the Opposition made to them before. But the whole Apprehension is
groundless. The English Dissenters, who have Six and Twenty Bishops established
among them, fear no Harm from them. Why then should the New England Dissenters
fear any, if one or two should be established, with much less Power, in one or
two neighboring Provinces? Those Provinces are not inhabited by Bigots; far
from it. Governors, Assemblies, Dissenters, nay Churchmen, and even Clergymen,
would be all on their Guard against episcopal Encroachments. Add to this, that
so public a Declaration as has been made of the Model of Episcopacy, proposed
to be followed in America, will itself be an effectual Barrier against any
undue Extension of ecclesiastical Power; of which the Doctor affects to be so
apprehensive." --

"BUT he has one Objection against Bishops in our Colonies, which I had almost
overlooked. He knows not how they are to be maintained. Nor, as he thinks, will
they run this Risque, unless they have more Faith in God, and less Love to the
World, than most of their Order have had, since Constantine the Great became a
nursing Father to the Church, and the pious maternal Council of Nice suckled
her with the clear and pure, the incorrupt and sincere Milk of Homoousianity,
that she might grow thereby. One might be at a Loss to find out the Association
of Ideas between the Doctrine of the Council of Nice, and the Maintenance of
Bishops in America. We can only suppose that the Doctor has an equal Love for
them both. But if no proper Maintenance can be found for them, he needs not be
uneasy at the Project of sending them: And that it is not to be at the Expense
of the Colonies, he has seen in Bishop Butler's Scheme, with which the others
agree."

"HE imagines that appointing Bishops for America, would probably increase the
episcopal Party there; and then great Evils might follow. I cannot discern in
what other Way it can increase that Party, than by supplying them more easily
with a competent Number of Ministers; taking Care that those Ministers should
be diligent and exemplary; and promoting an early Sense of Piety among their
young People. These are no Evils; and what can one or two Bishops, on a
Continent 600 Miles long, do besides? The Doctor says indeed, that Pretexts
might easily be found for enlarging their Powers, and increasing their Number.
But enlarging their Powers would immediately raise a Clamor that could not be
withstood. If a few Bishops proved disagreeable, more would not be added. And
though they should prove agreeable and useful; more would be sent, only to such
Provinces as chose them. In the short Stay which one of them would choose to
make in New England, he could not bring over many Persons to our Church. And
therefore how terrible Things soever Episcopalians, if they should become the
Majority, may attempt and perform there, they will be almost, if not quite, as
likely to accomplish, without ever seeing a Bishop among them, as with seeing
one now and then. But indeed there is very little Likelihood of their ever
becoming the Majority there; and still less, of their carrying Points in their
own Favor, as the Doctor fancies they may, while they continue a Minority; for
all Parties, though divided among themselves, will be sure to unite against
them. Nay, had they Power, there is no Reason to think they would be
oppressive; for they are not oppressive in the Colonies where they actually
have it: Or that they would attempt -- for they could not, with any Modesty, or
any Hope of Success -- such Laws against the Dissenters, as the Dissenters have
not attempted against them. And if the Zeal of the New England Clergy threatens
any Danger, Bishops would temper it, as they have done in England, instead of
inflaming it. Therefore upon the whole, I hope the Doctor will, on considering
farther, endeavor to reconcile our Countrymen to their Admission: A Request, in
my Opinion, somewhat more reasonable than his, that the Society should
reconcile the Members of our Church to being contented without episcopal
MINISTERS Mr. Apthorp's REVIEW of Dr. Mayhew's REMARKS on the ANSWER to his
Observations on the Charter and Conduct of the Society, etc. p. 54 -- 62.
."

AT Length Dr. Chauncy reenters, telling us, p. 178, that it is evident by
this Time, that Objections can be offered against such a Plan as has been
proposed. To which it is a sufficient Reply, that it is also evident BY THIS
TIME, that those Objections can within a much smaller Compass, be answered and
confuted.

I AM unable to account for so great a Confusion of Ideas, as discovers itself
in the two next Paragraphs. The Doctor seems very strenuously to deny, that the
Church of England in America has any RIGHT to the Episcopate proposed: But then
he declares himself perfectly willing that we should have it -- choosing
perhaps that it should be granted us as a Matter of Favor, rather than of
Right. But what need is there of this Distinction, and to what Purpose will it
serve, if it is not to operate against us? Our Claim is, that we may be upon an
equal Footing with the other religious Denominations in America. In Order to
this, it is necessary that we be allowed the Enjoyment of our ecclesiastical
Constitution, in the same complete Manner as it is enjoyed by them. Of our
ecclesiastical Constitution Bishops make an essential Part; and therefore,
without an Episcopate we cannot enjoy it. Our Claim is justified by the common
Principles of human Nature, of the Christian Religion, and of civil Society. We
call it a RIGHT, because all good Writers agree in calling a Claim thus founded
by that Name. But for Words we do not contend. What we insist upon is this, and
no more than this -- that the Church of England is, in all Respects, fairly
entitled to as full a Toleration in the Colonies, as other Churches in the
Colonies enjoy; and it cannot be thus tolerated, unless it be suffered to exist
in all its Parts. It is therefore the Business of our Opponents to show, that
we are an Exception from the general Rule, and that we ought not to be treated
in the same equal Manner with others. Unless they are able to show this, they
cannot prove that our Request for Bishops is unreasonable.

BUT says the Doctor, p. 180, the American Episcopalians want to be
distinguished by having Bishops upon the Footing of a STATE-ESTABLISHMENT. If
we want what is unreasonable, so far it is right to oppose us; but still our
reasonable Wants or Desires ought to be gratified. But where did he learn, that
we want Bishops upon such a Footing? Not from the Appeal; for therein the
direct contrary is expressly and repeatedly asserted. Did he learn it from any
Thing that has been published on the Side of the Church? Let him then inform us
from what, and by whom. I know of no such Thing, I can solemnly declare. I have
seen nothing that has been written, since the Plan was projected in the Reign
of Queen Anne, either in England or America, in Print or in Manuscript, that
indicates such a Desire. I will go still farther and say, that I have met with
nothing in the Course of Conversation, with Clergymen or Laymen, in or our of
Convention, from whence I can learn or suspect, that there is an Episcopalian
within the British Dominions that aims at, or expects an Episcopate here, upon
the Footing of a State-Establishment. And yet without Hesitation, or any
apparent Remorse of Conscience, we are all charged with aiming at it, and are
abused for it by many 'petulant Tongues and abusive Pens;' although not the
least Evidence has yet been produced, by the Managers against us. Our Comfort
is, that the unwarrantable Condemnation we have received from these Writers
will avail but little; our Appeal is made to the impartial Public, from which
we doubt not of a favorable Sentence.

THE Doctor affects to doubt, p. 181, whether the late Dr. Samuel Chandler gave
his Consent to, and Approbation of, American Bishops, in the Manner they have
been requested. But a Person of high Rank and equal Integrity, in a Letter
dated May 1764, says, Lord Willoughby of Parham, the only Dissenting Peer, and
Dr. Chandler, have declared, after our Scheme (for American Bishops) was fully
laid before them, that they saw no objections against it: And a Gentleman who
is now in America, was present at the Conversation in which the latter made
that Declaration, and has heard him express the same Sentiments on other
Occasions. Well then, if it was so, the Doctor wonders at it, and accounts for
it by supposing, that he was too complaisant to some high Dignitary of the
Church. But why should he wonder at it? Whoever is acquainted with the candid
and generous Sentiments of that eminent Dissenter, would much rather wonder, if
he had not approved of a Plan, so beneficial to the Church, while it is
harmless to all. To suppose him over-complaisant to any Dignitary of the
Church, is more than we can suppose would be the Case of some of his Brethren,
on this Side the Atlantic. But there is no Need of the Supposition, to account
for the Fact. Dr. Chauncy himself, who seems to be as little addicted to the
Sin of Complaisance to the Church, as most Men, has, in the Page immediately
preceding, said full as much in Favor of the proposed Episcopate, as Dr. S.
Chandler is represented to have said: The only Difference is, that he has not
said it with so good a Grace.

SECTION IX.
THE Design of the Ninth Section of the Appeal is to show, SECT. IX.
that the Episcopate proposed cannot hurt the Dissenters, and is free from all
reasonable Objections. In Answer to this Section, instead of replying to any
Thing advanced in the Appeal, the Doctor begins, with combating his own Phantom
of a State-Establishment; of which, no more is needful to be said. He then
introduces the fictitious Address to the University of Cambridge, in Order to
confront me with a Passage, which I do again assure him was not contained in
any Address of our Convention to that University, or to any other Body of Men,
or to any single Person.

IN Opposition to what was said of the Mildness, Tenderness and Moderation of
the English Bishops, for a long Course of Years past, the Doctor tells us, p.
187, of the Rejection of the Petition of the Presbyterian Church at New York
for a Charter from the King; the Miscarriage of which he supposes to have been
owing to the Interposition of the Lord Bishop of London. I have no Concern in
that Affair, and am not very particularly acquainted with it. But according to
the New York Gentleman's Account of it, which the Doctor has inserted, it
appears, that the Grant of the Favor was considered as a Breach of the
Coronation Oath One Branch of the Coronation Oath is in the following Words.
The Archbishop or Bishop asks: Will You to the utmost of your Power maintain
the Laws of God, the true Profession of the Gospel, and the Protestant reformed
Religion established by the Law? And will You preserve unto the Bishops and
Clergy of this Realm, and to the Churches committed to their Charge, all such
Rights and Privileges as by Law do or shall appertain unto them, or any of
them* To which the King or Queen answers, All this I promise to do.

Blackstone's Commentaries, Vol. I. p. 235.
; and that it was reported by the Board of Trade, that general Policy was
against the Petitioners having greater Privileges than are allowed by the Laws
of Toleration. How far the Grant would have interfered with the King's
Coronation Oath, it becomes not me to say; those to whom it was refered were
the proper Judges; and in their Opinion the Petition could not consistently be
granted. It is the unquestionable Duty of his Majesty's most honorable Privy
Council, to advise him against whatever is thought by them to imply a Breach of
the Coronation Oath; it is a Duty more peculiarly incumbent upon any such
Bishops as his Majesty thinks fit to call up to that high Trust. If therefore
the Bishop of London, upon the above Principle, was it more active than others
in opposing the Measure, it was because his Station required it. If general
Policy, in the Opinion of the Lords of Trade, was also against the Grant, they
were obliged to discountenance it; and the Petitioners, I conceive, ought to
rest satisfied, especially as it was a Matter of mere Favor, which was
requested, and more than was thought to be allowed by the Laws of Toleration. I
have been moreover told, that besides the Reasons assigned, a particular
Policy, with Regard to the Presbyterians in New York, concurred to defeat the
Petition. It was the Belief at Home, that the Church of England had been
treated with peculiar Malevolence, by some of those very Persons whose Names
were annexed to the Petition. It was therefore not unnatural to suspect, that
any additional Power put into the Hands of such Persons, would, as Opportunity
should offer, be exerted against the Church.

IN Proof of the present mild Spirit of the Church of England and of the
Prelates who preside over it, Reference was made in the Appeal, to the general
Sense of it confessed by the Dissenters at Home. The late Dr. G. Benson, a very
learned Dissenter, was given as an Instance to this Purpose; who did not
scruple to make the following Declaration: The Church of England, with its
present Candor, Spirit of Toleration and Charity, appears to me, to be the best
Establishment on the Face of the Earth. Here the Presbyter in Old England
furiously falls upon me, charging me with having been guilty of a Misquotation,
and an artful Deception, thereby imposing upon the Americans. Take it in his
own Words: Our Missionary (Pray, Mr. Presbyter, why your Missionary?) ought to
have given the Testimony its full Scope; for these are the Words of Dr. Benson
following in immediate Connection -- to which I would conform most gladly and
with all my Soul, provided they would admit me, without requiring any Thing,
which appears to me unreasonable, or unscriptural. But, as long as such Things
are contained in her Articles, and mixed with every Part of the common Forms of
Worship, (meaning, I suspect, the Doctrine of the Trinity) my Conscience
obliges me to dissent, and avoid Communion with her. I sincerely wish her a
thorough Reformation, and that speedily. What must now be thought of this
Missionary from the Society, thus imposing on the Americans, not capable, for
the general, of coming at Dr. Benson's Book, nor of detecting the
misrepresented Testimony; which when fairly given, is as full against his
Church System, as the Power of Language can express. This is the Objection, in
its full Scope. Before I saw this Presbyter's Performance, a Friend who had
read it, upon my Inquiry, told me, that he met in it with but one Passage that
could deserve Notice; which is the Passage I have quoted. When I came to see
it, it appeard to me to be in itself not worthy of a Reply, as I still think;
however as some officious Zealot has caused it to be reprinted in one of the
Boston Papers, for this Reason it may be proper briefly to answer it.

Whenever an Author is quoted, to show his Opinion upon any particular Point,
common Sense teaches us that it is unfair to quote him imperfectly; or in such
a Manner that his Opinion on that Point is misrepresented. At the same Time, no
Person of common Sense will quote farther than relates to the Point under
Consideration. Let us then examine, for what Purpose Dr. Benson was quoted in
the Appeal; from whence only we must judge whether he was quoted fairly or not.
Now if any one will be at the Trouble of turning to the Appeal, p. 90, he will
see, that his Testimony was manifestly produced, as an Evidence of the
Mildness, Tenderness and Moderation of 'the English Bishops' for a 'Course of
Years' past; and for no other Purpose. But had Dr. Benson ever declared his
Opinion upon this Point? Yes, directly and fully, in in the Words quoted. Did
the Quotation include the whole of his Declaration, and fairly express the
whole of his Opinion? I affirm that it included every Word relating to the
Subject, and consequently conveyed the whole of his Opinion thereupon, so far
as he thought proper to express it. What then is the Presbyter's Objection?
That I gave not the Testimony its full Scope. In what Manner does he attempt to
support it? He alleges my Omission of Words that follow in immediate
Connection with those quoted. What is the Tendency of the Words omited? To
account for Dr. Benson's not conforming to the Church. Was the Reason then of
his not conforming, that the Church appeared to him to be defective in Mildness
and Moderation? No, a quite different Thing, it was because such Things are
contained in her Articles, etc. as appeared to him to be unreasonable or
unscriptural. The Objector was able to see this, for he observes that the Words
omited contain a Testimony -- against what? Why, not against the Moderation of
the Bishops and Clergy, the only Thing then in Question; but -- against the
Church-System. I am sorry that he was not able also to see, that I was not upon
the Subject of Church-Systems, but of the Church of England's Mildness to
Dissenters: -- And that I might, with as much Propriety, have quoted any other
Passage in the whole Book, as that which I am blamed for omiting, although it
was in immediate Connection with the Sentence transcribed. It is now submitted
to the Reader, whether my Quotation was unfair, or the Presbyter's
Animadversion unjust and impertinent.

FROM the English Dissenters, I passed on to show the favorable Opinion of the
Church of England, which was entertained by some of the most eminent Reformers
and foreign Protestants; and by CALVIN amongst others. In Answer to this, Dr.
Chauncy denies that Calvin had any Friendship for Episcopacy. The plain Truth
is, says he, Calvin was in Principle as real an Enemy to the divine Right of
Episcopacy, as to the divine Right of Popes, p. 188. But Enemy as he was, to
say nothing now of his Testimony in Favor of Episcopacy which was produced in
the Appeal, he acknowledges that it was the Government of all the Churches upon
Earth, from the Times of the Apostles, for 1500 Years together Instit. Lib. IV.
Cap. IV. Sect. 2.
. But his extraordinary Opinion of Episcopacy will farther appear in a Letter,
which he and Bullinger, and other learned Men beyond Sea, wrote Anno 1549 to
King Edward the Sixth, offering to make him their Defender, and to have Bishops
in their Churches for better Unity and Concord amongst them, as may be seen in
Mr. Strype's Memorial of Archbishop Cranmer; as likewise, by a Writing of
Archbishop Abbot's, found amongst the Manuscripts of Archbishop Usher Answer to
Pierce, p, 17.
. Archbishop Abbot's Manuscript, to which the learned Answerer of Pierce
refers, in the above Passage, has the following Words: Perusing some Papers of
our Predecessor Matthew Parker, we find that John Calvin, and others of the
protestant Churches of Germany and elsewhere, would have had Episcopacy, if
permitted. -- And whereas John Calvin had sent a Letter in King Edward the
Sixth's Reign, to have conferred with the Clergy of England about some Things
to this Effect, two (popish) Bishops, viz. Gardener and Bonner, intercepted the
same; whereby Mr. Calvin's Offerture perished. And he received an Answer, as if
it had been from the reformed Divines of those Times; wherein they checked him,
and slighted his Proposals. From which Time John Calvin and the Church of
England were at Variance in several Points; which othewise through God's Mercy
had been qualified, if those Papers of his Proposals had been discovered unto
the Queen's Majesty during John Calvin's Life. But being not discovered until,
or about the sixth Year of her Majesty's Reign, her Majesty much lamented they
were not found sooner: Which she expressed before her Council at the same Time,
in the Presence of her great Friends Sir Henry Sidney, and Sir William Cecil
Strype's Life of Parker, p. 70,
.

ALMOST all the foreign Protestants, of any Distinction, have been Friends to
Episcopacy; although many of them have been unable to obtain that primitive
Form of Government for their Churches. Luther professes that if the popish
Bishops would cease to persecute the Gospel, we would acknowledge them as our
Fathers, and willingly obey their Authority, which we find supported by the
Word of God. Melancthon lays the Blame on the Cruelty of the popish Bishops,
that that canonical Polity was destroyed, which, says he, we so earnestly
desired to preserve: And bid the Papists consider what Account they will render
to God for thus scattering his Church. 'And Heerbrand, Chancellor of Tubingen,
says, it had been a salutary Thing if every Province could have had its
Bishops, and they their Metropolitans. -- "In the French Church Spanheim
witnesses, nec obscuri sunt in Gallia ipsa reformata illi Theologi, quorum si
Votis fuisset Locus, nec intercessissent Obices removeri nescii, accepissent
plerique Formam episcopalis Disciplinae. -- Citareque hanc in Rem, Casaubonos,
Camerones, Diodatos, Bochartos. Langlaeos, ac vivos etiam Testes, proclive
fore. -- Even the Synod of Dort, by their President Bogerman, expressed their
Approbation of the Church of England, and of Episcopacy, which they were
desirous to establish in their Churches, but the Times would not then permit
them to make this Change; complaining of their Want of it as a Misfortune:
Nobis non licet esse tam beatis. And Le Clerc says, he professes his Belief to
be, that Episcopacy is of apostolical Institution, and that none have a Right
to depart from it, unless in Cases where the Corruptions of the Church cannot
be remedied without it: And that those, who live in protestant Countries where
they have Bishops, as in England, are greatly to blame to separate themselves
from them; and more so, if they endeavor to overthrow Episcopacy in Order to
introduce Presbytery, Fanaticism or Anarchy Second Letter to the Author of the
CONFESSIONAL.
.

GROTIUS, not only the Glory of Holland, but the Honor of the human Species,
asserts, that Episcopacy had its Beginning in the apostolical Times. This, says
he, is testified by the Catalogues of Bishops left us by Irenaeus, Eusebius,
Socrates, Theodoret and others, who all begin from the apostolical Age. But to
detract from the Faith of such Writers, and so agreeable to one another in
their Assertions in an historical Matter, is the Part only of an irreverend and
obstinate Mind. It is as much as if you should deny that to be true, which all
the Roman Histories deliver, that the consular Authority began upon the driving
out of the Tarquins De Imperio summarum Potestatum: apud Brett.
. But no Testimony of this Kind is more extraordinary, than that of David
Blondel, who had concluded his Apologia pro Hieronymi Sententia, with Words to
this Purpose: By all that we have said to assert the Rights of the Presbytery,
we do not intend to invalidate the ancient and apostolical Constitution of
episcopal Pre-eminence. But We believe that wheresoever it is established
conformably to the ancient Canons, it must be carefully preserved; and
wheresoever by some Heat of Contention or otherwise, it has been put down or
violated, it ought to be reverently restored. 'But that Book having been
written at the earnest Request of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and
of the Scots especially, who had their Agents at Paris to strengthen their
Party, by misinforming the Protestants of France, and winning them to their
Side: When these Agents saw this Conclusion of Mr. Blondel's Manuscript, they
expostulated with him very loud; for marring all the good he had done in his
Book, and never left importuning him, till they had prevailed upon him to
strike out that Conclusion.' This Piece of Intelligence was given to Dr. du
Moulin by Archbishop Usher, Anno 1651 See Biographia Britannica, Art. DURELL,
in Note H.
.

IF we come down lower, to the Beginning of the present Century, we find the
Church of Geneva, in their Correspondence with the University of Oxford, and
the Bishop of London, expressing Sentiments of the greatest Respect for the
Constitution and Government of the Church of England; "We are so far," say the
ecclesiastical and academical Assembly of Geneva Anno 1706, from having any
Antipathy against the Church of England, that at all Times we have held her in
very high Esteem, and not one of our Assembly, during his Stay in England, ever
absented himself from their Congregations, and Ceremonies Many Particulars of
the abovementioned Correspondence have been lately published in New York, in a
large Pamphlet, entitled, TRUTH TRIUMPHANT, etc. in which there is a valuable
Collection of Testimonies of the like Nature.
. About the same Time, Dr. Nichols carried on a Correspondence with Daniel
Ernest Jablonski, a celebrated protestant Divine, who was Minister,
ecclesiastical Counselor, and President of the Society of Sciences, in Berlin.
In a Letter to Dr. Nichols, dated 1708, President Jablonski says: I spent my
Youth in Prussia and Poland, among British Subjects, who were averse from the
Church of England, and had been Parties in the Disputes betwixt the
Episcopalians and Presbyterians. Converse with them had filled my tender Mind
with such Prejudices against your Church, that when I came a young Man into
England, in 1680, I had an utter Abhorence of it, and thought her public Places
of Worship were as much to be avoided as those of the Papists. Soon after, in
endeavoring to learn the Language, I happened on the XXXIX Articles; the pure
Orthodoxy of which I so approved of, that, doubting of my former Opinion, I
more closely examined the whole Controversy; your ecclesiastical Constitution,
your Liturgy, the Objections made to each, and the whole Foundation of the
Schism. The longer I communicated with that Church, the more I grew confirmed
in the Opinion that her Articles had no Heterodoxy* her Liturgy no Idolatry or
Superstition, her Government much good Order and Decency; and that on this
Account, among all the reformed Churches, She came nearest to the Pattern of the
primitive Church, and was deservedly esteemed the brightest Star in the
Christian Heaven, the chief Glory of the Reformation, and the securest Defense
of the Gospel against Popery; and that no one can refuse her Communion without
SCHISM. Yet I so follow and honor the Church of England, as not to hate, but
pity, your Presbyterians; the greater Part of whom, I believe, trained up in
hereditary Prejudices, act with a good Conscience; but that some amongst them
abuse the Simplicity of the Rest Second Letter to the Author of the
CONFESSIONAL, p. 202.
.

SECTION X.
SECT. X.
ONE Section of the Appeal was devoted to the Consideration of the grand popular
Objection against an American Episcopate, that it would subject the People of
this Country to the Payment of TITHES. To this Section, which was one of the
most important in the Appeal, Dr. Chauncy attempts no Answer at all; evading it
by saying, p. 191, that it has no immediate Connection with the present
Subject. But he knows that before the Publication of the Appeal, it was
commonly thought to be most closely and intimately connected with the Subject,
and that it was one of the most general Objections against American Bishops
that was mentioned. When People were asked their Opinion of such an
Appointment, there was not perhaps one in Fifty, of those who knew not what
Kind of an Episcopate was proposed, but would answer, that we should all in
that Case be subject to the Payment of Tithes. This was frequently offered as
the only Objection, and almost always as the first; and there were but very few
of the common People that had any other Objections to offer, than this of
Tithes, and that of Spiritual Courts. It was therefore one principal Design of
the Appeal, to remove these two Objections; in the Exeecution of which I have
been so successful, that even the Doctor can find nothing to say in Support of
either of them. We are told now, that the Affair of Tithes has no immediate
Connection with the general Subject in Debate. This is unfair and ungenerous.
If the Doctor had set out, and proceeded, with as much Candor as is due, I will
not say, from one Christian and Clergyman to another, but, from Man to Man, he
would have confessed, that these two popular Objections had been so entirely
confuted in the Appeal, that they ought not any more to be mentioned in this
Controversy. It would have been no Injury to his Character, or his Cause, to
have made this candid Acknowledgment; for in the Case of every literary
Engagement, a decent Retreat is the next best Thing to a Victory.

TO strengthen what was said upon the Subject, and to confirm the Doctor in his
present Opinion, I will present him with the full and explicit Declaration, of
one of the most judicious and celebrated Writers, that ever treated of the Laws
of England. In speaking of the British Colonies in America, he says: It has
been held, that if an uninhabited Country be discovered and planted by English
Subjects, all the English Laws then in being, which are the Birthright of every
Subject, are immediately then in Force. But this must be understood with very
many and very great Restrictions. Such Colonists carry with them only so much
of the English Law, as is applicable to their own Situation and the Condition
of an infant Colony; such, for Instance, as the general Rules of Inheritance,
and of Protection from personal Injuries. The artificial Refinements and
Distinctions incident to the Property of a great and commercial People, (such
especially as are enforced by Penalties) the Mode of Maintenance for the
established Clergy, the Jurisdiction of spiritual Courts, and a Multitude of
other Provisions, are neither necessary nor convenient for them, and therefore
ARE NOT IN FORCE Blackstone's Commentaries on the Laws of England, Vol. I. p.
107.
.

AS none of my Opponents have hitherto thought proper to revive the baffled
Objections of Tithes and Spiritual Courts, I shall immediately proceed to the
concluding Section.

SECTION XI.
THE Design of the last Section of the Appeal was to remove the few remaining
Objections and Suspicions: SECT. XI.
Of which the first was, that, in Case of an Episcopate, Laws may hereafter be
made to subject us to the Payment of Tithes. To this it was answered, that
there can be no more Reason to be apprehensive, that new Laws will be made
under an Episcopate, to subject us to this Burden, than if Bishops were not to
be sent hither. For Tithes are not paid in England to Bishops, but the
Incumbents of Parishes. Dr. Chauncy would be thought to be of a different
Opinion, and to be apprehensive of this Evil; especially if the Support of most
of the episcopal Clergy, in many of the Colonies, should continue to depend on
the Charity of Benefactors at Home, as would probably be the Case, p. 192. Thus
it seems, the Imposition of Tithes for the Support, not of Bishops, but of the
Clergy, is the Evil to be dreaded. But the Clergy will have the same Need of
Support, with, as without, an Episcopate; and if their Support is the Object,
the Appointment or Non-Appointment of Bishops, which has no Connection with it,
will not have any great Influence upon the Pursuit of it. To suppose that two
or three Bishops in America will be able to turn the Scale so much in Favor of
the Clergy, implies, either that the Balance is nearly equal without them; or
that these Bishops will have much more Weight, than Persons, so destitute of
civil Power, were ever known to have. Were every Member of the Legislature,
both at Home and in the Colonies, firmly and zealously attached to the Church;
nay, if there were not a Dissenter, Papist or Infidel, within the British
Dominions, the Imposition of Tithes upon Americans for the Support of their
Clergy, would be an Imagination perfectly wild and chimerical. A large Majority
of the King's Subjects in England and the Colonies, are at this very Time
Episcopalians; but there is no Reason to believe that in so large a Number
there is a single Person that wishes it; and if they were all Churchmen without
Exception, it is more that probable that there would not be one Advocate for
such a Measure.

BUT, says the Doctor, without all Doubt, this Law, or some other less
offensive in Sound, would take Place here, as soon as the State of Things would
allow of it. I find it much harder to ascertain the Meaning of many of his
Objections, than to answer them, when the Sense is ascertained. If he means in
these Words, that some other Law, less offensive only in Sound, but equal in
its Effect, with the Imposition of Tithes, will without all Doubt be made for
the Support of the Clergy; it is answered above. And, what are we to understand
by the Expression, as soon as the State of Things will allow of it? The State
of Things which in his Opinion would amount to this, requires an Explanation
previously to an Answer. The Doctor seems here to have shifted the Idea of
Tithes, or of some Equivalent, for the Support of the Clergy, for that of a Tax
to support the Bishops. For he immediately observes, that I had incautiously
dropped that, which naturally leads to such a Thought, viz. A Tax for the Support
of American Bishops. And then I am introduced as answering the next Objection,
which is no other than this very Suspicion or Apprehension. Thus the Reader
sees, that by an unexpected Transition, whether artful or artless, I will not
determine, we are carried to another Point.

IN speaking to the Subject of an imaginary Tax for the Support of American
Bishops, nothing which I meant or wished to conceal, was incautiously dropped.
For in answering the Objection, I denied that such a Tax was at all intended or
desired. I moreover showed that it could not be much wanted -- that it was
always proposed, that the Bishops should be supported without any Expense to
this Country -- that a considerable Fund was already raised for that Purpose --
and, so far as it should be deficient, that there was no Doubt entertained by
the Friends of the proposed Appointment, of its being easily made up by
voluntary Donations. But farther to show that Americans have no Reason to be
terrified on that Account, I considered the Matter under the most unfavourable
Supposition that could be made; namely, that the Deficiency of the episcopal
Fund should be answered by a Tax upon the Inhabitants; and declared it as my
Opinion, that such a Tax would be inconsiderable, and amount to no more than
Four Pence in a Hundred Pounds. This, as I went on to observe, would be no
mighty Hardship upon the Country. He that could think much of giving the six
thousandth Part of his Income to any Use, which the Legislature of his Country
should assign, deserves not to be considered in the Light of a good Subject, or
Member of Society. This Observation I still believe to be as true, as any
Proposition in the Appeal, or in the Doctor's Answer to it One of our weekly
Adversaries smartly retorts upon me, in these Words: Would not he think it a
Hardship, and a mighty one too, to be obliged to pay one Farthing in a hundred
Pounds, to the Support of any other religious Denomination in the World? ( Am.
Whig, Numb. XXI.) I answer, No, I should not think it a Hardship to be obliged
to contribute such a Trifle, for the Support even of Mahometism; in Case I
lived in a Mohammedan Country, and were indulged with the free and full
Enjoyment of my own Religion, at the same Time.
. But thereupon he apostrophises and harangues ad Populum, in the following
rhetorical Strain: You see here, ye Colonists, the Opinion of the Dr. and, we
reasonably presume, of the episcopal Clergy under whose Direction he wrote,
that the Country might IN EQUITY, be taxed for the Support of Bishops, p. 193.
But I affirm that the Colonists see no such Thing. Such an Opinion I never
expressed, either cautiously or incautiously; and never once intimated that I
thought such a Tax would be equitable. If he will but review the Passage, he
must be convinced of this himself, unless he is in the Condition of those, who
"having Eyes, see not;" and if he will review his own Conduct relating to it,
perhaps he may be convinced of -- Something else.

THE Argument he uses to prove, that a good Subject and Member of Society might
consistently refuse to pay the six thousandth Part of his Income, toward the
Support of American Bishops, in Case such a Tax should be constitutionally
imposed; by proving too much, unfortunately proves nothing. If the Country
might be taxed Four Pence in a hundred Pounds, says he, it might for the same
Reason, and with AS MUCH Justice, if it was thought the Support of Bishops
called for it, be taxed Four Shillings, or Four Pounds in the Hundred, and so
on to Ten Pounds, until the Tax of Tithes was completely fastened on us, p.
194. To say nothing of the absurd Notion, that we may with as much Justice, or
with as little Injustice, transgress the Rules of Equity greatly and
notoriously, as in a small Degree; which is equivalent with this, that a Man
that has aberrated 100 Miles from his proper Road, is not farther out of his
Way, than he that has deviated one Mile: The same Argument will equally
conclude against every Degree of civil Authority. Thus, for Instance, if a
Country may be taxed Four Pence in a hundred Pounds, it may, for the same
Reason, and with as much Justice, if it was thought that the Support of
GOVERNMENT called for it, be taxed Four Shillings, or Four Pounds in the
Hundred, and so on to the whole. Again, if a Man's personal Services may be
justly claimed by the Public for one Day in the Year, they may as justly be
claimed for a Week, a Month, or even the whole Year. Any Man that should reason
at this Rate, and act according to the Tenor of such reasoning, I fancy, would
not be esteemed a good Subject or Member of Society, in any State or Kingdom on
the Face of the Globe. And yet, this Kind of reasoning the Doctor teaches!

THE next Subject of his Animadversion, is the Answer given in the Appeal to
the Objection or Suspicion, that probably the Power of American Bishops may be
hereafter augmented. But what was then said, I conceive, remains in full Force,
notwithstanding the Doctor's Attempts to weaken it The American Whig has given
himself very triumphant Airs, in his Attack upon the Passage under our present
Review. "However," as is remarked by one of my Friends, he does not offer a
Syllable that will invalidate the Inference. He rings the Changes on the Words
probable and possible, till he becomes most tedious, disgusting and
unintelligible. He insinuates that Dr. C. in his Answer to the Objection,
substituted the Word possible, in the Place of probable, to evade the Force of
the Argument. But every Person of the least Discernment, must perceive that the
Doctor, when he used the Word probable, put it in the Mouth of the supposed
Objector: When he used the Word possible, he speaks in his own Name. The ill
Effects which are supposed in the Objection to be probable, he denies to be
such, but barely possible only; and justly observes from thence, that if every
possible ill Effect of a Thing, although confessedly proper in itself and
harmless in its natural Tendency, may be made an Argument against it, there is
nothing that can escape. -- Evidently, there is in this no Sophistry, no
Artifice, with which the Whig very decently charges him.

WHIP for the Am. Whig, No. XXXI.
. If he has said any Thing upon the Subject which is worthy of Notice, it has
been abundantly answered, in the different Parts of this Defense, which I need
not repeat. Nay, much more that was said upon the Subject by Dr. Mayhew, who
pushed the Objection to Extremity, has been fully answered by Mr. Apthorp; and,
I may add, was powerfully answered and confuted by himself, in Words quoted
incautiously by the Doctor, in p. 174. It is readily owned, says Dr. Mayhew,
that our Apprehension of what may possibly or probably be the Consequence of
Bishops being sent hither, ought not to put us on infringing the religious
Liberty of our Fellow Subjects, and Christian Brethren.

TO show that Americans need not be frightened with the Imagination that our
Bishops may in Time be invested with civil Authority, I explained in what
Manner it would probably operate, on Supposition that the Case should actually
happen. My Words are these: But should the Government see fit hereafter to
invest them with some Degree of civil Power, worthy of their Acceptance, which
it is impossible to say they will not, although there is no Appearance that
they ever will; yet as no new Powers will be created in Favor of Bishops, it is
inconceivable that any would thereby be injured. The Doctor says, this has
unwarily opened the Workings of my own Heart. And in p. 202, he goes farther
and says, that I suppose, i. e. believe (as his Use of the Word necessarily
implies) that the American Bishops will be invested with civil Authority; but
with what Justice, is submitted to the Reader. Is such a Belief deducible from
my having made the Supposition? Things confessedly improbable, and even
impossible, are frequently supposed, for the Use of Illustration. Is it infered
from my declaring it to be impossible to say, that Bishops will not be invested
with civil Authority? I can also truly declare, that it is impossible to say
that Dr. Chauncy will not be made an American Bishop; but it would be unjust to
infer from thence, that I believed so extraordinary a Thing would happen;
especially if I should add, as I did in the other Case, that 'there is no
Apearance that he ever will.'

IN p. 196, the Doctor turns aside to show, that the Ministers of Christ's
Kingdom, which is not of this World, should not concern themselves with
temporal Matters; and he quotes St. Paul, to support his Opinion. But how far
he means to carry the Doctrine, whether as far as it was carried by the
Fratricelli, or the Disciples of Herman Pongilup, in the 13th Century, he does
not say; but he evidently carries it much farther than the venerable Doctors
Increase and Cotton Mather and Dr. Coleman, whose Opinion we have seen. As it
is not my Business to enter into a Discussion of this Subject, which has no
Relation to that of American Bishops, I shall pass it by; thanking the Doctor
for recomending to me good old Bishop Latimer's Sermon of the Plough; and
promising him to read it carefully, if he will be so kind as to direct me where
I can meet with it; if perchance he himself has met with any more of it than
is quoted by Mr. Pierce.

THE Doctor now, drawing toward a Conclusion, looks back upon his Performance,
and seems to be mightily satisfied with what he has been doing. I fear I have
somewhat broken in upon his Repose; the Apprehension of which, I assure him,
gives me no Pleasure. If I could have done Justice to the Cause I have
undertaken to plead, without disturbing him, I would most willingly have
avoided it. I have a Veneration for his Years, and much Respect for his
Character, which I am sorry he has exposed by engaging in so wretched a Cause.
He has written with Reputation on other Subjects, but he is manifestly unequal
to the Difficulties he had to encounter with on this. And indeed, where is the
Man that is equal to such a Task? Who is able to prove, that good is evil, and
evil good -- that Darkness is Light, and Light Darkness -- as well as to call
them so? Until a Person of such a Genius and Abilities can be found, it never
can be proved, that it is not cruel and unrighteous to oppose our having such
an Episcopate, as is requested for the Church in America.

THE Doctor has a few other Things to say, of which some Notice must be taken.
I had insisted that Reasons of Policy demanded from our Supeors and Governors
at Home, peculiar Attention to the Complaints of Episcopalians in the Colonies:
Because the Church of England here is inseparably connected with the Church at
Home, or rather, is essentially the same with it -- and because this Church in
its external Polity, is so happily connected and interwoven with the civil
Constitution, that each mutually supports and is supported by the other; no
Form of ecclesiastical Government so exactly harmonizing with a mixed Monarchy,
as that of a qualified Episcopacy. The Doctor answers, that according to my own
Account of Bishops, they are absolute Monarchs in the Church; and such must
Kings be in the State to make out a proper Analogy, p. 198; and much has been
offered to the same Purpose by one of my weekly Antagonists. But to all that
they have said, it is a sufficient Reply, that according to the Representation
of the Appeal, Bishops are invested with an Authority for which they
acknowledge themselves to be accountable, -- an Authority limited and regulated
by fixed Laws, which is incompatible with the Idea of an absolute Monarch; who
knows no other Law than his own arbitrary Pleasure Spirit of Laws, Book II.
. The true Parallel between ecclesiastical and civil Government, as I concieve,
runs thus: Independency answers to Democracy -- Presbyterianism, to an
Aristocracy -- primitive, or protestant Episcopacy, to a mixed Monarchy -- and
Popery, to an absolute Monarchy. From hence it follows, that in the View of
mere Policy, it is absurd to encourage episcopal Government in Republics and
democratical States; and as much so, to prefer Presbyterianism or Independency,
where the civil Government is regal, or monarchical.

THE Doctor is pleased to say, p. 199, in the true Spirit of Contradiction,
what I believe has never been said by any before him, that the Government of
the Church, by such Bishops as I had described, is MORE UNLIKE the Government
of the State, by Kings, Lords, and Commons, than any Form of Government of the
Church that was ever known in the Colonies; and perhaps, is MORE naturally and
powerfully adapted to SUBVERT it. But whither will these extraordinary Flights
at last carry him? He forgets that he set out upon the contrary Principle, in
the Beginning of his Book; stoutly contending that Episcopacy was established
at the Time of the Reformation, not upon the Footing of a divine Institution,
but upon Account of its being best fitted to the Form of Government in the
State. The civil Constitution of the British Monarchy is, in all essential
Points, the same now that it was at that Period, and Episcopacy is the same; so
that if they were peculiarly adapted to each other then, they are now. That
this was, and is, the Case, I fully believe; and Reasons for this Belief were
given in the Appeal; which Reasons the Doctor has not attempted to invalidate.

IT is well known that the same Opinion has been maintained, by the greatest
and best Writers upon the Subject. For the Government of Bishops, says the
incomparable Lord Bacon As quoted by Bishop Else.
, for my Part, not prejudging the Proceedings of other Churches, I do hold it
to be warranted by the Word of God, and by the Practice of the ancient Church
in better Times, and much more convenient for KINGDOMS, than a Parity of
Ministers, and Government by Synods. It was an Observation of the noble and
learned Philip de Mornay, who was not only a Calvinist, but a principal Support
of the Protestant Religion in France; that although the presbyterian Government
might do well enough in popular States, such as Geneva and Switzerland, yet in
Kingdoms or Monarchies, episcopal Government is rather to be chosen. And the
same Opinion in much stronger Terms, and with a particular View to England, was
professed by another Foreigner, who understood Politics as well as most Men of
his Time, and was both a good Protestant and had great Candor in Matters of
Religion; I mean the celebrated Passendorf, who expresses himself in the
following Words: In this Respect likewise not a little Blemish is thought to
lie upon many of the Calvinists, as being too much inclined to affect
Democracies, and being on the contrary averse to Monarchies, and forward to
subvert them. When Puffendorf says that the Calvinists are too much inclined to
Democracies, he is not to be understood as if he represented all of that Sect
as being at all Times thus disposed; for no doubt, while the Kings under whom
they live encourage and favor them, they may so long be well enough pleased
with their Government, and willing to support it. The Baron's Meaning I take to
have been, that the popular Forms of their Church Government, have a natural
Tendency to raise Dispositions, which, when either they are soured by
unfavorable Treatment, or not enough sweetened by personal Interest under
Monarchies, are apt to lean much toward popular Schemes Elyls Tracts, p. 148.
. I might quote innumerable Authorities to the same Purpose; but I will content
myself with one more. The established Religion, and the established Government,
says a Writer of great Candor and Penetration, are in their Constitution and
Interests so interwoven and linked together, that they who would subvert the
Government, have no surer Way to compass their wicked Ends, than by
endeavoring to ruin the Church first. The greatest Strength of the Government
ever did and ever will lie in the Fidelity and Affection of the Members of the
established Church: As the Government knows this to be true, so do its Enemies,
who therefore are as ready by all Artifices and Attempts to weaken it, as our
Governors can be to favor and protect it Hare's Works, Vol. I. p. 332.
.

WE are neither so void of Discernment, says the Doctor, or unacquainted with
the Intrigues of those who are most zealous for an American Episcopate, as not
to be fully satisfied, they have much more in Design than they have been
pleased openly to declare, p. 201. But notwithstanding his Opinion of his own
Discernment, he should remember that this Charge brought against us before the
Tribunal of the Public, ought to be supported, at least, with an Appearance of
Evidence. It is no small Thing publicly to accuse of Prevarication and
Falsehood, such a Number of Men, who have always been respected for their
Integrity; and something more than arbitrary Suspicions will be needful, to
justify so high an Impeachment. But he tells us, he is not unacquainted with
their Intrigues. Let him then, for the Sake of his own Reputation, discover
them to the World. This is what he owes both to the Public and himself; and it
is expected from him, as he would not betray the Cause, for which he professes
to be uncommonly zealous. Let him mention some one Intrigue, some over-Act,
from which it can reasonably be concluded, that our Designs are contrary to our
Declarations, and we will take Shame to ourselves; but if he can offer no other
Proof than his pretended Discernment of our secret Intentions, he will be
considered as no better than a false Accuser of his Christian Brethren, who
have given him no just Cause of Provocation. This Matter is of so great
Consequence in the present Debate, that we cannot give it up, but must insist
that he comes to a particular Explanation. Much, very much, depends upon it.
The Uproar about Bishops has been, in a great Measure, excited and continued by
this very Pretense. If we are guilty of what he charges us with, we deserve to
be opposed; if we are innocent, we ought to be acquitted. I therefore call upon
him in a public Manner to produce his Evidence, or to retract his Charge.

THEIR ultimate Views, says he, whatever they propose to begin with, have not
been so perfectly secreted in their own Breasts, but that they have been
whispered about from one Friend to another, so that we are at no Loss to form a
true Judgment of them. And again: Things have transpired from those, who did
not know how, or were not able to keep a Secret, p. 202. I once more affirm,
that we have no other Views than what we have published; and I defy any of our
Adversaries to prove the contrary. I can, at least, answer for myself; I can
answer also for our Convention, with whose Views and Intentions it will be
allowed that I am acquainted -- that we have no Secret in the Case; that we
have no ultimate Views that are contrary to our immediate ones; and that these
are not contrary to our public Declarations. But to answer to such an
indefinite Charge of private Whispers, by no Body knows whom or when, about no
Body knows what; is more than I will undertake, as I am conscious of my Want of
the necessary Discernment. And if the Doctor has no other Evidence, it is mere
trifling with the Attention of the Public, to insist upon this. It concerns him
to show that some Discovery has been made, either with or without Design, by
some Person who may be supposed to be acquainted with all Secrets of the Kind,
that the Clergy have been acting a deceitful, double Part with the World, and
are aiming at a different Episcopate from that of the Appeal. This is the grand
Point; and upon his Proof of it, I will venture to risque the whole Controversy.

I HAVE now done with Dr. Chauncy for the present, having replied to every
Thing material in his Performance, whether it relates immediately to the
proposed Episcopate, to the Church of England, or to the Appeal; excepting what
he has said upon the general Subject of Episcopacy: -- And even to some Things
that are not material, any farther than as they are thought so by some
ignorant, prejudiced Persons. I have passed over nothing, from any Opinion of
Difficulty in replying to it; and I have endeavored to obviate all the
Objections of others, in answering the Doctor's. Different Language from his
has been frequently used in the late periodical Exhibitions against the Church;
but the Objections have been much the same; and I am mistaken, if I have not
done Justice to the Arguments and Representations of those Writers, as well as
to his.

THERE is indeed one Objection started by them, which has not yet been
considered; and I hardly know, whether it is worth considering. The Objection
is, that such an Episcopate as is proposed for the Colonies, is an impossible
Thing in its own Nature. The Impossibility of the Thing is represented by one
Writer, to be so glaringly evident, that it is utterly incredible that they
(the Clergy) should be so excessively ignorant, as not to know it American
Whig, Numb. IV.
. It is a sufficient Answer to this Objection, supposing it to have been made
seriously, that those eminent Persons who first projected the Plan, and those
who have from Time to Time been its Patrons -- many of whom were much better
acquainted with the Constitution of the Kingdom and its Colonies than these
Objectors -- could see no Impossibility or Difficulty in the Matter. Nay, as to
the Impossibility of the Thing, Dr. Chauncy himself, who, in the American
Whig's Opinion, is one of the most learned and able Writers in America See
Numb. LII.
* was, about a Year ago, so excessive ignorant as not to know it. For it is
utterly incredible, that, if he had known or suspected the Impossibility that
such a Plan could be executed, he would not have availed himself of so capital
an Objection. To this may be added: It is a good Evidence that the proposed
Episcopote may exist in America, that such an Episcopate has actually existed,
and does now exist, in America, among the Moravians; and if it may in one
Church, why not in another? It has been said that the Church of England is an
Exception, because its Bishops by the Law of the Land, are entitled to certain
Powers and Preheminences wherever they are settled in the British Dominions;
which Powers are disclaimed in the Plan. The Law of the Land in this Objection,
I suppose, means the Laws of England, and not any Laws peculiar to this
Country; and if by the Laws of England Bishops, contrary to the clear Opinion
of Dr. Blackstone, will be invested with such Powers and Preheminences in
America, as soon as they shall be sent hither; it must be owing to this only
Reason -- that the Laws of England establish the Church throughout the British
American Colonies, in the same Manner that it is established in England. But
will the Objectors admit of this Doctrine? Have not the ablest Writers of their
Party, always insisted upon the contrary? Does not this Doctrine necessarily
imply, that we have, besides an equitable, a legal, Right to an Episcopate; and
that our Opposers transgress the Law of the Land, as well as the Laws of
Equity? But still, an Establishment in Favor of the Church here, which they
insinuate in this Controversy that we have, but which they mean not to allow on
any other Occasion, would by no Means exclude an Episcopate in the very Form
that is specified; for such an Episcopate, I believe, may, at any Time, be
erected, or rather, restored, in England. It was shown in the Appeal, that the
Bishops proposed for America, were first mentioned by the Title of Suffragans;
and those who are acquainted with the History of the Church, and the
ecclesiastical Laws of England, know, that the Bishops marked out in our Plan,
whatever they may be called, are in Reality no other than Suffragans. If
therefore the Laws of England admit of Suffragans, which they as certainly do,
as of Diocesan Bishops, they then admit of such an Episcopate as we contend
for; even were we to suppose the Church of England to be as fully established
in the Colonies as it is in England, and by the same Laws. Suffragans have been
frequently appointed at Home, under the present ecclesiastical Establishment;
and the Consequence is unavoidable, that they may be appointed here. But after
all, were the Case in every Respect as the Objection represents it to be, which
it is not in any Respect; yet an Act of Parliament would make our Plan
practicable; and there can be no Doubt but its Friends have Interest enough to
obtain such an Act, should they find it to be necessary.

The CONCLUSION.
THE Reader is now acquainted with both Sides of this Controversy. An
Episcopate is requested, in Behalf of the Church of England in America. The
Reasons for which it is desired, have been offered in the Appeal. The Nature of
the proposed Episcopate, has also been explained. Dissatisfied Persons were
heartily invited to propose their Objections. The Adversaries of the Church
have had Time to object; and a sufficient Number of Persons has been employed
in this Service. The periodical Objectors have had periodical Answers; and a
Reply is now given to the more formal Objections of Dr. Chauncy.

THAT Objections would arise against the Settlement of Bishops in the Colonies,
unless they should be under peculiar Regulations, was originally foreseen; and
therefore, in forming the Plan for an American Episopate, all possible Care was
taken to render it inoffensive. It is essential to this Plan, that the Bishops
intended, are to have no Support from the Colonies, except by voluntary
Donations from private Persons; and that they are to exercise no Jurisdiction,
but over the Clergy of the Church of England; by which Provision, the great
popular Objections of Tithes, and Spiritual Courts, have no Foundation to rest
on. This is so evident, that our Opponents have hazarded but very little upon
those Points; and have found it necessary to introduce a new Set of Objections,
in Order to keep up the Opposition against the Church, being unable to defend
the old ones.

THEY now object that we do not really desire to have an Episcopate under such
a Modification, as is proposed to the Public. This is a very material
Objection, could it be supported; and deserves perhaps more Attention, than all
the others which they are able to offer. But important as it is, it has nothing
more solid to depend upon than malevolent Conjecture; for whatever may be their
Pretenses, every Reader knows that they have hitherto entirely failed in the
Article of Proof. On our Side, the strongest Evidence that the Nature of such a
Case will admit of, has been laid before the Public. We have produced as
Witnesses the Society's anniversary Sermons, their Abstracts, and indeed all
that has peen published on the Subject by such as could be supposed to
understand the Case, for Half a Century past; all which, without one Exception,
testify in our Favor. We have added our solemn Declarations, which must have a
Weight proportionable to what is allowed to our Characters. The Testimony of
our Vouchers is clear and express, uniform and consistent, and directly to the
Point; while not one counter Evidence has appeared on the other Side to weaken
it. To the Weight of our Declarations nothing has been opposed, but ungenerous
Reflections and pretended Suspicions.

AETER driving the preceding Objection as far as possible, it has been farther
urged, that supposing such an harmless Episcopate as that of the Appeal to be
at first settled, yet it would soon degenerate into one that is oppressive. We
see not the least Probability of this* and we absolutely deny that any such
Thing is intended: So far from it, that the Friends of the Church would even
join ++with its Enemies, were that necessary, in guarding against it. All the
Assurances, all the Evidences, all the Securities which we have in our Power to
give, to prevent Uneasiness, we are willing to offer; and all that is not
beneath the Dignity of Government to give, we are willing to solicit. We want
not an Episcopate on the Footing of a State-Establishment; we desire no more
than a complete Toleration, which we have not at present; and thereby to be
raised to an Equality with other religious Denominations in the Colonies. To
this, we think ourselves entitled, upon the common Principles of religious
Liberty and of the English Constitution; and we are surprised and concerned, to
find that any who profess a Regard for those Principles, can oppose our Claim.
We are still more surprised to see the Arts to which they can descend, in
supporting their Opposition. From Men of Sense and Candor, reasonable and
candid Behavior is naturally expected. From Gentlemen we expect, at least,
Decency; and from Christians, Charity. Our Opponents make high Pretensions to
Candor and good Sense, and call themselves Gentlemen and Christians; but how
far their late Attacks upon the Church have been reasonable, or candid, or
decent, or charitable, I am perhaps too far interested, fairly to determine.
The Public have been invited to judge of this Controversy; and to their
impartial Decision the Manner, as well as the Matter of it, is most
respectfully submitted.

IF this Dispute is to be continued, I would humbly propose a new Plan of
Operations, viz. That the Debate be reduced within a narrower Compass, and that
nothing which does not immediately relate to the Merits of the Cause, be
offered on either Side. We have already trespassed too far upon the Patience of
the Public; let us be careful hereafter to make a proper Use of their
Indulgence. I would also propose, that no Invective or Abuse, nothing that
savors of Bigotry or Barbarity, be suffered to mingle in the Debate; but that
ingenuous, sober Reasoning, should decide it. It ought to be remembered, that
we are not only accountable to the Public for our Behavior in this Controversy,
but that we must one Day answer for it before a higher Tribunal.

THIS last Consideration had such an Effect upon Dr. du Moulin, who, it seems,
had been an abusive controversial Writer, that when he came to lie upon his
Deathbed, he made the following penitential Declaration; which may deserve our
peculiar Attention, while we are engaged in the present Dispute about American
Bishops. As for my Books, says he, in which I mixed many personal Reflections,
I am now sensible I vented too much of my own Passion and Bitterness; and
therefore I disclaim all that is personal in them; and am heartily sorry for
every Thing I have written to the defaming any Person. I humbly beg God, and
all those I have wronged, Pardon, for Jesus Christ's Sake, and am resolved, if
God spare my Life, never to meddle more with such personal Things: And do
earnestly exhort all People, as a dying Man, that they will study more Love and
mutual Forbearance in their Differences; and will avoid all bitter and
uncharitable Reflections on one another's Persons. And as I earnestly pray
those worthy Men of the Church of England to have Charity and Tenderness for
the Dissenters from them; so I beg of the Dissenters that they would have a due
Regard and Respect to those of the Church of England: Of many of whom I say
now, let my Soul be with theirs! And that all true Protestants among us may
heartily unite and concur in the Defense and Preservation of the holy reformed
Religion, now by the Mercy of God settled among us. And that Men of all Sides
may, according to St. Paul's Rule, cease to bite and devour one another, lest
we be destroyed one of another; and that whereunto we have already attained, we
may walk by the same Rule; hoping that if any Man is otherwise minded, in some
lesser Things, God shall either reveal that to them, or mercifully forgive it,
through Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

