THE HALFWAY COVENANT. A DIALOGUE.

By JOSEPH BELLAMY, D. D.

And look that thou make them after their Pattern, which was showed thee in the
Mount.

JEHOVAH. Teaching them to observe all Things whatsoever I have commanded you:
And lo I am with you.

JESUS CHRIST. BOSTON: Reprinted and Sold by KNEELAND and ADAMS, next to the
Treasurer's Office in Milk-Street. MDCCLXIX.

CONTENTS.
THE friendly Manner in which dissatisfied Parishioners ought to apply to their
Minister, and the kind Reception he ought to give them -- no Texts of Scripture
for the Half-Way-Covenant -- a brief History of its Origin -- the Sentiments of
common People about it -- the original plan -- the present Sentiments and
Practice inconsistent with Mather's Scheme -- and with Stoddard's Scheme -- and
with Scripture -- and with Common-Sense -- Covenants not requiring real
Holiness, a human Device -- give no Title to the Seals of God's Covenant --
Baptism administered without a Divine Warrant, neither lawful nor useful --
Christ's Commission, and the Apostles Practice -- the Nature of Baptism, and
when a Man may be said to desire it for his Children -- the Way in which all
Parents may have their Children regularly baptized, if it be not their own
Fault -- their Duty stated and urged.

A DIALOGUE. Between a MINISTER and his PARISHIONER, concerning the
HALF-WAY-COVENANT.
PARISHIONER. SIR, I am dissatisfied with a part of your public conduct, and am
come to open my mind freely to you, if you will be so kind as to allow me an
opportunity.


MINISTER. Sir, I am now at leisure, and at your service, and your honest
frankness gives me pleasure. Between you and me alone to let me know the
objections you have against any part of my conduct, is to act a friendly part.
It is more kind and christian-like, than to keep your thoughts to yourself, to
engender a secret disaffection in your heart. -- It is much more friendly than
to rail against me behind my back, all round the parish. And you may be quite
assured, that not only now, but in all future times, I shall with pleasure
listen to any objections against my public administrations proposed in a
friendly, candid manner; and will be ready to be set right, wherein I am wrong;
or to let you know the reasons of my conduct. For next to the light of God's
countenance, and the approbation of my own conscience, I prize the good opinion
of my fellow-men: And particularly, I greatly prize the testimony of the
consciences of my own people in my behalf. To your conscience, therefore, I am
now willing to approve myself. Open your mind without the least reserve.


P. I have lately moved into the parish; I had owned the covenant in the town I
came from; -- my other children have been baptized -- we have now another child
born; and I hear you refuse to baptize the children of any but those who are in
full communion: This gives me pain.


M. I cannot give you pain, without feeling pain myself. But you would not
desire, that I should go counter to the will of my Lord and Master, while
acting in his Name, as his minister; nor would this be a likely means to obtain
a blessing for your child. And if I am warranted by the gospel of Christ to
baptize your child, you are very sensible, my reputation, and every worldly
interest, will join to prompt me to it. You will easily make a convert of me to
your opinion, if you can point out one text of scripture to justify that common
practice.


P. I have not studied the point. I cannot mention any text of scripture; but
it is the custom where I was born and brought up; and I knew not but that it
was the custom every where, 'till I moved into this parish.


M. No, Sir, it is not the custom every where; it was not the custom where I
was born and brought up; and there are many churches in the country, that are
not in the practice. At the first settling of New England, there was, so far as
I know, not one church that allowed baptism to the children of any but those
whose parents were one or both in full communion. About 40 years after the
first church was formed, this custom was brought in by a Synod that met at
Boston 1662. Many ministers and churches zealously opposed it at the time, and
even to this day, the custom is not become universal: And of late a
considerable number of churches, who had adopted the practice, have laid it
aside. It is not practiced at all in the church of Scotland, as I have been
informed by a Rev. Gentleman of an established reputation, who has lately been
invited, and who has removed from thence, to the Presidency of New Jersey
College. And it is certain the confession of faith, catechisms and directory of
the church of Scotland, make no mention of it; Neither is the practice
mentioned in the Say-Brook platform, which has been generally received by the
churches in Connecticut; for the council which met at Say-Brook, did not see
cause to adopt that practice, although it had been introduced by the Synod at
Boston. -- But if you had not studied the point before you owned the covenant;
and if you took it for granted, that it was right, merely from education, yet
you are able to let me know in what views, and from what motives you owned the
covenant: As I suppose you meant to act conscientiously.


P. It was the common opinion that none ought to join in full communion, and
come to the Lord's table, but those that were godly, that had on a wedding
garment, lest coming unworthily, they eat and drink damnation to themselves.
But it was thought that graceless persons might own the covenant, and have
their children baptized; and this was my opinion, and I acted on these
principles.


M. Yes, Sir, and I suppose the generality of people in the country, that own
the covenant, in these times, act on these principles: But it was not so from
the beginning. The Synod in 1662, who first brought in the practice, were not
in this scheme. It was known, and owned, and publicly declared on all hands, in
the time of it; That the Synod did acknowledge, that there ought to be true
saving faith in the parent, according to the judgment of rational charity, or
else the child ought not to be baptized. See a Defense of the Answer and
Arguments of the Synod, etc. against the Reply made by the Rev Mr. John
Davenport, Pastor of the Church at New Haven. Preface, page 23, 24.



P. But, Sir, I am surprised! Is this true? Was this really the opinion of
those who first brought in this practice?


M. It is true, it was indeed their opinion, if we may give credit to their own
declarations. No man who was for this practice, was of more note than the Rev.
Dr. Increase Mather, of Boston, who was a member of the Synod, and afterward
wrote in defense of this practice; and no author can in more express language
declare his sentiments. These are his own words, in a pamphlet, entitled, A
discourse concerning the subject of Baptism, wherein the present Controversies
that are agitated in the New England Churches are from scripture and reason
modestly enquired into, page 52, 53. In the fifth place, it may be alleged,
that the persons in question, either have to the judgment of charity, a
justifying faith, or not. If not, they, and consequently their children, are
not baptizable. If yea, then they are forthwith admittable to the Lord's
supper. Answer.

1. I do readily acknowledge, that as it is only a justifying faith which
gives right to baptism before God; so it is the profession or visibility of
this faith, that gives right thereunto before the church. Some have maintained
that a dogmatical historical faith, or a faith of assent to the truth of the
gospel, does entitle to baptism. But the common protestant doctrine against the
papists, speaks otherwise. Though a man should believe all that the holy
scriptures say concerning God and Christ, yet if he does not consent with his
heart, that this God shall be his God, and this Christ his Savior, he has not
right to baptism in the sight of God; or if he does not profess such a consent,
(which is implied in the proportion before us, when it is said concerning the
persons in question, that they gave up themselves to the Lord) he cannot justly
claim baptism. In most churches in the world, men own the creed, (called the
Apostles) before baptism. Now therein they say, I believe [in] God, and not
only I believe God, viz. with a faith of assent only in the understanding. Now
to believe in God, implies a consent of the will, choosing this God for my
God. And considering that in baptism, there is a profession of repentance for
past transgressions, and an engagement to walk in newness of life for time to
come, Mark i. 4.2 Pet. i. 9 And that it comes in the room of circumcision,
which was a seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans iv. 11. And that thereby
remission of sins is sealed, Acts ii. 38. Which remission is not promised to
any faith but justifying; also that baptism is said to save, 1 Pet. iii. 21.
And they that are baptized are said to be in Christ, Gal. iii. 17. And to have
communion with Christ in respect of his death and resurrection, Romans vi. 4, 5.
Col. ii. 12. I say, from these and many the like considerations, I am fully
persuaded that it is not a mere historical, but justifying faith which gives
right to baptism.

These are his words, and they are as plain and express as could be desired.


P. But if this was in fact the case, I cannot conceive what room there was for
the halfway covenant! For such persons might consistently profess to comply
with the whole covenant, and not stop halfway in practice, but come up to all
ordinances.


M. You are right in this observation. Persons so qualified, who have been
brought up under the light of the gospel from their infancy, by pious parents,
and godly ministers, and now adult, and become godly themselves, professing and
practicing accordingly; are in a judgment of rational charity, as fit for the
Lord's table, as to offer their children in baptism. Nor is it merely a
privilege they may claim, to come to the Lord's supper along with their
christian brethren, and join with them in commemorating the death of Christ;
but it is their indispensible duty. They are bound to do it by the express
command of Christ, Luke xxii. 19. This do in remembrance of me. And to neglect
it, is practically to renounce the authority of Jesus Christ. And is it right
for ministers to teach the disciples of Christ to live in the breach of the
least of his commands?


P. But what would Dr. Mather say to this?


M. You may hear, for these are his words: (P. 54.) -- It will not follow that
these persons are immediately to be admitted to the Lord's table, or to the
privileges of full communion. For more full and satisfactory evidences of
regeneration and of christian proficiency, are requisite in order to admission
to the Lord's table, than in order to baptism. And if you will read Mather's
Magnalia, you will see, that they insisted on Initial grace in order to
baptism, but supposed greater seize necessary in order to the Lord's
supper. But if that command of Christ is binding on weak christians, who are
indeed real christians, Luke xxii. 19. To say they are not to be admitted to
the Lord's table, is to say, it is not lawful they should obey the command of
Christ. So this half-way-covenant while it teaches for doctrine the commandment
of men sets aside the command of Christ.


P. I am in the same opinion -- nor can I see any room for the
half-way-covenant on Mather's scheme: But I have heard that Stoddard's scheme
favors the present practice.


M. This is a mistake. Mr. Stoddard of Northampton, never practiced the
halfway, i. e. he never admitted any to have baptism for their children, but
those who were in full communion, and he expressly declares that those who have
been baptized in infancy, and owned their covenant, are obliged in duty to come
to the Lord's table. Yea, he says, (appeal p. 63, edit. 2.) It is a scandal if
they do not, and the church may call them to an account for their neglect. It
is a visible contempt cast upon the ordinance. He held the Lord's supper to be
a converting ordinance: And that unconverted men knowing themselves to be such,
might lawfully come. And that it was as lawful to come to the Lord's supper, as
to baptism, (p. 77.) so that there was no room for any half-way-covenant or
half-way-practice, on his scheme. For unconverted men knowing themselves to be
such may on his scheme come not only halfway, but to all ordinances, and to
one as well as to another.


P. I never heard of these things till now, and I know not what to think or
what to say. It seems as if the half-way-covenant, and the half-way-practice,
could not be made consistent on any scheme.


M. If the covenant owned is the covenant of grace, and if the parent acts
understandingly and honestly in the affair, he is a good man, he has a right
before God to baptism for his children, and an equal right to the Lord's
supper: Yea, that command of Christ in Luke xxii. 19. renders it his
indispensible duty to attend the Lord's supper. Under the Jewish dispensation
it was lawful for an Israelite, not hindered by any external impediment,
voluntarily to absent himself from the passover, if he was ceremonially
unclean. But under the gospel an Israelite indeed, of sufficient age and
understanding, and not hindered by any natural impediment, may not voluntarily
absent himself from the Lord's supper, unless disqualified by spiritual
uncleanness, by his own personal wickedness unrepented of, or for which he has
not made gospel satisfaction. And such an one is equally unfit to offer his
child in baptism. Number. 9.13. Mat. 5.23, 24.
But if the covenant owned is not the covenant of grace, those who have owned
it have in the sight of God no right to either of those ordinances which are
seals of that covenant, and of no other: No more right than if they had given
their assent to any chapter in the apocrypha. -- Did you never hear it observed
and talked of, that those who own the covenant make as full and large a
profession as they who join in full communion?


P. Yes. And my former minister read the same covenant to such as owned the
covenant, as he did to those that joined in full communion, word for word, only
one did not promise to come up to all ordinances, and the other did. And I must
confess this sometimes stumbled me.


M. If you please, sir, I will repeat the covenant we use when any join in full
communion, the same that was read to me by my minister, when I joined to the
church about three and thirty years ago. A brief summary of it is this, -- You
do now in the presence of the dread Majesty of Heaven and Earth, and before
angels and men, in the sincerity of your soul, avouch the Lord Jehovah to be
your sovereign Lord, and supreme Good, through Jesus Christ; and solemnly devote
and give up yourself to his fear and service, to walk in all his ways and keep
all his commands, seeking his glory, etc. And is this more full and express
than your former minister used when persons owned the covenant?


P. I think not, it is very much like it.


M. So far as I am acquainted, the forms in use all over the country, a very
few instances excepted, are very much alike. The only difference of any
consequence lies in practice. I think it my duty, in private, as well as
public, to explain the covenant, and to see to it, that persons understand it
before they make it, and know what they are about to do, and are sufficiently
instructed that it is a wicked thing to lie to God with their mouths and
flatter him with their lips.


P. Very well, sir, no doubt this is a minister's duty. But, alas for me, I
never knew what I was about, nor considered the import of the words, I publicly
gave my consent unto. I knew myself to be unconverted. -- I meant to own the
covenant, as the phrase is, and have my children baptized; but I had no design
to profess godliness, or to pretend a real compliance with the covenant of
grace. This godly people may do: But it had been great hypocrisy in me to do
it. To lie to men is bad, but to lie to God is worse. I supposed that owning
the covenant was what the unconverted might do.


M. How can a man that knows himself to be unconverted, dead in sin, and
destitute of the grace of God, stand up before the whole congregation, and say,
I do now in the presence of the dread Majesty of Heaven and Earth, and before
angels and men, avouch the Lord Jehovah to be my sovereign Lord, and supreme
Good, through Jesus Christ, and solemnly devote and give up myself to his fear
and service, to walk in all his ways, and keep all his commands, seeking his
glory? --


P. I freely own I knew not what I did, when I owned the covenant. -- But you
hinted just now, that this is not the custom in all the churches where the
half-way-practice takes place.


M. I have heard of a few churches where the ministers have of late drawn up a
new form for those who own the covenant, essentially different from that which
is used when any one is admitted to full communion; which new form designedly
leaves out the covenant of grace, and contains a profession, which unconverted
men may make, and yet speak true. And this, with greater propriety, may be
called the half-way-covenant, although indeed, it does not go halfway, and
gives no right to those ordinances which are seals of the covenant of grace.
Besides, God never did propose any covenant to mankind, but which required real
holiness on man's part; and any covenant short of this, is a mere human device.
It is teaching for doctrine the commandment of men, directly contrary to the
express orders of Jesus Christ to his apostles, and all their successors. Mat.
28.20. Teaching them to observe whatsoever I command you. -- The covenant with
Adam, required perfect holiness, without any provision for pardon in case of
transgression. -- The covenant at Sinai, written on the two tables of stone,
called the tables of the covenant, containing ten commands, according to our
Savior's interpretation, required them to love God with all their heart, and
their neighbor as themselves, in which the sum of all virtue consists; (Mat.
22.37 -- 40.) But however it made provision for pardon to the true penitent,
through shedding of blood, but not for impenitent sinners, Lev. 26. 1 Kin. 8.
And it is acknowledged on all hands, Antinomians excepted, that repentance
toward God, and says toward Christ, are required in the covenant of grace, as
revealed in the gospel. These ungracious covenants, therefore, are not from
heaven, but of men.


P. My conscience is convinced. I am obliged to give up the half-way-covenant;
but it is with no small reluctance: For what will become of my child? Must it
remain unbaptized? I cannot bear the thought. What shall I do?


M. Is it lawful for a minister of Christ to baptize any one without a divine
warrant?


P. No.


M. Is baptism administered without a divine warrant, a likely means to do a
child any good?


P. No. But where is your commission to baptize? And what is the tenor of it?


M. In Mark xvi. 15, 16. Go preach the gospel to every creature. Thus unlimited
is the commission to preach the gospel. And he that believes, and is baptized,
shall be saved. The faith which entitles to baptism, is a saving says.
Accordingly when the multitude were pricked at the heart, on the day of
Pentecost, Peter did not say, own the covenant; nor did he say, join in full
communion: But repent first of all, and then be baptized in the name of the
Lord Jesus, for the remission of sins, Acts ii. 38. And with the same sacred
regard to the divine commission, Philip said to the eunuch, If thou believe
with all thine heart, thou may, Acts 8.37. And it is a settled point on all
hands, that if parents have no right to baptism for themselves, their children
can have no right on their account.


P. Is it lawful for me to join in full communion, when I know I have no grace?
Can I answer it to God?


M. You remember when the King came in to view the guests, he saw a man among
them not having on a wedding garment; to whom he said, Friend, how came thou
in hither, not having on a wedding garment? And he was speechless. To make a
false and lying profession, is inexcusable wickedness. It is true, there will
be tares along with the wheat; but it is the Devil saws them there, and not the
servants. And it self brethren come into the church, they creep in unawares;
they have no right to be there.


P. But does not my own baptism render me a churchmember, and entitle my child
to baptism, although I am destitute of faith and repentance?


M. Circumcision verily profits if thou keep the law: But if thou be a
breaker of the law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision. For he is not a
Jew, that is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is outward in
the flesh, Romans ii. 25, 28. One baptized in infancy, who in the sight of God
practically renounces his baptism when adult, as all do who reject Christ, and
continue impenitent, is not considered by God, as entitled to the blessings of
the new covenant, but as under the curse of the law. He that believes not is
condemned already, and the wrath of God abides on him, John iii. 19, 36. And
what right has this man to the seals of the covenant of grace, in the sight of
God, who is by Christ himself declared to be under condemnation and wrath?


P. Well, if I have no right to baptism for my poor child, I must be silent.
But I wish it might be baptized.


M. Will you allow me to examine the earnest desire of baptism which you
express?


P. I ought to be willing. I ought to know the motives that influence me; for
God knows them, whether I do or not.


M. I am glad to see your mind so serious and candid. If this temper should
continue, I should hope all your doubts would be removed. -- For I can tell you
seriously, I am willing to baptize your child, provided you do understandingly,
and with all your heart desire it.


P. And do I not? I should be a cruel parent if I did not.


M. Baptism, you know, is administered in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. In baptism, therefore, you dedicate your child to
God the Father, through Jesus Christ his Son, to be sanctified by the Holy
Ghost; and so give up your child with all your heart to the Lord for ever, to
be educated for God, and to be for him, and for him alone, in time and to
eternity. And do you love God to that degree, as thus to give him your child
for ever; if so, why do not give yourself to God, first of all? You love your
child, but you love yourself better. First of all then cease to be cruel to
your own soul; no longer practically renounce your own baptism, by turning your
back on God and the Redeemer; but act up to its genuine import; give yourself
to God, through Jesus Christ his Son, that you may become the temple of the
Holy Ghost; and thus ratify what your parents did for you, when they dedicated
you to God in baptism. This is that owning of the baptismal covenant which God
requires at your hands. Then bring your dear child, and consecrate it to God in
sincerity and truth. This is the way, the right way, for a blessing. But if
instead of this, you are moved only by custom, by a sense of worldly honor, by
pride and shame; and desire that holy ordinance to be administered to your
child from unholy motives, as Simon Magus desired the miraculous gifts of the
Holy Ghost to answer his carnal ends: God knows it, and all the world will know
it at the day of judgment. -- Pray, how was it when your other children were
baptized? And how is it in general to all appearance when people own the
covenant and get their children baptized? Are they brought up for God? Or only
to serve diverse lusts and pleasures? Look through the country, wherever you are
acquainted, the youth learn to dress, to sing, to dance; but do their parents
appear to understand, that they have devoted them to God? And is this evidently
their great concern to bring them up for God? But to leave others, and to
attend only to your own heart. Can it be true, that you have a heart to give
your child to God, and yet not a heart to give yourself to him? Think of it, my
dear sir.


P. I must grant that it is absurd and inconsistent, for a parent to pretend to
have a heart to give his child to God, and yet have no heart to give himself to
him. But I do desire to give myself to God.


M. Pray, sir, what then hinders you from giving yourself to him? You may
desire to escape everlasting misery, you may desire to be happy for ever; so
Balaam did: Self-love may excite to this, where there is no love to God in the
heart. But if you love God so, as to be willing to have him for your portion;
if you love Christ so, as to be willing to deny yourself, take up your cross
and follow him; you may have your choice: You may do as you like: Come, for all
things are now ready. And if you would now in fact make this choice, it would
put an end to your present difficulties about your child. Nothing, therefore,
can hinder the baptism of your child, but your continuing to reject God and the
Redeemer, by which you practically renounce your own baptism, and forfeit all
the blessings of the covenant.


P. Shocking affair! My child unbaptized! None to blame but its own parents!
What shall I do?


M. Is not God your Creator? Are you not his by an original, absolute, entire
right? Is he not infinitely worthy of your supreme love? Were you not in your
infancy dedicated to him in baptism? And have you turned your back upon him to
this very hour? And practically renounced your baptism in his sight? So that
dying in this state, your baptism will be of no advantage to you; you will
perish among the uncircumcised, among the unbaptized, among pagans; as it is
written, he that believes not shall be damned, and except ye repent, ye shall
all likewise perish! And do you now enquire, what you shall do? Ah, may dear
sir! The answer is plain. Repent and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out. And thus at last comply with the import of your baptism. And
become a disciple of Christ. And if ye are Christ's, then are ye Abraham's
seed, and heirs according to the promise. But unto the wicked, God says, what
have thou to do, to declare my statutes? Or that thou should take my covenant
in thy mouth? Psa. l. 16. -- Pray accept kindly this advice from one who is
your friend, and who is bound by office to act an honest part with the souls
committed to his charge.


P. I thank you, sir, for your fidelity, and ask your prayers -- For the
present, adieu.


M. I thank you for your kind visit. I ask the favor of another hour, when you
are at leisure. -- I am always at your service -- and might I be a means of
your salvation, it would give me joy, while I live, and after I am dead, through
eternal ages. -- I only add, if you will read what the late learned, pious
President Edwards wrote on the qualifications for christian communion, printed
at Boston; and the Rev. Mr. Green's pieces on the same subject, printed at
New York; you may in them see the truth confirmed, and objections answered more
largely. And if after all you should desire farther conversation on this
subject, I will be ready to attend when ever you will be so kind as to call
upon me. -- Only come it all times, as you have at this, in a serious,
friendly, candid spirit; remembering, this is one of the most interesting,
solemn and important subjects. Adieu, my dear Sir.


FINIS.

