SPIRITUAL LIBERTY: A SERMON, DELIVERED At JAMES ISLAND, in SOUTH CAROLINA,
OCTOBER, the 9th, 1769; In Consequence of the Late RESOLUTIONS. By HUGH ALISON,
A B.

AT nos non Imperium neque Divitia, petimus; quarum Rerum Causa, Bella atque
Certam. ^a inter Mortales sunt; sed LIBERTATEM, quam N^^o bonus, nisi cum Anima
simul, amittat. SA^L. CHARLESTOWN: PRINTED for the AUTHOR, MDCCLXIX.

SPIRITUAL LIBERTY: A SERMON.
ST. JOHN, VIII. 36. IF THE SON THEREFORE SHALL MAKE YOU FREE, YE SHALL BE FREE
INDEED.
LIBERTY is an inestimable treasure; the delight and passion of mankind. It is
the source of almost all human felicity; the parent of virtue, pleasure, plenty
and security: And the love of it is an appetite so strongly implanted in the
nature and constitution of all living creatures, that even the principle of
self-preservation, which is allowed to be the strongest, seems to be contained
in it; since by means of Liberty, they enjoy the means of preserving
themselves, and of satisfying their desires in the manner which they choose and
like best. Hence many animals can never be tamed, but feel the bitterness of
restraint in the midst of the kindest usage; and often grieve and starve
themselves to death.

By Liberty in general, I understand the Right every man has to pursue the
natural, reasonable and religious dictates of his own mind; to enjoy the fruits
of his own labor, art and industry; to work for his own profit and pleasure,
and not for others, who live in idleness, and would riot in luxury, rapine and
oppression. In short, liberty is to live upon one's own terms; and whenever
this is lost or invaded, labor and industry will inevitably languish; life
grows precarious, always miserable, and oftentimes intolerable. Slavery, on the
other hand, is to live at the mere mercy and caprice of another; and a life of
slavery must be a continual state of uncertainty and wretchedness; often an
apprehension of violence; often the lingering dread of a premature death; and
hence in most heroic souls, the love of liberty is superior to the love of
life.

How many have forsaken the tenderest connections, and fled to the barbarous or
solitary wilderness, to enjoy the blessings of liberty, and a good conscience?
How many have rushed into precipitate death, as a remedy for the loss of it?
What convulsions have shook the world from nations struggling under violence
and oppression? How many haughty tyrants have felt their vindictive rage? How
many princes have brought sudden vengeance upon themselves and posterity by
their unjust usurpations? Never was a nation so degenerate or regardless of
their rights, as tamely to suffer the loss of natural liberty and the exercise
of unlimited power. People must be deceived and frightened before they will
become slaves. And thus, by the engines of violence and delusion, have wicked
and ambitious men extinguished liberty in almost every country except
Great Britain and her American colonies. And here too, by the same fatal means,
it must presently expire, unless a sovereign remedy be suddenly applied: The
symptoms are many and dangerous, and its groans are continually ecchoing from
shore to shore.

What have not Americans done to prevent this sad catastrophe? When
parliamentary prerogative and ministerial caprice first began to extend their
formidable arm and crush the tender plant of LIBERTY; how were its jealous SONS
alarmed, and unanimous resolved to defend their favorite TREE? Fired with an
unquenchable love for their country, and the British constitution, they wrote
with all the energy and enthusiasm of Greek or Roman orators. They painted
liberty in the most attractive charms, adorned with the pleasant fruits of
peace, plenty, science, virtue and happiness; and slavery in its native horror
and deformity, black with ignorance, wickedness and misery. They asserted their
inherent right to all the privileges of Englishmen; they gave sufficient
testimonies of their loyalty and affection; they remonstrated with a zeal
becoming patriots; and they petitioned with the dutiful submission of humble
dependants. And what is the event? What is the result of all these animated
endeavors? Why, instead of obtaining immediate redress, which they had reason
to expect upon the principle of right, they were threatened by administration;
charged with unwarrantable combinations,, and with being in a state of violence
and opposition to legal authority; their memorials were passed by in silence,
and neglected, whilst their malicious enemies were caressed and heard with
applause.

As the last effort of a virtuous and oppressed people; they have lately framed
and entered into Resolutions of industry, frugality and economy, hereby
intending to defeat the Acts of the British legislature; to distress the
merchants and manufacturers in England, and thus interest them in our favor. A
measure of this nature unanimously adopted, and vigourously prosecuted seems
the most probable means left in their power for obtaining redress of
grievances, and a restitution of their invaluable rights and privileges. May
divine providence smile upon their attempts and grant the desired success!

The nature and design of these resolutions you cannot be ignorant of. They are
necesary, practicable, and judiciously calculated to promote the end in view. I
doubt not, the generality of you have signed them, evidencing at once a sincere
affection for your country, and a genuine love of liberty. You have given
demonstration of your magnanimity, and your abhorrence of oppression and
arbitrary power. You detest the black thoughts of slavery, or of betraying your
rights by an indolent or timid behavior. This encourages me humbly to propose
to you, and I hope you will show an equal spirit and alacrity in this case, to
enter into Resolutions for securing another kind of liberty; a LIBERTY as much
excelling the former as the Soul is more excellent than the Body; a LIBERTY
which shall exalt you to the privileges and immunities of the sons of God; for
in the emphatical language of our text, "If the son shall make you free, ye
shall be free indeed."

You confess that a future state is of infinitely greater importance than the
present, and that temporal things cannot come into competition with things
eternal and everlasting; you acknowledge that there will be a solemn day of
retribution, when the righteous and the wicked shall be eternally rewarded and
punished, by him who is appointed the sovereign judge of quick and dead; you
know from constant experience, that this is but a transient and evanescent
scene, and that the fashion of this world very soon passes away. Can you
therefore make earthly temporal things the sole objects of your attention and
pursuit, and neglect the endless joys of heaven, and immortal glory? Can you be
alarmed at every innovation and encroachment upon your civil liberty, and at
the same time sink into spiritual and perpetual bondage to the worst of
tyrants? Well might the earth wonder and the heavens be astonished at your
folly. Surely if you know what it is to be reasonable creatures, you will not
hesitate a moment to enter into steady, permanent and inviolable resolutions
for obtaining such a perfect liberty, and becoming the free and happy subjects
of the Prince of peace.

To assist you in this important matter, I shall endeavor to explain to you
the connection and relative meaning of the text, "If the son therefore shall
make you free, ye shall be free indeed;" and then consider some of the
essential properties of that freedom which alone is perfective of your natures,
and to which I would urge you earnestly to aspire. And may God vouchsafe his
almighty blessing, and grant us the glorious liberty of his children, "that we
being delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him without fear,
in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life." Luke i. 74,
75.

I. We are to take a view of the connection and relative meaning of the text.

In this chapter we have an account of diverse remarkable conferences our
Savior had with the unbelieving Jews, who daily sought occasion against him,
and made every thing he said a matter of controversy and cavil. However he had
a remnant, according to the election of grace, who believed on his name, and
were his constant and faithful followers. In one of those discourses therefore,
after having denounced death and final misery against the impenitent Jews, he
addresses himself to those Christians who believed on him, and tells them, "if
you continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed." I exhort you to make
it appear to the world that ye are my disciples, by a holy and exemplary
conversation; by adhering impartially to my word, and the faith of the Gospel;
and for your encouragement, ye shall enjoy the privileges of all my sincere and
humble followers, ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free."

The Pharisees, who were present at this Conference, thinking themselves
egregiously affronted by the charter of liberty granted to believers, were much
exasperated at this saying, and with equal pride and indignation replied, "we
be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any man, how say thou, ye
shall be made free?" We are of no slavish extraction; our pedigree is noble and
virtuous; we are descended from that illustrious father of the faithful, who
was in special covenant with God; and by that means we are freeborn, or at
least possess privileges quite incompatible with a state of slavery; yea, "we
never were in bondage to any man;" therefore to talk of our being made free is
perfect mockery and insult.

Jesus, who bore the contradiction of sinners against himself, did not choose to
dispute the truth of their insinuations, though he might with a great (...)
justice and propriety. For how long did the seed of Abraham groan under the
heavy yoke of Egyptian bondage? How often were they brought in subjection to
the neighboring nations in the time of the Judges? They were seventy years in
a Babylonish captivity; and at this very juncture were lying under a national
bondage being tributaries to the Romans, and impatiently looking for the
Messiah, who, according to their crooked apprehensions, would be a great
temporal monarch, and would restore the kingdom to Israel. But if Christ had
introduced a dispute with the Jews, at present, concerning their civil liberty,
it would have been entirely foreign to his subject; for he was speaking before
of a liberty wherewith the truth should make them free, which must undoubtedly
be understood of a spiritual freedom. Therefore, without upbraiding them with
their fallacy, he proceeded to explain the doctrine more fully, and answered
them, "verily, verily, I say unto you, whosoever commits sin is the servant
of sin." He that makes provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof; he
that yields his members instruments of unrighteousness unto sin; he that
complies with all the sinful tendencies of corrupt nature, without any
reluctance; is emphatically a slave; he has sold himself to work wickedness;
and therefore can have no pretense to liberty, whatever boast he may make of
his parentage, or liberal extraction.

This is a truth of universal concern. It is not limited to the Jewish nation,
or to the Pharisees of old, but is co-extensive with the whole human race,
"that whosoever committed sin is the servant of sin." He is in captivity to the
Prince of this world. Though he never were in bondage to any man, yet he is in
bondage to his own corruption. "Know ye not, (faith the apostle) that to whom
ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey,
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?" Romans vi. 16.

Now that all men are naturally the servants of sin is an undeniable
proposition. All are naturally in the gall of bitterness, and the bonds of
iniquity. Hence proceeds that indifference about heaven and eternal things
which characterizes the present age; that aversion to the pleasures of holiness
and benevolence which universally prevails; and that deluge of iniquity which
has overspread the world with such an uncontrouled predominance. This, my
brethren, is your own condition. Though you enjoy all the external rights of
freemen and British subjects, which is a doubtful case at present, yet you are
naturally in spiritual bondage; slaves to corruption; and to be insensible of
it is a more shocking symptom of degeneracy, and that every heroic and
generous principle is extinguished in your minds.

Would you now aspire after liberty and happiness? Would you escape from a
wretched captivity unto sin? Would you become free citizens of the new
Jerusalem? Then you must determine to enter into steady, permanent and sacred
resolutions to oppose the motions of sin in your members, and to live soberly,
righteously and godly in the world. You must offer up humble and fervent
petitions to the throne of grace for relief. The Majesty of Heaven will not be
deaf to your complaints; "behold the Lord's hand is not shortened, that he
cannot save; neither his ear heavy that it cannot hear." But your petitions
must be presented through Jesus Christ, who is the way, the truth and the life.
He is the believers agent in the celestial court. He is able to save to the
uttermost, all that will come unto God through him. And then "if the son shall
make you free; ye shall be free indeed."

I have now explained the connections and relative meaning of the text; I
proceed therefore,

II. To consider some of the essential properties of that freedom which alone
is perfective of your natures, and to which I would urge you earnestly to
aspire.

1. It is a liberty that frees all believers from the guilt of sin and the
condemning sentence of the law. The law required perfect and universal
obedience in heart and life under pain of a most tremendous curse; "cursed is
every one that continues not in all things which are written in the book of
the law to do them." It prohibited the minutest failure, and admitted of no
repentance. The smallest transgression rendered the soul obnoxious to death and
endless torment. God's immaculate holiness obliged him to annex threatenings of
the most exquisite misery to the breach of his law; and his unchangeable
veracity makes him execute them; else few would reverence his authority, and
his government would be exposed to perpetual insult and violation.

Now all men, being by nature the children of wrath and disobedience, lie
exposed to the penalty of a broken law. We are transgressors from the womb;
"and there is none righteous, no not one." Every person that reflects upon his
own moral conduct, and compares it with the extent and purity of the divine
commandment, will find just cause to lament with the prophet Isaiah, "Woe is
me, for I am a man of unclean lips." And woe unutterable shall be the certain
portion of all unbelievers, who live and die under the enslaving power of sin;
"they shall be cast into outer darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing of
teeth." But believers in Christ are already freed from the condemning sentence
of the law, and delivered from the guilt of sin whereby, they were bound over
to the awful terrors of death and a future judgment. "Christ has redeemed
them from the curse of the law, being made a curse for them; therefore being
justified by faith, they have pardon and peace with God."

Believers indeed are not freed from a conscientious regard to the duties of
the moral law. They are freed from it as a covenant for justification, but not
as a rule for their direction and practice. This is the measure of their
conduct both in private and in social life. Hence the precepts of the law are
still urged under the gospel, to enforce the duties of the Christian religion.
But yet it is certain, "that there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit." He has
blotted out the hand writing of ordinances, which threatened their eternal
ruin; he has canceled the obligation to punishment, and having spoiled
principalities all powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them.
O GLORIOUS LIBERTY OF BELIEVERS! "Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
God's elect? It is God that justisieth: Who is he that condemns? It is Christ
that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of
God, who also makes intercession for us. Romans viii. 33. 34.

2. Another essential property of this liberty of the gospel is, that it frees
all believers from the reigning power and dominion of sin; what an abject and
intolerable slavery is the service of diverse lusts? How sad and deplorable is
their condition, who follow the dictates of a hard heart and a depraved
conscience. Subjection to the most despotick prince on earth cannot exceed it.
On the contrary, how secure and happy is the estate of those who are renewed
and sanctified by the operations of the blessed spirit! Their bondage is at an
end. and their obedience is perfect freedom. "For the law of the spirit of life
which is in Christ Jesus has made them free from the law of sin and death."
Romans viii. 2.

It Is true, perfection is not attainable in this life. None enjoy an absolute
freedom from corruption; the best of Christians feel and lament the workings of
indwelling sin; they find a law in their members warring against the law of
their mind, and bringing them into captivity. Corruptions, like the Canaanites,
are still left in the land, to be thorns in our eyes, and goads in our sides.
Often too they prevail against the believer, and bring him into captivity and
spiritual bondage; so that he cries out with the apostle "O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death!"

But it is also true, that sin shall not have perpetual dominion over them,
"for they are not under the law, but under grace." Their evil affections are
crucified with Christ, and the body of sin dies in them daily; they are
gradually gaining a more complete victory over their corruptions; and advancing
by degrees to that region of perfect freedom and never-ending felicity which is
beyond the grave.

3. Believers by the liberty of the gospel are delivered from the control and
authority of Satan. I mean not that they are freed from the assaults and
temptations of our malignant adversary. The devil and his infernal ministers,
under whose administration they were by nature, are continually imposing taxes
and exacting a revenue from the children of God, and exerting every malicious
scheme to bring them into their former state of servitude and subjection. Hence
we are said to wrestle not only with flesh and blood, but with principalities
and powers; with the rulers of the darkness of this world; with spiritual
wickedness in high places. Our blessed Savior himself conflicted with the
violent temptations of Satan; and Job, Heman and David, have left on record,
doleful complaints on this account.

But as Christ foiled the devil in every assault and led captivity captive; "so
believers are made more than conquerours by the power of his might." Being
purchased not with corruptible things as silver and gold, but with the precious
blood of the Redeemer, they pay him the voluntary tribute of gratitude and
praise for his infinite condescension and unmerited blessings; and bear their
strongest testimony against paying any duties to that evil spirit which rules
in the children of disobedience.

4. Believers, by the liberty of the gospel are delivered from the slavish
fears and terrors of death. The Christian is subject to the same calamities of
life, and to the same laws of mortality with the infidel world; but not to the
same dire and gloomy apprehensions of futurity. When the sinner approaches near
the borders of the invisible world, and yields to grave and serious
reflections, then he knows and feels himself to be, what he actually is, a
wretch, a self-accused, self condemned criminal, presaging in his conscience,
that witness within him, his condemnation at a higher tribunal. But a sincere
Christian's reason and conscience are his friends and advocates. His rejoicing
is the testimony of a good conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity,
he has had his conversation in the world. Hence he has confidence toward God;
and when the time of his dissolution comes, he can say in triumph, "O death,
where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? Thanks be to God, who gives
me thy victory, through Jesus Christ." I. Cor. xv. 55, 57.

Upon the whole, the liberty derived from the truth of the gospel, is glorious,
and its privileges extensive; it frees us from the yoke of the ceremonial law,
and from the more grievous burdens of the tradition of the elders; it frees us
from false prejudices and mistakes; from the dominion of lust and passion; and
restores the soul to a religious self-government, and to the rational life of a
Christian; it enlarges the mind with spiritual knowledge; elevates it above the
objects of time and sense; and makes it an heir of glory and immortality; it
brings every thought unto the obedience of Christ; nor does the soul ever act
with greater liberty than when it acts under a divine command. The enemies of
Christianity pretend to free-thinking, whereas those are the freest reasonings
that are guided by faith; those are the men of freest thought, whose thoughts
are captivated and brought unto obedience to Christ.

You have now heard explained, though in a very cursory and imperfect manner,
the essential nature of that freedom, which Christ, the eternal Son, grants to
all those who embrace the truth of his gospel, and continue steadfastly in his
word. You have also heard, that the whole world lies in wickedness, by nature
exposed to the curse of a broken law, and in miserable captivity to the prince
of this world. A little candid reflection, and self-examination will convince
you that this is the case. Arise then, my brethren, and lash up your
resentment; view the LIBERTY, the transporting LIBERTY of the SONS OF GOD! View
the fullness of joy and immortal pleasures that are before you! These shall
attend as rewards of your success. Ignominy, disgrace, slavery and endless
torment should inflame you more than all the harangues in the world.

Consider the wiles and stratagems of your common enemy. "He is continually
going about seeking whom he may devour." He is striving to deprive you of your
heavenly inheritance, and to involve you in common misery and destruction. Now
when your friend or neighbor injures you in your temporal pursuits, or
defrauds you of some expected good, your revenge immediately rises! When
administration makes an illegal attack upon your civil liberty, your resentment
is presently roused, and every means exerted to frustrate their designs! Surely
it becomes you much more to be jealous of your spiritual liberty; to oppose the
avowed enemy of God and man, and endeavor to disappoint his wicked
machinations.

Consider at what prodigious expense this freedom was procured; when thousands
of rams, and ten thousand rivers of oil were insufficient to purchase it, the
blessed Jesus "gave himself a ransom for us." He who was the brightness of his
father's glory, and the express image of the invisible God, disrobed himself of
his magnificence; assumed the humble garment of poverty and contempt; and
suffered the rude insults of a wicked world, and even the agonies of death
itself, for our redemption Can you therefore neglect a treasure of such immense
value? Can you forget your almighty benefactour and advocate, whilst you honor
and applaud every common patriot that has distinguished himself in the cause of
your country? Then every noble principle is eradicated out of your minds, and
you are capable of venturing upon any form of ingratitude and baseness.

Consider your own eternal felicity is at stake; this you cannot be altogether
indifferent about; it is of more importance to you than kingdoms and empires;
"For what is a man profited if he gain the whole world, and lose his soul?"
This consideration should awaken every one to vigourous endeavous after that
grace and sanctification, which alone can release him from the bondage of
corruption, and constitute him an heir of a blessed immortality. You mutually
run into measures of economy, frugality and industry, in order to defeat the
acts of parliament, and promote a general repeal; much more should you adopt
another kind of economy and industry, as absolutely necessary in order to
defeat the empire of sin in your souls, and to promote your own salvation.

LASTLY, Consider the welfare and happiness of succeeding generations. A regard
for posterity is a considerable argument in the present contest for liberty.
You want to transmit inviolate to the latest posterity the rights and
privileges of that happy constitution you have derived from your ancestors: an
honest and laudable ambition! But surely a favor of religion and christian
liberty is equally worthy to be transmitted to posterity. You cannot convey
them a better inheritance. God visits the iniquities of the fathers upon the
children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate him; but shows
mercy unto thousands of them that love him and keep his commandments.

From these and the like considerations, which are highly proper and rational,
I hope you will not delay to enter into holy and inviolable resolutions, for
obtaining this glorious and exalted freedom, which shall make you happy amidst
all the storms and tempests of this mortal scene, and heirs of a kingdom that
shall never end, where you shall sing hallelujahs and songs of salvation to Him
that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb that was slain, for ever and
ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

