THE INCONSISTENCE OF RENOUNCING THE HALF-WAY-COVENANT, AND YET RETAINING THE
HALF-WAY-PRACTICE. A DIALOGUE.

By JOSEPH BELLAMY, D. D.

Why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the Things which I say?

LUKE VI. 46. NEW HAVEN, Printed by THOMAS and SAMUEL GREEN.

A DIALOGUE Between a MINISTER and his PARISHIONER.
Parishioner. SIR, ENCOURAGED by the kind reception I met with in my first
visit, I am come to make you a second. For I still have a strong desire that my
child should be baptized, and I have something new to offer.


Minister. I am ready to baptize your child with all my heart, as soon as you
will put me in a way to do it on principles consistent with the bible, and with
themselves. Have you yet found any text of scripture that will warrant the
half-way-practice?


P. I have been round the country since I saw you, and my ears have been open
to all the talk: Particularly, I have had a long conversation with my former
minister, the substance of which has been printed at Hartford, under the title
of a second dialogue between a minister and his parishioner, concerning the
half way-covenant; which, I suppose, you have seen. And now according to the
words he has put into my mouth, and according to all I have heard about the
country among my friends, I am come to speak at this time. Therefore I say, --
as to a text of scripture -- "allow there is none," not one text of scripture
to justify the half-way-practice, "it don't in the least prove the point." --
Pray, where is there one to condemn it? p. 3.


M. In this controversy gentlemen on your side of the question are wont to
argue abundantly from the old testament dispensation. Did you never observe,
that according to the express letter of the Jewish law, if any man was found
guilty of the half way-practice, he was to be excommunicated?


P. Indeed, Sir, I never did.


M. Be pleased to take the bible, and turn to Number. 9.13. The text I referred
you to when here before, and read it in this view.


P. The words are -- But the man that is clean, and is not in a journey, and
forbeareth to keep the passover; even the same soul shall be cut off from his
people, because he brought not the offering of the Lord in his appointed
season: that man shall bear his sin.


M. Read the foregoing, 10, 11, verses, and you will see, that those who were
hindered by uncleanness, or a journey, from attending the passover in its
season, were obliged to keep it the very next month; whereas it is the custom
in some of our churches, to allow persons to own the covenant, and have their
children baptized, and live and die, and never come to the Lord's table. Among
the Jews such men would have been excommunicated. -- And besides, are not the
ministers of Christ obliged by their commission, Mar. 28. to teach the
disciples of Christ to observe all things which he has commanded? And has he
not expressly commanded all his disciples, saying, This do in remembrance of me?
Luke 22. And are we not all agreed that the second command requires us to keep
pure and entire all such religious worship and ordinances as God has appointed
in his word? And have ministers or churches a dispensing power? Are they
authorized by Christ to grant indulgence to any of his disciples to live in the
allowed breach of any one of his laws? Mat. 5.19. The pope claims this power;
but all protestants are agreed in disclaiming it.


P. "I cannot believe the command of Christ obliges any of his followers to do
that which they in their consciences dare not attempt." -- "To oblige persons
to that, which they are not convinced they may safely do, is hard." -- "I
freely allow it is the duty of all to come." -- "I believe it is my duty to
come, but I believe I must first get my scruples removed." p. 4 5.


M. What are your scruples? my dear sir. Let me know them, and will do my best
to remove them.


P. It is not because I think I ought to be converted before I come to the
Lord's table. This was my only scruple once. But I give it up. My former
minister has convinced me, that the scheme I was in cannot be vindicated He
tells me, I have as good a right to come to the Lord's Table, knowing myself to
be unconverted, as to attend the common means of grace, p. 8 and I am now
convinced; but yet I dare not in conscience come. p. 5.


M. That is, you believe you have an undoubted right to come, and yet you doubt
whether you may come. You believe it is your duty to come, but yet you dare not
in conscience come. Your conscience says, yes, and no, at the same time. A
strange conscience this! I thought you honest in your first visit, but what
shall I think now? to believe a thing to be, and not to be, at the same time,
is to believe a contradiction -- Pray be not offended, my dear sir, at my
pointing out the inconsistence of your present scheme; rather review it with
that candor that becomes an honest man.


P. My former minister tells me, that the halfway practice has been approved
of and practiced upon by many great and good men, p. 4, 14, 15.


M. Perhaps he did not mean to be understood, that they approved of his
half-way-practice; for he knew, that this scheme of his, to which you are
become a proselyte, was not the scheme upon which they professed to act This
scheme is essentially different from the half-way-scheme of the synod in
Boston, 1662; for they -- did acknowledge, that there ought to be true saving
faith in the parent, according to the judgment of rational charity, or else the
child ought not to be baptized. -- This I told you before; and did your former
minister deny this to be the synod's scheme?


P. He did not. But he however really thinks in his conscience their scheme is
wrong; (yea, that it amounts to the same thing with Sandemeanism, p. 5.) for he
believes, that a man may enter into covenant with God; and have his child
baptized, and come to the Lord's table too, who knows himself to be
unconverted, p. 8 -- 12.


M. Your former minister then knows, that the famous men, whom he mentions, are
not in his scheme. Why then did he mention them in a manner which tended to
lead you to think they were? I suppose he also knew, that there is no evidence
that the half-way-practice was set up in New England, till after the synod,
1662, 40 years after the first settling of the country. Mr. Prudden in his
letter dated, 1651, to which he refers, says, "it is a thing I do not yet hear
practiced." And not one of the letters in my collection, say, that it was
practiced. But be this as it may, it is nothing to your purpose, for you reject
their scheme, and advance one of another nature, on different and contrary
principles; even on principles on which the half-way-practice never was
justified before by any synod, council, presbytery, or any one single writer,
perhaps, since the world began. A scheme which no parishioner can be in, and
act upon, without being guilty of the most glaring self-contradiction. A
scheme, therefore, I am of opinion, no parishioner ever was in, and acted upon,
that understood himself. For, if men believe they have equal right to both
ordinances, there is no room left for scruples. There is no room for the
half-way-practice, upon their own principles, according to their own
conscience. The synod in 1662, knew better than to advance such a scheme as
this.

The sum of the matter is this, when you owned your covenant, you did not mean
to own the covenant of grace, which you thought none but the godly might do;
but the half-way-covenant, which you thought the unconverted might do; your
former minister, in the time of it, thought the principles you acted upon were
wrong; but, for peace sake, suffered you to take your course, and this
confirmed you in your error. -- Now he tells you plainly, "there is no
half-way-covenant;" and he that is qualified to have his children baptized is
equally qualified for the Lord's table. -- You are convinced -- you give up the
half-way-covenant; and to be consistent, you must now give up the
half-way-practice too. For, according to your own conscience, you are now as
fit for one ordinance as for the other; and to say you dare not come, is
expressly to contradict yourself.


P. But what if I had been conscience bound? And what if no one could have
convinced me? In such a case as this, surely it would be the duty of a minister
to bear with one.


M. And what if you was about to sign a bond of L. 1000 to a merchant for a
pearl of great price? And what if you thought it to be L. 1000 old tenor? A
good bargain, think you. And what if in this view you was greatly engaged to
strike the bargain? Conscience bound! and was so bad a reader, as not to
observe it was plainly written L. 1000 sterling. -- Now, nothing can open your
eyes, and hinder your signing the bond, and binding yourself to ten times as
much as you are worth in the world, or would be willing to give; but the plain
truth -- the merchant fees your mistake -- shall he tell you the truth, wake
you up from the pleasing dream, or let you go on in your error? -- the answer
is easy. -- Oh, how many poor souls are there, who know not what they are
about, when they own the covenant! -- Pray, my dear sir, how do you understand
the covenant of grace, and covenanting transactions?


P. I am told, that the covenant of grace requires real holiness, even
repentance toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ: And yet that men,
who know they have no grace, may enter into this covenant with a good
conscience, without being guilty of lying. p. 8, 9.


M. How can you with a good conscience profess that to be true, which you know,
in the time of it, is not true?

This is thought to be lying in our dealing between man and man; and why not in
our transactions with the heart-searching God?


P. The Israelites entered into covenant at Mount Sinai, but they were
generally graceless. p. 6.


M But do you not remember the high charge which God afterward exhibited
against them by the divinely inspired psalmist. They did flatter him with their
lips, and they lied unto him with their tongues, for their heart was not right
with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant. Ps. 78, 36, 37. And do
you not remember that the carcases of this wicked hypocritical generation fell
in the wilderness? And do you not know, that these things were written for our
warning that we might not sin and perish, as they did; and not for our
imitation? And if they are thus charged by God with lying, for professing that
to be true which was not so, although in the time of it, for aught appears, they
thought it was; how will God look upon you, if you profess that, which, in the
time of it, you know to be false? Can wilful lying be called an instituting
means of grace, which is so plainly contrary to the light of nature? Can this
be preached up as a means of conversion, which naturally tends to harden men in
sin? Ask the wisest man that ever lived under that dispensation, and he will
tell you, Better is it that thou should not vow, than that thou should vow
and not pay. Eccl. 5.5. -- And if that people acted hypocritically in the time
of Asa, as is intimated p. 9. whether justly or not, we need not stand to
enquire, for if they did, they must fall under the same condemnation with their
forefathers: And their wicked example is not to be your pattern, but the law of
God is your only rule.


P. I do not mean to profess, that I have true repentance, or saving faith, or
any holiness in my heart, or any thing that implies it. This is not necessary
in order to sealing ordinances. p. 8 -- 12.


M. What is the covenant then with which you mean to profess a compliance?


P. Not any half-way-covenant, for -- "there is no half-way-covenant," p. 4. --
"no one disputes it being the covenant of grace." -- "no one dare deny it." p.
6.


M. What then! does your former minister instruct you thus? Does he teach you,
in words, to profess a compliance with the covenant of grace, and at the same
time to mean in your heart, that you do not comply with it? Does he teach you
to substitute such gross dissimulation in the room of so holy a transaction as
entering into covenant with the GREAT GOD! And does he learn you to justify
your conduct by the hypocritical professions of that generation whose carcases
fell in the wilderness!


P. No, sir, by no means. I do not believe a profession of a compliance with
the covenant of grace is necessary in order to sealing ordinances. This was not
required of the Israelites by Moses, nor of the Jews by John baptist, or by
Christ, or his apostles. p. 8 -- 12.


M. What then! We are to profess a compliance with no covenant at all, it
seems! Not with the half-way-covenant; for there is none. -- Not with the
covenant of grace; for this never was required. -- And there is no other
covenant. -- It therefore follows, according to you, that we are to enter into
covenant with God visibly, without professing to comply with any covenant at
all, what say you to this?


P. I have heard that it has been said, that a man who knows he has no grace,
may profess to comply with the covenant of grace, with moral sincerity.


M. And why might not Annanias and Sapphira be supposed to exercise moral
sincerity in their profession, as well, when they brought their money, and laid
it at the apostle's feet, and said, this is all; although they knew what they
said was not true? For, if we profess supreme love to God and Christ, etc. when
we know there is none in our hearts, we do say that which we know is not true,
as really as they did. And if we do not profess supreme love to God and Christ,
etc. we do not profess a compliance with the covenant of grace, and so do not
visibly enter into covenant with God, and so are not visible disciples of
Christ, nor can we claim the peculiar privileges of such. When therefore your
minister, speaking of that covenant with God, which professors publicly enter
into, in our churches, previous to their admission to special ordinances, said,
"there is no half-way-covenant" -- "no one disputes it being the covenant of
grace" -- "no one dare deny it." He implicitly yielded up every point for which
we contend. Nor do I doubt, if this controversy should go on, it will soon
publicly appear, that there is "one who dare deny it." For, otherwise all men
of sense will see that gentlemen on that side of the question, are grossly
inconsistent with themselves.


P. Sir, I feel myself pinched. I cannot get out. I must therefore deny that it
is the covenant of grace, that is to be owned, and by consequence I must say,
that a profession of a compliance with no covenant at all, is necessary in
order to sealing ordinances. To own the covenant, i. e. to own that we are in
duty bound to comply with the covenant of grace, and at the same time knowingly
not to comply with it, notwithstanding all obligations, is not really to enter
into covenant with God, as in duty we are bound, but really to reject the
covenant of God, to reject God and the Redeemer. And to profess to own the
covenant in this sense, is not a visible entering into covenant with God. Such
a profession is not a covenanting transaction.
For there is no other covenant, but the covenant of grace. But this would
condemn the practice of all our churches in a lump. For they all have their
covenants. What shall I do?


M. Read President Edwards on this subject -- for it is beyond my original
design to enter far into these things: it appears quite needless, til some one
shall attempt an answer to what he has already published. My design was to show
the absurdity of the half-way-covenant, and the half-way-practice, in use in
our churches. You have given up the former; and I am willing to leave it to
your own judgment, whether the latter can be retained, if the former is given
up?


P. But, Sir, I have not the Books by me, which you recommend. Therefore pray
answer me a few Questions, as briefly as you please.


Question 1. What did the covenant with Abraham require of him?


Answer To believe in Jehovah, Genesis 15.6. To walk before him and be perfect,
Genesis 17.1. To forsake his native country, and follow God. Genesis 12.1.


Q. 2. What did the covenant at Mount Sinai require of the Israelites?


A. Supreme love to God. Exodus 20.6. Deuteronomy. 6.4.5. and 10.12, 13, and 11.22, 23.
To love their neighbors as themselves. Lev. 19.18. And put an entire trust and
confidence in God. Number. 14.11. Heb. 3.19. and 4.11. and from love to God and
man to perform all the duties required respecting God and man. Mat. 22.40. So
that love was the fulfilling of their Law. Romans 13.8, 10. The sum of which was
contained in ten commands, and was written on two tables of stone, which were
called the tables of the covenant. Deuteronomy. 4.13. and 9.9, 11. And the whole was
written more at large in a book, even the whole law of Moses, and this was
called the book of the covenant, which was put in the ark of the covenant.


Q. 3. What did the Israelites promise when they entered into this covenant?


A. To comply with the whole of it. Exodus 19.8. and 24, 3. Deuteronomy. 26, 17.


Q 4. What does the gospel require of its professors?


A. Repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and to do
all Things whatsoever Christ commands us. Acts 20, 21. Mat. 28, 19, 20.


Q 5. But can no man be a disciple of Christ, without this?


A. No man can be Christ's disciple unless he love him more than father and
mother, yea, more than his own life, and deny himself, and take up his cross
and follow him. Mat. 10.32 -- 39. Luke 14 25 -- 33.


Q. 6. To whom was baptism administered in the days of Christ, and his Apostles?
I speak only as to adults.


A. To those, and to those only who professed that very faith and repentance
which the gospel required, and that very discipleship. First they made
disciples, and then they baptized them. First they appeared to repent, they
professed to believe, and then they baptized them. John 4.1 Acts 2.38 41, 44,
47, and chapter 8 36, 37. and chapter 16 31, 34. Mat. 28.19, 20 Mark 16.15, 16.


Q. 7. What is the meaning of Mat. 28.19. Teach all nations, baptising them.


A. In the original it is, disciple all nations, baptising them, i. e. first
make them disciples, and then baptize them. The meaning of the word disciple
may be seen Luke 14.25 -- 33. Their manner of making disciples is exemplified,
in Acts 2.37 -- 47. The import of baptism is stated, Acts 22.16. Romans 6.1 --
14. Gal. 3.27, 29.


Q 8 What did Philip mean by believing with all the heart? Acts 8.37.


A. St. Paul will tell you, in Romans 10.9 If thou shall confess with thy mouth
the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, etc. thou shall be saved.


Q. 9. What was the import of the Eunuch's profession, as they used words in
the apostolic age? I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.


A. We may learn from 1 John 5.1. Whosoever believes Jesus is the Christ, is
born of God. And chapter 4. 15. Whosoever shall confess, that Jesus is the Son of
God, God dwells in him, and he in God.


Q 10. To whom did John administer Baptism?


A. John preached up but one kind of repentance -- the repentance which he
preached up was a gracious repentance; for it was connected with the remission
of sins: those who appeared by their profession to comply with his preaching,
even those who came to him confessing their sins, he baptized; and therefore
his baptism was called by the name of the baptism of repentance for the
remission of sins: and therefore was evidently the same with that in Acts 2.38.
Repent and be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, for the remission of
sins. See Mat. 21.28 -- 32. Mat. 3.6. Luke 3.3.


Q. 11. Did not Christ desire hypocrites to make a profession of his religion,
and come into his visible kingdom?


A. Far from it. Luke 6.46. And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the
things which I say? Mat. ^2.12. Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a
wedding garment? See Luke 14.25 -- 33.


Q. 12. What was this man (in Mat. 22.12) blamed for?


A. For coming into Christ's visible kingdom without a wedding garment; which
he did when he made a profession.


Q. 13. Does not baptism, received in infancy, merely of it self, give right to
baptism for our children?


A. If our baptism alone gives us a right to have our children baptized, then
our right continues after we have been censured for gross scandal, yea after
excommunication; for even excommunication does not cause us to be unbaptised,
or render it needful that we should be baptized again, upon repentance; as all
grant.


Q. 14. Are not all baptized infants in the church? and have not all
church members a right to church privileges?


A. Baptism alone, in the apostolic age, never made any adult person, a
churchmember; or give any one a right to church privileges, without a
profession. Profession was first made, and then they were baptized. Those
therefore that are baptized in infancy, in order to be members, in this sense,
must make a profession when they become adult. The New England churches,
therefore, are right in demanding it.


Q 15. Were not the graceless Israelites, in fact, in covenant with God? And
have not all who are in covenant a right to covenant privileges?


A. He who complies with the covenant of grace, in the sight of God, as
searcher of hearts, has a right, in the sight of God, as searcher of hearts, to
all the blessings of the covenant; and so to the seals. In this sense, the
graceless Israelites were not in covenant; as all allow. -- He who professes
to comply with the covenant of grace, and promises to live according to it, is
bound by his profession and promise to be holy to God in heart and life; is
under covenant bonds and obligations by his own act and deed; and so is in
covenant with God in this sense; and that although he renounces the covenant in
his heart by impenitence and unbelief; yea, although he renounces the covenant in
his life by open scandal. And, in this sense, the Israelites were God's
covenant people, even when they lived in open idolatry; yea, after they had
rejected and crucified the Messiah, Acts 3.25. But being in covenant, in this
sense, gives no real right to sealing ordinances; for if it does, then the
rejecters and murderers of Christ had such a right.


Q. 16. Did not God know that the Israelites at Mount Sinai were graceless when
they entered into covenant? If so, why did he lead them to enter into covenant?


A. As the omniscient, heart-searching God, he knew it: but he did not act in
this character. -- As visible head of that people, in which character he acted
he did not know it. Isa. 63.8. For he said, surely they are my people, children
that will not lie. Read the following verses.


Q. 17. What do they mean by the external covenant?


A. It is not a scripture phrase -- Divines, who use it, mean, some, one thing,
and some, another. -- Some mean the covenant of grace, externally exhibited by
God in his word, and externally complied with in a profession of godliness.
Others mean a covenant requiring only external obedience, in distinction from
heart-holiness. -- Thus some suppose the Sinai covenant required merely
external obedience -- and was essentially a distinct and different thing from
the covenant of grace -- and some suppose the baptismal covenant not to be the
covenant of grace, but a covenant requiring external obedience only. -- I am of
opinion these ungracious covenants are creatures of the imagination, a mere
human device, for reasons I have already hinted at. -- But the practice of
allowing sealing ordinances, to those who know themselves to be graceless, can
be vindicated only on the supposition of such an ungracious covenant: and
indeed, this is the only point that need be settled, to settle the whole
controversy; for if a compliance with the covenant of grace must be professed,
those who know they have no grace cannot make a profession.


Q. 18. The Jews universally circumcised their children, attended the sacrifice
of the passover, and all their other sacrifices and ordinances, let them be
ever so openly and scandalously wicked, even although they lived in idolatry; and
why should we not do so too, in the christian world? Why should not we as
universally attend sacraments, as we do public worship on the sabbath?


A. God has never told us that the example of that wicked hypocritical people
should be the rule of our conduct. This point, you seem to take for granted;
but it is not allowed. Taking this for granted, you build your argument wholly
upon it; an argument which would lead to the most scandalous conduct.


Q 19. But did not God command them to attend all ordinances?


A. Not in the manner in which they did. For if our Savior understood the law
of Moses, all the duties required in it, the Jews were obliged by their law to
perform, in a gracious manner. i. e. from love; from love to God and man. For
on these two hang all the law and the prophets. Mat. 22.37 -- 40.


Q. 20. My former minister allows that we ought to perform all duties in a
right manner. p. 7. But the question is this, is it not better to do them in a
wrong manner, than not at all?


A. Those sinners are more likely to be converted, who attend the common means
of grace, than those who do not: for, how shall they believe in him of whom
they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? Romans 10.14
Nevertheless, as to covenanting transactions, the words of the wise man are the
truth. Eccl. 5 5. Better is it that thou should not vow, than that thou
should vow and not pay. It is better to do nothing than to lie. Lying is not
a means of grace -- It is not an appointed means of conversion. Psa. 50.16. But
unto the wicked God says, what have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that
thou should take my covenant in thy mouth? But graceless men may attend
common means without lying.


Q. 21. Granting all these things are so; yet is it not better for us to go on
in the common way? Some of the good kings of Judah reformed things as far as
they could: Nevertheless the high places were not taken away. If the half way
practice cannot be vindicated from the word of God; yet is it not best to
tolerate it? "I tremble to think of the awful consequences," of doing
otherwise. p. 13.


A. They provoked him to anger with their high places. Psa. 78.58. And shall
their God provoking conduct, be the rule for us to walk by? -- Surely no --


In popish countries they are instructed to believe, that the laity may take
Christ's body and eat it, but may not drink his blood. And no doubt thousands
of the common people think it a very wicked thing to drink one drop of the
sacramental wine. They dare come to the altar, as they call it; they dare take
and eat Christ's body; but their consciences are so tender they dare not taste
the wine. But, pray, whence arise their scruples? not from the bible. There is
not a tittle in the bible that looks that way. They are as expressly commanded
to take the cup and drink it, as to take the bread and eat it So the command to
all Christ's disciples is equally plain in the present case, as is granted.
Every parent who has a right to baptism, for his children is expressly enjoined
to attend the Lord's Supper, as is allowed; but if with light and in love we
vindicate this, and practice accordingly, "you tremble for the awful
consequences." -- The clergy among the papists, if they would unite, as one
man, might soon rectify the judgments of the common people, and remove all
their scruples, and bring on a general reformation without any "awful
consequences," in that case. So the clergy might in our churches, in this case.
Both cases as they stand in the bible are equally plain. And are not the popish
clergy to blame for not teaching their people the truth plainly, all as one
man? -- It Is true, if a few popish clergy men should come out boldly, and
declare plainly, that the laity have as good a right to one element as to the
other, and practice accordingly; they would soon be silenced, if not something
worse. But is it therefore lawful and right for them to go on in their
half-way-practice, contrary to the divine institution, to avoid this "awful
consequence"? are they not bound to abide by and act agreeable to Christ's
institution at the risque of their lives? Luke 14.25 -- 33.

And now to conclude, what shall we do to avoid "the awful consequences? Shall
we give up the covenent of grace, and substitute in its room a covenant
requiring no holiness, nothing but external duties, to suit the taste of wicked
men? Or, if we keep the covenant of grace, shall we tolerate wilful lying in
the worship of God, by leading those, who know themselves to be graceless, to
make a profession of a compliance with the covenant of grace, in order to keep
peace? Is such wickedness as this necessary to a quiet life? Can it be? Surely
no* Our confession of faith declares, chapter 28. Sacraments are holy signs and
seals of the covenant of grace. Chap. 29. Baptism is -- a sign and seal of the
covenant of grace And the heads of agreement say, that none shall be admitted
as members, in order to communion in all the special ordinances of the gospel,
but such persons as are knowing and sound in the fundamental doctrine of the
christian religion, without scandal in their lives, and to a judgment regulated
by the word of God, are persons of visible holiness and honesty; credibly
professing cordial subjection to Jesus Christ. And when the bible is so full on
our side, and our confession of faith, and articles of discipline so express;
and the half-way-covenant and halfway practice, neither name nor thing so much
as ever once mentioned in our platform -- and the covenants in use in our
churches generally as full as can be desired. -- Would the clergy all unite in
love as one man, our churches surely might be reclaimed by the blessing of God.
-- And if any of you, gentlemen parishioners, who are convinced in your
consciences, that we only abide by and act agreeable to the institution of our
Lord and Master, in refusing to practice on the halfway, should treat us ill,
you will not be able to hope for mercy at the hands of God, on that
consideration mentioned in Paul's case, 1 Timothy 1.13. I obtained mercy, because
I did it ignorantly, and in unbelief.

P. God forbid I should ever treat my minister ill for acting like a christian,
and like an honest man. -- But it is time for me to go -- I thank you for your
kind instructions -- I am determined to look into this matter thorolly,
carefully to consider every text you have referred me to, and to search the
scriptures to see whether these things are so.


M. If you meet with any objection, my dear sir, which you cannot answer, I am
always ready at your service. You shall not want light, if I can give you it.
And you may depend on the kindest treatment -- Adieu, my dear sir. -- God grant
it may happen to you as it did to the noble BEREANS!


PROPOSALS For Re printing by SUBSCRIPTION, An humble Inquiry into the Rules of
the Word of GOD, concerning the Qualifications requisite to a complete
Standing, and full Communion in the visible Christian Church.

By the Late Reverend and Learned, JONATHAN EDWARDS, A. M. President of the
College of New Jersey.

With an Appendix by the Rev. Mr. FOXCROFT.

The Books will be printed in a near Octavo Volume, and will be afforded to
Subscribers at Two Shillings, stitched in Blue Paper. Those who subscribe or a
Dozen, shall have one gratis.

Subscriptions are taken in by Thomas and Samuel Green, in New Haven, Green and
Watson, in Hartford, and Timothy Green, in New London.


