AN ACCOUNT OF THE TRIAL of JOSEPH ANDREWS FOR PIRACY AND MURDER, Together with
his Confession to the Gentlemen of the Clergy who visited him during his
Confinment, and to the Keepers of the Goal the Day before his Execution; the
Account he gave them of his Parentage and Manner of Life; also his Character
and DYING SPEECH.

AMERICA. Printed for every Purchaser. M,DCC,LXIX.

An ACCOUNT of the TRIAL OF JOSEPH ANDREWS.
ON Wednesday the 17th of May, 1769, by Virtue of a special Commission from his
Majesty, for the Trial of Piracy, etc. at the Hall of the City of New York, was
held a Court of Admiralty, consisting of the following Gentlemen, viz. His
Excellency the Governor Sir Henry Moore, President; ten Gentlemen of his
Majesty's Council, the Judge of the Admiralty, the Deputy-Secretary, the
Receiver General and Collector of the Province, and the Commander of his
Majesty's Ship Deal Castle,

JOSEPH ANDREWS, late of the Sloop Polly, Mariner, was brought to the BAR.

Richard Nicholls, Esquire Register of the Court of Vice-Admiralty, and John
M'Kisson, Esquire Deputy-Register; and a Notary Public, exhabitted five several
Charges against the Prisoner; fourteen Witnesses were, examined on the Part of
the Crown, and two on the Part of the Prisoner. It appeared by the Evidence,
that in the Month of August 1766, he entered himself on board the Sloop Polly,
Roluff Duryee, Master, bound from New York to the West Indies. The other
Persons on board were Peter Demilt, jun. Mate; Nicholas Johnson, and William
Harris, Mariners, -- Cobbs, a Cabin Boy, Wells Coverley, a young Man; John Van
Bunschooten, another young Man, who went for his Health; and an Antigua Captain
who had sold his Vessel, and was returning home, Passenger. Soon after leaving
New York, observing the Captain and Passengers had a good deal of Money, he and
Johnson formed the Design of gaining Possession of it by Murdering the People.
This Design they concluded to put in Execution as soon as they should make the
Land; accordingly about 8 Days after, the Night before they expected to get to
St. Christophers, about Midnight, William Harris being at Helm, and the Captain
asleep on a Hencoop on Deck, Johnson with one Blow of an Ax killed him, and he
expired without a Groan or Struggle. They then in like manner between them
Murdered the three Passengers, and Mate with the Ax, and threw the Boy
overboard alive. One of them made a Stroke with the Ax at Harris, who ran to
the end of the Boltsprit with a Knife, and declared he would Kill the first Man
that approached him. They then told him, if he would join them and swear to be
secret and faithful, he should be safe, and share the Plunder with them; for
Johnson having formerly sailed with him, pretended to have a Regard for him:
But it was previously agreed between Johnson and Andrews, to kill him before
they got ashore. Harris then came into the Vessel and assisted in throwing the
Bodies overboard; after which they broke open the Captain's and Passengers
Chests and Lockers, got a Bottle of Wine, and drank Damnation to themselves and
each other if they discovered the Secret. They then got a Bible and made Harris
swear upon it that he would not betray them; 3 or 4 Days after this, being in
Sight of Land, and several Vessels appearing, they got out the Boat, put into
it two Chests, with whatever they thought proper to take, scuttled the Vessel,
left her, and sailed toward the Land, telling Harris to steer clear of the
Shore. But he telling them, if they did not get pretty near the Land, the
Current would drive them to the Leeward of all the Islands, they left him to
steer as he thought best, -- but intended to throw him overboard before he got
to Land. After some Time, Johnson and Andrews both fell asleep, when Harris,
having got near the Shore, stripped himself, took the Opportuaity to throw
overboard, without Noise, his Clothes, and both the Oars, one of which he had
used instead of a Rudder to steer the Boat, he gently let himself down into the
Sea and swam on Shore at St. Kitts. where he gave a blind suspicious Account of
himself, being afraid to say any Thing that might break his Oath of Secrecy;
but at last he applied to a Minister for Advice how a Man ouht to act in a Case
similar to his own. The Minister convinced him that such kind of Oaths were so
far from being binding, that it would be highly criminal to keep them He then
went before the Judge Surrogate of the Admiralty and gave his Deposition of all
the Circumstances he knew of the bloody Affair. Soon after he quitted the Boat,
the irregular tumbling of it waked the two Criminals, who saw their desperate
Situation, and were enraged they had not an Opportunity to satiate their
Revenge upon Harris. They at first endeavored to steer with their Hats, but
afterward did it more effectually with their Sprit, and by that Means got to
Eustatia, where they sold the Boat.

Some Days after their Arrival, the St. Christopher's Gazette with Harris's
Deposition, made its Appearance in Eustatia; Andrews happening to see it,
immediately left the Island, in a Vessel bound to Casco-Bay. The Governor of
St. Eustatia; on seeing the Deposition, published by Proclamation an Order for
a deligent Search, and that no Person should carry the Criminals off, under the
Penalty of 50,000 Pieces of Eight: He also dispatched a Vessel after Andrews,
with a proper Notification of the Charge against him, and Description of his
Person. Johnson was soon taken up at Eustatia, confessed the Fact, and was
executed on the 15th of November, 1766, by being broke alive on the Rack: He
was stretched naked on a Cross, where the Bones of his Arms, Legs and Thighs
were broken with an Iron Bar, and he afterward received upwards 20 Strokes on
his breast, before he expired. Andrews the present Criminal was soon after his
Arrival taken up, and imprisoned some Time at Boston, when he attempted to cut
his own Throat, but was prevented by the Care of his Attendants. From Boston he
was sent here, where he arrived the Twenty-sixth Day of May, 1767, and remained
a Prisoner till his Execution.

The greatest Part of the clothing found with the Prisoner in his Chest, and by
him claimed as his own, in the Presence of the Court, were very fully and
circumstantially proved to have belonged to Captain Duryee, and his Mate, or
some of the Persons who were Murdered on board the said Sloop; and also many
other Things found in the Chest and owned by the Prisoner. -- Many of the
Clothes were marked with the initial Letters of the Names of their former
Owners, and many others of them with the plain Marks of those Letters
remaining, though the Silk of the marking was taken out, and they were marked J.
A. the initial Letters of the Name of the Prisoner* a Needle worked Pocketbook
found with, and owned by the Prisoner, before it was shown in Court, was
exactly described by the Woman who made it, particularly that a Corner of it
was left unfinished for want of Worsted to do it it; likewise a Medal of which
the Brother of one of the Murdered Persons, had a Copy, Several things said by
the Prisoner, during the Course of the Trial, and in his Defense, militated
much against him. The Trial lasted from Ten o'Clock on Wednesday, until One
o'clock on Thursday Morning, during all which Time his Excellency never left
the Bench. The Evidence was full, clear, and particular; the Prisoner was found
guilty, and received Sentence of Death.

He was Executed on Tuesday the 23d of May, at the East Side of Hudson's River,
near Domini's Hook, between the ebbing and flowing of the Tide: And his Body
was afterward hung in Chains, on the most conspicuous Part of the Pest or
Bealow's-Island, in New York Bay, as a Spectacle to deter all Persons from the
like atrocious Crimes.

The Account he gave of himself was as follows, viz. That he was an Englishman,
born at the Town of Swanzey, in Wales, of poor but honest Protestant Parents,
who brought him up in their own Persuasion, gave him an Education suitable to
their Circumstances, and sent him to Sea: That he has led a Seafaring Life ever
since, and sailed to many different Parts of the World; that he had some
Friends and Connections in Portugal, which led him to frequent and make some
stay in that Place, and learn the Language; which gave Rise to the Report, that
he was a Portuguese, and a Roman-Catholic, which was not true, as he never
professed any other than the Protestant Religion.

For many Years past he has made the City of New-Fork (where he married and has
left a Widow) the place of his Residence, when not at Sea. -- His Behavior on
Shore was irregular and disorderly.

A Neglect of Religion and all Christian Duties, and a free Indulgence of every
vicious Inclination, particulatly in keeping bad Company, led him from one
degree of Wickedness to another, till his Heart was hardened against Remorse
and became capable of harboring and devising horrid Thoughts and Designs. The
restraining Influences of the Divine Spirit, so often slighted and abused, were
withdrawn from him, and he was left to be governed by the furious Impulses of
his disorderly Passions, and to pursue with Greediness the Desires of his own
wicked Heart. The Gratification of these Desires was the Temptation that lead
him to covet the Money of the Captain and Passengers, which he hoped would
furnish him with the Means; and when that Thought had taken Possession of his
Breast he was determined to remove every Obstacle to its Accomplishment,
however dreadful the Consequences.

Those Minds must have been most amazingly hardened in Guilt, that could in
cool Blood have been so long brooding over such a horrible Purpose, and Persist
in it till its final Execution. This caused a Suspicion that Men capable of a
Fact like this, must have been Veterans in Blood and Murder, and could not for
a first Essay, have been Actors in so dreadful a Scene of Slaughter.

And therefore these Criminals were suspected to be the Authors of several
other Murders perpretated within these few Years, particularly of Anthony De
Noyer, Master of a French Schooner, near the Island of St. Domingo; in the Year
1765, and of two Men in New Jersey; but they both, till their last Moments,
persisted in solemnly denying that they had ever before been concerned in any
Murder or other capital Crime.

Joseph Andrews, was remarkably ignorant or insensible in Matters of religious
or moral Obligation; and though he seemed heartily to feel the Horrot of his
Situation; yet all his Distress seemed to arise from the Dread of personal
Punishment -- not at all from a proper Sense of his Guilt; and though he
confessed the Fact for which he suffered, repeatedly, to both the Ministers,
and at the Gallows, ye he always seemed to own it with Reluctance; and to feel
something of Resentment against the Witnesses upon whose Evidence he was found
guilty, but said he forgave them.

The Excuse he made for throwing the Boy overboard, was, that in the Scuffle he
had received a Wound, which he apprehended would have been Mortal, and that
therefore it was best to end his Misery at once.

At the Gallows he owned his Crime, desired all People, especially Sailors to
take Warning by him, and after repeating the Creed and Lord's Prayer, was
executed.

THE Night preceding ANDREWS's Execution, a Gentleman whose veracity can be
depended upon, went up to the Room wherein he was confined in the New-Goal, and
had a very serious conversation with him. And after having joined him in
Prayer; he advised him to satisfy the Public, by confessing the Crimes he had
been guilty of -- Andrews mused for some Time, and then gave the following
declaration. -- As a dying Man, I think it is a duty I owe to myself, to say
something against the many Crimes laid to my Charge by some Persons, as a
clamourous and insolent, as they are ignorant and stupid; for if you take the
Voice of the People, in general, there never was a Crime committed by mankind
but what has been imputed to me. I pray God to forgive them and they have both
my Forgiveness and Pity: My name is Joseph Anderson: I was born in Swanzey, in
the Southern Part of Wales, near Vaux-Hall, of poor but honest Parents -- in my
Youth, I came over an Indented Servant to Boston, and served part of an
Apprentiship to a Capt. of a Vessel; but being very ambitious to be my own
Master, I deserted from him when at Lisbon. -- I always had an insatiable
desire for Money, and this unhappy propensity has prompted me to do things, the
remembrance of which is now very grievous unto me; but who lives and sins
not! And those who rail most against me, if they will take the trouble of
scrutinizing their own Lives, they will find their conduct has not been
unexceptionable. -- However they may say of me what they please, as my Time
here, in all probability is very short -- And after the Execution of my
Sentence, when they* see my Body Hanging in Chains, they may (as they no doubt
will) say there Hangs the Body of ANDREWS, the Pirate, who being a Roman
Catholic, would make no Confession.

He was then Silent for a short Time, and upon the Gentleman's Asking him
whether he was a Roman Catholic or not, he Answered in the Negative. And added
that he had lived and should die a Member of the Church of England. He was very
desirous to know if his Body realy was to be hung in Chains, if not, he would
give a particular account of the Transactions of his Life; but if on the
contrary, they persisted in their resolution to Hang him in Chains, the World
should have little Satisfaction from him. -- His Behavior at the Place of
Execution was decent and resigned, he Prayed about fifteen Minutes and then
desired the cart to be drove of. -- Upon the whole he seemed to be a daring
resolute Fellow.


