LETTERS TO THE MINISTRY FROM Governor Bernard, General Gage, and Commodore
Hood. AND ALSO Memorials to the Lords of the Treasury, FROM THE Commissioners
of the Customs. WITH Sundry LETTERS and PAPERS annexed to the said Memorials.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY EDES and GILL, IN QUEEN STREET, 1769.

LETTERS, etc.
Extract of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Shelburne, dated
Boston, January 21, 1768.
I Found it necessary to call the Assembly sooner than I intended, and they
accordingly met on December 30th. I deferred giving your Lordship any Account
of their Proceedings till they should become interesting enough to deserve your
Lordship's Notice. The first 18 Days were spent in preparing Remonstrances
against the Act for imposing new Duties, and directing the Application of them
for the Support of the Administration of Justice and the Government. A few Days
before the Meeting of the Assembly the Speaker of the House was with me, and in
the Course of Conversation informed me that it was intended to remonstrate
against the late Acts, and asked my Opinion upon it. I told him that if they
were determined upon that Step, I would advise them to do it in such a Manner
that the Terms of their Remonstrance might not necessarily come before
Parliament; for I knew that however cautiously it might be worded, it could not
be free from a Claim of a Right to an Exemption from Acts of this kind, and I
was well assured that however favorable the Parliament had been to them
heretofore, it was at present by no Means disposed to bear with a farther
Dispute of their Authority so soon after it had been so solemnly declared to be
inherent in them, and especially in the present Case, which was of Port Duties
which had heretofore been admitted to belong to Parliament, and now were to be
taken away by a Refinement which however it might read in American Newspapers,
would never be heard in the two Houses; which allowed of no Distinctions in
what they should think fit to enact for America. I added, that if they should
think proper to address his Majesty's Secretary of State upon this Occasion, it
was my official Business to take the Charge of it, and I should faithfully
remit it, whatever the Contents were; and if they put it into other Hands, I
should remonstrate against it as being irregular and unconstitutional for any
Addresses to pass from an Assembly (where the King has a Representative
presiding) to his Majesty, either directly or indirectly, except through the
Mediation of his Representative.

As soon as the Assembly met, the House ordered the Commission of the
Commissioners of the Customs, which was registered in the Secretary's Office,
to be brought in and read, and then appointed a Committee to consider the State
of the Province and report. This Committee reported a Letter to Mr. DeBerdt
their Agent, and another to your Lordship: these being very long, they took
many Days Consideration, in which many offensive Passages were struck out; though
I am told there stilll remain, at least in the Letter to Mr. DeBerdt, several
bold Expressions. These two Letters took up 18 Days, after which the Committee
reported an Address to the King, which was concluded and agreed upon in 4 or 5
Days more. When the two first Letters were finished, I directed the Secretary
to ask the Speaker to let me have a Sight of them, as I had been always used to
do in like Cases, without ever being refused. The Speaker said he must advise
about it, and afterward told the Secretary that there was an Order of the
House that no Copies should be taken, and therefore he could not let me have
them. The Secretary replied that that was no Objection to my seeing them, for
that I did not want any Copy, and would give him any Assurance that no Copy
should be taken, whilst in my Hands; and advised him to see me. The Speaker
came to me and repeating his Difficulties, offered to take the Opinion of the
House. I told him he should new move the House in my Name, for I would not put
it in their Power to refuse me this; that I had already waited five Days for a
Sight of those Papers; and if he would not let me have it now, I should take it
as a Refusal, and should acquaint the Secretary of State with it; he still said
that he would endeavor to get Leave to show them to me, but nothing has been
done. I must add, that I by no Means apprehend this to be an Affront to my
Person, but my Office; for at this Time the Speaker himself seemed uncommonly
desirous by some other Means to persuade me of his Respect; and the House, from
the Time of the opening the Session to this Day, has shown their Disposition to
avoid all Dispute with me, every Thing having passed with as much good Humor
as I could desire, except only their continuing to act in addressing the King,
remonstrating to the Secretary of State, and employing a separate Agent, as if
they were the States General of the Province, without a Governor or a King's
Council.

It is the Importance of this Innovation, without any Wilfulness of my own,
which induces me to make this Remonstrance to your Lordship, at a Time when I
have a fair Prospect of having in all other Business nothing but Good to say of
the Proceedings of this House, I mean so far as their Disposition has hitherto
appeared.

A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Extract of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Shelburne, dated
Boston 30th January 1768.
I Received your Lordship's Letter No. 11, by the November Mail, which arrived
here this Day Se'nnight, the October Mail which has other Letters of your
Lordship for me, is not arrived here, though by the Accounts we have it is daily
expected; I have therefore at present only to say, that I shall regard the
Letter now received rather for my own Instruction, than a Direction to others.
The Time is not yet come when the House is to be moved against popular
Printers, however proflgiate and flagitious. But if there was a View of
Success, I should by no Means think is proper to make such an Attempt now when
the House shows so good a Disposition to a Reconciliation to Government, of
which they have given good Proof, since the Date of my former Letter. They have
acted in all Things, even in their Remonstrance (as far as I who have not been
allowed a Sight of it can learn) with Temper and Moderation: They have avoided
some Subjects of Dispute, and have laid a Foundation for removing some Causes
of former Altercations: I speak this only from private Report, nothing of this
Kind very material having as yet come up to me.

But in one Thing the House has shown itself contra-agent to the Faction, who
want again to embroil America. There is no doubt but the principal Design in
forming these Remonstrances was to set an Example to the Rest of America, and
produce a general Clamor from every other Assembly against the late Acts. This
was partly defeated by my refusing to call the Assembly before the usual Time;
and again by the House resolving to form their Remonstrance in such a Manner
that it should not of Necessity be made public; but though this last Intention
was quite inconsistent with the Purpose of communicating the Substance of their
Remonstrance to the other Assemblies, yet it did not discourage the Party from
attempting it; the House was accordingly moved that a Day be assigned to take
into Consideration the Propriety of informing the other Governments with their
Proceedings against the late Acts, that, if they thought fit, they might join
therein. Upon the Day this was strongly opposed and fully debated; it was said
by the Opposers of the Motion, that this would be considered at Home as
appointing another Congress, and perhaps the former was not yet forgot. Upon
the close of the Debate, it was carried in the Negative by at least 2 to 1. No
one Transaction in the House has given me so great Hopes that they are
returning to a right Sense of their Duty and their true Interest, as this has
done; and I hope it will make some Atonement for their Remonstrances.

A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Shelburne, dated 2d
February 1768.
Boston, February 2 d, 1768. My LORD,
I HAVE just now received a Packet from your Lordship's Office (13 Days after
it arrived at New York) containing among other Papers your Lordship's Letters
No. 9 and 10, and the Duplicate of your Lordship's Letter No. 8. (the Original
having not as yet come to Hand) I am much obliged to your Lordship for
representing my Conduct to his Majesty so as to obtain for me his gracious
Approbation.

I shall make such a prudent and proper Use of this Letter, as I hope will
perfectly restore the Peace and Tranquillity of this Province, for which Purpose
considerable Steps have already been made by the House of Representatives.

I am, etc. FRA. BERNARD.
A true Copy,

John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.



Extract of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Shelburne, dated
Boston, February 18, 1768.
BY my Letter No. 2, I informed your Lordship that a Motion in the House for
circulating a Copy of their Proceedings against the late Acts of Parliament to
all the Assemblies on the Continent had been rejected by above 2 to 1; and that
I formed promising Conclusions from this Defeat of the factious Party; but I
was too hasty in my Approbation of the Conduct of the House. This was too great
a Point to be given up, the Party therefore resolved to make another Effort,
and having prepared the Way by privately tampering with, and influencing
Particulars, they moved that all the former Proceedings upon this Business
should be obliterated out of the Journal, which being agreed to, the Way became
clear for another Motion that a Committee should be appointed to prepare a
circular Letter to the several Speakers of the Assemblies upon the Continent,
containing an Abstract of their Remonstrances against the late Acts, and a
desire that the other Assemblies would join with them; a Letter was presently
reported and agreed to by the House.

As soon as I knew that this was past, I got the Speaker to come to me, and in
the Presence of the Secretary required a Copy of the Circular Letter that I
might transmit it to your Lordship, to whom I said I should be obliged to send
an Account of this extraordinary Proceeding, which I feared would be thought
similar to the Congress in 1765. He said that he did not doubt but that it
would be easily obtained, with the Leave of the House. He accordingly asked the
Leave of the House the next Day, which he not only obtained for the Copy in
Question, but also for the other Proceedings of which he had refused me the
Sight some Time before.

I now send your Lordship a Copy of this Circular Letter, which I would
animadvert upon, if the Time would permit; at present I will only make two
Observations, 1st. That this present Undertaking is calculated to inflame the
whole Continent, and engage them to join together in another Dispute with the
Parliament about the Authority of the latter; although the present Subject Matter
was professedly allowed by the Americans themselves to be within the Bounds of
the Power of Parliament at the Time of the former Dispute. 2dly, That the
Distinctions, by Means of which they now transfer the Matters contained in the
late Act of Parliament, from the Range of what they Before conceded to
Parliament, to that of what they before denied, is equally conclusive of all
Acts of Parliament imposing Duties in any of the American Ports, and
consequently if the last Act should be given up to those Pretentions, all other
Acts of American Revenue must follow. I shall write fully to your Lordship upon
this Subject when I have Leisure to review the Proceedings of this Session.

A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Extract of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Shelburne, dated
Boston, March 5th, 1768.
YESTERDAY I prorogued the General Assembly, after a Session of above nine
Weeks, the greatest Part of which was spent in animadverting upon, and
counterworking the late Acts of Parliament concerning the Revenue, so that
there was not Time eno' to do the Provincial Business, nor even all of that
which I recommended to them at the opening of the Session, some of the
Productions of these Animadversions will come to your Lordship directly from
the Speaker of the House.

The Circular Letter to the Rest of the Colonies, I have already sent to your
Lordship; there is a Letter I am told from the House to the Lords of the
Treasury, but there is no Occasion for my communicating that; I now send a Copy
of the Resolves of the House upon Importations and Manufactures; it is so
decently and cautiously worded, that at another Time it would scarce have given
Offense: but they boast of it, as it was meant to be a Confirmation of the
Boston Resolves.

On February 28th appeared in the Boston Gazette a virulent Libel against me --
I had never before taken any Notice of the Libels published in the Boston
Gazette; but this was attended with so many Circumstances of Flagitiousness
that I did not think I could with Safety to the Government pass it by
unnoticed; I therefore next Morning laid it before the Council at a very full
Board, there being 20 present, which is the whole Number but 3. It was received
with general Detestation; most of the Gentlemen spoke to testify their
Abhorrence of it, and it was remarkable that some of those who heretofore had
been inclined to the popular Side, were most loud in their Resentments of this
Outrage. In the End they unanimously advised me to lay it before the two Houses
of the General Court, that is, themselves in their Legislative Capacity, and
the House of Representatives. This I did by a Message to each, in the Terms
enclosed which are the same except in the proper Distinctions.

The Board appointed a Committee to prepare an Answer to my Message, which was
reported and agreed upon unanimously by the same Number as before mentioned: In
the House which was grown thin and evacuated by the Friends of government in
greater Proportion than the Opponents. It had not the same Success. They
labored with all their Might to prevent the Paper being censured. It was
debated a whole Afternoon, and adjourned to the next Morning, during which
Interval all the usual Practices of tampering with the Members were employed,
and the next Day upon a Vote the Consideration of the Libel was dismissed. The
chief Argument used for this Purpose was that as there was no Name used, it was
not a Libel in Law, and would not be considered so in a Court of Justice, it
was finally agreed that the Message as enclosed should be sent to me. The
Faction carried their Points by small Majorities; upon the last Question the
Numbers were 39 to 30, the greater of which is about one third Part of the
whole House; upon this Occasion -- behaved in the House like a Madman; he
abused every one in Authority, and especially the Council in the grossest Terms.

The next Morning he came into the Council Chamber, before the Board met, and
having read the Council's Address, he with Oaths and Imprecations vowed
Vengeance upon the whole Council at the next Election, and told one Councellor
who happened to be there, that he never should sit at that Board after his Year
was out. This is the Man who makes such a Disturbance about my using my
Negative in the Appointment of Counselors; the annual Election of whom is the
Canker Worm of the Constitution of this Government.

It may be expected that after such strong Declarations against this Libel, the
Council would have joined with me in the Prosecution of the Printers, but that
could not be brought about; it was known that I intended to move that Business,
and therefore one of the Board in the Name of some of my Friends was sent to me
to advise the contrary. It was suggested it would be better to leave the Matter
where it stood, with a continued Unanimity of the (almost) whole Council, than
by proceeding farther to divide them, especially as it was thought probable
that a Vote for a Prosecution might not be obtained. It was satisfied with
these Reasons, and declined making any further Motion. This is one of the
Consequences of that fatal Ingredient in this Constitution, the Election of the
Council, which will always weaken this Government, so that the best Management
will never make it is Weight capable of being put in the Scales against that of
the People, though the late Act of Parliament will do much toward it. However, I
ordered the Attorney General to procure Informations, so that if a Prosecution
may hereafter be thought advisable, it may be practicable. But after all,
these Printers are answerable to Great Britain, an Hundred Times more than they
are to this; and while that Debt remains unsatisfied, we ought not to complain
that it is not paid here.

I had intended when I prorogued the General Court to have made a short Speech
to the House in Answer to their last Message on your Lordship's Letter; but
their publishing that Message in one of their Papers, and that virulent Libel
in the next, showed such a determined Design to misrepresent me to the People,
that I was obliged to enter more fully into my Justification than I intended to
have done at first; and accordingly I delivered the Speech enclosed: I
Approbation it has received from all Parties in this Town; it is intended to
open the Eyes of the People, to the Wickedness of this factious Junto, though
perhaps they will not see it clearly 'till they feel some of the Effects of
it is Machinations, which cannot fail of coming upon them in some Shape or
other, as they are now going on.

A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Extract of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Shelburne, dated
Boston, March 12, 1768.
SINCE I wrote my last the Superior Court has been opened at Boston, upon which
Occasion the Chief Justice (Lieutenant Governor) made a long and forcible
Charge to the Grand Jury upon the Subject of the Libels published in the Boston
Gazette, and particularly that which has been lately animadverted upon by the
Council. This so sensibly affected the Grand Jury and all the Hearers of it,
that it left no Doubt in the Mind of any one present, that the Grand Jury would
find a Bill against the Printers. And they themselves had so little Doubt of
it, that as soon as they came out Court they sent for the Attorney General, and
directed him to prepare a Bill against the next Morning.

But in the Interval, the Faction who conducts that Paper, was indefatigable in
tampering with the Jury, so that when the Business was resumed the next Day,
that Bill was opposed so effectually that it passed in the Negative by a small
Majority, some say of one only. Upon this Occasion the Managers of the Paper
were seen publicly, to haunt the Grand Jurymen wherever they went.

Sensible People who have a Regard for their Country are much concerned at this
Defeat of Justice. They say that it is a Symptom of such extreme Weakness in
the Government, that it affords little Hopes of its Recovery. And indeed I do
not expect the Government will ever recover its Authority without Aid from
superior Powers. If the Opposition was directed only against Persons and
Measures, a Reconciliation might and would soon take Place, and all might be
well again. But Men and Measures are only nominal Defendants, the Authority of
the King, the Supremacy of Parliament, the Superiority of Government, are the
real Objects of the Attack, and a general levelling of all the Powers of
Government, and reducing it into the Hands of the whole People, is what is
aimed at, and will, at least in some Degree, succeed, without some external
Assistance. The Council which formerly used to be revered by the People, has
lost its Weight, and notwithstanding their late spirited Exertion, is in
general timid and irresolute, especially when the annual Election draws near.
That fatal Ingredient in the Composition of this Constitution is the Bane of
the whole, and never will the Royal Scale be balanced with that of the People
till the Weight of the Council is wholly put into the former. The making the
Council independent of the People (even though they should still receive their
original Appointment from them) would go far to cure all the Disorders which
this Government is subject to. But my Lord, whilst I am treating of the
Constitutional Imbecility of the Council, I must not forget my Promise that I
would represent to his Majesty the public-spirited Conduct of the Council
during this last Session. I must therefore beg Leave to assure your Lordship,
that in many Transactions in this last Session, the Council have in general
shown great Attention to the Support of the Government and the Welfare of the
People, and have upon many Occasions shown a Resolution and Steadiness in
promoting his Majesty's Service, which would have done Honor to his Majesty's
Appointment if they had wholly held their Places under it, which makes it more
to be lamented that such Men should be subjected to be continually threatened to
be turned out of their Places, whenever they exercise the Dictates of their own
Judgments in Contravention to the Fury of a seditious Demagogue.

I must not omit to do Justice to the spirited Conduct of the Lieutenant
Governor, in his Function of Chief Justice. It gives me great Pleasure to say,
that I can depend upon his Resolution and Steadiness as much as I can upon my
own; and am assured that there will be no want of a due Enforcement of the Laws
to the Correction of the present Abuses. Where there is a Failure of this
Exertion, it will arise either from the Defaults of Juries, or from the
Control which in this defenseless Government the common People sometimes
exercise over of Laws, especially the Laws of Great Britain. The Chief Justice
has been much pressed to print his Charge; but has hitherto declined it. However,
he has reduced it to writing, that if it should be misrepresented in the Boston
Gazette (as from the great Licentiousness which reigns here is very probable)
he may be able to justify himself. In the mean Time, as he has begun with these
Printers, he will I dare say, pursue his Purpose; and as the Publication of
this Paper is a Crime committed in every County in the Province; it is
probable, that another Grand Jury may not be so regardless of their Oath and
their Duty to their Country, as this has been.

I am, etc. FRA. BERNARD.
A true Copy,

John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.



Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Shelburne, dated Boston,
March 19th 1768.
My LORD, Boston, March 19 th, 1768.
I Expected that the Appointment of Commissioners of Customs, in America, would
have made it unnecessary for me to have troubled your Lordship with any
Representations upon the Subject of the Customs. But I see such an Opposition
to the Commissioners and their Officers, and such a Defiance to the Authority
by which they are appointed continually growing, that I can no longer excuse my
informing your Lordship of the Detail of Facts from whence the most dangerous
Consequences are to be expected.

It is some Time since there have been frequently Reports of Insurrections
intended, in which it has been said the Houses of one or more of the
Commissioners and their Officers would be pulled down; two were more
particularly fixed upon. Upon one of these Nights a Number of Lads about 100,
paraded the Town with a Drum and Horns, passed by the Council Chamber whilst I
was sitting there in Council, assembled before Mr. Paxton's (a Commissioner's)
House, and Huzza'd, and to the Number of at least 60 justy Fellows (as I am
assured) invested Mr. Burch's (another Commissioner's House) for some Time, so
that his Lady and Children were obliged to go out of the back Door to avoid the
Danger which was threatened. This Kind of Disturbance was kept up all the
Evening, and after all was treated at the Diversion of a few Boys a Matter of
no Consequence. This was I think on March the 4th.

After this it was reported that the Insurrection was postponed till March
18th, which was the Anniversary of the Repeal of the Stamp Act, upon which Day
Effigies were to be exhibited, and two Persons, Mr. Paxton a Commissioner, and
Mr. Williams one of the Inspectors General, were mentioned as devoted to the
Resentment of the Mob. I took all the Pains I could to discover the Truth of
this Report, but could get no other Answer, but Assurances that no such Thing
would be done or suffered. On the very Day before I spoke with the most knowing
Men I could procure, who were very positive that no Effiges would be hung up,
and yet late that Evening I had certain Advice that Effigies were prepared, but
it was too late to do any Thing, and my Information was of that Nature I could
not make use of it in Public.

Early the next Morning the Sheriff came to me to inform me that the Effigies
of Mr. Paxton and Mr. Williams were hanging upon Liberty-Tree. I had the Day
before appointed a Council to meet, and I now sent round to get them together
as soon as possible it might be. Before I went to Council I learned that the
Effigies had been taken down by some of the Neighbors without any Opposition.

At Council I set forth in strong Terms the Atrociousness of this Insult, the
Danger of it is being followed by actual Violence, and the Necessity there was
of providing for the Preservation of the Peace of the Town. But all I could say
made no Impression upon the Council, they persevered in treating the Affair as
of no Consequence, and assuring me that there was no Danger of any Commotion.
After they had given their Opinion as in the enclosed Copy of the Minutes, I
received a Letter from the Commissioners, setting forth the Insult they had
received, the Danger they apprehended, and desiring the Protection of the
Government. I communicated this to the Council, and proposed that they should
reconsider this Business, but finding them not inclined to depart from their
Opinion as before given; I adjourned the reconsideration till the Afternoon. In
the Afternoon upon the Question being put to them again they adhered to their
former Opinion.

I should have mentioned before, that under all these Assurances I had, that
there would be no Disturbances, it was never understood that the Day, the
Anniversary of the Repeal of the Stamp Act should not be celebrated;
accordingly at break of Day there were beating of Drums, and firing of Guns
heard, and the whole Town was adorned with Ships Colors, and to add to the
Celebration the Feast of Saint Patrick being the Day before was postponed to
this Day.

However, great Pains were taken by the Selectmen of the Town, and some other
Gentlemen, that the Festivity should not produce a Riot in the Evening, and so
far it succeeded that it produced Terror only, and not actual Mischief.

There was a Number of Gentlemen dined at two Taverns near the Town House, upon
the Occasion of the Day. These broke up in good Time; after which many of the
same and other Gentlemen kept together at the Coffee-House (one of the Taverns)
all the Evening. These prevented the lighting a Bonfire in that Street, which
was several Times attempted, and would probably have been a Prelude to Action.
But the assembling a great Number of People of all Kinds, Sexes and Ages, many
of which showed a great Disposition to the utmost Disorder, could not be
prevented. There were many Hundreds of them paraded the Streets with Yells and
Outcries which were quite terrible. I had in my House Mr. Burch one of the
Commissioners and his Lady and Children, who had the Day before moved to our
House for Safety.

I had also with me the Lieutenant Governor and Sheriff of the County. But I
had taken no Steps to fortify my House, not being willing to show an
Apprehension of Danger to myself. But at one Time there was so terrible a Yell
from the Mob going by, that it was apprehended that they were breaking in, but
it was not so. However, it caused the same Terror as if it had been so; and the
Lady, a Stranger to this Country, who chose our House for an Asylum, has not
recovered it as yet. They went on and invested Mr. Williams's House, but he
showed himself at a Window, and told them that he was ready for their
Reception, and they went off, and either did not intend or dared not to attack
his House. They also at two different Times about Midnight made Outcries about
Mr. Paxton's House, out of mere Wantonness to terrify his Family. The whole
made it a very terrible Night to those who thought themselves Objects of the
popular Fury; and yet if I should complain of it, I should be told that it was
nothing but the common Effects of Festivity and Rejoicing, and there was no
Harm intended.

Your Lordship will perhaps ask what I have been doing all this while, that
this Spirit of Disorder is got to such a Pitch; I answer, every Thing in my
Power to prevent it; since first these Tumults were apprehended, the
Commissioners, with whom (I mean 4 of the 5) I am upon the most intimate Terms,
have often asked me, what Support to their Office, or Protection for
themselves, I can afford: I answer, none in the World. For though I am allowed to
proceed in the Ordinary Business of the Government without Interruption; in the
Business of a popular Opposition to the Laws of Great Britain founded upon the
Pretentions of Rights and Privileges, I have not the Shadow of Authority or
Power. I am just now in the Situation I was in about two Years ago, sure to be
made obnoxious to the Madness of the People, by the Testimony I am obliged to
bear against it, and yet left exposed to their Resentment without any possible
Resort of Protection. I am then asked why I don't apply for Troops as well to
support the King's Government as to protect the Persons of his Officers. I
answer, because I don't think it proper or prudent to make such Application
upon my own Opinion only.

All the King's Governors are directed to take the Advice of the Council in
Military Movements; and in this Government where the Governor is in a more
peculiar Manner obliged to have the Advice of the Council for almost every
Thing he does, it would be dangerous to act in such an important Business
without such Advice. And it is in vain to put such a Question to the Council,
for, considering the Influence they are under from their being Creatures of the
People, and the personal Danger they would by subject to in assisting in the
restraining them, it is not probable that the utmost Extremity of Mischief and
Danger would induce them to advise such a Measure. I have once before tried the
Experiment when the Danger was more urgent and immediate than is now; and the
Success then fully convinced me that it is to no Purpose ever again to repeat
the Question. His Majesty's Ministers have within these three Years been fully
acquainted with the Defenseless State of this Government, and therefore I trust
that I shall be excused leaving it entirely to the Administration to determine
upon a Measure, which they are much more able to judge of, and be answerable
for, than I can be. I shall have Danger and Trouble enough when such Orders
arrive, though I keep ever so clear of advising or promoting them. These, my
Lord, are the Answers I have given to the Commissioners in the Course of
Conversation which I have thought proper to recapitulate in this Place for my
own Vindication if it should be needful. I should have mentioned before, but
for not interrupting the Narrative, that in the Debate at the Council one
Gentleman said that there were Associations formed for preserving the Peace of
the Town; I said that I had not been made acquainted with them, that if there
were any such they ought to have been formed with my Privity, and confirmed by
my Authority. That if a general Association for supporting the Authority of the
Government and preserving the Peace of the Town could be brought about, it
would be of great Service, and I should be glad to see it set about
immediately. Upon this a Councellor got up with Vehemence, and said, that such
a Subscription was illegal and unconstitutional, and he should protest against
it, as tending to bring an Approbium on the Town. I said that at a Time when a
Subscription was handed about the Town in direct Opposition to the Parliament
and People of Great Britain, and was every Day enforced by Menaces, and other
unfair Methods, it was very extraordinary at that Board to hear a Subscription
for the Support of Government and Preservation of Peace called illegal. That I
should not endeavor to press a Measure which would derive its chief Efficacy
from being voluntary, but I feared they would see the Expediency of such a
Measure when it was to late. From this and the generality of the Assurances
that no Mischief would be done, I am to understand that the Preservation of the
Peace of this Town is to depend upon those who have the Command of the Mob, and
can restrain them (and of course let them loose) when they please, and Civil
Authority is not to interpose in this Business; and indeed I have with
Attention observed that all the Assurances that no Mischief was intended at
present, are founded upon the Impropriety of using Violence at a Time when they
were applying to the Government and Parliament of Great Britain for Redress.
But it is inferred, and sometimes expressly declared, that when they have Advice
that the Redress which they expect is denied, they will immediately proceed to
do themselves Justice. And it is now become common Talk that they will not
submit to Duties imposed by Parliament, not only those imposed by the late
Acts, but all others which raise a Revenue. This is public Talk* as for the
sanguine Expectations which the Faction, from whose Cabinet all these Troubles
have arisen, has formed for comptrolling and triumphing over Great Britain; I
dare not repeat what I have heard till their Purposes become more apparent.

In this Narrative I have taken no Notice of the Town Meetings, Meetings of
Merchants, Subscriptions for not importing English Goods, Proposals for
Manufactures, etc. which have been carrying on before and during the whole
aforementioned Time. I intend to make a separate Letter upon these Subjects,
which possibly may accompany this, as I am not at present apprized of a
Conveyance safe enough to trust this by.

I am, etc. FRA. BERNARD.
A true Copy,

John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.



Extract of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Shelburne, dated
Boston, March 21st, 1768.
IN my last Letter I omitted giving your Lordship an Account of the meetings of
the Merchants, etc. within the time I was describing, as I reserved it for a
separate Letter; as the two Subjects are not necessarily connected, and I cannot
say how far they are really so. These Proceedings however so immediately
followed a particular Transaction, that it is necessary to begin the Narrative
with that.

About the middle of February one Malcom a Trader who about 18 Months before
made himself famous by a violent and riotous Resistance to the Custom House
Officers, endeavoring to search his House for uncustomed Goods, (of which
there is a very full Account in your Lordship's Office) expecting a Schooner
laden with Fyal Wines to come in, asked an Officer of the Customs, what
Indulgence he might expect in regard to the Duties. The Officer answered him,
none at all; he must pay the whole Duties; Malcom replied, he was glad to know
what he had to trust to. Some days after the Schooner came in, and was ordered
to anchor among the Islands 5 Miles below the Town. From thence the Cargo,
consisting as is said, of above 60 Pipes of Wine was landed in the Night, and
carried in Drays to different Cellars, each Load being guarded by a Party of
Men with Clubs. This business employed a number of men the greatest part of the
night, and was as notorious, by the noise it occasioned for many Hours
together, as if it had been done at noonday. The Lading of the Schooner was
also publicly known and talked of long before she arrived. She appeared plainly
when she came up to Town by well-known Marks to have been lightened a yard or
more, and was evidently too light to bear the Sea. Nevertheless the Master went
to the Custom House, and Swore that she came from Suranam in Ballast, and had
landed nothing since she left that Port.

Two or three Days after, this Malcom procured a Meeting of some Merchants and
Traders at which he presided. Their Deliberations were Sanguine, and full of
high Pretensions; but nothing was determined upon, but to call a general
Meeting of the Merchants on Friday March 4th. This may be said, to be the first
movement of the Merchants against the Acts of Parliament: all the proceedings
before were carried on at Town Meetings, and were rather upon Refinements of
Policy than concern for Trade. There never was less Reason for the Merchants to
complain of the Regulations of Trade than at present; there never was a greater
Plenty of Money, or a more apparent Balance of Trade in their Favor, of which
the State of Exchange with London, which now is, and for a long time, has been
at Par, is an irrefragable Evidence. However, the Merchants are at length
dragged into the Cause, their Intercourse and Connections with the Politicians,
and the sear of opposing the Stream of the People, have at length brought it
about against the Sense of an undoubted Majority both of Numbers, Property and
Weight. Accordingly the Result of this Meeting was, that a Subscription for not
importing any English Goods, except for the Fishery for 18 Months, should be
prepared and carried round the Town, and a Committee was appointed for that
purpose. This was the same night that the little Mob with the Drum passed by
the Townhouse.

Upon the Subscription Paper first going round the Town, it met with no great
success; A great many declined it as indeed it cannot fail being ruinous to the
Generality of Traders. Upon this, all Engines were set to Work to increase the
Subscription; some were told they would be obnoxious to the lower sort of
people; others were threatened with the resentment of the higher: Some were
made afraid for their Persons and Houses; others for their Trade and Credit. By
such means the subscription has been filled by numbers, who if at Liberty would
protest against the force put upon them, and neither intend nor can comply with
the Terms, and there are still remaining enough of the most respectable
Merchants in the Town, Non-Subscribers, to defeat this Scheme, even if the
Subscribers were to keep to their promise* and it never can be carried into
execution without the interposition of the Mob. But it is scarce a Secret with
any of them, that the chief Intent of this Subscription is to raise an Alarm
among the Merchants and Traders of Great Britain.

To illustrate the foregoing Narrative, I send your Lordship their own Account
of the Meeting on the 18th, with a List of the Toasts as usual. There is also
in the same Paper, a piece containing a Sneer upon the late Proceedings of
Parliament; the whole Wit of which arises from the common Assertion, that the
Parliament has no Right to impose Duties in the American Colonies -- no more
than they have in Portugal. In the same is also the Letter to your Lordship,
and the Address to the King is in another of the same Papers, and in others.
This shows that the chief use of these Letters is to inflame the other
Colonies: for unless they preferred this Service to the obtaining Redress from
Home, they could not be so deficient in Duty, Respect and even common Civility,
as to publish in America an Address to the King, and a Letter to his Minister
of State; before they could have come to hand in England. Heretofore even a
complimentary Address to the King never used to be published in America, till
it appeared there in the Gazette. In short, your Lordship may depend upon it,
that nothing less than the Abolition of all the Acts imposing Duties is
proposed. When that is done, the Transition to all other Acts of Parliament
will be very short and easy.

I am, etc. FRA. BERNARD.
A true Copy,

John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.



Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Boston, 11th and 13th June, 1768. (No. 5.)
Boston, June 11, 1768. My LORD,
I AM sorry to inform your Lordship that a great Riot has happened in this Town
last Evening, which had very bad Consequences, though happily there were no Lives
lost. The Collector and Comptroller of this Port seized a Sloop for openly and
forcibly landing a Cargo of Wines without paying Duty, and by Means of
Assistance from the Romney Man of War secured her. Upon their Return Home they
were attacked by a Mob with Clubs, Stones and Brickbats; Mr. Harrison the
Collector was much bruised, particularly in the Breast, but kept his Legs so as
to escape through an Alley. Mr. Hallowell, the Comptroller, was knocked down and
left on the Ground covered with Blood. He has many Wounds and Bruises, but none
dangerous to Life. Mr. Harrison's Son, a young Gentleman not in any Office, who
accompanied his Father, was knocked down and dragged by the Hair of his Head,
and would have been killed, if he had not been got into a House by some
Standers by. In another Part of the Town Mr. Irvine, under the Board of
Commissioners, was attacked by another Mob, very much beat and abused, and
would probably have been killed if he had not been rescued by two of the Mob,
and enabled to escape through an House. This Gentleman was no Ways concerned in
the Seizure.

After this they went to Mr. Hallowell's House, and began to break the Windows
and force an Entry, but were diverted therefrom by Assurances that Mr.
Hallowell was almost killed, and was not at Home. They then went to Mr.
Harrison's and broke his Windows: but he not being at Home, and the Owner of
the House entreating them to depart they left it. Then they went to Mr.
Williams's House, one of the Inspectors general, who was then at a Distance
from Boston, and broke near an hundred Panes, and did other Damage to the
House, but upon Mrs. Williams appearing and assuring them, that he was absent,
and only she was at Home they departed. Happily they did not break into any
House, for if they had got at a Cellar, the Mischiefs would have been greater
and more extensive.

After this they went to a Wharf were lay a Pleasure Boat belonging to Mr.
Harrison, built by himself in a particular and elegant Manner. This they took
out of the Water, and carried it into the Common and burnt it. By this Time
there were about 500, some say, 1,000 Men gathered together whilst the Boat was
burning. Some Gentlemen, who had an influence over them, persuaded them to
depart: this was debated and put to the Vote, whereupon Proclamation was made,
"each Man to his Tent." Before this they were harangued by a Leader, who among
others, used these Words as they have been reported to me. "We will support our
Liberties, depending upon the strength of our own Arms and God." Whilst they
were upon the Common, they got some Rum, and attempted to get more: if they had
procured it in Quantity, God knows where this Fury would have ended. And now
the Terror of the Night is over, it is said to be only a Prelude to further
Mischeifs, the Threats against the Commmissioners and all the Officers of the
Board being renewed with as great Malice as ever.

This Morning I got the Council together as soon as I could, and laid this
Affair before them; after a long Altercation about what should be done, in
which appeared a Disposition to meddle with it as little as possible, it was
advised and ordered that such of the Council as were Justices of the Peace
should assist me in ascertaining the Facts by the Examination of Witnesses: and
Monday Morning at 9 o'Clock is appointed for proceeding upon this Business.
When this is done, I shall be able to give your Lordship a more full and
particular Account of this Affair. At present what I send is only the Heads of
it, which I dare say will not vary materially from the most authentic
Narrative. And I write this at present in Order to send it by the Post to
New York, to take the Chance of the Packet, which it will probably just hit the
Time of.

I am with great Respect, my Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient, and most
humble Servant, The Right Honorable FRA. BERNARD.

The Earl of Hillsborough.
P. S. June 13. This Morning early I received a Letter from the Commissioners,
informing me of some Particulars from whence they concluded that they were
immediately exposed to further Violences, and therefore they on Saturday
Evening took Sheltor on Board the Romney Man of War. That it being necessary to
provide for their further Security, they desire that their Families and
Officers may be received, accommodated and protected at the Castle, I
immediately answered this, by enclosing an Order to the Captain of the Castle
to receive them accordingly.

This Morning a Paper was found stuck upon Liberty-Tree, inviting all the Sons
of Liberty to meet at 6 o'-Clock, to clear the Land of the Vermin, which are
come to devour them, etc. etc. I have been in Council all this Morning to
consider of preventing an Insurrection To night; no Resolution has or will be
taken before I send away this. Perhaps the Commissioners retiring may assist
our Purposes.



A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Roxbury, near Boston, June 14, 1768.
Roxbury, near Boston, June 14, 1768. My LORD,
BY my Letter No. 5, I informed your Lordship of a Riot which happened on the
10th of June in the Evening, and that upon my laying the Matter before the
Council, they advised that such of the Board as were Justices of the Peace
should assist me to ascertain the Facts, after which the whole should be taken
into Consideration. I should have added, that there was then no Apprehension in
the Council that there would be a Repetition of these Violences, nor indeed did
any such immediate Danger appear to me whilst I staid in Boston which was till
Sunset, when I went to my Country House about 4 Miles from Boston.

The next Day being Sunday, I heard some loose Reports that there was to be
another Rising. Early in the Afternoon the Son of Mr. Harrison, the Collector,
came to me and said that his Father apprehended that his Life would be in
Danger if he staid in Boston, and desired I would give an Order that he should
be received at the Castle I accordingly gave him such an Order. The next
Morning being Monday the 13th, a little after 5 o'Clock, I received a Letter
from the Commissioners, which is mentioned in the P. S. of my last; a Copy of
which, together with my Answer, and my Order to the Commander of the Castle, I
herewith enclose; immediately after, I went to Town, and ordered the Council to
be summoned to meet at Nine o'Clock. Before I went to Council, the Sheriff came
to inform me that there was a most violent and virulent Paper stuck up upon
Liberty Tree, containing an Invitation to the Sons of Liberty to rise that
Night to clear the County of the Commissioners and their Officers, to avenge
themselves of the Officers of the Custom-House, one of which was by Name
devoted to Death; there were also some indecent Threats against the Governor,
if he did not procure the Release of the Sloop which was seized. Afternoon as I
came to the Townhouse where the Council Chamber is, I found several HandBills
which have been circulated round the Town, stuck up there; an exact Copy of
which follows.

BOSTON, June 13, 1768.
THE Sons of Liberty request all those who in this Time of Oppression and
Distraction, wish well to and would promote the Peace, good Order and Security
of the Town and Province; to assemble at Liberty-Hall under Liberty-Tree, on
Tuesday the 14th Instant, at Ten o'Clock Forenoon precisely.

When I got into the Council Chamber in the Morning after waiting for a full
Board, I told them that there was no Time to enquire of the Particulars of the
former Riot which was accidental, when we were immediately threatened with new
Disturbances premeditated; I therefore laid before them the Informations I had
received, and desired that they would take into Consideration the Necessity of
providing for the Peace of the Town, and the proper Means of doing it: But
notwithstanding all, I could not bring them to any Conclusion, or even to state
a Question. All that was done in the Morning was to censure an Expression in
the Commissioners Letter, which obliged me to write the Letter the second of
that Date. About One o'Clock they desired me to adjourn the Council 'till 4
o'Clock in the Afternoon, that in the mean Time they might inform themselves of
the Probability of new Disturbances arising.

In the Afternoon the Printed Paper was laid before the Council; but it was not
considered as an Implication of Danger; neither was the Impropriety of the Sons
of Liberty appointing a Meeting to secure the Peace of the Town, when the
Governor and Council were sitting upon that Business and seemingly to little
Purpose, taken much Notice of. I laid before them the Letter of the
Commissioners of that Day; but a Disposition to censure it rather than to
answer it appearing I postponed the Consideration of that Letter 'till after
the Determination of the main Question. Fresh Attempts were made to get rid of
the Business, and it was again proposed, as it had been in the Morning, that I
should lay the Business before the General Court by a Message to both Houses. I
called for the Journal of the House, and showed them that when I pursued this
Method (upon the Stamp Act Riots) with the Advice of the Council, I was told by
the House that it was the Business of the Executive Government to quell Riots,
and the Legislature had no Right to interpose, unless new Laws were wanted.
That there was as much Reason for them to give the same Answer now; and I did
not care to receive it twice. But the Bias still running this Way, I was
obliged to give it up, and leave it to the Council to raise a Committee of both
Houses to consider of this Business, although I had many Objections to this
Measure: But I could not help myself.

In the Course of these Debates, I told them that if this had been the first
Business of the Kind, I should have asked their Advice, Whether I should not
send to the General for Troops? But having tried it at a Time when there was at
least as much Danger as now, and found them utterly averse to it, let the
Danger be ever so great and imminent, it would be in vain to repeat the
Question; however, I was ready to do it, if any one Gentleman would propose it.
I was answered, that they did not desire to be knocked on the Head: I said that
I did not desire that they or I should; but I was ready to take my Share of the
Danger if they would join with me, though I could not alone in so unpopular a
Measure, for if I did, I must quit the Government at least for the present: I
added, that though I was well assured, that if I put this Question every
Gentleman would answer in the Negative, yet I doubted not but every one would
be glad to see the Peace of the Town restored by this Method, if it should
appear to be the only one left. No Answer was given.

By the removing this Business into the General Court, it is taken out of my
Hands any further than the final Consent or Dissent to what shall be sent up to
me. It is not with my Approbation, nor entirely to my Dissatisfaction; for as I
cannot conduct the Business as it ought to be, it may be best for me to have
little Hand in it.

I am, etc. FRA. BERNARD.

To the Right Honorable The Earl of Hillsborough
P. S. As I have not been able to proceed in the Enquiry, I here enclose Copies
of the Depositions taken by the Commissioners. The Meeting of the Sons of
Liberty in my next.



VIII.
A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Boston, June 16 and 18, 1768.
Boston, June 16, 1768, My LORD,
I Come now to give your Lordship an Account of the Meeting at Liberty-Tree in
Pursuance of the printed Notice, a Copy of which I inserted in my last. Your
Lordship must know that Liberty-Tree is a large Old Elm in the High Street,
upon which the Effigies were hung in the Time of the Stamp Act, and from whence
the Mobs at that Time made their Parades. It had since been adorned with an
Inscription, and has obtained the Name of Liberty-Tree, as the Ground under it
has that of Liberty-Hall. In August last, just, before the Commencement of the
present Troubles, they erected a Flag-Staff, which went through the Tree, and a
good deal above the Top of the Tree. Upon this they hoist a Flag as a Signal
for the Sons of Liberty, as they are called; I gave my Lord Shelburne an
Account of this Erection at the Time it was made. This Tree has often put me in
Mind of Jack Cade's Oak of Reformation.

Upon this Staff the Flag was flying early in the Morning on Tuesday; at the
Time appointed there were assembled they say at least 4,000 Men, many having
come out of the Country for that Purpose; some of the principal Gentleman of
the Town attended in order to engage the lower People to concur in Measures for
Peace and Quiet. One of the Select-Men was chosen Moderator or Chairman, when
it was found that they could not do Business there, they adjourned to the
Town Hall. Here it was objected that they were not a legal Meeting; to obviate
this, they adjourned to the Afternoon, that in the mean Time the Select-Men
might call a Town-Meeting to legalise the Assembly.

In the Afternoon they met in a large Meeting House, the Town Hall being not
large enough for the Company, and Mr. Otis was chosen Moderator. Many wild and
violent Proposals were made, but warded off. Among these were, that every
Captain of a Man of War that came into this Harbor, should be under the
Command of the General Court: Another was, that if any Person should promote or
assist the bringing troops here, he should be deemed a Disturber of the Peace,
and a Traitor to his Country, but nothing was done finally but to pass a
Petition to the Governor, and to appoint a Committee of 21 Persons to Resort to
his Country House (where I then was) and present it to him; and to appoint a
Committee to prepare Instructions for their Representatives, and a Letter to
Mr. DeBerdt, as their Agent, after which they Adjourned to the next Day.

The same Evening the Committee which was in general very respectable, attended
me in a Train of 11 Chaises: I received them with all possible Civility, and
having heard their Petition, I talked very freely with them upon the Subject,
but postponed giving a formal Answer till the next Day, as it should be in
Writing. I then had Wine handed round, and they left me highly pleased with
their reception, especially that part of them which had not been used to an
Interview with me. The next Day Mr. Otis having received my Answer in Writing,
reported the whole, took Notice of the polite Treatment they had received from
me, and concluded that he really believed that I was a well wisher to the
Province: this from him was uncommon and extraordinary. The Answer was
universally approved, so that just at this Time I am popular: Whenever my Duty
obliges me to do any Thing which they don't like, there is an end of my
popularity, and therefore I do not expect to enjoy it a Week. I should here
mention that I am not sure that the Appointment of the Committee for preparing
Instructions, etc. which I have mentioned to have been done on the first Day,
was not on the second, but it is not material. They then Adjourned to Friday
next in the Afternoon. There was but one Thing mentioned in the Petition that I
could do: And that I had promised the Select Men 2 Days before that I would do:
this was to settle with Capt. Corner, Commander of the Romney, a Regulation for
impressing Men, so that it might not hurt the Town. And this I had settled long
before; only there happened to be one single Breach of it by an inferior
Officer against his Orders. And indeed the Mob of the Town had lately used him
and his Officers so very ill, that he was disengaged from any Promise he had
made, if he had desired it. I accordingly went on Board the Romney, attended by
three of the Council, and had a full Conference with the Captain, in which he
acted with the utmost Candor and good Nature, and after recapitulating the
Injuries he and his Officers had received, renewed the Engagement concerning
pressing, and professed a Desire of making that Service agreeable to the Town.
In the Afternoon I went to the Council, and having sent for the Select Men, I
reported to them what had passed with the Captain, and after having shown them
how much it was the Interest of the Town to cultivate a good Understanding with
the Commanders of the King's Ships, I exhorted them to use their Influence over
the Common People, so as to dispose them to treat the Captain, his Officers and
Men, in such a Manner as might procure his favor, at least avert his
Resentment: And one of the Gentlemen who accompanied me, engaged to attend the
Town Meeting and Report what had passed at this Interview as of his own Accord,
it being not thought proper that the Governor and Council should appear to have
any Correspondence with a Meeting so originated and composed as this was.

June 18 th, 1768.

I am able now to proceed in my Narrative of the Town Meeting. Yesterday in the
Afternoon they met according to their Adjournment. The Gentleman of the Council
who had engaged to report our proceedings with Capt. Corner, did it in such a
manner as gave great Satisfaction both in regard to me and the Captain. But no
Message was voted either to me or Captain Corner; to me it was needless, but to
him requisite, as they have in a manner interdicted him and his Officers of the
Town. All they did was to instruct their Representatives; the only Instruction
I hear of is, to enquire if any Persons have been Writing for the King's Ships
or Troops to come here, and who? that they might be distinguished as Enemies to
their Country. They broke up quietly, and there is an End of the Meeting.

The Commissioners and their Families, and Officers are still on Board the
Romney, where they proceed in their Business. The Town will not hear of their
return to Boston; and it is much better that they should not until the Question
is determined. I hear that they are to fix their Residence at the Castle next
Monday. The Romney is fell down and now ^^es off the Castle toward the Town;
there is a Sloop (...) of 16 Guns just come in, which being stationed (...) the
other side the Castle, will complete the command of all the approaches to the
Castle, there are also other Ships of War expected in, so that the retreat of
the Commissioners has been very timely and very well circumstanced, and their
security is now effectually provided for. Your Lordship may wonder at my
dwelling upon this: but if there is not a Revolt, the Leaders of the Sons of
Liberty must falsify their Words, and change their Purposes. For my Part, when
I consider the defenseless State of this Town, I cannot think they will be so
mad as to attempt to defend it against the King's Forces: But the Lengths they
have gone already are scarce short of Madness. I send you Copies of Papers
stuck upon the Townhouse, they may be the Works of a few Individuals.

I am, etc. FRA. BERNARD.

The Right Honorable The Earl of Hillsborough.
P. S. June 18.

The Instructions of their Representatives which passed at the Town-Meeting
Yesterday, have this Morning produced a Vote in the House of Representatives to
the Purpose following.

Ordered, That Mr. Speaker, Mr. Otis, etc. with such as the honorable Board
shall join, be a Committee to enquire into the Grounds and Reasons of the
present Apprehension of the People, that Measures have been taken, or are now
taking for the Execution of the late Revenue Acts of Parliament, by a Naval or
Military Force: In which the Council have joined. I will endeavor to get a
Copy of the Instructions before I seal this.



A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Boston, 17th June, 1768.
My LORD, Boston, June 17 th, 1768.
I HAVE the Honor to receive your Lordship's Letters No. 6 and 7, together with
the Duplicates, etc. enclosed in the Cover of the first. Upon the Receipt of
them I consulted the Lieutenant Governor and the Secretary about the best
Manner of excepting the Orders contained in No. 7, and we all agreed that it
would be best to stay till the Town-Meetings, continued by Adjournments, were
over, and the People a little composed. I therefore shall not be able to
communicate to the House his Majesty's Requisition until Tuesday or Wednesday
next, according as the House fills, there being always a thin House on Saturday
and Monday.

I cannot foresee what will be done upon this Occasion, whether Prudence will
get the better of Faction, or not, I know not how to hope that they will
comply; if they do not your Lordship may depend upon it I will obey my Orders.
It happens very lucky that I am at present seen in a very favorable Light by
the People, and that may prevent my being charged as the Author or Adviser of
this Measure, as at other Times I should certainly be. I have lately caused it
to be hinted that the Faction is likely to have Disputes eno' upon their Hands
without quarrelling with me; and therefore they had best reserve me for a
Mediator, as they will certainly want one: I believe some of them have listened
to this.

However, I shall not put too great Confidence in them: I shall act with all
proper Caution; and if I find myself obliged to Dissolve the Assembly, I shall
end the Session by Prorogation, and Dissolve them by Proclamation. By these
Means the Shock will become gradual; and I shall be able to step out of the Way
'till the Wonder is over. Indeed I intended when this Session was over, to take
a little Relaxation; as I find the Multiplicity of Business of late, and the
Attention which the Importance of it has obliged me to give to it, has impaired
my Health.

I am with great Respect, my Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient and most
humble Servant, The Right Honorable FRA. BERNARD.

The Earl of Hillsborough.
A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated 25th
and 28th June, and 1st July 1768.
My LORD, Boston, June 25 th, 1768.
BY my Letter No. 8, I informed your Lordship of the Reasons why I deferred
communicating his Majesty's Requisition to the House unto Tuesday following,
being the 21st Instant. On that Day in the Forenoon I sent a Message to the
House, a Copy of which I enclose, together with a Copy of the 2d, 3d and 4th
Paragraphs of your Lordship's Letter. I did not send a Copy of the 5th and 6th
Paragraphs, because I knew that the Faction would make use of them to insinuate
that the House was treated with Threats and Menaces in the first Instance,
before their Minds were known, and were not allowed Freedom of Debate
concerning what was required of them; if I had sent no Extracts at all, but
incorporated the Substance of your Lordship's Letter into my Message, they then
would have called for the Letter itself, and not proceeded till I had given a
Copy of it. As it was, I steered this Business in the right Way.

In the Afternoon when the Messages, etc. were read a second Time, -- made a
Speech near two Hours long, of the most violent and virulent Nature. He abused
all Persons in Authority both here and at Home; he indeed excepted the King's
Person, but traduced his Government with all the Bitterness of Words. He said
that the King appointed none but Boys for his Ministers; that they had no
Education but traveling through France, from whence they returned full of the
slavish Principles of that Country; that they knew nothing of Business when
they came into their Offices, and did not stay long enough in them to acquire
that little Knowledge which is gained from Experience; that all Business was
really done by the Clerks, and even they were too frequently changed to
understand what they were about; that the People in England did not know what
the Rights of Englishmen were; that there was not a Person in England capable
of composing so elegant, so pure, and so nervous a Writing as the Petition to
the King which passed the last Session, etc.

I give your Lordship a Specimen of this Rhapsody; and it was remarked that in
his general Censure of the Administration of the King's Government, no
Exception was made of the Ministers who favored America by the Repeal of the
Stamp Act, and by other Indulgencies, by the Abuse whereof this very Faction
has rose to this Head: all were involved in one common Obloquy. I quote these
Sayings from the Months of those who heard them delivered in the House, which
was laid quite open, both Doors and Gallery upon this Occasion, but neither
they nor I can pretend to Exactness of Words, but the Substance. I dare say,
does not vary materially. In another Part of his Speech, he passed an Encomium
on Oliver Cromwell, and extolled the Times preceding his Advancement, and
particularly the Murder of the King. The Result was the appointing a Committee
to take the Message, etc. into Consideration, which Committee consisted
entirely of the most violent of the Heads of the Faction, viz. the
Representatives of the Town of Boston, and three of those whom I had resisted
to admit into the Council upon Account of their (...) by their somenting the
Troubles of the Government, with two others: thus the House seemed to prejudge
this Business in the Appointment of the Committee; and indeed the Appointment
of a Committee at all showed a Disposition rather to agree than submit.

On Thursday Morning June 23d, upon an Application from the Committee, a
Message was sent to me desiring Copies of my Instructions upon this Occasion,
II.
of your Lordship's Letter (of which I had given an Extract) and of a Letter of
your Lordship's No. 6, which I had communicated to the Council, and Copies of
my Letters to your Lordship upon the Subject. The next Morning (June 24) I
returned an Answer with a Copy of the 5th and 6th Paragraphs of the Letter, III.
which concluded the whole. In my Answer I caution them to provide for the Tax
Bill; I had a Hint given me that they intended to omit that Business, on
Purpose to oblige me, in Case I dissolved this Assembly, by popular Clamor and
real Inconvenience, to call another Assembly immediately after, which I by no
Means think proper, nor myself to be at Liberty so to do. I therefore thought
proper to counterwork this Intention.

June 28.

SINCE the former Date I have been obliged to keep Watch upon the Proceedings
of the House, having been told that the very Reverse of disavowing the
Proceedings of the late House is preparing. They have been much elated within
these 3 or 4 Days by some Letters they have received in Answer to the circular
Letter. I shall enclose printed Copies of what have been published in the
Papers here. I am told that there is also a circular Letter from the Assembly
of Virginia arrived; I had it from a Gentleman who said he saw it at
Rhode Island. If it is other than the Letter from Virginia now published, they
keep it secret here, but I shall soon have a Copy of it. I keep a Look-out in
the House, that if upon the Report of the Committee they should move for
another Congress (as -- in his Speech said, he hoped would soon take Place) or
another circular Letter, or any Thing that contravenes his Majesty's
Requisition, I shall immediately put a Stop to their Proceedings without
waiting for an Answer in Form. For which purpose to bring this Matter to a
Crisis as soon as may be, after having watched their Motions all this Morning.
I put a Message in the Secretary's Hands to be delivered to them this
Afternoon, IV.
as in the enclosed Copy.

July 1.

On the next Day, V.
June 29* the House sent me a Message, desiring me to grant them a Recess, that
they might consult their Constituents respecting the Requisition. I knew that
such an Indulgence would be liable to great Abuse; but if I had thought it
could have produced any good Effect, which I had not any Reason to expect, I
did not think myself at Liberty to postpone the Consideration of this important
Question. I therefore returned an immediate Answer, VI.
that I could not consistently, with my Sense of my Duty, prorogue or adjourn
the Court until I had received an Answer.

The next Morning I went early to the Council to watch the Proceedings of the
House, having been informed that they intended to originate an Invitation for
another Congress: in which Case the Moment I got Intelligence of it, intended
to Dissolve them. The House kept themselves locked up all the Morning, the best
Part of which was spent in preparing a Letter to your Lordship, which I am told
is very lengthy; but as I have not seen it, and probably shall not be allowed a
Sight of it 'till it is printed in the Newspapers, I will say no more of it
than that I am told that it is in the old Strain, complaining that they have
been misrepresented; though the present Censure arises from an Act of theirs,
which they have had circulated throughout his Majesty's Dominions. They then
put the Question, "Rescind or not Rescind," which was determined in the
Negative, 91 to 17: Among the Majority were many Members who were scarce ever
known upon any other Occasion to vote against the Government-side of a
Question, so greatly has Infatuation and Intimidation gained ground. They then
settled the Answer to be given to me, and appointed a Committee to deliver it.
After this, a Motion was made to appoint a Committee to prepare an Address to
his Majesty, to desire him to remove the Governor, and appoint another more
agreeable to the People: This was carried by a Majority of 5, and with this
ended the Business of the Morning.

I had some Doubts with myself, whether I ought not to dismiss the Assembly,
immediately after I knew for certain that the House had passed a Vote against
Rescinding. But upon a little Recollection, I thought it best to wait 'till
received their Answer, as I was not obliged to take Notice of this Vote, 'till
it was notified to me in Form. In this I was influenced by a Consideration
respecting myself: The House had appointed a Committee to prepare an Address to
get me removed: If I had dismissed them in a hasty unformal Way, whilst this
Business was on the Carpet, it would have been said that I was afraid of the
Enquiry. Whereas this is the third Time the Faction has moved to impeach me;
the two former Times they had been obliged to give it up for want of Materials;
and I was sure that they had acquired none since their last Attempt of this
Kind. And this Motion ended in the same Manner as the two former; after having
endeavored for two Hours together in the Afternoon to cook up something to
found this Application on, and finding that I would not interrupt them in it,
as I believe they expected and desired that I should, they were obliged to give
it up themselves. VII.
Upon this the Answer which had all this while been detained, was sent up to
the Council Chamber, where I received it. Immediately after which I sent up for
the House, and Prorogued the General Court, intending to Dissolve it by
Proclamation.

Upon this Occasion there happened a Fracas in the Council sudden and
unforeseen, but what probably will be improved by the Faction for their own
Purposes. It seems that the Evening before the Council had appointed a
Committee to consider the State of the Province; which Committee had prepared
an Address to his Majesty concerning the late Duties, to be reported to the
Board. I had all along declared that I should dismiss the General Court
immediately upon receiving the Answer from the House; I knew nothing of any
Business being undone, not being acquainted with this; I had ordered the
Secretary to prepare for the Prorogation by laying the Acts which had passed
that Session on the Table, their Titles being to be read in the Presence of the
whole Court as has been my Usage; and the Acts were accordingly laid in Order.
Whilst I was thus waiting to receive the Answer of the House, the Committee of
the Board introduced this Address: I testified my Surprise upon the Occasion,
and observed that they could not expect to go through that Businness at that
Time. Presently after the Committee from the House attended; they were admitted
and delivered their Answer. As soon as that was done, I ordered the Secretary
to call up the House; as soon as the House entered, one of the Committee of the
Council expostulated with me upon my calling up the House whilst the Council
was proceeding on the Address, and was so indecent as to appeal to the House. I
silenced him: Another Gentleman interposed; I stopped him also, and proceeded to
the Prorogation.

When the House was gone out of the Council Chamber, I expostulated with these
Gentlemen upon the Interruption they had given me, in the Presence of the
House, in executing his Majesty's positive Commands. I told them that I should
have thought myself blameable, if I had suffered 5 Minutes to intervene between
receiving the Answer and dismissing the House; for I should have made myself
answerable for all they did in the Interval. This Proceeding could not be
justified and was really condemned by some other of the Council, and was in
some Measure apologized for; but it will not be in the Power of the Apologizers
to prevent an ill Use being made of it. I then informed the Council that I had
no Desire to stop any Representation which they wanted to make to the King, if
it was conceived in decent and respectful Terms, as it seemed to me, from
hearing it read, this was. I therefore would let them introduce this into the
privy Council; and if it appeared to be inoffensive, I would lay it before his
Majesty, though I should not agree with them in Opinion as to all their
Assertions, as I pointed out some, where I should not. But this was not enough:
It seems that when the Address was past, there was a Petition to the House of
Lords, and another to the House of Commons to be bro't in. I told them I could
have nothing to do with them; I could not pretend to commnnicate with those
great Bodies; my Correspondence went no higher than his Majesty's Ministers.
After some Altercation, they submitted to this, and were content with the
Address being brought into the privy Council, after it had received my
Approbation. This compromise was very expedient to obviate the
Misrepresentations, which this Business would otherwise be subject to.

Having carried my Narrative to this Length, I must suspend my Reflections upon
these Events unto a farther Opportunity. I will however here observe that it
may be suggested that I have not conducted this Business with Spirit; but it
must be observed to what a Weakness this Government is reduced, which makes the
most gentle Way of doing any Business the most advisable. I never intended to
depart from his Majesty's Orders in the least; but upon many Accounts I thought
it best to dissolve by Proclamation; and such Proclamation is already signed,
and bears Date the Day after the Prorogation. It was said, that it was well
that I dismissed them by Prorogation, and not by Dissolution; why, I don't
know: But if any Triumph arises from it, it will be but short-lived; for the
Dissolution will be published in the Papers at the same Time with the
Prorogation.

I am, etc. FRA. BERNARD.
A true Copy,

John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.



Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Boston, June 30th, 1768.
Boston, July 30, 1768. My LORD,
SINCE the first beginning of the Troubles of this Town to the present Time, I
have frequently represented to your Lordship's Office the Impracticability of
my applying for Troops, either for the Support of the Authority of the
Government, or the Power of the Magistracy; both of which have been continually
insulted and made contemptible for near three years past. The great Difficulty,
which has attended this Measure, has been, that I could by no Means get the
Council to advise or concur in it, and neither by the due Consideration of my
Instructions and the Rules of other Governments, nor by the Forms of this
Government, where the Governor is more connected with, and restrained by the
Council, than in the Governments which are merely royal, did I think myself
authorized to introduce Troops into a Town not used to them, upon my own
Opinion only, and contrary to that of the Council, who I am directed to consult
and advise with in all Matters of Importance. And I have never imagined, that
it would be expected of me that I should separate myself from the Council upon
this Occasion, and make myself solely answerable for the Consequences of the
introducing Troops here, or the not introducing them, especially as I have
always understood that, since the Repeal of the Stamp Act, the Intention of the
Administration was, that all Appearance of forcible and compulsive Measures
should be avoided; and as I have constantly sent Home Accounts of all
Occurrences which could Influence this Question. I have concluded that a Change
of Measures must originate at Westminster, and that the first Orders for
quartering Troops at Boston would come from thence.

In my Letter to the Earl of Shelburne, No. 8, of this Year, Par. (...), I
treat this Subject particularly as it relates to the Commissioners of the
Customs. In my Letter to your Lordship, No. 6, which gives an Account of the
Riot on June 10th, and the Commissioners leaving the Town. I inform of what
passed between me and the Council concerning sending for Troops, from which it
will appear to what little Purpose it is to put a Question upon that Subject to
the Council. However, this Business is now brought to such a Crisis, that I
could no longer avoid putting such Question in Form: It has become necessary to
my own Justification, and acquitting me of the Consequences, if any Bad should
arise of this Town remaining destitute of Troops, and to give an Account of
this Transaction is the Business of this Letter.

On the 2d of July I received a Letter from General Gage, with two Packets for
Col. Dalrymple at Halifax enclosed, informing me that he had received an
Account of the Tumults at Boston, and had sent an Order to the Commanding
Officer at Halifax for Troops, if they were wanted at Boston. I sent both
Letters away, and wrote to General Gage, setting forth the Reasons why I could
not apply for Troops, but that I had sent the Letters forward; for tho 'I
thought it improper for me to require Troops, it was full as improper for me to
prevent their coming if they were otherwise ordered. In Answer to this the
General has sent me a Copy of the Letter to Col. Dalrymple, by which I am
informed that the Orders to him are only to collect the Troops together, but
not to embark them till they are required by me. I have thereupon wrote to the
General, that if the Troops are not to move from Halifax till I require them,
they are like to continue there. For I cannot think it proper for me to make
such a Requisition, without the Advice of Council, and there was no Probability
of my obtaining such Advice; however, I would lay it before the Council. I have
been less explicit on these Letters, as I shall enclose Copies of them.

On Saturday July 23d I held a Council, where having in Part opened the Matters
I had for their Consideration, they advised, that in Regard to the Importance
of the Business I would order all of the Council who lived within a Days
Journey of Boston, to be summoned to meet on the Wednesday following, and the
Council to be adjourned till then. On Wednesday the 27th there were fourteen
met; and we proceeded to Business that Day and Friday following. As the Minutes
of the Council are extended more than ordinarily, they will be sufficient to
explain, what was done: There was some Altercation that was scarce worth
remembering, but I am obliged to take Notice that I observed with convern, that
the popular Spirit upon this Occasion showed itself higher in the Council than
I had known it heretofore, and my endeavoring to moderate it, subjected me to
Treatment different from what I have been used of late to receive from that
Board. But these Considerations are more proper for another Time and Place.

I shall inform General Gage of the Result of this Council, by which all
Expectation of Troops coming to Boston until Orders arrive from England is
over. Perhaps if no great Mischief is done in the mean Time it may be much
better for them to be ordered from England than to be brought here by the Order
or Requisition of any one in America, as they will be introduced in a Manner
much more authoritative. For my Part, I have acted herein for the best,
according to my Judgment. I could not require Troops against the Opinion of the
Council, without making myself an Object of popular Resentment, which would
probably, if it had produced no worse Effects, have obliged me to quit the
Government. Now, my Lord, as I have no Leave of Absence to justify my
Departure, I must have stayed till I was drove out by Force or apparent Danger.
And if such an Event had happened, how could I have justified myself in doing
an Act with a Doubt of the Regularity of it, and a Foresight of it is ill
Consequences, which should produce such a Convulsion in the State as obliging a
Governor to quit his Post?

I am with great Respect, my Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient and most
humble Servant, FRA. BERNARD.
P. S. Your Lordship will observe that in the Answer of the Council there is
nothing proposed or provided for the Return of the Commissioners to Boston, and
their Protection in the Execution of their Office there. It seemed to be the
general Opinion, that it was quite Impracticable for them to return, and be
protected in the Execution of their Office. One Gentleman said, that he was
convinced, that they never would return to Boston and resume their Functions,
and gave for Reason, that Great Britain had too much employment at Home to
keep* her own unruly People in Order, and ballancing the Parties which harrast
the Government and weakened the Administration, to think of meddling with
America, or endeavoring to enforce the Execution of an Act of Parliament,
which the Americans had declared against.



A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Extract of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Boston, 9th July, 1768.
I Gave your Lordship a full account of the issue of the proceedings upon His
Majesty's requisition, together with Copies of all Papers relating thereto. I
sent the original by a returned Express to General Gage, to be forwarded by the
Packet. The Duplicates I put into the hands of Capt. Smith, of the Brig --,
which sailed last Monday for Glasgow. As there are other Ships now preparing to
sail, I shall enclose some printed Copies of the Papers from the Newspapers,
some of which may come to your Lordship's hands before either of my Letters.
From these your Lordship will see that I dismissed the General Court by
Prorogation, and Dissolved them the next Day by Proclamation. This form of
Proceeding* though immaterial in the Effect, made this Business pass more easily
than I expected.

The Sons of Liberty keep up their Spirits still: on Tuesday Evening last past,
a number of them between 50 and 60, went out of Boston at the close of the Day,
and having divided themselves into two Parties, met on each side of an House in
Roxbury, about three Miles from Boston, which Mr. Robinson, one of the
Commissioners of the Customs has lately hired, with an intention, as is
supposed from the Manoevre they practiced, to surprise him there and prevent
his escape. But he being at the Castle, where he had resided since the
Commissioners have been driven thither for safety, they did nothing but plunder
his Fruit Trees, and break off the Branches thereof, and break down some of the
Fences, and trample down the Garden, and did not, that I can learn, break into
the House. After this, about Midnight, they went back to Boston in a Body
huzzaing all the Way. This is called a Frolic of a few Boys to Eat some
Cherries.

Last Night about 30 Men came on Board a Schooner lying at a Wharf, which had
been seized for having Thirty Hogsheads of uncustomed Molasses on Board, and
was then in the Custody of two Custom-House Officers, and having confined the
two Officers to the Cabin, carried off all the Molasses. When the Sloop was
seized which occasioned the Riot in which the Custom-house Officers were ill
treated, and in Consequence of which the Commissioners of the Customs were
obliged to leave the Town, the greatest part of the Resentment was expressed
against carrying the Sloop from the Wharf and putting her under the Care of the
Man of War. This, they said, was an affront to the Town, as it contained an
insinuation that the Sloop would not have been safe if it had been left at the
Wharf in the Custody of a Custom-House Officer. Therefore when this Schooner
was seized, it was left at the Wharf under no other guard but 2 Custom-House
Officers. It would have been very easily secured by laying it in the Stream,
and putting a Guard on Board, either from the Romney or the Castle; but I
suppose it was though it best to try the Experiment. As every Seizure made or
attempted to be made on Land at Boston, for three Years past, before these two
Instances, has been violently rescued or prevented, it was easy to see what
would be the Event of this, and I foretold it was certain. However, the
Experiment has been made.

I have not received any Request from the Commissioners upon this Occasion, nor
do I expect it: for they know I can do nothing. Your Lordship has observed in
my Letters No. 5 and 6, that I consulted the Council upon the great Riot on
June 10th, and after having, upon repeated Adjournments, endeavored to bring
them to some Resolution, the whole Business was avoided by referring it to the
General Court. After this a Committee of both Houses was appointed under the
specious Title "To take the State of the Province into Consideration," when
after several Meetings, as the two Bodies had different Purposes to serve, they
could come to no Conclusion. And so this Matter rests: And I have no Desire to
revive it again; as, in the present State of Things, the Advice of the Council
will be timid, and the Executive Power of the Governor is perfectly impotent.

In Regard to the Answer of the House, so far as it relates to me, I will make
but one Observation upon it: It is Felo de se of its own Purport; it pretends
to be the Voice of the People, and gives Evidence itself that is the Voice of a
Faction. It charges the Governor with misrepresenting the Generality of the
People, by asserting that the blameable Conduct of the House is to be imputed
to a Faction prevailing there, and not to the People in general. Now if this is
not true* all the Injury the Governor has done the People, is by setting them
in a more favorable Light than they deserved and therefore if the People wore
to take Notice of it, there would be no Occasion for Passion or Resentment. But
it is otherwise with the Faction: if they are charged with more than belongs to
them, it is natural that they should resent it: and therefore Passion, Malice
and Abuse become them, and are suitable to their Character and the Occasion.
From this Criterion, one may safely pronounce that this Answer is the violent
Overflowing of a Faction, and not the cool Voice of a People. And yet my Lord,
I do not intend to give up my Opinion of the Faction or the People,
notwithstanding the high Pitch to which the Wickedness of the former has raised
the Inflammation and Infatuation of a great Part of the latter.

I have been under some Concern for the Safety of the Castle since the
Commissioners retired thither, not upon Account of any Intelligence I had of an
Intention to attack it, (for that at most amounted but to idle Rumors) as from
a Consideration of the Weakness of the Garrison, and the Ease with which it
might be surprised. But I am relieved in this by the Care of Commodore Hood,
who has so well supplied us with Naval Force, that there are now about the
Castle one Fifty Gun Ship, two Sloops of 16 Guns, and two Cutters armed with
Swivel Guns; so that I am under no Concern for that Place. Besides I have
lately received by Express from General Gage some Dispatches for Colonel
Dalrymple at Halifax, which I forwarded by one of the King's Cutters, and I am
mistaken if there is not among them an Order for at least one Regiment to come
here; although General Gage, who knows my Situation, where Death is publicly
denounced against those who are concerned in bringing Troops here, is so kind
as to conceal the Contents of the Dispatches from Me. One Regiment will secure
the Castle, but will not be sufficient to awe the Town. This very Morning the
Select Men of the Town ordered the Magazine of Arms belonging to the Town to be
brought out to be cleaned, when they were exposed for some Hours at the
Townhouse. They were expostulated with for this imprudent act; they excused
themselves by saying, that those Arms were ordered to be cleaned two Months
ago. I have been much pressed to go to the Castle, when Troops shall arrive
here. I do not choose to show a want of Resolution as I don't feel the firmness
of my Mind to fail, but I shall not unnecessarily expose myself to Danger where
I can foresee it. A short time will determine whether Boston is to be subject
to Great Britain or not, if the Intention to dispute it is any Thing more than
Talk.

I am, etc. FRA. BERNARD.
A true Copy,

John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.



Copy of the Supplement to a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of
Hillsborough, dated Boston, July 9, 1768.
My LORD, Boston, July 11, 1768.
I FIND myself obliged to add a Supplement to my Letter No. 10. which I sent
away Today, by a Brig for Liverpool, the Duplicate whereof will be enclosed
with this. I had there informed your Lordship that 30 Hogsheads of Molasses
which had been seized for illicit Trade, together with the Schooner it was in,
had been taken from thence out of the Custody of the Custom-house Officers who
had the Care of it. This very Molasses was on the next Day returned and put on
Board the Schooner again. The Account I have of this Affair is this: The People
of the Town were dissatisfied, that the Assurances which they had made, that
the Sloop which had been seized before this, and put in the Custody of the Man
of War, would have been safe if she had been left at the Wharf in the Care of a
Custom-House Officer, should be so soon falsified. The Selectmen of the Town
therefore sent for the Master of this Schooner, and upon his denying that he
knew any Thing of the Molasses, told him that would not pass: For Nobody would
take away his Molasses without his Privity; they thereupon ordered him to
return the Molasses directly, under Pain of the Displeasure of the Town; which
was immediately done. I dare say, neither the Custom-house Officers, nor the
Judge of the Admiralty, nor the Chief Justice, nor the Governor, could have
prevailed upon any one to run the Risk of informing where this Molasses was
conveyed, or to assist in recovering it, if it had been against the Houmour of
the People. But to serve a Purpose of the People, the Select-Men in a summary
Way can do this Business in a Trice. So we are not without a Government, only
it is in the Hands of the People of the Town, and not of those deputed by the
King or under his Authority.

I am, etc. FRA. BERNARD.
The Letter to your Lordship is not Printed in this Day's Paper as was
expected. I enclose a Letter from Maryland, which gives great Pleasure to the
Faction.



A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough dated
Boston, July 16th, 1768.
My LORD, Boston, July 16, 1768.
BY My Letter, No. 9, I informed your Lordship that at the Time I dismissed the
Assembly, the Council was beginning to proceed upon a Petition to his Majesty,
which Proceeding was interrupted by the Prorogation of the General Court* and
that to take away all Pretense to charge me with intending to stop any
Representation which they wanted to make to the King, I gave them Leave to
proceed in this Business in the privy Council; and if the Petition was
conceived in decent and respectful Terms, I promised to submit the same to be
laid before his Majesty, although I should not entirely agree with them upon the
Subject Matter.

I have now the Honor to transmit the Petition enclosed to your Lordship, and
desire the favor that you would be pleased to lay the same before His Majesty
for His most gracious Consideration. I am not a Party in it, nor could I think
it proper that I should be: and therefore this Address is not quite regular in
Point of Form. But your Lordship will consider the Circumstances
beforementioned, that it originated in the Legislative Council, although it was
not completed there, and will receive it as an Act of that Body to which the
Concurrence of the Governor is not necessary.

Your Lordship will observe that I am desired to recommend the Prayer of the
Petition. I have been always tender in expressing my Disapprobation of Acts of
Parliament, and was so especially in a Case where I thought the Act had better
have been spared. But I can readily recommend that Part of the Petition which
prays Relief against such Acts as are made for the Purpose of drawing a Revenue
from the Colonies. For they are so little able to bear the drawing Money from
them, that they are unable at present to pay the whole Charge of their Support
and Protection.

I am, with great Respect, my Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient and most
humble Servant, The Right Honorable FRA. BERNARD.

The Earl of Hillsborough.
A true Copy,

John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.



Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Boston, July 18th, 1768.
My LORD, Boston July18 th, 1768.
I HAVE now an Opportunity of sending your Lordship a printed Copy of the
Letter of the House to your Lordship; the Dispute concerning publishing it
having only delayed it for a Week. As it is professedly intended for the People
more than for your Lordship, so it is accompanied with Comments much more
calculated to prepare the People to resent the Disallowance of their
Pretensions than to induce your Lordship to endeavor to procure an Allowance
of them.

I never saw this Letter 'till it was in print: I find nothing in it that
requires my Answer. I am abused upon a Supposition of my having misrepresented
them in the Business of the circular Letter: I have looked over my Letters upon
this Subject, and find nothing in them which is not admitted in the Letter to
your Lordship. I never said that there was a thiner House when the Circular
Letter passed than when it was rejected. I said that the Way was prepared for
this second Vote by tampering with and influencing Particulars; this was as
notorious as that there was a House. There was another Reason for this
contradictory Vote, which I did not assign, that although the Number of the
House was the same, yet it consisted of many different Persons, which as the
Number was less than two Thirds of the whole, and there was a Fortnight
intervening between the two Votes, may be easily conceived. The highest Charge
against them, the erasing the Journals of the House to serve this Purpose, they
admit: this surely is a very ^^justifiable Proceeding.

The general Charge against me for Misrepresenting them is false, and has not
been supported by any one Instance. It has been my Misfortune to be Governor of
this Province during a Time, when the most favorable Representation of the
Proceedings of the Assemblies, and the Doings of the People must occasion his
Majesty's Displeasure. Before this Time I scarce ever met the Assembly without
receiving from them Testimonials of their Approbation of my Conduct. For these
three Years past it has been impossible to reconcile the Duty of the Governor
with pleasing the People; and it would have been so, if a Man of greater
Ability than I pretend to, had been in my Place. Nothing less than a general
Sacrifice of the Rights of the Sovereign State can make a Governor popular in
this Place at this Time.

I shall continue writing to your Lordship until I have communicated all I
think necessary for your Lordship's Information. When that will be, God knows.
My Ideas are become too numerous and extensive for writing, and are fitter for
a Conferrence than a Series of Letters. My Letter, as intended upon the Subject
of calling another Assembly, will be lengthy, comprehensive and important, but
it does not require Haste as yet. The Newspapers which I enclose contain a
Variety of Sedition and Calumny, besides that which the Letter dispenses.

I am, etc. FRA. BERNARD.
A true Copy,

John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.



Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Boston, July 18 and 19, 1768.
Boston, July 18, 1768. My LORD,
THE dangerous State which this Government is in, makes it necessary for me to
acquaint your Lordship of every little Disturbance which happens here, as one
cannot foresee the Tendency of any of the Movements of the Sons of Liberty, and
must expect the worst Consequences from each of them.

I sent your Lordship a Copy of a Paper stuck up in the Town House, inviting
the Sons of Liberty upon Mr. Williams (one of the Inspectors of the Customs)
his return to Town, to make him resign his Office or quit the Town. Mr.
Williams returned from the Circuit about the Middle of last Week. On Friday
last an Attack upon his House was planned: and to effect it, according to a
preconcerted signal, they rung the Fire-Bells, and cried out Fire; and then
directed the People to Mr. Williams's House, a Mob soon assembled there, and
began to break into the Courtyard; Mr. Williams kept in the House upon the
Defensive with Fire Arms, and afterward went into the Court and there parlied
with them. The Mob demanded that he should meet them at Liberty-Tree the next
Day at Noon and there resign his Commission: He refused to do either; but said
he would be upon 'Change next Day at Noon, and would there be ready to give an
Answer to any Thing that should be Objected to him. By this Time some of the
Magistrates and other Gentlemen of the Town had got to the Place, and they
persuaded the Mob to accept of the Offer and to disperse.

The next Day Mr. Williams attended by several Gentlemen, among whom were some
of the Council; went about Noon into the Council Chamger. There were about 1500
People assembled about the Town House: Mr. Williams went into the Balcony of
the Council Chamger, and told the People he was come according to his Promise,
to Answer any Objections which were urged against him. Nothing was offered:
after a Quarter of an Hour's interval, he repeated his Proposal again; nothing
was said except by an Ignorant Fellow, whose Absurdity created laughter. After
a little Stay, they all departed in seeming good Humor, and Mr. Williams
returned to his House, accompanied by the Gentlemen who had attended him, in
Peace and Quiet.

This transaction has flung great Disgrace upon, and given great Chagrin to the
Faction; and I am told they are determined to retrieve it.

The Truth is, the directors of the Mob, durst not show their Faces at this
Place, and upon this Occasion, left they should thereby acknowledge that they
had spirited them up to the last Night's Work. They now gloss it over by giving
out that the Mob of that Night were not the true Sons of Liberty, and acted
without Authority, and an Advertisement is published in the Boston-Gazette,
signed by a pretended Secretary of the Sons of Liberty, disclaiming the
requiring Mr. Williams to appear upon Change, and threatening the Printer who
should make Use of the Name of the Sons of Liberty, without an authentic Order.
Something is to be done and soon to recover the Spirit of the Sons of Liberty.
I am told that some of the Chiefs of them are this Day to go to Mr. Williams
and advise him as a Friend if he will not resign his Commission, to retire to
the Castle; if he does not his House will be destroyed, and himself killed.
What will be the End of this we must wait to know.

July 19 th*

Since I wrote the foregoing, I have seen Mr. Williams. He confirms this
Account, and adds that the Mob expressed great dissatisfaction that those who
set them on did not appear to talk for them. Several of the Mob, and
particularly the Captain, a noted Mob leader have declared their Approbation of
Mr. Williams's Conduct, and that they will defend him against any other Attack.
On the other Hand great Pains are taken to drive him out by intimidation:
private Letters have been sent to him; without a Name; and one of the Chiefs of
the Faction declared publicly against his fool hardiness in staying in this
Town, But Mr. Williams declares he will not go out of the Town, unless he is
drove out by Force. He tells me he fears no Danger: And I am inclined to think
he will succeed in his Defiance of the Faction and their Tools. If he does he
may do good Service in lessening the Terror which the Troops of the Faction
have occasioned here.

I am, etc. FRA. BERNARD.
Enclosed is a Paper stuck up on Saturday Morning. P. S. Observing that there
was no Account in any of the Newspapers, of the Riot on Friday Night, or the
Meeting at the Townhouse on Saturday, I asked the Reason of it, and was told
that the Sons of Liberty had forbid all the Printers publishing any Thing of
it. If the King's Government should assume such a Power, what would they say?



A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Boston, 6th August, 1768.
My LORD, Boston, August 6 th, 1768.
YOUR Lordship will observe from my Letter No. 9, and its Enclosures, that I
signified to the House that, if I should be obliged to dissolve the Assembly, I
should not think myself at Liberty to call another until I received His
Majesty's Orders; therefore I was asked in Council, whether I had received a
special Order for that Purpose, or whether I drew it by Implication from any
Part of your Lordship's Letter: I answered that I drew it from two Passages in
your Lordship's Letter; First, I am ordered if I dissolve the Assembly to send
an Account of their Proceedings, that his Majesty may lay the same before his
Parliament, to prevent such Conduct for the future. Now if I was to call
another Assembly without Order, it might not be in the Power of the King, or
the Parliament, to prevent such Conduct for the future; for it would probably
be repealed before any Provision could be made against it. 2dly. Your Lordship
signifies to me that if the Dissolution should operate to the Discontinuance of
any necessary Establishments, Care will be taken for the Support of Government.
-- By this it is plain, that your Lordship does not expect, that I should call
a new Assembly; for in such Case your Lordship would have directed me to call
upon the new Assembly to renew the discontinued Establishments.

But if your Lordship's Intention had not appeared so plain, my own Discretion
would have directed me, not to have called another Assembly soon after the
Dissolution of the former. -- Such a Proceeding has scarce ever sailed to
produce bad Consequences; in the present Case it would have the worst. The
chief Alteration in the House would be in the Exclusion of those few Members,
or a great Part of them who, in the late Question, dared to side with the King,
and have since been held up in the public Papers, as Objects of the Resentment
of the People. It were to be wished, that a new Assembly might not be called
until the People had got into a better Temper, and had gained truer Notions of
their Rights and Interest, than they have at present: When that Time will come,
God knows; it will depend more upon what is done at Westminster, than upon any
Measures that can be pursued here. I can therefore only state to your Lordship,
the Inconveniences which will attend the not calling the Assembly, until the
next General Election, and wait your Lordship's Orders.

The usual Time for the Assembly's Meeting for the Winter Session, has of late
been about the Middle of January. -- The Session has usually lasted about two
Months; great Part of which has been lately spent in political Squabbles,
rather than in real Business. The ordinary Business of this Session has been to
elect Officers, viz. Treasurer, Commissary, and Impost-Officer, and some lesser
of no great Significance, to grant Salaries to the Judges, and other Officers,
and to the President and Professors of the College, etc. and to pass the Act of
Tonnage and Impost. The Election of Officers may be postponed; for in such
Case, they would continue in their Offices by their former Appointment; and the
Election is nothing more but the Continuance of the same Officers. The Grants
of Salaries may be postponed, without any other Inconvenience than a Delay of
Payment for about three Months. The not renewing the Impost-Bill, would, I
believe discontinue that Revenue for about two Months, but I cannot be certain
of it, as I have not the Bill by me. These are the principal ordinary
Inconveniences which would arise from the not calling another Assembly before
next May; they must be balanced by the Advantages proposed by the Suspension;
and the whole will be governed by the Measures which are taken for the
Restoration of the Government. And I must beg your Lordship's Favor, that I may
receive Orders, whether I am, or am not, to call the Assembly; for when the
usual Time shall come, it will be quite necessary, that the Governor should be
able to vouch positive Orders for his not calling the Assembly, if he is not to
do it. -- In Regard to the calling the new Assembly in May, it will require
much Consideration; but there is Time eno' for that as yet.

There is another Matter for Consideration in calling a new Assembly, which I
cannot overlook, because it is a common Subject of Reflection; and yet I must
own I dare not give my Advice in it with that Freedom, with which I could wish
to act in all public Business; it is, whether, when a new Assembly is called,
it ought to meet at Boston, or at some other Town. People imagine, that the
principal Part, which Boston (distinguished from other Towns) has taken in
raising and somenting the present Troubles of the Province and the Continent,
will probably incur, and deserve the Censure of having the Government removed
from it; others say, that, if Boston is subjected, and brought into order, the
Inconveniences which the Government now feels, by being seated there, would be
removed. For my own part, I could speak upon this Subject, where I could
explain myself occasionally, but I know not how to write upon it; all that I
can now say is, that, if the prevailing Faction should be effectually checked,
and the terror of the Mobs removed, it might be better to keep the Government
here; but undoubtedly, for these three Years last. Government has suffered very
much by its being seated here. There are no two Towns on the Continent more
contrasted, in regard to Respect, and Duty to the King's Government both at
Home and here, than Boston and (the second Town in the Province) Salem. -- And
yet I could not recommend the removing the Government to Salem, otherwise than
as a temporary Censure; but this is a subject too delicate for public letters.

Having gone thus far, I find a great Deficiency from the want of a proper
Representation of the present State of this Government, which is brought so
low, that it can never recover itself by any internal Means, without a
Sacrifice of the Rights of the imperial Power: This is a nice Task, and I wish
I could do it in Person, if I cannot, I shall have much Difficulty to represent
it in Writing, and will overcome it as well as I can.

I am with great Respect, My Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient, and most
humble Servant, FRA. BERNARD.

The Right Honorable The Earl of Hillsborough.
A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Boston, 9th August, 1768.
Boston, August 9, 1768. My LORD,
I THINK it proper to inform your Lordship, that for above a Week past there
has been agitated among the Merchants of this Town a Subscription against
importing English Goods. -- It was begun by two principal Merchants who have
all along abetted the Purposes of the Faction; at first they met with very
little Success, but persevering in it, and Ways and Means being used to push it
on, it was last Night reported at their third Meeting, that there was a
sufficient Number of Subscribers to carry the Matter into Execution, that there
were forty who would not subscribe, but would observe the Restriction, and
thirty five who would neither subscribe nor observe. The latter I suppose are
to be brought to Reason by Mob-Law, otherwise thirty five Importers only, will
defeat the Scheme.

There was the like Subscription set about at the beginning of March last, of
which I gave an Account in my Letter to my Lord Shelburne, No. 9. That was
defeated by the Merchants of Philadelphia refusing to concur in the Measure,
and the Merchants of New York thereupon declining it also, upon which those of
Boston were obliged to give it up: but now I suppose they assure themselves of
better Success at those Places, and expect to raise a Combination formidable
enough to alarm Great Britain, at the Meeting of the Parliament. But, my Lord,
the Futility of this Threat will be exposed by an Enquiry into the Quantity of
Goods which have been lately ordered from Great Britain, which has exceeded and
anticipated the usual Quantities and Times in Order to provide for an
Abstinence from Importation for a Year: This is professed by some, and is
undoubtedly true of others, who are too attentive to their own Interest to
desist from Importation without taking Care not to have Occasion for it. But
the Non-subscribers, among which are some of the principal Importers of the
Town, will effectually defeat this Scheme, if they are sufficiently secured
from Mobs, which it is supposed they and all others will be before the first of
January next.

I am with great Respect, my Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient and most
humble Servant, FRA. BERNARD.

The Right Honorable The Earl of Hillsborough.
See my Letter No. 9, beforementioned, Par. last but one.



A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Extract of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Boston, August 29th, 1768.
I Enclose the printed Account of the Celebration of the 14th of August, being
the Day of hanging the Stamp-Officer in Effigy, and destroying his House in
Reality. This is the third Anniversary Celebration of this Day; at the (...) of
the Procession were two principal Merchants who have all along abetted the
Parades of the Sons of Liberty. In the Procession, as I have been informed by
several Persons, was one Moore, who was a principal Hand in pulling down the
Lieutenant-Governor's House, was committee to Goal for it, and rescued from
thence by a Number of People in the Night. This Man is now at Liberty (...)
celebrate those Exploits, by which he legally incurred the Penelty of Death.

A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Extract of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
September 9th, 1768.
Boston, September 9 th, 1768. My LORD,
THE July Mail arrived here last Saturday, Sept. 3^ which brought me the
Duplicate of your Lordship's Letter No. 10, and the Original of No. 11, 12, 13,
14, and 15. The June Mail which Tomorrow will have left London 13 Weeks, is
not yet come here; by it I expect to receive the Original of No. 10.

Your Lordship's Observation of the Intention of the Faction, to defeat all
conciliating Measures, will be fully confirmed, if it is not a ready. Their
Influence over the Courts of Justice, especially at Boston, is carried to an
enormous Length, of which there has been lately a most extraordinary Instance.
On Monday August 22d, being the Day before the sitting of the Superior Court,
there came out in the Boston-Gazette a most virulent Libel against the Chief
Justice, in which he was threatened, that if he gave any more such Charges as at
the former Session, his private Life and Conversation should be exposed in that
Paper, by which he is to be rendered odious to the People. The next Day when
the Court was opened the Grand Jury was found to have among them several of the
Abettors of the Boston Mobs, and particularly the famous is Capt. Malcolm, who
having twice in a forcible Manner set the Laws of Trade at Defiance with
Success, has thereby raised himself to be a Mob Captain; and was actually the
raiser of the Mob which abused the Custom-House Officers on the 10th of June
last. This Man was though it a fit Person to be upon a Grand Jury before whom his
own Riots were to be enquired into. To account for this your Lordship must know
that in this Government, Juries, both, Grand and Petty, are not returned by and
at the Election of the Sheriff, but by the Appointment of the several Towns and
returned by the Constables.

This being the Case, it was to no Purpose for the Chief Justice to enter into
Particulars concerning the late Riots: He therefore made his Charge general,
except only vindicating himself from an infamous Lie published in the
Boston-Gazette, asserting that he had received a Commission from England
appointing him Chief Justice. The Attorney General had been ordered by me with
the Advice of Council to prosecute the Rioters on the 10th of June. But when he
came to lay it before the Grand Jury, no Evidence could be procured against any
one Man. There had been 2 or 300 People who paraded and did great part of the
Mischief in the public Streets in the Day time; and yet no Man could be found
who dared to Charge any of them, And it is no wonder whilst the Head of the Mob
sat upon the Grand Jury ready to Mark those who should testify against his Mob,
And I suppose the Attorney General was not very earnest in endeavoring to
procure Evidence; as he must see that before such a Grand Jury there was no
Probabilty of getting a Bill found.

I am sorry my Lord, that I cannot continue to give the Council that Credit,
which I have done in former Letters, immediately after the Vote in the House
for not Rescinding, etc. The Council suffered so great a change that they don't
appear to be the same Persons. And I can no longer depend upon them, for that
assistance, which I have been used to expect and often to receive of them, in
support of the Rights of the Crown. They seem to have caught the general
Intimidation, to look upon the Cause of the present Government, to be
desperate, and to think that it is high Time that they should take Care of
their Interests with the prevailing Party of the People. And yet I am convinced
that these Gentlemen or the greatest part of them are in their Hearts Friends
to Government, and would choose to be numbered among them, if they were
Independent of the People. But it is a melancholic Truth, that this Government
after a three Years War is a Length subdued, and in my Opinion will never
recover itself, until some Amendment is made in the Constitution, especially in
the Appointment and Stability of the Council. I shall not produce Instances in
support of these assertions now, they will be fully explained hereafter.

A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Boston, September 16th, 1768.
My LORD, Boston, September 16, 1768.
IN the Boston Gazette of the 5th Instant, appeared a Paper, containing a
System of Politics, exceeding all former Exceedings. Some took it for the
casual Eaisings of an occasional Enthusiast. But I persuaded myself it came out
of the Cabinet of the Faction, and was preparatory to some actual Operations
against the Government. In this Verswasion I considered that if the Troops from
Halifax were to come here of a sudden, there would be no avoiding an
Insurrection, which would at least fall upon the Crown Officers, if it did not
amount to an Opposition to the Troops. I therefore thought it would be best
that the Expectation of the Troops should be gradually communicated, that the
Heads, of the Faction might have Time to consider well what they were about,
and prudent Men Opportunity to interpose their Advice. I therefore took an
Occasion to mention to one of the Council, in the Way of Discourse, that I had
private Advice that Troops were ordered hither, but I had no public Orders
about it myself. This was on the 8th Instant, and before Night it was
thoroughly circulated all over the Town.

The Faction immediately took the Alarm; and at first nothing was to be heard
among them but Declarations that the Troops should not enter the Town. But
nothing was done in Public, but appointing a Town-Meeting on Monday following.
In private there were, as I am told two Meetings, the one a large one on Friday
Night (the 9th) where it was the general Opinion that they should raise the
Country, and oppose the Troops. The other Meeting as I am informed, was very
small and private on Saturday Night at the House of one of the Chiefs, and
there it was resolved to surprise and take the Castle on the Monday Night
following. I don't relate these Accounts as certain Facts, but only as reported
and believed. On Saturday Night an empty Turpentine Barrel was put up upon the
Poll of the Beacon (which had been lately erected anew in a great Hurry by the
Select Men without consulting me). This gave a great Alarm the next Day, and
the Council sent to me on Sunday Afternoon to desire I would order a Council,
which I held at a Gentleman's House half Way between me and Boston. Here it was
debated what Means should be used to take the Barrel down; and it was resolved
that the Selectmen should be desired to take it down, but they would not do it.

On the Monday at the Hall the Faction appeared surrounded with all its Forces.
There were very few of the principal Gentlemen there; such as were, appeared
only as curious and perhaps anxious Spectators; the Meeting was opened with
Speeches much to the same Purpose as the Paper enclosed and first mentioned.
Nothing was then resolved but to put two Questions to me, which your Lordship
will see in the printed Account; and to appoint a general Committee to consider
and report. The next Day the Reports were made, upon which followed a Set of
Speeches by the Chiefs of the Faction and no one else; which followed one
another in such Order, and Method, that it appeared us if they were acting a
Play, every Thing both as to Matter and Order, seeming to have been
preconcerted before hand. As they have printed their own Account to circulate
it round the Province, I shall only add to it, an Account of some of these
Speeches, from the Tenor of which the general Intention of the whole
Transaction will be fully explained.

I should have mentioned before, that in the Middle of the Hall where they met,
were deposited in Chests the Town-Arms, amounting as it is said to about 400.
These as I have before informed your Lordship, about 4 or 5 Months ago, were
taken out of the Lumber Rooms, where they had lain for some Years past, to be
cleaned; and have since been laid upon the Floor of the Town Hall to remind the
People of the Use of them. These Arms were often the subject of discourse, and
were of singular Use to the Orators in the way of Action. As the subject of
their Debates turned upon Arming the Town and Country against their Enemies,
the Probability of a French War was mentioned as a Pretense for Arming the
Town, and a Cover for the frequent Use of the Word Enemy. It was said that the
Enemy would probably be here before the Convention met, that is within ten
Days; it was moved that the Arms should be now delivered out to oppose the
Enemy; this was objected to, for that they might fall into Hands, who would not
use them. But this flimsy Veil was not always kept on; it was often said, that
they had a Right to oppose with Arms a Military Force, which was sent to oblige
them to submit to unconstitutional Laws, and when it was required to be more
explicit, the Chairman said, that they understood one another very well, and
pointing with his Hand, added there are the Arms; when an Attempt is made
against your Liberties, they will be delivered, our Declaration wants no
Explication! And indeed it does not.

When first it was moved that the Governor be desired to call an Assembly, it
was said to be to provide for the Safety of the Province, and put it in a
Posture of Defense: It was thereupon, observed that that would make Troops
necessary, and it was immediately struck out: One cried out that they wanted a
Head; this was overruled, for indeed it was too premature. Another an old Man,
protested against every Thing but rising immediately, and taking all Power into
their own Hands. One Man very profligate and abandoned, argued for Massacring
their Enemies, his Argument was short, -- Liberty is as precious as Life; if a
Man attempts to take my Life, I have a Right to take his. Ergo, If a Man
attempts to take away my Liberty, I have a Right to take his Life. He also
argued that when a People's Liberties were threatened, they were in a State of
War, and had a Right to desend themselves. And he carried these Arguments so
far, that his own Party were obliged to silence him.

I will now make one Observation on one Passage in the printed Declaration, to
show to what Length is capable of being carried, a Pretension to an Exemption
from the Authority of Great Britain. It has been heretofore argued that the
Parliament has no Authority over the American Colonists, because they are not
represented in the Parliament of Great Britain; and in Consequence that the
provincial Assemblies are to all Intents and Purposes the Parliament in Regard
to the Subjects of the respective Colonies. This has been heretofore applied
only to the raising and disposing of public Money, and now observe a large
Stride to a very different Business, because it is declared in an Act of the
first of William and Mary, that no Standing Army shall be kept up in the
Kingdom in Time of Peace but by Consent of Parliament, therefore the King shall
not keep any Part of the Standing Army raised and supported by the Parliament
in any American Province without the Consent of the Provincial Assembly. And
this Exemption is pleaded in Virtue of a Charter granted by King William, etc.
without the Authority of Parliament, and consequently according to true
Revolutional Principles not to be pleaded against the Parliament, as according
to such Principles the King has no Power by his own Act only, to exempt any
Subjects of Great Britain from the Authority of Parliament.

I herewith enclose a Blank Copy of the Precept which the Selectmen of Boston
have used in calling together the Convention: Surely so daring an Assumption of
the Royal Authority was never practiced by any City or Town in the British
Dominions, even in the Times of greatest Disorder; not even by the City of
London, when the great Rebellion was at the highest, and the Confusion arising
from thence most urgent for some extraordinary Measures. How large this Meeting
will be, and what they will do, at present can only be guest at. But as they
have hitherto pursued the Dictates of the Paper in the Boston-Gazette, it may
be supposed that they will go through with them, and exclude the Crown
Officers, and resume the first original Charter, which has no Ingredient of
Royalty in it. It certainly will be so* if it is not prevented by Power from
without: And I much doubt whether the Force already ordered by General Gage,
viz. two Regiments, will be sufficient. For my own Part, if I had any Place of
Protection to resort to, I would publish a Proclamation against the assembling
the Convention. But I dare not take so spirited a Step without first securing
my Retreat.

It is now a great Question whether the King's Troops will be suffered to enter
the Town or not: the general Opinion is in the Affirmative. The Design against
the Castle is now so well known that it is probable that the very Names of the
People who were enrolled for that Service to the Number of 500, or of the Chief
of them will be discovered. The Chiefs of the Party now own that it will be
impossible for them to hold the Castle or the Town, though they should seize and
Garrison them for the present. They therefore, at least some of them, seem
content that the Troops shall stay here, till the Parliament has determined
upon their Remonstrances; as they say the Troops cannot remain here for two
Years, if the Parliament refuses to do them Justice.

I am, etc. FRA. BERNARD.
A true Copy, John Rosier,
Clerk of the Papers.
Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough dated
Boston, September 23d, 1768.
My LORD, Boston, September 23 d, 1768. 30 th July 1768.
UPON the Receipt of your Lordship's Letter No. 16. I ordered a Council to be
called on the Morning of Monday last; at which Time I communicated the two
first Paragraphs of your Lordship's Letter, and also a Letter from General Gage
to me, wherein he writes, that, in Obedience to His Majesty's Commands, he had
ordered two Regiments from Halifax to Boston, the one to be quartered at
Boston, the other at Castle William, and desiring that Quarters might be
provided for them. -- The Council instantly resorted to the Act of Parliament,
and there it was read, that if there were no Barracks, the Troops should be
quartered in the Public Houses, and if they were not sufficient; then the
Governor and Council, or in their Default, the Justices of Peace should hire
Barns, Outhouses, etc. for them. They therefore said, that as there were no
Barracks, they had nothing to do with it; for it was the Business of the
Constables to billet them in the Public Houses, and the Council had nothing to
do till the Public Houses were full. I answered, that they must be sensible,
that this Act of Parliament (which seemed to be made only with a view to
marching Troops) could not be carried into Execution in this Case; for if these
Troops were to be quartered in Public Houses, and thereby mixed with the People,
their Intercourse would be a perpetual Source of Affrays and Bloodsheds; and I
was sure, that no Commanding Officer would Consent to having his Troops
separated into small Parties in a Town, where there was so public and professed
a dissaffection to His Majesty's British Government; and as to hiring Barns,
Outhouses, etc. it was mere trifling to apply that Clause to Winter Quarters
in this Country, where the Men could not live but in Buildings with tight Walls
and plenty of Fire Places; therefore the only Thing to be done was to provide
Barracks, and to say, that there were none, was only true, that there was no
Building built for that purpose; but there were many public Buildings, that
might be fitted up for that purpose with no great Inconvenience. At last what I
said produced a Committee of Council, to confer with the Select-Men about
providing Quarters for the Troops; and the Council was adjourned.

I had no Opinion of this Reference, but could not avoid consenting to it. -- I
considered that the Select-Men were the Tools of the Faction, and the Design of
the latter was to embarrass the Business of providing Quarters, so as to oblige
the Officers to make good their own Quarters, and from thence, to ground an
Insurrection of the People against the Invaders of their Property. -- I was
told 2 or 3 Days before this Council met that -- explained the plan at the
Town-Meeting, (or at some other Meeting about the same Time, I forget which) in
the following Manner. "There are no Barracks in the Town, and therefore by Act
of Parliament they must be quartered in the public Houses; but no one will keep
a public House on such Terms, and there will be no public Houses; then the
Governor and Council must hire Barns, Outhouses, etc. for them; but no Body is
obliged to let them, no Body will let them, no Body will dare to let them. The
Troops are forbid to quarter themselves in any other Manner than according to
the Act of Parliament under severe Penalties; but they cannot quarter themselves
according to the Act, and therefore they must leave the Town, or seize on
Quarters contrary to the Act. When they do this, when they invade Property,
contrary to an Act of Parliament, we may resist them with the law on our Side."
-- So here is a System to make an Act impracticable* and then to oppose the
King's Troops for not observing it! Indeed the Act is impracticable enough
without all this Contrivance; but what is most surprising is, that so many
Persons of Consideration and Property should join in supporting a Scheme,
which, if it is carried into its full Execution, must involve this Town into
universal Desolation and Ruin, in Order to save a few desperate and wicked Mem
from being made answerable for their Crimes; and yet your Lordship will find
the forementioned System of Reasoning adopted by Men, from whom one could not
expect to have heard it seriously mentioned.

At the next Council, which was Yesterday, the Committee reported, that the
Selectmen had given for Answer, that there was an Act of Parliament for the
quartering the Troops, and they had nothing to do with it; but give it for
their Opinion, that it would be most for the Peace of the Town, that the two
Regiments expected from Halifax should be quartered at the Castle. -- That in
Regard to the Troops expected from Ireland, it was Time enough to think of
them, as it would be a long Time before they would arrive, and most probably
they would not come before Winter; for Mr. Hancock, one of the Selectmen, had
told them, that he had Advice from London, that the Troops ordered from Ireland
would not sail till after the Parliament met; and --,the Gentleman who
reported, said, that if they were to sail this Fall, it would be so late, that
probably they would not get in these Seas till Winter was set in, and then they
would be drove off the Coast. -- In this Manner was your Lordship's positive
Notice of the ordering these Troops to embark immediately, and his Majesty's
Orders thereupon, treated.

After the Report was made, followed several Speeches, all tending to give
Reasons, why they could not provide Barracks for the Reception of the Troops.
-- It was strongly urged, that the Act of Parliament directed how to quarter
the Troops, and they could not depart from it. -- I reminded them, that at the
last Council it was generally agreed, that it would never do to quarter the
Troops in public Houses; for it would produce the utmost Disorder throughout
the Town; and they must be sensible, that the Troops could not live in the
Winter of this Country in Barns, Outhouses, etc. -- That I did not want them
to act against the Act of Parliament, but to carry into Execution the first
Part of it, which recommended the Troops being put into Barracks, as the most
preferable Disposition, and thereby avoid resorting to the latter Parts of it,
which had been admitted by them to be impracticable -- They answered, that if
they were to follow the Act of Parliament, the Barracks at the Castle, which
were in the Town of Boston, must be filled, before they could demand other
Quarters. -- That the Barracks at the Castle would hold the whole of the two
Regiments from Halifax. -- I observed, that they confounded the Words Town and
Township; that the Castle was indeed in the Township of Boston, but was so far
from being in the Town, that it was distant from it by Water three Miles, and
by Land seven. -- Besides, in the General's Orders, there was an express
Distinction between the Town and the Castle, one Regiment being to be quartered
in the Town, and the other at the Castle -- That it could not thereby be
intended, that both should be quartered at the Castle -- And in your Lordship's
Orders, that the two Regiments from Ireland should be landed at Boston, it
could not be conceived, that your Lordship imagined, that the Castle, which was
known to stand upon an Island some Miles distant from Boston, was in Boston;
and that in executing those Orders, it would be sufficient to land those
Regiments at the Castle. But it was insisted, that Town and Township was the
same, and that the Castle was in the Town of Boston; and that as the Act had
directed the Barracks to be first used, neither the General's Letter nor your
Lordship's could alter the Law; and one Gentleman added, that if there had been
other Barracks in the Province, though at 50 Miles distant, they must be filled,
before any Quarters could be demanded at Boston -- I told them, that this
fallacious Way of Reasoning, however it might flatter them, would not pass
elsewhere; and particularly they never would be able to persuade the commanding
Officers, who are ordered to land their Troops at Boston, to land them at the
Castle; and therefore, as the Officers would certainly bring their Troops into
the Town, if no Barracks were provided for them, they would in their own
Defense be obliged to take Possession of some of the public Buildings, and make
Barracks for themselves. -- I was then told by one Gentleman, as it was
supposed that the Troops would be under my Command, if they should come into
Town, and take Quarters contrary to Laws, I should be charged as the Author of
it. -- I replied, that whatever Power I might have over the Troops, I certainly
should not have that of requiring them to disobey their Orders. -- On the other
Hand, I desired them to consider, what they would have to answer for, if, by
refusing to concur with me in providing Barracks for the Troops, they should
oblige them to provide their own Quarters, and thereby afford a Pretense for
the Enemies of the public Peace to draw the People into an Opposition to the
King's Troops, which they had in vain attempted to bring about previous to
their landing. -- I then gave them the Account of the Declaration of -- upon
this Subject, as mentioned in Pa. 2 and 3, of this Letter; and I might have
added, that it was long ago since I first heard, that it was the Intention of
the Faction to embarrass the Business of Quartering the Troops, and thereby set
them and the People together by the Ears -- In the Course of this Dispute, it
was frequently urged on the Side of the Council, that they had no Power to draw
Money out of the Treasury for building or fitting up Barracks. -- This Argument
was always ready at hand, when any Plan was proposed for the Purpose -- As I
saw we were like to rise without doing any Thing, I was reduced to make a
Proposal as my ultimate Effort. I observed, that Col. Dalrymple with the two
Regiments from Halifax, were expected every Day: That the Barracks at the
Castle, although they had held 1000 Men for a short Time in the Summer, yet they
would not hold much more than a Regiment with Convenience, and Col. Dalrymple
certainly would not consent to take less than a Regiment to Boston; therefore
Accommodations for one Regiment ought immediately to be provided -- That there
was the Manufactory-House (a Brick Building belonging to the Province) now
wholly unappropriated, and inhabited only by Self settlers, who are ready to go
out at a Day's warning -- This Building, with a small Addition to it for
Officers, would hold a Regiment. -- I therefore desired, that they would
authorize me to fit up this Building, with the Addition, and I would assure
them, that, if the Assembly should refuse to allow this Expense, I would engage
to recommend it to the King's Ministers, so that it should be paid by the
Crown, and they should be indemnified from it. -- When this was done, we should
have Time to consider of providing for the two Regiments from Ireland. -- If
they refused this, I did not see how they could clear themselves from being
charged with a Design to embarrass the Quartering the King's Troops, nor of the
Consequences, which might follow the obliging the Troops to make good their own
Quarters. I spoke this so forcibly, that some of them were staggered, and
desired further Time to consider of it; I therefore adjourned the Council to
this Day; and since, on Account of the Weather, Tomorrow -- I have since spoke
with several of them, and they all tell me, that I shall never get a Vote for
providing Barracks for the Troops at Boston -- One of them pleasantly said.
"What can you expect from a Council, who are more afraid of the People, than
they are of the King?"

September 24.

The bad Weather continuing, I am obliged to postpone the Council to another
Day, as several of them come out of the Country, and would not attend on this
Day; and as there are two Ships ready to sail as soon as this Storm is over, I
shall probably send away this Letter and its Duplicate, before I can bring this
Business to a Conclusion. -- I am sorry I am obliged to give your Lordship a
Detail so disagreable to the Body which is the Subject of it, but it is
necessary, as well to my Vindication, as to give your Lordship a true Idea of
the present State of this Government; I shall pursue this Narrative till I have
finished it. In what I shall have to write upon other Parts of your Lordship's
Letter. I shall have frequent Occasion to observe, how impossible it will be
for me to execute his Majesty's Commands, according to his Expectation, until I
have a Council more dependent upon the King than the present is.

I am, with great Respect, my Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient and most
humble Servant, FRA. BERNARD.

The Right Honorable The Earl of Hillsborough.
P. S. -- Sept. 24.
After I had finished this Letter I received a Message from the Council, to
inform me, they were ready to give an Answer to my Proposal made at the last
Council. I accordingly met them, and received the Answer; in which they
positively refuse to do any Thing for providing for the Troops expected from
Halifax, except fitting up the Barracks at the Castle; and for the Troops
expected from Ireland, they absolutely refuse to make any Provision, but shall
leave them to be billeted according to the Act of Parliament, which they know
to be impracticable under the present Circumstances of the Town. -- I am sorry
to see this Spirit got so high in the Government. -- It can end in nothing else
but obliging the Troops to provide their own Quarters. -- I cannot act in this
myself; all that there is left for me to do is to (...) the Manufactory-House
for the Use of the Troops. This I will do without the Council, though I foresee
it will create a Clamor. -- They have taken back their Answer to correct some
Mistakes; I shall receive it Tomorrow, and will send your Lordship a Copy,
with my Observations upon it.



I am, with great Respect, my Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient and most
humble Servant, FRA. BERNARD.

A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Boston, 26th September, 1768.
My LORD, Boston, Sept. 26th, 1768.
I NOW send your Lordship a Copy of the Council's Answer to me concerning
providing Barracks for the Troops, and what is extraordinary in Print; which
shall be explained in Order. In the P. S. of my last, I informed your Lordship
that the Council sent to me on Saturday to desire that I would meet them to
receive their Answer to my Proposal of fitting up the Manufactory-House. At
that Time there was a violent Storm of Wind and Rain, and I was at my Country
House at Roxbury 5 Miles from Boston. I thought by their being in such an Hurry
that they intended to do something; and as there was no Time to be lost, I
determined not to regard the Weather, but set out immediately for Boston; and I
therefore was surprised to find that I was sent for in such a Storm merely to
receive a Refusal, for I was not in the Secret then, and did not know that all
this Hurry and Drawing me through the worst Weather I almost ever traveled in,
was to get their Writings through, so that they might put it in the public Papers
on Monday.

I mentioned to your Lordship that they had taken back their Answer to correct
some Mistakes; these Mistakes were mentioning Sayings of mine which I never
said, and couching Insinuations which I did not observe. Upon my explaining
these passages, it was said that nothing was intended against me, and that they
would alter the Passages to my Satisfaction; and they offered to do it
directly. I told them that I had rather that they should take it back and
reconsider the whole; for it seemed to me that it wanted Alteration upon their
Account as well as mine. It was objected that it would cause the unnecessary
Trouble of calling another Council; I answered that as there was nothing to be
Advised or Ordered, I would Consent that they should deliver the Paper, when
corrected, to the Secretary, without calling a Council in form.

They met early next Monday Morning in the Council Chamber, when they made some
little Alterations to remove what I had excepted to, which however was not done
fully. After which it was moved (neither myself nor the Secretary being
present) that this Answer should be printed in one of the Papers of that Day.
This was opposed, and occasioned some little Debate, when the Question was put,
and determined in the Affirmative 7 to 3; among the 7 was one Gentleman who
rather acquiesced than approved; the other 6 being firm in this system. In the
Course of this Debate, and also in the first bringing in this Paper, one
Gentleman argued against it, and protested against some Parts of it (...)
another took him aside and said, you had better not distinguish yourself in
this Opposition; the Council are determined not to alter a Word in this Paper,
they are resolved to adhere to the people; the same last-mentioned Gentleman in
arguing for the printing, said, I have no immediate communication with them
(meaning the Sons of Liberty) but I know pretty well what is going on by my
intimately conversing with many of the middling People. I say it again and
again, and would have it well understood, that if we don't print the Answer to
the Governor this Day, there will soon be no Government.

Accordingly they immediately sent for one of the Printers, of the Government
Gazette, and ordered him to stop his Press, and gave the only Copy of the
Answer to him, to set the Press by, immediately after it was finished. I came
into the Council Chamber a little after 11, and there I found one of the
Council with the Printer correcting the Press, after which, and not before, the
Paper was delivered to me. I told the Gentleman that I would immediately
represent this to his Majesty as the highest Insult that ever was put upon a
King's Governor. He answered that there was no Intention of affronting me. I
replied that most probably there was not personally, for I had never deserved
to be ill used by them: but there was a great affront put upon the King in his
Representative, and it was my Business to resent that.

To show the high Nature of this Usurpation, I must observe that the Council
except in this Legislative Capacity have no Activity of their own without the
Governor; they are by Charter appointed to advise and assist the Governor, and
therefore they cannot meet without the Governor, nor can act in any Business
but what he proposes. Indeed it has been usual to appoint Committers to prepare
Papers for the Council, but then such Papers are reported to the Governor in
Council, and have no Validity until they are confirmed there. But for a Council
to meet without the Governor, to appoint a Committee, to meet again and receive
the Report of the Committee, to admit a Motion for printing their Proceedings,
and put the Question upon it, and to order the Proceedings to be printed
without the Governor's Consent or Knowledge, and even before it was reported to
him, is altogether a Transaction never known or imagined before, and wholly
illegal and unconstitutional; there is but one Way to make it regular, and that
is to consider the Council as meeting in their Legislative Capacity; this
indeed will make all right, and they will form an upper House to the Assembly
of Representatives now sitting in Convention, and then there will be nothing
wanting to render it a complete General Court, but the Authority and
Representative of the King; if all this coming together does not operate so as
to produce an Amendment (at least) of the Charter, wise and good Men who want
to see the Authority of the King's Government restored, or rather rebuilt upon
a more firm Foundation, will be disappointed. There is but one rational Way of
accounting for these Proceedings of the Council, so contrary to their Conduct
about seven Months ago, and this is, that they are desirous to lend an Hand to
the Convention, to bring about a Forfeiture of the Charter; which considering
how they have heretofore been treated by their Constituents, they may well be
supposed to desire.

As to the Answer, I have little to say about it, having fully explained the
System it is founded upon in my Letter immediately preceding. If it wants any
Thing more I will add a Paragraph which one of the Council proposed to be
inserted in their Answer to me, but it was rejected: this Paper has by chance
fell into my Hands in the handwriting of the Proposer; and I will enclose a
Copy of it. It fully shows that there is an Intention of opposing the Troops by
embarrassing their Quarters and attaching them afterward by Means of such
Embarrassment, to justify which a formal System of Law is already prepared. As
to what the Council have desired for the printing a formal Answer to me, which
I sent a Copy of to your Lordship with my Letter No., your Lordship must
understand that since the Council (I mean the Majority of them in and about the
Town of Boston) have gone over to the popular Party (the Day of which Revolt is
precisely fixed) they have been very fond in Imitation of the Faction of the
House, to do Business by Writings calculated for the Press; the Paper referred
to was plainly written for that purpose, but I prevented its being published
hitherto, and shall, notwithstanding this public Call added to many private. In
regard to the present publication, upon the first opening this Business I
charged their proceedings with Secrecy, and the only pretense to evade this
Charge is that I did not renew that Charge at every Adjournment, though the same
Business was continued.

And now, my Lord, I consider the Government as entirely subdued, the Outworks
have been taken by Degrees, the Citadel, the Council, however remained to the
King until within these 3 Months, now that is surrendered, and the Garrison has
joined the Enemy, to speak plain, now the Council cooperate with the Opponents
of Government, and they whose Business it is to advise and assist me, do all
they can to embarrass me; they who ought to join with me in executing the
King's Commands, are at the Head of those who oppose them: What can I do,
circumstanced as this Government at present is? Ipsa Salus non potest Servare
bane rempublicam. If the 3 Regiments ordered to Boston were now quietly in
their Quarters (which I don't see how they are like to be by the means of the
Civil Power only) it would not follow that the Civil Government could resume
its Functions. It will take some time to recover that Intimidation and Lachere
which has prevaded all Orders of Men. I shall write more particularly upon this
Subject when I write in Answer to the other parts of your Lordship's Letter
which the present Emergencies prevent.

I am with great Respect, my Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient and most
humble Servant, FRA. BERNARD.

The Right Honorable The Earl of Hillsborough.
A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Boston, September 27th, 1768.
My LORD, Boston, September 27, 1768.
IN my Letter No. 22, I informed your Lordship of the Origination of calling an
Assembly of Representatives under the Name of a Committee of Convention,
notwithstanding that is the Name of the Body, the Members also are all called
Committees; so that for Distinction sake, we must call the Body the Convention.
This Convention is now sitting, they met on Thursday, and did nothing that
Morning but choose a Chairman and a Clerk, viz. the late Speaker and the Clerk
of the House. The same Morning I prepared a Message to this Convention, and
left it with Mr. Oliver the Secretary to deliver in the Afternoon. I wrote it
wholly in my Hand, and my Name so written was in the Title; but as it was not
undersigned by me they refused to receive it. This was only to gain Time to
send me a Message before they acknowledged the Receipt of mine. As they print
what they do, your Lordship will have their own Account of these Proceedings.
The three Days last Week, they kept open Doors, -- was then absent. The two
Days this Week they have kept the Doors shut; -- is with them. Whatever further
transpires I will inform your Lordship of it.

It is now made a great Question in what Manner Great Britain will resent this
Proceeding; for certainly, at the Fountainhead it was intended to provoke a
Resentment, the great Principle of the Faction being to raise and blow up Fire.
Some say, and especially in the Convention itself, that the Persons assembling
would be by Act of Parliament rendered incapable of serving in any public
Office. But this seems to be at once too confined, and too general a Censure.
The Towns who chose these Deputies (next to that who issued the Summons) are
answerable for this Convention; and if they are a Majority of the Towns who
send Members, as their own Accounts at the lowest assert, the Province is
answerable. It is therefore concluded that the most probable Consequence will
be the Forfeiture of the Charter. If this is the worst. It is an Event most
devoutly to be desired by every Well-wisher to the Province.

I am, etc. FRA. BERNARD.
A true Copy,

John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.



Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Boston, 1st October, 1768.
My LORD, Boston, October 1, 1768.
THE Day my last Packet went out of the Harbor, brought in the Fleet from
Halifax, with two Regiments on board under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel
Dalrymple. As soon as I was informed of it. I went to the Castle, and got there
before the Ships got to Anchor. Soon after I saw Col. Dalrymple, and informed
him of all the Proceedings of the Council concerning his Quarters, and the
Difficulties he was to encounter. And it was agreed that I should call a
Council at the Castle the next Morning, and invite the Colonel and the
Commanding Officer of the Fleet to attend the Council.

The Council accordingly met at the Castle the next Morning, being Thursday
September 29th. The Commanding Officers likewise attended after the Business
was opened, the Colonel acquainted them in a very genteel Manner that he was
ordered to Quarter one of the Regiments at Boston; That he hoped he was going
among his Friends, and that his Men would on their Parts behave as such; That
he should be glad if he could have Quarters in the Way of Barracks, where he
could keep his Men under the Eyes of their Officers, and then he would engage
that his Men should be kept in good Order. He added several kind Expressions
signifying his Desire to conduct the Business in a Manner that should be most
easy and agreeable to the Town. He was answered, That they hoped he would
observe the Act of Parliament; and if he did, he would put both his Regiments
in the Barracks at the Castle, which were in the Town of Boston, and capable of
holding two Regiments: That when the Barracks were full, the Council had
nothing to do with Quartering Troops till the public Houses were full. The
Colonel said he would not dispute whether the Castle Island was in the Town or
not, they certainly were distinct Places in his Orders: That he was not used to
dispute his Orders but obey them, and therefore should most certainly march his
Regiment in the Town; and if they assigned him Quarters in the public Houses he
should take them: but then he could not answerable for the good Order of his
Men, which it would be impossible to preserve, if they were intermixed with the
Town People and separated from their Officers. I then interrupted and asked
whether as the Colonel had now told them, that he must and would march his
Regiment into the Town, it would not be best to reconsider my Proposal for
fitting up the Manufactory House for a Barrack. It was observed that it was not
regular to put a Question until the Board was cleared: The Gentlemen thereupon
withdrew.

I then desired that in reconsidering my Proposal for fitting up the
Manufactory House, they would let me know what Objection they had to it: The
only Objection worth Notice was that they had no Power to draw the Money. I
told them that there was an Appropriation in the Treasury for contingent
Services, which had much more Money upon it than would be wanted for this
Business, which was a contingent Service. They still declined it. I then told
them that I would make one more Proposal to them, which was, that if they would
authorize me to fit up this Building, I would be answerable it should be done
at the Charge of the Crown. This also they refused in writing, refering to
their former Answer. I then gave them to understand that those Subterfuges
would not disappoint the Execution of the King's Commands; and that I by myself
would assign the House in Question for a Barrack.

The next Morning when I got to the Castle as usual to hold a further
Consultation, Capt. Montresor, an Engineer, arrived here, and brought Letters
from General Gage, for me and the Colonel, wherein the General says, That by a
Number of private (...) from Boston to New York, and from the Narrative of the
Proceedings of the Town Meeting at Boston, it was reported and believed at
New York, that the People in and about Boston had revolted, he therefore sent
Capt. Montresor to assist the Forces as Engineer, and to enable them to recover
and maintain the Castle, and such other Posts as they could secure. As Things
were not so bad as this came to, the Colonel thought proper upon the Authority
of these new Orders, to alter his Plan, and land both Regiments at Boston,
without Loss of Time. I gave him a positive Order to take Possession of the
Manufactory House for one; and the other Regiment was to be encamped. This
being Resolved, the Fleet was immediately put into Motion, and by the next
Morning commanded the whole Town -- And this Day at Noon the Troops began
landing, and were all paraded on the Common by Four in the Afternoon, This was
done not only without Opposition, but with tolerable good Humor. -- Thus this
Business has been effected for the present, which would have had none of these
Difficulties, nor have occasioned such a Parade, if it had not been for the
undutiful Behavior of the Council.

I am, etc. FRA. BERNARD.
A true Copy,

John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.



Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough dated
Boston, October 3d, 1768.
My LORD, Boston, October 3d, 1768.
IN my Letter No. 25. I gave your Lordship an Account of the proceedings of the
Convention, in this I propose to finish it. They sat exactly a Week, and their
last Act I hereby send your Lordship a printed Copy of, this and what I before
sent being all that has been printed. They have besides, as I am told, prepared
a Petition to the King in the same, or nearly the same Terms as the former, and
have sent it to Mr. DeBerdt, with a long Letter of Instructions, among which
is, as is said, a Direction to give it into the King's own Hands. But I am not
certain of this, as all this Business was done with a kind of Secrecy, into
which it is scarce worth while to pry.

The chief Observation upon these Writings, is of their Moderation so very
different from the Temper of those who called this Meeting. This is accounted
for many Ways: many of the Deputies came down with Instructions and Disposition
to prevent the Bostoners involving the Province in the Consequences of their
own mad Devices: many of them were, from the Beginning sensible of the
Impropriety and Danger of this proceeding, and were desirous, by a moderate
Conduct, to correct the One and ward off the other. My Message (which was said
to be very high, though I hope not too high for the Occasion) although it did not
disperse them, had the good Effect to keep them in Awe. Hence it was that.....,
when he joined them, was perfectly came; and his Colleague Adams when he
attempted to launch out in the Language used in the House of Representatives,
was presently silenced. And now these People assume to themselves the Merit of
the Moderation of those whom they called together for very different purposes.

However therefore this temperate Conduct of these Deputies may in some Measure
apologize for the Towns who deputed them and for themselves who assembled, it
makes no Excuse for those who took upon themselves to call them together. For
whoever reads the Minutes of the Town-Meeting in which the summoning this
Convention was ordered, will easily perceive that it was intended to have very
different Effects from those which it was issued in.

I am, etc. FRA. BERNARD.
A true Copy,

John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.



Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Boston, October 5th and 6th, 1768.
Boston, October 5 th, 1768. My LORD,
THE Landing the two Regiments at Boston on Saturday last with such dispatch
and parade, which I informed Your Lordship of by No. 26, is like to have good
Effects, and will at last, though it has not done it at present, produce Quarters
for the Troops. On the Monday following I called the Council together, and laid
before them a Requisition of Col. Dalrymple's for the usual Allowances under
the Act of Parliament. Against this it was argued that they were ready on their
parts to comply with the Act of Parliament if the Col. would on his. If
therefore the Col. would remove both the Regiments to the Castle, they would
provide the Allowances, otherwise not. This produced a good deal of Debate,
after which I told them, that the Col. had desired that if they were disposed
to refuse, he might be heard before the Refusal was made absolute, and I
accordingly sent for the Colonel.

He came with Capt. Smith, and I informed him of what was passing. He enforced
his Requisition in very strong Words, not without some Hints of the King's
Resentment which would follow their Refusal. He said that he had encamped one
of the Regiments and was providing Barracks for the other, that they might be
both considered to be in Barracks. If therefore they refused the Allowances
because they were not in the Barracks at the Castle, they took upon themselves
to determine upon the propriety of the King's stationing His Troops at this or
that place, and to presume to dispense with an Act of Parliament, unless the
Troops were stationed at such Places as they thought fit; although such proposed
stationing directly contradicted the Intention of the King's ordering the
Troops to be stationed here at all. This was the Substance of the Colonel's and
my own reasoning upon the Occasion, which had much Weight, so to induce the
Council to desire me to give them Time to consider further of it; which I did
upon their assuring me that they would draw up no more Papers for Publication;
accordingly the Council was adjourned to this Day.

Upon this Day the Council met by themselves in the Council Chamber, and two of
the Council came to me to know if I could engage the Colonel to send one of the
Regiments to the Castle, if they would provide for the other. I said, I could
make no such Terms with the Colonel, but as he happened then to come in, they
might hear from himself. He said that his Orders were to station the two
Regiments in the Town, but if Things were quiet, and the Troops well received
and accommodated, he made no Doubt but the General would allow one Regiment to
go to Castle; for which Purpose he had already wrote. The Gentlemen returned to
the Council, they continuing to sit by themselves at the Council Chamber; when
after many Debates it was determined to supply the Troops by 8 against 5 in the
Council then assembled.

Afternoon they came to me in a Body, and gave me an Answer in Writing, wherein
they resolved that I should appoint a Person to provide the Allowances, he
undertaking "to run the Risque of the Assembly paying the Charge of it." I told
them that this Clause was disabling as well as enabling; for by inserting such
a terrifying Proviso, I should not be able to get any one to undertake it. If
they meant nothing but to indemnify themselves from being personally answerable
for this Charge, I would recommend this Clause "that such Provision should be
made on the Credit of the Assembly, and not of the Particulars of the Persons
composing the Governor and Council." Some Gentlemen approved of this; but it
was greatly opposed, and it was urged that as there really was a great Risque
that the Assembly would not pay this Money, it was fitting that the Undertaker
should know it; I asked them if the Troops were Barracked at the Castle,
whether they would have inserted this Clause; they freely answered no, for then
there would have been no doubt of the Legality of making such Allowances, now
there was. I then told them that it plainly appeared that this discouraging
Clause was put in as a pre-judgment of what the Assembly had to do in providing
for this Expense, and a Dictation to them not to discharge it: and so it would
by all knowing of this Proceeding. However, I insisted upon the Question of the
Amendment I proposed being put, and it passed in the Negative. Upon which upon
the unamended Answer, I proposed a Person for Commissary for this Purpose; and
he was approved. So here is a Subject for Dispute laid in Store against the
next Meeting of the Assembly.

October 6.

This Morning I had with me Colonel Dalrymple* and Mr. Godthwait the Person I
appointed to make Provision for the Troops. And being informed of the Terms
upon which the Council had made this Appointment, Mr. Goldthwait, with the
Advice and Approbation of the Colonel, declined undertaking this Business; and
the Colonel told me that he thought it was to no Purpose for me to apply any
more to the Council upon this or any other Provision for the Troops, for he saw
that they were determined to do nonothing. And I must add myself, that I am
certain that the Proviso was put in to defeat the whole Purpose. I am assured
that at first they resolved to make a positive Refusal, and had drawn up near
two Sheets of Paper of Arguments, to justify this Refusal. But this Paper being
much excepted to, and generally disapproved, and a Vote being obtained to make
a Provision, the Opponents hit upon this Expedient to annul the Vote and render
it ineffectual, and the Affirmers of the Vote with their Eyes open into this
Expedient.

I am, etc. FRA. BERNARD.
A true Copy,

John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.



Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Boston October 14, 1768.
Boston, October 14, 1768. My LORD,
I FIND myself obliged to continue my Informations of the Council's Separation
from and Opposition to the Governor in the Execution of his Majesty's Commands.
I should have been glad to have been excused carrying the Account any further
than where I have already laid it; but my Duty, and the Importance of the
Subject, will not admit of my not proceeding.

In my Letter No. 24, I informed your Lordship that I had prevented the
Publication of the Proceedings of the Council on July 27 and 29, last, by
ordering the Secretary to deliver no Copies, thereof; which I then thought was
an effectual Means of Prevention. Also in my Letter No. 28, I informed that I
consented to the Council's taking Time to consider of my Proposal for their
providing the Allowances for the Troops, upon their assuring me that they would
draw up no more Papers for Publication. And I might have added, that I expressly
stipulated that they should deliver into the Secretary's Hands all Papers which
they should use upon this Occasion, without keeping any Copies thereof. And
this Stipulation was, as I understood, unanimously assented to before we parted.

Nevertheless there appeared on Monday last October 10th, in three of the
Newspapers of that Day, a Publication of all the Proceedings on July 27th and
29th, and also the entire Minutes of Council on October 3d and 5th, which are
the Subject of the Stipulation beforementioned. Upon my enquiring of the
Secretary how these Papers came to be published, he said he understood that it
was done by Order of the Council, but how they came by the Copies he did not
know. He was sure that no Copies came out of his Office; for he had kept the
Originals in his own Custody, and never suffered them to be out of his Sight
when they were in Use.

The next Council Day October 12, I took an Opportunity to observe upon this
Publication, and reminded them of the Assurances they had given that no Papers
or Copies of Papers should be kept out of the Custody of the Secretary; and I
desired to know from whom the Copies used for these Publications were procured,
as they did not come from the Secretary, and who committed them to the Press?
No Answer was given for the present; but when the Business of the Council was
over, and we had rose from the Table, Mr. Bowdoin, who upon this Separation of
the Council has been the perpetual President, Chairman, Secretary, and Speaker
of this new Council, addressing himself to me, said that he was desired by the
Council to inform me, that they had caused this Publication, judging it
necessary to quiet the Minds of the People. Upon my observing that they had
promised to keep no Copies of the Papers they had used upon the last Occasion,
he answered, that the Publication was not from Copies, but the Originals, I
answered that they had promised to deliver to the Secretary all Papers used in
that Business; but that I was obliged to him for being so explicit; for their
declaring that the Original Papers of these Minutes of Council were with them,
and that those remaining with the Secretary were only Copies, was such an
Avowal of their being a Board separate from and independent of the Governor, as
I did not expect. But they were in the right to speak out. I added that it
might be doubted whether the Council by any separate Act of their own, could
create a Forseiture of their Charter; but if they could, I should have no
Doubt, but that their separating themselves from the Governor, and acting as a
complete Body by themselves, would amount to such a Forfeiture. And I either
added, or had it strongly in my Mind (I cannot say which) that these their
Proceedings would probably be joined with other extraordinary Proceedings on
the Part of the People, to infer a general Departure from the Constitution of
the Government, and an Invasion of the Royal Rights contrary to the Tenor of
the Charter.

Mr. Bowdoin, in Justification of himself and his Associates, said that the
People in their present Temper would not bear with the keeping the Proceedings
in Council secret; for this Reason to quiet the People, they found themselves
obliged to make their Doings public, and could not submit to an Injunction of
Secrecy. I answered, that if they would show me any civilized Government upon
Earth that did or could support itself under a continual and immediate
Publication of the Results of its most intimate Councils, so that before any of
its Orders could be carried into Execution, they should be canvassed by Tavern
Politicians, and censured by News Paper Libellers, I would submit to their
Prescriptions. But as I knew that Government could not be carried on upon these
Terms, I should be obliged to desire his Majesty's Instructions how to conduct
myself under these Difficulties.

I should have before observed that in opening this Council I ordered the
Secretary to read the Oath of a Counselor, Part of which is that they shall
not reveal what shall be committed to them in Secrecy; and I added that what I
was now going to commit to them was in Secrecy. I added that I was sorry to
observe that some Matters which I had heretofore committed to them in Secrecy,
had not only transpired, but been published, with the Particulars, which could
not have been known abroad, if a due Regard had been had to the Oath. Upon this
Mr. Bowdoin said that the Council were of Opinion that the Oath of Secrecy
related only to such Matters as they should think and advise ought to be kept
secret; and that the Governor had no Power to enjoin them to Secrecy without
their own Consent. I told them that this their Resolution, which I now heard
the first of, was very extraordinary, for it argued, 1. That Matters committed
to the Council in Secrecy should be committed by themselves, which was a
Contradiction in Terms; 2. That if Secrecy was not to be enjoined 'till after
the Matters had been considered of and debated upon, they could not be
committed in Secrecy; 3. That according to this, the Governor could not commit
any Matter in Secrecy to the Council, though enjoined by the King himself.

Besides the Merits of the subject Matter, your Lordship will observe the
extraordinary Circumstance of a Counselor denouncing to the Governor the
Resolution of the Council upon a Question, or a Distinction of a Question,
which, though relative to the Conduct and Duty of the Council, was never moved
or argued in Council before the Governor, and concerning which he has neither
had an Opportunity to hear the Reasons which induced the Council to be of that
Opinion, or to offer his own Reasons against it; and in Consequence can make no
Report of the Principles upon which such Opinion was founded.

Before I finish this Subject I must mention a Fact of their Treatment of Mr.
Oliver the King's Secretary. This new Council met in the Council Chamber by
themselves, and by their own Appointment, and sent for the Secretary. When he
came, they examined him concerning an Entry in the Minutes of the Council,
which to my Knowledge was read and approved of before they parted, but which,
upon Recollection, did not suit their Purpose, and therefore they disavowed. --
During this Examination they kept him standing at the End of the Table, and at
last asked him to sit down at the Bottom of the Table, he said, he knew of no
Council where the Governor was not present, and withdrew.

Mr. Oliver, by his Rank in the List of Counselors, and the Usage of the
Country, had a Right to take Place of much the greatest Part of the Counselors
present, in all indifferent Places. But being full of their own self-assumed
Dignity, they treated this Gentleman with a Rudeness, which I should have been
ashamed to have seen practiced upon a Man of much less Rank and Merit, if I had
been in the Chair.

The Difficulties I meet with in carrying His Majesty's Orders for Quartering
the Troops into Execution, will, I foresee, occasion my being behind-hand in
Letters due to your Lordship.

If therefore you should observe in me a want of Punctuality, you must not
impute it to my Idleness; for I was never harder worked than I am at present.

I am, etc. FRA. BERNARD.
A true Copy,

John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.



LETTERS from Lord Hillsborough, General Gage, Commodore Hood, etc.
Copy of a Letter from the Earl of Hillsborough, to Governor Bernard, dated
24th December, 1768.
Whitehall, December 24 th, 1768. SIR,
I HAVE received and laid before the King your Dispatches No. 29, 30, and 31,
and as every Circumstance relative to the State of your Government is now
before Parliament, I shall hope to be able to send you very soon the Result of
their Proceedings. In the mean Time I am to acquaint you, that His Majesty
approves your Conduct in every Part of it, and sees with Concern and
Dissatisfaction, how greatly his Service is obstructed, and the Dignity and
Spirit of His Government destroyed, by the unwarrantable and unjustifiable
Behavior of the Council upon many Occasions, and more especially with Respect
to Quartering His Majesty's Troops* a Service in the facilitating of which they
were called upon by every Consideration of Duty to the Crown, and of Regard to
the Peace of the Public, to exert themselves to the utmost of their Power.

I am, etc. HILLSBOROUGH.

Governor Bernard.
A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Copy of a Letter from the Earl of Hillsborough to Governor Bernard, dated 4th
January, 1769.
Whitehall, 4 th January 1769. SIR,
I Have received and laid before the King your Dispatches No. 32 and 33, which
appear to contain only farther Accounts of the Obstruction given by the Council
to Government in general, and of their determined Resolution to pursue a
Conduct that can have no other Effect than to defeat the Measures His Majesty
has thought fit to adopt, for restoring Peace and good Order in the Town of
Boston.

As the State of the Province is still under the Consideration of Parliament, I
have nothing to add to what I have already said to you in my Letter No. 22 upon
that Subject* and have only to repeat to you, that as soon as the Proceedings
of Parliament are brought to a Conclusion, I shall not fail to transmit to you
the Result of their Deliberations: In the mean Time, I am persuaded there will
be on your Part no Relaxation of that Attention to the Execution of your Duty,
which does you so much Credit, and that you will steadily and firmly pursue
every Consitutional Measure for the Support of His Majesty's Authority, and the
Dignity of His Government.

I am, etc. HILLSBOROUGH.

Governor Bernard.
A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Extract of a Letter from the Earl of Hillsborough, to the Honorable
Major General Gage, dated.
Whitehall, 10 th December, 1768.
HIS Majesty approves your Activity, and the Attention which you have shown to
His Service in your Resolution to go to Boston, and hopes that your Presence
there will greatly conduce to remove the Difficulties which have occurred in
quartering the Troops, and to prevent any just Cause of Complaint on the Part
of the Inhabitants, as well as to assist the Governor in reducing them to a
just Sense of their Duty, and in the Preservation of the Peace and the
Execution of the Laws, in which he appears, as far as the weak State of
Government would admit, to have exerted a becoming Spirit, and to have shown a
due Regard to His Majesty's Service.

A true Copy, John Rosier. Clerk of the Papers.

Extract of a Letter from the honorable Major General Gage, to the Earl of
Hillsborough, dated, Boston, Nov. 3, 1768.
HIS Majesty's intentions Communicated to me in Your Lordship's Letter No. 12,
respecting the Ship of War, which carries Lord Botetourt to his Government, and
that which escorts the Transports to Boston, has been made known to Commodore
Hood, and I have acquainted the Commodore with my Opinion that His Majesty's
Service did require those Ships to remain in the American Seas. He is daily
expected here from Halifax and I hope to settle that Matter with him in Person,
before I return to New York.

Every thing now has the Appearance of Peace and Quiet in this Place, and I
find some Prosecutions are commenced in the Court of Admiralty against two of
the most popular Leaders, who dared to violate the Laws in a very daring and
open Manner; and it is hoped this Example will encourage the Civil Officers of
every Degree to do their Duty without Fear, and to curb effectually the
licentious and seditious Spirit which has so long prevailed in this Place. Your
Lordship will see that the Presence of the Troops has already produced some
good Effects; and it appears very necessary for his Majesty's Service, that
both his Land and Sea Forces should be strong in North America, for some Time
to come; particularly 'till the Affairs of America have been laid before
Parliament, and the Resolutions concerning the Colonies shall be made known.

A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Extract of a Letter from the Earl of Hillsborough, to the honorable Major
General Gage, dated Whitehall, Dec. 24, 1768.
I Have this Day received and laid before the King your Dispatches from Boston,
dated the 31st of October, and 3d and 8th of November, numbered 18, 19 and 20.

The Account contained in these Dispatches of the Conduct and Proceedings of
the Council, and of the Inferior Magistrates at Boston, upon the repeated
Applications made to them for quartering his Majesty's Troops pursuant to the
Act of Parliament, is a farther Testimony of the weak and disordered State of
Government in the Province of Massachusetts Bay, and of the Disposition that
prevails in almost all Ranks of the People to obstruct and embarrass the King's
Service, in a Case in which His Majesty has shown so great a Regard to the
Peace and Security of a Town, where Government had been so repeatedly insulted,
and set at Defiance.

As every Circumstance relative to the State of the Province of
Massachusets-Bay is now before Parliament, I have only to express to you his
Majesty's Approbation of the Measures you have taken, in Concert with Governor
Bernard, for providing for the Reception and Accommodation of the Troops during
the Winter, and of the Caution you have used to execute this Service in such a
Manner as to avoid all Grounds of reasonable Discontent, and to secure his
Majesty's Officers from the Hazard to which the Uncertainty and want of
Precision in the Law might expose them in a Place where every Effect of Malice
seems to be exerted to ensnare and distress them.

For my own Part, I shall not fail to submit your Observations upon the
Mutiny-Act to the Consideration of the rest of His Majesty's Servants, and
shall be very happy if any Alteration can be made therein, which without giving
up the Principle, may render it more easy in the Execution, and less hazardous
to the Officers.

As you appear to think that there is no Probability that any Inconveniency
will arise from allowing the Provincial Garrison to keep possession of
Castle-William; the King is satisfied with the Reasons you give for permitting
them to remain in it for the present. What may be necessary hereafter in
Respect to this Fortress, as well as to what you suggest of building Barracks
upon, and fortifying the Eminence behind Boston, must depend upon the future
Conduct of that Town.

It has given great Pleasure to the King to find by your Letter No. 19, that
the Measure of sending Troops to Boston, has been so fully justified by the
Effects of it, which His Majesty hopes from the present Appearances, will
finally produce that Spirit of Order and Obedience to lawful Government upon
which the Happiness and Security of Society depend.

A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Copy of a Letter from Captain Smith, to Mr. Stephens, dated on Board His
Majesty's Ship the Mermaid, in Boston-Harbour, the 26th of October, 1768.
Boston, October 26 th, 1768. SIR,
(...) pleased to acquaint my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, that I have
received their Order of the 11th of August last, signifying their having caused
Transport Vessels to be provided to carry the 64th and 65th Regiments of Foot
under Convoy of His Majesty's Ship Hussar from Ireland to Boston in
New England, with Orders to take that Ship under my Command, if Circumstances
of Affairs should make her Assistance necessary, otherwise to dispatch her back
to England; a Copy of which Order I immediately sent off by his Majesty's Ship
Romney for Commodore Hood at Halifax, whom I daily expect at this Port. In the
mean Time (if the Hussar should arrive) I shall take her under my Command
until the Commodore's further Orders concerning her, of which I have
acquainted him; no doubt but their Lordships are advised by the Commodore of
his Order to me of the 14th of September last, to embark the two Regiments, and
a Company of the Train of Artillery, at Halifax, (...) board his Majesty's
Squadron, and proceed to this Port, (...) land them, which I did on Saturday
the 1st Instant, in (...) Order, and without Opposition. But the Troops are
(...) yet quartered, nor by any Means provided for, as they should be;
therefore by an Application from the Governor, General Gage and Colonel
Dalrymple, and since them an Order from Commodore Hood, I remain before the
Town with his Majesty's Ships Mermaid and Glasgow, with the ^enegal, Beaver,
and Bonetta Sloops, and Hope Schooner, having sent back to Halifax his
Majesty's Ships Romney and Lannceston, Martin Sloop with the St. Lawrence and
Magdalene Schooners.

I am, etc. SMITH.
A true Copy,

John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.



Copy of a Letter from Lords Commissioners of Admiralty to the Earl of
Hillsborough, dated Admiralty-Office, 7th Jan. 1769.
Admiralty-Office, 7 th January, 1769. My LORD,
HAVING just now received Letters from Commodore Hood, Commander in Chief of
His Majesty's Ships and Vessels in North America, dated the 15th, 22d, 25th and
27th of November last, giving an Account of the Situation of Affairs in those
Parts, and of his Arrival at Boston: we send your Lordship herewith Copies
thereof, for his Majesty's Information, and are,

My Lord, etc. C. Townshend, J. Buller, Piercy Brett.


Earl of Hillsborough, etc.
A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Extract of a Letter from Commodore Hood, to Mr. Stephens, dated,
Boston-Harbour, 15th November, 1768.
I BEG you will be pleased to acquaint my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty,
that I am just arrived here in Ten Days from Halifax, accompanied by the Viper
Sloop and Gaspee Schooner, and find every Thing perfectly quiet, and flatter
myself, from what I have been told, that Things will remain so the Winter. Six
of the Transports from Cork are arrived, the last came in Yesterday, and parted
with the Hussar the 2d Instant, not far from Long Island. I shall keep a
Schooner in the Bay to look out for her and the missing Transports.

A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Extract of a Letter from Commodore Hood to Mr. Stephens, dated on Board his
Majesty's Ship the Romney, in Boston-Harbour, 22d November, 1768.
I Desired you would acquaint my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty of my
Arrival here the 15th, by a Vessel just then about to sail, Duplicate of which
accompanies this.

Governor Bernard sent me a Letter Yesterday from Capt. Thompson, acquainting
me of his Arrival in Hampton-Road in Virginia the 25th of last Month, with his
Majesty's Ship Rippon under his Command, and that Lord Botetourt was landed the
next Morning, and enclosing their Lordship's Order of the 25th of August,
directing me, if the King's Service shall in my Opinion require it, to take the
said Ship under my Command, and employ her in such a Manner as I shall judge
best in the Execution of the Services entrusted to my Care; but if
Circumstances of Affairs, shall be such as to render her Assistance
unnecessary, to direct her Captain to repair without Loss of Time to Spithead,
and to send an Account of her Arrival to you: At present Things here are very
quiet, and I flatter myself will remain so, till the Resolutions of Parliament
are known, what turn they will then take, is uncertain. The Spirit of
Opposition to the Acts of Parliament of Great Britain, is as high as ever, and
general throughout the Colonies; it therefore seems very prudent and necessary
to be as strong in all Parts, and in all Respects as possible; and there is no
saying now, how far the Rippon may be essentially serviceable in the Spring.
The present Season is such as to render any Movements at Sea, of the King's
Ships, very hazardous; and as the Disturbances in Virginia and other Provinces
to the Southward of this, are as great as they well can be, without actual
Rebellion. I have judged it right, upon consulting with General Gage, to direct
Captain Thompson to remain in Hampton Road till further Orders, holding the
Ship under his Command, in as great Readiness for Service, as is consistent
with her Safety; for if Troops should be required to be carried from this
Province to any other, or from any other to this, it is a Service not to be
effected but in his Majesty's Ships, as Transport Vessels cannot be hired.
These are my Reasons for detaining the Rippon in America, which I hope will
prove satisfactory to their Lordships; and if the Winter Resolutions at Home
(upon which the Obedience of the Colonies wholly depends) should restore
Affairs here to any Degree of Order, I shall immediately send Capt. Thompson to
England; and in the mean Time, if I see no Cause to the contrary, I shall
direct him to join me here, as soon as the Severity of the Winter is over, by
which he will be able to return Home with the greater Expedition, as the Post
is five and twenty Days at soonest from this to Virginia, and very precarious
from Philadelphia.

The Hussar and two Transports are still missing; I begin to be in Pain about
them, as the Weather has been very tempestuous for many Days past.

I propose to remain here the Winter, keeping with me the Romney, Mermaid, two
Sloops, and two Schooners; I have ordered the Glasgow to Winter at Halifax, and
a Schooner at Louisbourg, a Sloop at Rhode Island, and the Deal-Castle and a
Schooner at New York, where I shall also send another Frigate if the Hussar
should not arrive there; from the last Account of her, she was without a
Bowsprit, and from the Winds that have since prevailed, I do not imagine she
can reach this Port. She was spoke with standing in for Sandy-Hook about ten
Days since, so that I expect to hear of her Arrival by Tomorrow's Post.

The Raven Transport which has Colonel Mackay on board, has been spoke with in
Latitude 38. Longitude 66, with her Foremast and Maintopmast gone, and it is
supposed she is gone to the Southward.

A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Copy of a Letter from Commodore Hood to Mr. Stephens, dated on board the
Romney, in Boston-Harbour, November 25, 1768.
Romney, in Boston-Harbour, Nov. 25, 1768. SIR,
I BEG you will be pleased to acquaint my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty,
that His Majesty's Ship Hussar is arrived at New York; she parted Company with
two of the Transports on the 30th of OCtober, between the Islands of Madeira
and Teneriffe, and with the other Six on the 3d of this Month, from Necessity,
by carrying away her Mizen-Mast and Main-top sail-yard, which obliged her to
carry Sail in a hard Gale of Wind at S.by W. supposing themselves very near the
Shoals of Nantucket. She has also received other Damage, and has a Leak seven
Feet under Water, which makes 12 Inches every four Hours; and from the Report
of the Survey sent to me of the Ship, she requires to be caulked before she can
proceed to Sea. I have directed Capt. Parker to get His Majesty's Ship under
his Command in a Condition for Service as soon as possible, and to draw upon
the Navy-Board for such Stores as she is under a Necessity of taking, as well
as for the Workmanship necessary to be done, and have recommended it to him, in
the strongest Manner, to have no more Stores, or Works done, than are
absolutely unavoidable; and have directed him to remain at New York 'till
farther Orders. Disturbances seem again to be renewed there, the General and
Governor Bernard have been lately burnt in Essigy, in a most public Manner.

I have the Pleasure to acquaint you that the Dolphin Transport is just come in
all well on Board, so that the Raven with Col. Mackay on Board, is the only one
missing.

I am, Sir, etc. SAMUEL HOOD.

Philip Stevens, Esquire Admiralty.
A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Copy of a Letter from Commodore Hood, Commander in Chief of his Majesty's
Ships and Vessels in North America, to Mr. Stephens, dated on Board the Romney
in Boston-Harbour 27th November, 1768.
I Beg you will be pleased to acquaint my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty,
that his Majesty's Ship (...) arrived here this Afternoon in five Weeks from
the (...) Islands. She met with very tempestuous Weather upon this Coast, which
has sprung her Bowsprit, and done other Damage to her.

I am, etc. S. HOOD.
A true Copy,

John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.



Extract of a Letter from Commodore Hood, to Mr. Stephens, dated on Board the
Romney in Boston-Harbour 7th of December 1768.
DUPLICATES of my last Letters accompany this, and I beg to observe that every
Thing here remains Quiet, and I flatter myself Order will be restored in a few
Months; The Resolutions of Parliament will determine clearly whether the
additional Naval Force of the Rippon and Hussar can be of any Service.

A true Copy, John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.

Copy of a Letter from Commodore Hood to Mr. Stephens, dated on Board his
Majesty's; Ship the Romney, in Boston-Harbour, the 12th December, 1768.
SIR,
I HAVE had the Honor of writing to you very frequently of late, but as
Affairs of this Country have been and still are very interesting at Home, it
must be satisfactory to their Lordships to hear often how they go; I beg now to
acquaint you, that the People here are perfectly Quiet, and I am pretty sure
they will remain so till the Resolutions of Parliament are known, which I am in
Hopes will restore Order and make it lasting. There does not appear to me the
least Probability of the People's taking Arms. I think it cannot happen. Indeed
some few of the Convention took Pains to bring the Ignorant and lower Class
into that Mind, and possibly might have succeed had not the Troops arrived as
they did; but those few are now alarmed, and expect nothing less, than a Voyage
to England against their Inelinations. The Council are now sitting without the
Governor, and preparing Addresses, etc. to England; His Excellency has told
them how unconstitutional they act, but they still go on. No account has yet
been received of the Arrival of the Raven Transport with Colonel' Mackay on
Board.

I am, etc. SAMUEL HOOD.
A true Copy,

John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.



MEMORIALS of the Commissioners of the Customs in North America, with several
Letters and Papers annexed.
Copy of a MEMORIAL of the Commissioners of Customs, June 16th 1768, and
several Papers thereunto annexed.
May it please your Lordships,
IN our former Memorials to your Lordships, we represented the Disaffection of
the People here to the Revenue Laws, and from the many treasonable Publications
that had been spread through all the Provinces, and the Correspondence carried
on by the several Assemblies, we were persuaded there had been a long concerted
and extensive Plan of Resistance to the Authority of Great Britain; and we
believe, that the Seizure referred to in the enclosed Papers, has hastened the
People of Boston to the Commission of actual Violence sooner than was intended.

From their outrageous Behavior toward our Officers, and their repeated
Threats of immediate Violence to our own Persons, we found it absolutely
necessary in Order to save His Majesty's Commission from further Insult, and to
preserve our Lives, to take shelter on Board His Majesty's Ship the Romney in
Boston-Harbour, from whence we are removed into Castle-William to carry on the
Business of the Revenue; till we can receive such protection as will enable us
to act in Safety at Boston.

We herewith lay before your Lordships Copies of our Minutes of the 13th and
14th Instant, together with Copies of several Affidavits and Letters relative
to our present Situation agreeable to the Schedule enclosed, and we beg Leave to
submit our Opinion, that nothing but the immediate Exertion of Military Power
will prevent an open Revolt of this Town, which may probably spread throughout
the Provinces.

Which is humbly submitted, Hen: Hulton, J. Temple, Wm. Burch, Cha: Paxton,
John Robinson.

Castle-William, Boston-Harbour. June 16th, 1768.
(copy) On Board His Majesty's Ship Romney, Monday, 13th June 1768.
Henry Hulton, Esquire in the Chair.

Copy No. 2.
PRESENT Mr. Robinson, Mr. Burch, Mr. Paxton, and Mr. Temple.

MR. Harrison, Collector of this Port, having laid before the Board on the 16th
Instant, an Information taken on Oath, setting forth that the Tidesman placed
on Board the Sloop Liberty, which arrived from Madeira on the 9th Day of May,
had been forcibly confined on Board the said Vessel, during which Time Part of
the Cargo had been unladen, before Entry thereof had been made at the
Custom-House or Naval-Office, the Commissioners referred the Matter to the
Consideration of the Solicitor; and in the Evening the Collector and
Comptroller made Seizure of the said Vessel, and delivered her into the Charge
of the Master of his Majesty's Ship Romney, which lay near the Wharff where the
Seizure was made, who immediately carried her along Side the said Ship, as
there was a Mob assembled, who attempted to rescue her.

The Collector and Comptroller, with the Son of the Collector, on their Return
from the Wharff into Town, were attacked by a numerous and outrageous Mob, Mr.
Irving, Inspector of Imports and Exports, who happened to be passing the same
Way in his Return from the Wharff was likewise attacked by the Mob, who cried
out, he is a Commissioner, Kill him, Kill him; These several Persons were
grossly insulted, and much bruised, and escaped with the utmost Hazard of their
Lives, the Collector having been confined to his Bed and in great Danger from a
Blow he received on his Breast with a Stone or Brick-bat thrown at him, and the
Comptroller having been likewise confined to his House under the Care-of a
Surgeon, from the Wounds and Bruises he received; after these Violences
committed on the Persons of the Officers, the Mob proceeded to the Houses of
the Collector and Comptroller, broke their Windows and those of Mr. Williams
Inspector General, and they concluded the Night with dragging the Collector's
Boat from the Wharff through the Town to the Common, where they burnt it.

Whilst these Outrages were committing, the Commissioners had every Reason to
expect they should meet with the like Insults, and therefore retired from their
Houses, taking Shelter 'till after Midnight with their Families in the Houses
of some Persons in their Neighborhood.

Early on the next Day, the Governor acquainted the Commissioners that the
Council would meet on the Affair of the Riot of the preceding Evening, and
desired if the Board had any Thing to communicate to them thereon, that it
might be laid before them; upon which the Chairman summoned the Commissioners
to meet, it not being a Board Day, Copy 3.4.5.6
when they wrote a Letter to Governor Bernard and the Collector, Comptroller,
Mr. Irving and young Mr. Harrison having sent to the Board their Affidavits on
this Affair, the Commissioners immediately directed the Secretary to lay them
before the Governor in Council. -- 7.
-- The Board received a Letter from Mr. Oliver Secretary of the Province,
acquainting them, that the Enquiry into the Affair of the Riot was referred to
a Committee of the Council to be reported on Monday.

June 11. During this Day the Commissioners received frequent Informations that
further Riots were intended. And in the Afternoon a verbal Message was brought
to them at Mr. Paxton's, where four of them dined in Company with the Governor,
that the Town was in a great Ferment, and that Mr. Hancock the Owner of the
Sloop, desired she might be restored upon his giving Bond to answer the
Prosecution that might be commenced against her, in order to quiet the Town,
the Commissioners told the Person that they could give no Answer to verbal
Messages, that if the Owner had any Application to make to them, he must do it
in Writing, to be laid before the Board.

The Commissioners, considering this Application as a Menace, and finding no
Measures had been taken by the Governor and Council for securing the Peace of
the Town, and the Governor having repeatedly told the Commissioners that he
could give them no Protection, and that he would not apply to General Gage for
Troops, unless the Council advised him to it, and at this Time said there was
no Safety for them in this Place, and they considering the Temper of the
People, and the Appearance of further Disturbances that Night, thought it most
prudent to secure a Retreat on board His Majesty's Ship, and accordingly wrote
to Captain Corner, Copy 8
and in the Evening Mr. Burch and Mr. Hulton, with their Families, went on
Board the Romney, and the next Day Mr. Robinson and Mr. Paxton came on board
the Man of War, when the Commissioners wrote a Letter to Governor Bernard. Copy
9


Monday 13. Read a Letter of Yesterday's Date from the Chairman to the
Secretary.

Read a Letter wrote by three Commissioners at 3 o'Clock this Morning, 11
to the Collector and Comptroller at Boston.

Read a Letter of the 11th Instant from the Collector and Comptroller of
Boston, 10
giving an Account of their seizing the Sloop Liberty, Captain Bernard, from
Madeira, and delivering her into the Possession of the Master of the Ship
Romney.

Read a Letter of this Date from Governor Bernard, enclosing Orders to the
Captain of Castle-William for receiving the Commissioners with their Families,
and the Officers of the Board into the Castle, and for giving them all the
Protection in his Power.

Read a Letter wrote Yesterday by the Chairman to the Comptroller and Collector
of Boston, directing them to draw up and deliver to the Secretary a written
Representation of the Proposals made for returning the Seizure to Mr. Hancock.

As the present Meeting of the Board is to concert Measures to be immediately
taken for the Honor of Government, and Security of the Revenue -- Resolved,
That Captain Corner be desired to take a Seat with the Commissioners at the
Board, and he assisted at the Board accordingly.

Read a Letter from the Collector and Comptroller of Boston, dated June 12, in
Answer to the Letter wrote by the Chairman Yesterday.

Orig.
Signed a Letter to Captain Corner.

Signed a Letter to Governor Bernard.

Ordered, That it be delivered to him by the Secretary.

The Board adjourned till Tomorrow Morning Ten o'Clock, when Mr. Temple and
the Secretary at Two o'Clock went on Shore, the other four Commissioners and
their Families remaining on Board.

H. H.

(Copy) On Board his Majesty's Ship Romney.
Tuesday, 14th June 1768.
Henry Hulton, Esquire in the Chair.

PRESENT. Mr. Burch, Mr. Robinson, Mr. Paxton, and also Captain Conner, who was
desired to attend as Yesterday. Orig.


THE Secretary having in the Evening been directed to acquaint Mr. Temple that
the Board would meet at 9 o'Clock this Morning, and that the Custom-House Barge
would attend at Wheelwright's Wharf, to take on Board the Ship, Mr. Temple, the
Secretary, and such other Officers as might be there.

About Eleven o'Clock no Boat appearing at the Wharff before the Secretary came
on Board bringing with him a Letter from Mr. Temple excusing his Attendance at
the Board on Account of the Weather.

The Board were acquainted, that Advertisements were Yesterday stuck up in
various Parts of the Town, and Hand-Bills distributed, of which the following
is a Copy.

BOSTON, June 13, 1768.
THE Sons of Liberty request all those, who in this Time of Oppression and
Distraction, wish well to, and would promote the Peace, good Order, and
Security of the Town and Province, to assemble at Liberty-Hall, under
Liberty-Tree, on Tuesday the 14th Instant, at Ten o'Clock Forenoon, prceisely.

-- And that in Consequence thereof, a Red Flag was hoisted Yesterday in the
Afternoon at Liberty-Tree, and continued flying this Morning, and that about 10
o'Clock this Morning a great Number of People, supposed to be near 2000, met,
and after choosing a Moderator adjourned to Faneuil-Hall 'till 3 o'Clock in the
Afternoon.

Read a Letter from Governor Bernard, dated the 13th Instant in the Forenoon.

Read another Letter from Governor Bernard, dated the 13th Instant.

The Board taking the said Letters into Consideration* together with their
Letters to the Governor of the 12th and 13th Instant, and having received
repeated Information of the tumultuous and disordered State of the Town of
Boston still continuing and increasing, are fully persuaded of the Justness and
Propriety of their said Letter to the (...)

Resolved, That from the outrageous Behavior of the People in the Town of
Boston, the Commissioners cannot return there, but at the utmost Hazard of
their Safety and the Honor of the Crown.

Resolved, That not receiving any Assurances from the Governor and Council of
Protection in Boston, the Board judge it expedient to retire to Castle-William,
which the Governor has offered to the Commissioners, in Order to carry on the
Business of the Revenue.

Resolved, That a Letter be wrote to Capt. Corner, to desire he will put the
Commissioners on Shore at Castle-William, and that he will remain there with
his Majesty's Ship under his Command for their Protection.

Read a Letter of this Date from the Collector and Comptroller of the Port of
Boston, wrote on Board the Ship Romney.

Orig.
Signed a Letter to Capt. Corner, of his Majesty's Ship Romney.

H. H.

Orig.
Copy of the Deposition of Thomas Kirk, Tidesman in the Port of Boston, dated
10th June, 1768.
I Thomas Kirk of Boston, Orig.
do declare and say, that being appointed one of the Tidesmen on board the
Sloop Libert, Nathaniel Barnard, Master, from Madeira, I went on board the said
Vessel the 9th Day of May last, in the Afternoon, and about 9 o'Clock in the
Evening Capt. Marshal came on board the said Vessel, and made several Proposals
to me to persuade me to consent to the hoisting out several Casks of Wine that
Night before the Vessel was entered, Orig.
to all which I, I peremptorily refused; upon which Capt. Marshall took hold of
me, and with the Assistance of five or six other Persons unknown to this
Declarent, they forcibly ^^ove me down the Companion into the Cabin, and nailed
the Cover down; I then broke through a Door into the Steerage, and was
endeavoring to get upon Deck that Way; but was forcibly pushed back again into
the Steerage, and the Companion Doors of the Steerage also fastened, and was
there confined about three Hours, and during that Time I heard a Noise as of
many People upon Deck at Work a hoisting out of Goods, as I distinctly heard
the Noise of the Tackles; when that Noise ceased, Capt. Marshall came down to
me in the Cabin and threatened, that if I made any Discovery of what had passed
there that Night, my Life would be in Danger and my Property destroyed. The
said Capt. Marshall then went away and let me at Liberty; and I was so much
intimidated by the aforesaid Threatenings, that I was deterred from making an
immediate Discovery of the aforesaid Transactions; and further this Declarent
faith not.

(Signed) Thomas Kirk.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, 10 June, 1768.
The abovenamed Thomas Kirk made Oath to the above-written Affidavit, before
me,

Samuel Pemberton, Just. Peace.



Copy of the Deposition of Joseph Harrison, Esquire Collector of the Customs at
Boston, dated June 11, 1768.
JOseph Harrison, Esquire Collector of his Majesty's Customs at Boston, on Oath
declares, that in the Afternoon of the 10th Instant, between the Hours of six
and seven, in Consequence of an Information of some illicit Practices having
been committed on board the Sloop Liberty, Capt. Barnard lately arrived from
Madeira, he went to Mr. Hancock's Wharff, and made Seizure of the said Vessel,
which he left in Charge of an Officer belonging to his Majesty's Ship the
Romney; That in returning to his Dwelling House he was surrounded and insulted
by a numerous Mob in a Street about two Hundred Yards from the said Wharff, and
was by them pelted with Stones and Dirt; that he received several Blows with
Sticks, and particularly one Blow on the Breast, which staggered him greatly,
so that it was with Difficulty he kept himself from falling; and the Deponent
verily believes, that if a Person had not pointed out to him a turning into
another Street, whilst the Mob were surrounding a House, that the Deponents
Life would have been in more imminent Danger.

That the Deponent, fearing the Mob would grow more outrageous, as they
increased in Numbers, took Refuge in a Friend's House, where he is now confined
to his Bed, and where he was informed, that his House had been attacked, and
the Windows broken, and that a Pleasure-Boat belonging to him had been dragged
up from the Waterside to the Common, and there burnt and destroyed, and
further faith not.

(Signed) Jos: Harrison.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, June 11, 1768.
Then Joseph Harrison, Esquire made solemn Oath to the Truth of the above-written,
subscribed by him before me,

(Signed) Belcher (...). Justice O'Peace



Copy of the Deposition of Benjamin Hallowell, Esquire Comptroller of the Customs
at Boston.
BEnjamin Hallowell the younger Comptroller of his Majesty's Customs at Boston,
on Oath declares, that on Information of Frauds having being committed on
Board the Sloop Liberty, Barnard Master, lately arrived from Madeira, laying at
Hancock's Wharf, he went with the Collector in the Afternoon of the 10th
Instant, between the Hours of Six and Seven o'Clock in Order to make Seizure of
the said Sloop, which they effected, and delivered into the Charge and Custody
of an Officer belonging to His Majesty's Ship the Romney. -- That during the
Time of the Seizure and Delivery of said Sloop, Numbers of People collected
together, amongst which were Daniel Malcolm, John Matchet, Captain Hopkings,
and others unknown to this Deponent -- Malcolm Matchet and Hopkins said, that
the beforementioned Sloop should not be taken into Custody; and decalared they
would go on Board, and throw the People belonging to the Romney overboard; and
made Use of every Means in their Power to interrupt the Officers in the
Execution of their Duty; saying if this Work was going forward, it was high
Time to begin; and these People, with many others, swore Revenge upon the
King's Officers, holding the Vessel by the Ropes and Sides, until she was
forced from them.

That on returning toward home, this Deponent with the (...) and his Son, were
surrounded by a numerous Mob, (...) threatened them, with many Speeches, that
they would (...) them overboard, etc. and threw Vollies of Stones, (...) and
Dirt at them. This Deponent received several (...) on the Head and other Parts
of the Body, in particular one on the Right Cheek, and another upon the Back of
his Head, of a dangerous Nature, whereby he is now confined to his House: And
this Deponent verily believes, that if (...) friendly People had not interposed
and rescued him from (...) Fury of the Mob, that he should have been murdered
in the Street.

That about Eight o'Clock the same Evening this Depo^^^ House was surrounded by
a great Concourse of People who broke his Windows, and endeavored to force the
(...), and demanded his Person, to give Satisfaction for the (...) made as
before mentioned, and after remaining for about three Quarters of an Hour, and
finding their Searches for him in vain, they dispersed; and further says not.

(Signed) Benj: Hallowell, Junior.
ss. Sworn to the same Day, before Edmund Quinsey, Justice of Peace. Boston,
11th June, 1768.



(Copy)
RIchard Acklom Harrison, Son of Joseph Harrison, Esquire Collector of His
Majesty's Customs at Boston, on Oath declares, that being in Company with his
Father in the Afternoon on the 10th Instant, between the Hours of 6 and 7, when
he made Seizure of the Sloop Liberty lying at Hancock's Wharff, and returning
homewards with him; he the Deponent was surrounded and insulted by a numerous
Mob, who pelted him with Stones and Dirt, and threw large Sticks at him; they
also threw him down, and dragged him by the Hair of his Head, and otherwise
treated him in a cruel and barbarous Manner, whereby he received two Wounds,
one in his Leg, and the other in his Arm, and put him in imminent Danger of his
Life; and had he not taken Refuge in a House by the Assistance of some friendly
People, the Deponent verily believes, that he should have been murdered in the
Street, and further says not.

(Signed) Richard Acklom Harrison.
Suffolk-Street, Boston, June 11, 1768
Then Mr. Richard Acklom Harrison made solemn Oath to the Truth of the above
(...), subscribed by him before me

(Signed) Belcher Noyes,Justice OF Peace.



Copy of the Deposition of Thomas Irving, Esquire Inspector of Imports and Exports.
Honorable Sirs,
CONSIDERING myself in some Respects under your Protection, I beg Leave to lay
before you the following short Account of an Attack made upon my Person last
Night.

Returning by myself from the End of the Long Wharff in the Evening about nine
o'Clock, I was attacked by a considerable Number of disorderly People, who,
after laying violent Hands on me, demanded if I belonged to the Man of War? To
which I answered I did not. Their next Question was, whether I belonged to the
Board of Commissioners, which I answered in the Affirmative. They then began to
beat me with Clubs, Sticks, etc. but some of the Ringleaders interposing, and
assuring me of their Protection, I walked pretty quietly up amongst them to
that Part of the Wharff adjoining King Street, where the Mob returning with me
was joined by another of much superior Numbers. This Mob after dragging me from
amongst my former Friends, seized me by the Hair, Arms, etc. whilst others were
beating me upon the Head with Clubs, calling out to murder or kill me. In this
disagreeable Situation two Men meanly dressed took Compassion upon me, and with
great Difficulty pulling me from amongst the Crowd, got me conveyed through a
House into a back Yard, and from thence into another House, where I remained
until the Mob moved me to some other Part of the Town. My Sword I have got
broke to Pieces, and received a few flight Wounds.

Thus, honorable Sirs, you have the Particulars of this Affair, as nearly as I
can recollect; at the same Time humbly craving the State of this Case may be
laid before his Majesty's Ministers, whose Protection, as a Subject, and a
Servant of the Crown, I flatter myself I am entitled to.

I am with the greatest Respect, etc. (Signed) Thomas Irving.
Boston, June 11, 1768. Suffolk-Street, June 11, 1768.
Personally appeared Thomas Irving, Esquire and swore that the above Deposition by
him subscribed was the Truth.

Signed. Benjamin Hallowell, Junr.
Justice of Peace.


(Copy)
SIR, Boston, 11th June 1768.
HIS Excellency directs me to acquaint your Honorable Board, that the Council
was just up when he received your Letter; but that there was a Committee
appointed of Six Gentlemen of the Board, who are in the Commission of the Peace
for this Country to assist him in making Enquiry into the Disorders of the last
Evening, in Order to ascertain Facts, and that the Governor has appointed
Monday Morning Nine o'Clock for this Business at the Council Chamber.

I am, Sir, Your most Obedient humble Servant, (Signed) ANDREW OLIVER.

Honorable John Robinson, Esquire
Copy of a Letter from the Commissioners of the Customs at Boston, to Captain
Corner.
SIR,
FROM the Outrageous Behavior of the People in this Place last Night, toward
our Officers, and the present Appearance of Things, we are persuaded, that
further Violence is intended, and that we ourselves are the Objects; We
therefore desire, Sir, that you will Order a Boat to take us on Board His
Majesty's Ship under your Command, to shelter us from Insult.

We are, etc. Henry Hulton Wm. Burch Char: Paxton John Robinson.

11th June 1768.
Copy of a Letter from the Honorable Commissioners of His Majesty's Customs to
Governor Bernard.
SIR,
AS we found by Mr. Secretary Oliver's Letter Yesterday, that no immediate
Measures were taken in Council for securing the Peace of the Town. though there
was the strongest Reason to expect further Violences, and your Excellency
acquainting us, that you could give us not Protection, and that Boston was no
Place of Safety for us, and having received a verbal Message from the People,
by a Person of Character to this Effect, That if the Sloop that was seized was
brought back to Mr. Hancock's Wharf upon his giving Security to answer the
Prosecution, the Town might be kept Quiet; which Message appearing to us as a
Menace, we applied to Captain Corner to take us on board His Majesty's Ship
under his Command, where we now are; and being this Day further informed, that
some of the Leaders of the People had persuaded them in an Harangue to desist
from further Outrages 'till Monday Evening, when the People are to be left to
use their own Discretion, if their Requisitions are not complied with: We
acquaint your Excellency, that we cannot consistent with the Honor of our
Commission, act in any Business of the Revenue whilst under such an Influence,
and think it necessary to provide for our future Security, and therefore
request your Excellency to give Directions that the Commissioners may be
received into the Castle, and that they may have the Use of the Accommodations
there for themselves, their Families, and the Officers of the Board; and that
your Excellency will please to give Orders for their Protection and Security,
whilst they may remain there.

(Signed) John Robinson, H. Hulton, W. Burch, C. Paxton.

On Board his Majesty's Ship Romney, 12th June 1768.
To his Excellency Gov. Bernard.
Copy of a Letter from the Collector and Comptroller of Boston, to the
Honorable Commissioners of the Customs at Boston.
Honorable Sirs,
AGREEABLE to your Honors Directions, we laid before the Solicitor Mr. Lesle,
Thomas Kirk's Deposition relating to the Sloop Liberty, Capt. Barnard, from
Madeira, on which from the Facts and Circumstances therein related, he gave his
Opinion, that the said Sloop ought to be seized, in Consequence of which and of
Directions given us by the Chairman of the Honorable Board, we immediately
proceeded to make Seizure of the said Sloop Liberty, then laying at Mr.
Hancock's Wharff, which we effected Yesterday about 7 o'Clock in the Afternoon,
and delivered her into the Possession of the Master of his Majesty's Ship
Romney, who now has the Charge of her. We are,

Your Honors most dutiful and most obedient Servants, Jos. Harrison, Collector,
Benj. Hallowell, Count.

Custom-House, Boston, June 11, 1768.
The Honorable the Commissioners of his Majesty's Customs.
(Copy)
Romney, 12th June, Sunday 4 o'Clock. Gentlemen,
AS Chairman, I am to desire that you will immediately draw up and deliver to
the Secretary or Mr. Reeve, a written Representation of the Proposals made
Yesterday for restoring the Seizure to Mr. Hancock, on his giving Security for
the Value, in Order to pacify the Town, and also of the Stipulations that were
entered into last Night by the Principals of the Mob, that no further Outrage
should be committed until Tomorrow Evening, that they might have the Board's
Answer to the Proposals; and you are to express the same in the most full and
clear Manner. -- You shall soon hear further from me, on the Subject of our
Conversation last Night.

I am, etc. (Signed) John Robinson.

Copy of a Letter from the Collector and Comptroller of Boston, to the
Chairman, June 12, 1768.
SIR,
WE beg Leave to inform you in answer to your Letter, that the Proposal made to
us on Behalf of Mr. Hancock, is, that the Sloop Liberty that has been seized,
and now under the Protection of the Romney Man of War, shall be returned to Mr.
Hancock's Wharff, and suffered to lie there, till the Affair is issued in the
Court of Admiralty, and that he, Mr. Hancock, will give Security, that the said
Sloop shall be at forthcoming and re-delivered to us, in Case the Decree shall
be in our Favor.

The Substance of the several Informations we have had respecting the
Stipulations in Behalf of the Mob, is, that a Design was formed, and concerted
for a general Insurrection or Assembly last Night, and in Consequence thereof
large Numbers of People were actually gathered together, and regularly formed
into Parties under their respective Leaders in several Parts of the Town. That
the Reason given for this Proceeding was to oblige by Force those concerned in
the Seizure to return the Sloop Liberty to the Wharff from whence she had been
taken. As the Consequence of that Attempt might have been a general Outrage, or
perhaps a Pillage of every Person concerned in the Customs, and of those who
are accounted their Friends and Abettors; it has alarmed several Gentlemen of
the Town, and induced them to make the Proposal abovementioned for returning
the Sloop to Mr. Hancock's Wharff, and to give Time for a Negotiation to that
Purpose, it was stipulated with the principal Leaders and Managers of the Mob,
that no farther Outrages should be committed, but that the People should remain
quiet till Monday Night, which was the longest Term that could be obtained of
them.

It appears evident to us, that a Plan for an Insurrection, of a very dangerous
and extensive Nature, has long been in Agitation, and now brought nearly to a
Crisis; and that to put it in Execution, there was only wanting some Step to be
taken by the Officers of the Customs, that might be made a Handle of to Inflame
the Minds of the People, which this Seizure has furnished them with.

Upon the whole we can only observe, that as the Powers of Government in this
Country, are in so weak and enervated a State, and the Mob, by what we can
learn, determined upon their point, we should consider it as a Measure of
Policy in the present Dilemma to take Mr. Hancock's Security, and release the
Sloop for the Preservation of the Officers, and Tranquillity of the Town, which
we have Reason to believe would otherwise be greatly endangered.

We are, Sir, with great Respect, Your most obedient and most humble Servants,
Jos. Harrison, Collector. Benj. Hallowell, Count.

Boston, 12th June 1768.
To the Honorable John Robinson, Esquire
Gentlemen,
IN Consequence of the Intelligence you have given us, we think it absolutely
necessary to direct you to convey all the Money in your Custody belonging to
the Crown, in the Boat herewith sent you, in order that it may be deposited in
the Romney for safe Custody.

Signed.
John Robinson, Henry Hulton, Wm. Burch.

Romney, 13th June 1768. Monday 3 o'Clock Morning.
To the Collector and Comptroller, Boston.
Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Commissioners of the Customs.
Council Chamger, June 13th 1768. Forenoon. Gentlemen,
HAVING communicated your Letter of the 12th Instant to the Council, they
observe with Concern, that you say, that no immediate Measures were taken in
Council for securing the Peace of the Town, though there was the strongest Reason
to expect further Violences; they cannot but be apprehensive, that this
Sentence, if it should pass unnoticed, must tend to charge them with a Neglect
of their Duty, in not advising me to take proper Measures for preserving the
Peace of the Town; they therefore have desired me to acquaint you, that, during
the Sitting of the Council on Saturday Morning, so far from their having the
strongest Reason to expect further Violences, there was no Reason at all given
for such Expectation, and there was no Apprehension either in the Governor or
Council of an immediate Danger of further Violences: It was therefore the
general Opinion, that they might take Time to ascertain the Facts of the Riot
on Friday Evening, before they proceeded to order the bringing the Offenders to
Justice, or to prevent the like Offenses for the future. I have this Morning
informed them of the present Apprehensions of further Violences, and they are
now taking the same into Consideration.

I am, Gentlemen, etc. (Signed) Francis Bernard.

To the Honorable the Commissioners of the Customs.
Copy of the Commissioners Letter to Captain Corner, dated Romney, 13th June,
1768.
Sir,
AS the Officers of the Customs, and our Servants in Boston, are exposed to the
utmost Outrages from the Violences of the People, we desire you would afford
Shelter on board his Majesty's Ship under your Command to such of them, as may
take the Benefit of that Protection, and you will please to issue Orders for
their being received and victualled.

We are, etc. Signed
Henry Hulton, J. Temple, W. Burch, Cha: Paxton, John Robinson.


To Capt. Corner, Commander of his Majesty's Ship the Romney.
Copy of a Letter from the Commissioners of the Customs in Boston, to Governor
Bernard.
Sir,
WHEN your Excellency met in Council last Saturday, we were in Hopes to have
heard that effectual Measures would have been taken to aid and protect us, and
our officers, in carrying on the Service of the Revenue, and for preserving the
Peace of the Town; but we were much surprised to find, that a Committee was
only appointed to ascertain the Facts attending the Tumult of the preceding
Night, and that your Council was not to sit again till this Day.

On Saturday Afternoon finding ourselves utterly insecure in Town, the major
Part of us were obliged to seek for an Asylum where we now sit as a Board,
being persuaded of the Danger of attempting to proceed in our Duty in Town.

The Disorders of the Town, we are sorry to observe, are increasing to such an
enormous Pitch, as to give it the Appearance more of an Insurrection than a
Riot; and we find ourselves obliged to apply to your Excellency to grant us
such Aid and Protection, as may enable us and our Officers to proceed in our
Duty; and that we may be in some Degree enabled to judge, whether the Aid and
Protection you will think proper to grant will be adequate to the Distresses and
embarrassed State of the Service: We must request, that you will let us know,
what kind of Aid and Protection we may expect to receive.

(Signed) Hen. Hulton, J. Temple, Wm. Burch, C. Paxton, J. Robinson.

On Board his Majesty's Ship Romney 13th June 1768.
Jamaica-Plains, June 13, 1768. Gentlemen,
I AM very sorry, that you think yourselves so much in Danger in Boston, as to
make it unsafe for you to reside there. As you judge it necessary to you
Security to resort to the Castle, I hereby enclose Orders to the Captain of the
Castle to receive you and your Families, and the Officers of your Board, and to
accommodate you there, and to give you all the Protection and Security in his
Power.

I am, Gentlemen, your most obedient humble Servant, Fra. Bernard.

To the Honorable the Commissioners of His Majesty's Customs.
Boston, 13th June, 1768. Gentlemen,
IN Answer to that Part of your Letter of this Day, wherein you desire me to
grant you such Aid and Protection as may enable you and your Officers to
proceed in your Duty; I can only inform you, that, after several Hours
Deliberation of the Necessity of taking some Measures to preserve the Peace of
the Town, and what those Measures should be, the Council have come to a
Resolution, that as there appears to be no immmediate Danger of further
Violence, they are of Opinion, that it would be best to refer this Matter to
the Consideration of a Committee of both Houses; I therefore cannot at present
let you know, what Kind of Aid and Protection you may expect to receive.

I am, Gentlemen, your most obedient humble Servant, FRA. BERNARD.

To the Honorable Commissioners of his Majesty's Customs.
Copy of a Letter to the Commissioners, from the Collector and Comptroller of
Boston, dated on Board the Romney, 14th June, 1768.
Honorable Sirs,
THE Depositions, which we laid before your Honors, on the 11th Instant,
concerning the outrageous Manner in which we were attacked, and treated on the
preceding Evening, after making Seizure of the Sloop Liberty belonging to Mr.
Hancock, will best describe what happened on that Occasion, and by our Letter
of the 12th your Honors will have observed the inflamed Temper of the People,
and the Stipulations that were demanded for a Truce until the Monday; after
which Period they seemed determined to take their own Measures for Redress; the
Event however has manifested that the Peace and Tranquillity of the Town was not
the Object they meant to seek after; for no Assurance was sent on the Part of
Mr. Hancock, either verbally or in writing, that he would agree to any
Stipulations for the re-delivery of the Sloop; and we are of Opinion, that it
was no Part of their Design to let go this Plea for breaking out into open
Violence.

After the ruffian Treatment we had experienced on the Friday Evening, merely
for executing our Duty, the Stipulation broke through, knowing the preverseness
of the People, and the Temper of the Times, our Lives threatened, and hearing
that even your Honors had been obliged to seek Refuge on Board His Majesty's
Ship in the Harbor, our own Safety's became a Consideration of a very serious
Nature. The Collector has had an Intimation, that he would be laid hold of by
way of Reprizals and the Inveteracy against the Comptroller is so general and
confirmed, that they have both been obliged to leave the Town, and seek for any
Asylum from the Fury of a distracted and enraged Multitude.

The Business of the Collector is left in charge of his Deputy Mr. Sheaffe, and
the Comptroller's with his Clerk, both capable of duly executing their
respective Offices, so long as any Officer belonging to the Customs shall be
suffered to remain in this Place. But it is with deep Concern that we acquaint
your Honors, of what we hear repeatedly from all Quarters, which is, that a
general Spirit of Insurrection prevails, not only in the Town, but throughout
the whole Provinces; and when we reflect on what has passed before, we fear it
has too much the Air of Truth.

We are, etc. (Signed) Jos. Harrison Benj. Hallowell.


Copy of a Letter from the Honorable the Commissioners of the Customs at
Boston, to Commodore Hood.
SIR,
FINDING it utterly impossible to carry on the Business of the Revenue in the
Town of Boston from the Outragous Behavior of the People, who grossly abused
and wounded the Collector, and Comptroller, and other Officers in the Execution
of their Duty, on the 10th Instant, and still continue to threaten their and
our Lives, we took shelter on Board His Majesty's Ship Romney, and desired
Captain Corner to put us on Shore at Castle William, where we now are, and at
our Request Captain Corner will continue near to the Castle for our Protection.

The Ferment amongst the People has greatly increased since the 10th Instant,
and we are persuaded, that their Leaders will urge them to the most violent
Measures, even to open Revolt; for one of their Demagogues in a Town-Meeting
Yesterday, said, if they were called on to Defend their Liberties, and
Privileges, he hoped and believed they would one and all Resist, even unto
Blood.

What Steps the Governor and his Council may take we cannot tell; but having
applied to them, we have not received any Assurances of Protection; and we are
persuaded the Governor will not apply for Troops without the Advice of his
Council; which Measure we do not imagine they will recommend; and we now write,
Sir, to acquaint you of the very alarming State of Things in Boston, and to
desire you will give us such further Protection, as you may be able to afford
us in the present Exigency.

We are, etc. Signed Hen. Hulton J. Temple William Burch Cha's Paxton John
Robinson.

Castle, William, Boston Harbor 15 June 1768.
Samuel Hood, Esquire
[ A Copy of the foregoing Letter was sent to his Excellency General Gage, at
New York, and to Colonel Dalrymple, at Halifax.]



Boston, 14th June 1768, 6 o'Clock, P. M. Honorable Gentlemen,
AT Three Clock this Afternoon there was a very numerous Meeting of the
Inhabitants of the Town of Boston at Faneuil-Hall, when James Otis, Esquire was
chosen Moderator. But before he came to the Hall, a Motion was made to exclude
the Tide Waiters from being present, several of them being then in the Meeting,
but 'twas objected to, as having no Right to such a Proceeding, and that it
would be best, every one should hear what was to be offered. When the Moderator
came, he was ushered into the Hall by an almost universal Clap of Hands. By
this Time the Hall being quite full, and a great number being Outside, the
Meeting was adjourned from the Hall to Dr. Sewall's Meeting House, as being
much larger for that Purpose. The Doors of the Meeting House were soon opened,
and the People crowded in, when Silence being called, a Motion was made, that a
Paper in the Hands of one of the Select-Men might be read, which was a Petition
of the Inhabitants of the Town of Boston to His Excellency Governor Bernard, in
which was represented the Difficulties and Burdens the Town labors under; in
particular with Regard to His Majesty's Ship Romney, now in our Harbor, and
praying his Excellency would cause the said Ship to be removed; and a Committee
of 21 Persons was chosen to wait on his Excellency the Governor immediately at
his Seat at Roxbury with the aforesaid Petition, and the said Committee are
gone accordingly. In the said Petition Complaint was also made of the unlimited
Power of the Board of Commissioners, and other Grievances; notwithstanding
little else was said about the Board of Commissioners, or the Riot that
happened last Friday Evening. A Motion was then made, that the Meeting be
adjourned till tomorrow Afternoon 4 o'Clock, which was agreed to by a large
Majority, the Moderator first making a Speech to the Inhabitants, strongly
recommending Peace and good Order, and the Grievance the People labor under
might in Time be removed; if not, and we were called on to defend our Liberties
and Privileges, he hoped and believed we should one and all resist even unto
Blood; but, at the same Time, prayed Almighty God it might never so happen.
After the Meeting People's Minds seemed somewhat easy. All Inaccuracies we hope
will be overlooked, and shall take due Care to inform you, Honorable Gentlemen,
of every Thing in our Power conducive to His Majesty's Service, which it ever
has been, and we humbly beg Leave to say ever shall be, our sincere Wish at
least is so to do.

G. --
who was on Board of His Majesty's Ship Romney in the Forenoon.
Extract of a Letter from a Gentleman of Character, dated Boston, June 14th,
1768.
Sir,
MR. -- this Morning delivered your kind Message; I am sincerely sorry for the
III-behaviour of the People, which must terminate in their Ruin and
Destruction. -- There certainly is, among some of the most wicked and
abondoned, a settled Scheme to oppose even the King's Troops landing, if that
should be attempted, and they are endeavoring to get the Country to join in
that most profligate and vile Undertaking; however, I think it is beyond all
Doubt, but those of Property, and the better Sort of People among us, will
discountenance such intolerable Madness; and will, notwithstanding the
malicious and unreasonable Efforts of a few, lost to all Sense of Gratitude to
their Mother Country, desperate in their Fortunes, and in short devoid of all
Principles except such as are peculiar to Devils, exert themselves against such
a Measure, as soon as they dare act in Conformity to their own Judgment.

It is my Opinion, that the Promoters of the present Evils are ready to unmask,
and openly discover their long and latent Design to rebel, and, if possible, to
involve this miserable Country in Blood and Horror. Heaven avert the Evil! to
commit to Writing the various Methods, by which they delude the ignorant and
persuade the vicious, would be extremely tedious; but in general, nothing is
left undone to accomplish both.

One of their grand Objects is to spread the Infection, and thereby bring all
the Colonies to the very verge of a general revolt; if they are disappointed in
this, their Projects will drop of Course.

I still am, and will continue to be, Dear Sir, Your sincere Friend, and most
obedient Servant.

Extract of a Letter from a Gentleman well acquainted with the State of the
Town of Boston.
Dear Sir,
IT is with the utmost Concern, that I observe a great Uneasiness and unusual
Sourness in the Minds of the People in general; have much Grieved at the
public Abuses of some great Personages among us, who, to say no more, have
merited very different Treatment. Much might be said on that Head; but to
pursue what was more immediately in my Mind; I don't know, but fear, that the
uproar of Friday Night is but a prelude of greater Disturbances. And, Sir, as
my regards for you are unfeigned, I would just hint what I have noticed from
the several Quarters, etc. The People, as a People, are exceedingly averse to
the Gentlemen of the Honorable Board of Commissioners. -- I have heard your
Name oftenest mentioned. -- I have obviated many Things, and anticipated
others, to the utmost of my poor Abilities. -- I know that these convulsions
among these People must give you Uneasiness: but rouse your Philosophy. -- I
fear there will be more confusion, though I do but guess, for I am in no Secret;
yet at the same Time he that runs may read, that without some speedy
Interposition a great Storm will arise; which God avert.

I am, Dear Sir, etc.
A true Copy,

John Rosier, Clerk of the Papers.



MEMORIAL of the Commissioners of the Customs in North America, July 11th,
1768, and Papers thereunto annnexed.
Copy of a Letter from the Commissioners of the Customs at Boston, to the Lords
Commissioners of his Majesty's Treasury.
May it please your Lordships,
IN our Memorial of the 16th of June, we represented the Situation we were then
in, and laid before your Lordships sundry Papers relative thereto, and our
Proceedings thereon; and we now transmit Copies of Letters we received from
General Gage at New York, and Commodore Hood and Colonel Dalrymple at Halifax,
in Answer to our Letters, Copies of which were enclosed in the forementioned
Papers.

His Majesty's Ship Romney, and Sloops the Beaver and Senegal, with two
Schooners, are now in this Harbor, and this Protection afforded us by
Commodore Hood, has been the most seasonable, as without them, we should not
have considered ourselves in Safety, nor his Majesty's Castle secured from
falling into the Hands of the People.

The Inconveniences we are exposed (...) we bear with Cheerfulness, and beg
Leave to assure your Lordships, that no Difficulties shall abate our Zeal in
the Service; but it is impossible for us to set Foot in Boston, until there
are two or three Regiments in the Town, to restore and support Government: We
further represent, that the Castle being situated on a small Island in the Bay,
about a League from the Town, will render our Situation any longer than the
Summer Months insupportable: We therefore pray your Lordships, that Orders may
be given for our Residence and Protection before the Winter.

Which is humbly submitted, John Robinson, Hen. Hulton, Wm. Burch, Cha. Paxton.

Castle-William, Boston Harbor, 11th July 1768. [ It may here be observed,
that at the Commencement of this Board of Commissioners, a Majority of them
considered it necessary for all the Members to sign such Letters and Memorials
to the Treasury as should be agreed on by the major Part. Accordingly it became
a Rule, that the whole should sign whatever was so agreed on, notwithstanding
the Dissent of any Individual. This (it is said) was very reluctantly complied
with by one of them, who immediately applied to the Treasury to be instructed
whether such signing was indispensibly necessary. The Answer was in the
Negative: Since which, that Member (we are well assured) has witheld his
Signature from all Letters, Memorials and Papers he in Conscience thought
wrong: And that he took the precaution by writing Home to set aside the effect
of his Signature (...) all such as went forward, before he had obtained the
Sense of the Treasury upon that Matter.]



Copy of a Letter from General Gage to the Commissioners of the Customs at
Boston, dated New York, June 21, 1768.
Gentlemen,
I AM sincerely concerned to learn by Your Letter of the 15th Instant,
delivered to me by Mr. Elliot, Collector of this Port, that the Turbulent State
of Affairs in the City of Boston has laid you under the Necessity to take
Shelter at Castle-William, and to have Occasion for the Aid of His Majesty's
Forces.

My Inclination would lead me to Order Troops to march immediately for your
Protection; but you must be sensible that it would be highly improper in me to
Order Troops into a Province for the Purpose of quelling Riots, unless
Application should be first made to that End by the Civil Power.

I have yet heard nothing on this Subject from Governor Bernard, who must be
best acquainted with the Situation of Affairs in his Province, and the
properest Judge how far such a Measure would be expedient and necessary.

The Moment he applies to me for the Aid of the King's Forces to support His
Majesty's Government on this or any other Occasion, they shall move to his
Assistance with as much Dispatch as it shall be possible for them to do, and as
many of them as he can in Reason demand.

I have the Honor to be with great Regard, Gentlemen, etc. (Signed) THO. GAGE.

Commissioners of His Majesty's Customs North America.
Copy of a Letter from Commodore Hood, to the Honorable Commissioners of His
Majesty's Customs at Boston.
Gentlemen,
I HAVE received your Two Letters of the 15th and 18th, and am very sorry
Affairs at Boston wear so upleasant an Aspect; I have ordered the Beaver to
return immediately as well as the Saint Lawrence Schooner; and if you think
further Naval Force essentially necessary for carrying on the King's Business,
I shall be happy in sending it to the utmost of my Power on the first
Application; at present I have only a Forty Gun Ship wholly unrigg'd and under
Repair; but am in daily Expectation of three or four.

I am, etc. (Signed) SAMUEL HOOD.

Commissioners Customs Boston
Copy of a Letter from Colonel Dalrymple, to the Honorable the Commissioners of
the Customs at Boston, dated at Halifax June 23d, 1768.
THE immediate Return of His Majesty's ship Beaver only allows me to
acknowledge the Honor of the Letter from your Honorable Board, dated June 15th,
as well as the Receipt of some other Papers occasioned by the late Outrageous
Proceedings at Boston.

My feelings as a Man joined with those of a Servant of the Crown, are deeply
affected on this Occasion; and I am very unhappy at not being able to give you
instant and effectual Relief; but the Board may rely entirely on my performing
the Part that my Situation enables me to do, which is the holding ready at a
Minute's Warning the whole of the Troops under my Command, to act in Obedience
to any Orders or in Compliance with any Requisitions given or signified to me
by my Superiors; and I trust, that, should there be unhappily Occasion, the
Force here is more than sufficient to compel all those who shall dare to resist
lawful Authority, to act in a Manner more becoming good Subjects.

I shall at all Times esteem it Honor to prove myself Gentlemen, Your most
humble and most obedient Servant, (Signed) W. DALRYMPLE
A true Copy,

John Rosier,Clerk of the Papers.




