Gospel Comfort, under heavy Tidings. THE SUBSTANCE OF A SERMON, Delivered at
MIDDLEBOROUGH, FEBRUARY 5, 1769, Upon hearing of the Death of a godly MOTHER.
By ISAAC BACKUS, PASTOR of a CHURCH there. To which is added, Some MEMORIES of
her LIFE.

PROVIDENCE: Printed by JOHN CARTER, at Shakespeer's Head. M,DCC,LXIX.

GOSPEL COMFORT FOR MOURNERS.
1 THESSALONIANS, iv. 14. For if we believe that Jesus died, and rose again,
even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him.


ONE peculiar excellency of the gospel revelation is, that it opens a glorious
prospect beyond the grave, where nature can see nothing but darkness. In those
gloomy regions where the light of nature (that is cried up by many) can see
nothing but perpetual night, the gospel opens a morning which shall never have
an evening.

Many of the heathen had some confused notions of the future existence of the
soul, but they never dreampt of the resurrection of the body: Hence when the
Apostle Paul was at Athens, that noted seat of learning in the heathen world,
though the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers could hear him upon other points,
yet when he came to the doctrine of the resurrection, they mocked at it, as a
matter too absurd to deserve a hearing. Such a miserable guide is fleshly
wisdom! And since many of the Thessalonians had been lately turned from those
dark ways, the Apostle takes care, among other important articles, to instruct
them in this great point, that they might not sorrow for their Christian
friends, as others which have no hope. No hope of ever seeing or enjoying them
again, as if they were lost in the grave. He does not forbid all sorrow; no, it
is given as a mark of an abandoned people, when the righteous were taken away,
and no man laid it to heart. Isa. lvii. 1. Jesus himself wept over his friend
Lazarus, yet an immoderate sorrow is to be guarded against; for if we believe
that Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will
God bring with him.

The particular occasion of my reading these words to you at this time, is the
tidings I have just received of the death of my dear godly mother Mrs.
Elizabeth Backus, of Norwich, who died January 26, 1769, in the 71st year of
her age.
, though they afford many important instructions which deserve the constant
notice of every soul. They may naturally lead us to consider what it is to be
in Jesus; that death is but a sleep to such, and that God will wake them up,
and bring them with him in the great day.

1. What is it to be in Jesus? For if we are not first in him, we cannot sleep
in him. Answer, 1. It is by faith to take him as our refuge from all evil. In
our fallen state we like the slayer are exposed to the avenger's stroke
continually, from which no natural nor Christian friends can secure us; our
houses are no defense, neither are the strongest holds that nature or art can
afford: Nothing but the refuge which God has provided can secure us. The city
of refuge was an eminent type of our glorious Savior, who by his obedience and
satisfaction has brought in an everlasting righteousness, which is unto all,
and upon all them that believe; which secures them from the dreadful sentence
of the law: For there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus; yea
his own mouth has declared, that they shall not come into condemnation, but are
passed from death unto life. Romans iii. 22. and viii. 1. John v. 24. Souls will
not fly to this refuge till they see their danger; hence appears the necessity
of the law, as a schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. When Israel heard its
thunderings from Mount Sinai, they saw that they should die if they had not one
to stand between God and them; and when any soul effectually hears the law, it
is alarmed to fly for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us. Heb. vi.
18. A view of which hope will make the soul gladly quit all its own stuff, that
it may win Christ, and be found in him. Phil. iii. 8, 9. Who is also a refuge
from every enemy.

The strong man armed would fain drag us to ruin, but Jesus has conquered him,
and taken away all his armor, so that he cannot hurt any saint. Indeed the
serpent will show his venom at their heel; but the God of peace shall bruise
him under their feet shortly. Romans xvi. 20. Persecutors often take crafty
counsel against them, but it is in vain, for they are hidden ones: Their life is
hid with Christ in God. Psa. lxxxiii. 3. Col. iii. 3. Believers are in the
midst of a world of troubles, yet God is their refuge and strength, and such a
present help therein, that he makes all to work together for their good. He is
a wall of sire round about them, and the glory in the midst of them: Which
leads me to observe,

2. That to be in Jesus is to have a living union with him, as the branch has
with the vine. As natural life is lost when the union between soul and body is
dissolved; so our spiritual life was lost by revolting from God, and is
recovered only by reconciliation and union with him. By the divine spirit the
soul is cut off from nature's stock, and grafted into Christ, the true vine,
whereby they have such a vital union with him as to receive strength and
nourishment from him, to bring forth fruit to the Father's glory; without which
union and communion, they wither, and can do nothing. Romans xi. 24. John xv. --
The great Apostle of the Gentiles says, I am crucified with Christ,
nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me. And again, I also
labor, striving according to his working, which works in me mightily. Those
who thus walk in Christ as they have received him, are truly happy in life, as
no others are, and death is far from putting a period to their felicity; so far
from it, that it puts an end to all their toils and troubles, and brings them
to their rest. Hence observe,

2. That death is but a sleep to those who are in Jesus. This metaphor is often
used to describe the saints departure. Christ himself said, our friend Lazarus
sleeps. The aptness of the similitude may be seen in these particulars:

1. Sleep is peculiarly for the body. While that is asleep, the thoughts often
rove far and wide, and sometimes God has appeared to and conversed with the
soul while the body slept; so in this case, when the body returns to the earth,
the spirit returns unto God who gave it. Eccl. xii. 7. Some have advanced a
conceit of the soul's sleeping with the body till the resurrection, but that is
a most stupid notion, contrary to the whole book of God. Our Savior showed to
the Sadduces, that God's saying I am the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob,
clearly proved that they then had a living existence, as well as should
hereafter have their bodies raised. Luke xx. 38. And he said to the penitent
thief, today shall thou be with me in Paradise. Also in the parable of the
rich man and Lazarus, he is so far from countenancing this notion, that he
shows how hell-flames will wake up the soul which was stupid before, and give
it a keen sense of its own torments, and apprehension of the saints happiness,
even while his brethren remained in this world, and needed to take warning of
their danger.

2. Sleep is for the night, after the season for labor is closed. This life is
often compared to a day, in which important labor and business is to be done,
and it discovers great stupidity not to attend thereto in its season. Hence
that sharp reprimand, "why stand ye here all the day idle?" Matt. xx. 6. Jesus
spoke and acted as a pattern for his people, when he said, I must work the
works of him that sent me while it is day; the night comes, wherein no man can
work. Though we have not the same works in many respects to do that he had, yet
each one has a work assigned him, by him who sent us into the world, and
whatsoever our hand finds to do, we ought to do with our might, since there
is no device, work or knowledge in the grave, whither we are going.

3. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet. It is emphatically so with those who
have labored for God, and have spent their time and strength in his service.
It is said of David, that, after he had served his own generation by the will
of God, he fell asleep. And he says or himself, thou art my hope, O Lord God;
thou art my trust from my youth; I will hope continually, and will praise thee
more and more. I will go in the strength of the Lord God: I will make mention
of thy righteousness, even of thine only. O God, thou have taught me from my
youth; and hitherto I have declared thy wondrous works: Now also when I am old
and grey-headed, O God, forsake me not, until I have showed thy strength unto
this generation, and thy power to every one that is to come. Psa. lxxi. 5, 14,
16 -- 18. Thus he ascribes all the honor to God in the fullest manner, while
he enjoys great comfort in his own soul, on a review of the part he had been
enabled to act in life, and with a prospect of the glorious morning when he
shall be "brought up again from the depths of the earth." Verse 20. A like view
made Paul say, I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at
hand. 2 Timothy iv. 6 -- 8.

I am far from thinking that rich grace may not now as well as formerly be
displayed, if God will, at the last hour, to such as have spent their life in
sin, so as to give a joyful prospect of glory; yet for souls to neglect the
great salvation, with a notion of obtaining such mercy hereafter, is an evil
which we have as great warnings against, as any one that is mentioned in (...)
How full to this purpose is Prove. i. 22 to the end, and v. 11 -- 14? O what
distress can be like mourning at the last, with this keen reflection, how have
I hated instruction and my heart despised reproof! Hence we have that call
often inculcated, today if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. On
the other hand, Peter enforces his exhortation to the saints, to give all
diligence to add to their faith virtue, etc. by this motive, that so an
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And he thought it meet, as long as he was in
this tabernacle, to stir them up, by putting them always in remembrance of
these things. 2 Peter, i. 5 -- 13. Again,

4. Sleep gives relief from the toils and troubles of the day; so those who die
in the Lord, from henceforth rest from their labors. Rev. xiv. 13. Indeed here
the antetype goes far beyond the type, for common laborers have only a short
respite, and then return to their task again; but those who sleep in Jesus,
from henceforth rest for ever from their labors, yea, and from every thing
disagreeable; for they go where the wicked cease from troubling, and where the
weary are at rest. Yet it is far from the sluggard's paradise, for while the
Prophet shows, that, in opposition to all unhappiness, the righteous are taken
away from the evil to come, and enter into peace and rest in their beds, he
shows at the same time, that in distinction from all stupidity, each one is
walking in his uprightness. Isa. lvii. 2. The soul is joining with angels, and
the spirits of just men made perfect, while the body sleeps in the dust. And,

5. Sleep is but for a night, to wake in the morning with fresh vigor: So
shall it truly be with the saints. Though in this world they are often
neglected or abused by such as trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in
the multitude of their riches; yet Death shall feed upon them, and the upright
shall have dominion over them, in the morning. Psa. xlix. 14. O glorious
morning! Then will the righteous be satisfied, when they awake in the divine
likeness. Psa. xvii. 15. Which leads us to consider,

3. That God will wake up those who sleep in Jesus, and bring them with him in
the great day. This is the certain consequence of Christ's death and
resurrection, which is the foundation of all our hopes. The resurrection is not
a doctrine of natural, but of revealed religion, and is built upon God's
promise through his Son, who therefore resolved the error of those who formerly
denied this doctrine into two points; their not knowing the scriptures, nor the
power of God. Matt. xxii. 29. Not knowing the scriptures, which reveal it, nor
the power of God, which will perform it. And those who deny the resurrection of
the body in our day, err in the same points; but let infidels set up reason
against revelation ever so much, and say, how can this flesh, which moulders in
the dust, or is scattered in the air or water, ever be raised again? Yet if we
believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus
will God bring with him. He that gives up this doctrine forfeits the name of a
Christian, for if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised; and if Christ
be not raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins. But now is Christ
risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept. 1 Cor. xv.
16, 17, 20. And as surely as he arose and ascended to heaven, so surely will he
come again with power and great glory, and will speak with such authority, that
all who are in their graves shall hear his voice, and come forth. John v. 28,
29. That morning will be as joyful to the righteous, as it will terrible to the
wicked.

But how will the saints then appear? Our ideas thereof are very imperfect. The
beloved disciple says, it does not appear what we shall be, but we know that
when he shall appear we shall be like him. Well that is enough for the
heaven-born soul, whose language is, then shall I be satisfied, when I awake in
thy likeness! Yet the Apostle Paul has given some lively descriptions of this
affair, in 1. Cor. xv. 42 -- 44. Alluding to the quickening of seed that is
sown, he says, it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is
sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised
in power; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. It Is the
same body, though gloriously changed; therefore he adds, that this corruptible
must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. And
elsewhere he tells us, that the Savior shall change our vile body, that it may
be fashioned like unto his glorious body. Phil. iii. 21. Then shall the saints
be satisfied with likeness to him, both in body and soul, and he will bring
them with him: None will be left behind, but all shall be caught up together in
the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and shall be openly acquitted and
blessed by the great Judge; and to crown the whole, shall be EVER WITH THE LORD.

These things may teach us,

1. The importance of looking each one to his own case: Are we in Jesus or not?
No question can be of greater weight to us, therefore my friends pass it not
over slightly. Have you been made to know the dreadfulness of being without
Christ, without God in the world? And have you been driven out of every other
refuge, so as to take sanctuary in Christ alone? One peculiar excellency of the
knowledge of him is, that it transforms the soul into his likeness: Hence John
gives this as the reason why the saints know that when he shall appear they
shall be like him, namely because they shall see him as he is. i. John, 3.2.
The views they have of him now, through a glass darkly, cause a self-loathing
for their former actings against him, and a longing after conformity to him in
heart and life: Hence they justly conclude, that when their views of him come
to be perfect, their likeness will be so also; and this is the mark they steer
for, and the prize they press after: Therefore the apostle asserts in the next
words, that, every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself even as HE
is pure. Have we truly this hope or not?

2. This doctrine may afford much support and encouragement to the faithful, in
all their labors and sorrows here. These are but for a day, which is swiftly
passing, and though ye may bear the burden and heat of it, yet the shadows of
the evening draw on apace, when you shall rest from your labors, and reap the
happy fruits of them for ever. James's exhortation is full to this purpose:
Having spoken of the suffering which the just are exposed to in this world, he
turns to them and says, be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the
Lord: Behold the husbandman waits for the precious fruits of the earth, and
has long patience for it, until he receive the early and the latter rain. Be
ye also patient; stablish your hearts; for the coming of the Lord draws nigh.
Jam. v. 7, 8. Does the husbandman pursue his labors, and patiently go through
the toils of summer with the hope of a future harvest, and shall not the
believer show equal diligence and constancy in his father's vineyard? Did I say
equal? Yea much greater; for the one labors for the meat that perishes, while
the other's labors are for that meat which endures unto everlasting life,
which the Son of Man shall give unto them. John 6.27. The husbandman has no
certain security but that all his labors may prove fruitless; but the
exhortation to the saints to be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord, is enforced with this motive, that ye know your labor is
not in vain in the Lord. 1 Cor. xv. 58.

3. What reproof may these things administer, to those who are wasting the
hours of life in idleness or mischief, instead of regarding the great things
which concern their peace? Many behave as if they had nothing to do but to live
at ease, and gratify the flesh upon the fruits of others labors: But this is
as contrary to the end of our being, as death is to life; for those who live in
pleasure, are dead while they live. They invert the true order of things, and
sleep away the day, till ere they are aware the night comes, when no man can
work. And alas! how doleful will that night be to them! An eternal night,
without the least rest! They had been dreaming of many years of ease and
merriment, till they slipped into destruction as in a moment, and are utterly
consumed with terrors. Psa. lxxiii. 18, 19. Once they had no ears to hear the
cries of the poor or of the oppressed, but now they will find that those cries
have entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts, who will avenge their cause.
Then those who have laid up treasure for themselves, and have not been rich
toward God, will find that the good creatures which they have abused shall be
witness against them, and shall eat their flesh as it were fire. Luke xii. 21.
Jam. v. Ah woeful case! Now therefore awake thou that sleep, and arise from
the dead, and Christ shall give thee life.

Perhaps some may think they are not wasting the day in idleness, because they
are busily engaged; but what is it about? Why they are careful and troubled
about many things, and yet neglect the one thing needful. Jesus says, seek
FIRST the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you. And what a wretched plea would it be before his bar, for the
soul to say, I had so many concerns of my own, that I had no time to attend to
the one thing needful! A man of great note in the world, once cried out on the
views of eternity, alas! I have spent all my life in laboriously doing nothing!

Once more,

4. These great truths may afford much support under the loss of Christian
friends. Did I say loss? Must I not retract the expression? For we are not wont
to call our weary friends lost, when they are got to rest in a quiet sleep; and
none sleep so quietly as those who sleep in Jesus. They are beyond all danger
of having their repose disturbed for ever. They have done their work, and are
receiving their reward; have fought the good fight, and are shouting the
glorious victory; and shall we begrudge them their happiness! Rather let us
congratulate their safe arrival to the realms of peace. Yet what will become of
us who are left behind? The righteous are taken away from the evil to come. The
same day that righteous Lot went out of Sodom, fire and brimstone destroyed
them all; and the prophet says, except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a
very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom. Surely then it is a loud call
to us when any of this remnant are taken away; and he is a stupid creature who
does not lay it to heart. But what shall we lay to heart?

1. We should lay to heart the evil of sin. Had we never known sin, we should
not have known death. Sin is the cruel murderer that destroys families and
nations, and lays our dearest friends in the dust; and can we mourn their
departure, and yet harbor the murderer! Can we take this viper into our
bosoms! All our sorrows in life, and all the terrors of death, are but so many
discoveries of what this monster has done; and still we see but a little part
of his mischiefs. Look to Calvery, and behold the Prince of life in the agonies
of death; a scene which made the sun hide its face, the earth to quake, and the
rocks to rend asunder; and shall not this rend our rocky hearts! For he endured
all this because he was made sin for us.

2. Let us lay to heart that time is short. Our fathers, where are they? And
the prophets, do they live for ever? How many are already gone? We find they
are daily going, and every one must draw after them, as there are innumerable
before them. We are all but transient persons here, and are hastening to
another world, as fast as time can carry us; O therefore let us use the world
as not abusing of it, for the fashion thereof passes away.

3. Let us lay to heart the vast importance of being always ready. The
shortness of time, the uncertainty of life, the terrors of death, with many
other considerations, loudly inculcate this lesson; but nothing can enforce it
more than the glorious blessings which are to be enjoyed therein. What
blessings does our Lord pronounce on those who are found watching? And James
says, behold we count them happy which endure. Them who have endured the rage
of earth and hell, and have ended their race with peace or with triumph, we
count them happy: Well, says he, my brethren, take them for an example of
suffering affliction and of patience. Jam. v. 10, 11. Balaam wished to die the
death of the righteous, but his desires were vain, while he still loved the
wages of unrighteousness. True desires to die their death, will engage us to
live their life.

These things deserve the constant regard of every one, and they call for our
special and particular notice, who have been lately bereaved of a godly
relative. Paul speaks of some who were in Christ before him: And I have
abundant reason to think that my dear Mother was in Christ before I was born;
and when he granted a glorious visitation of his spiritual presence to this
land, in the year 1741, is was as welcome and joyful a season to her as his
personal coming was to Elizabeth of old. O how freely did she speak of the
wonders of redeeming grace, to her children and others round! And I believe
very few have lived with more constant devotedness to God than she has done
ever since. Many may doubtless be apt to attribute this to the power of natural
affection; and I am not insensible that the dead are often extalled
extravagantly; but shall others lies make us afraid to speak the truth, and
cause us to cover with obscurity those whom God says shall be in everlasting
remembrance? Psa. cxii. 6. Yet I am not going to advance any encomiums of my
own, only shall beg leave presently to annex a few of her own testimonies to
vital religion, which I trust will justify what I have now said. In the mean
time, my brethren, may all your prayers be unto God for us who are bereaved,
that we may rightly improve this providence; that we may neither despise his
chastnings, nor faint under his rebukes.

The stroke is aggravated by our distance, which prevented our knowing any
thing of Death's approach till she is gone. O affecting thought! Gone so that
we shall see her face no more; no more enjoy her delightful and instructive
conversation. But stay; is she gone from our world of sin and snares? gone from
our grovelling converse, to join the general assembly above, and can we wish
her back again!

"Ye then that mourn, suppress the pious tear;
"You wish her out of Heaven to wish her here."
Yet surely we have cause to be humbled under God's mighty hand, which has
given this stroke; and oh that the bitterness of this stroke might imbitter sin
to our souls! May it bring eternal things in nearer view, and rouse us all from
our stupidity, so that we may no more be slothful, but followers of them, who
through faith and patience inherit the promises.

APPENDIX, CONTAINING SOME Memories of Mrs. BACKUS's Life.
MRS. ELIZABETH BACKUS was descended from one of the first planters of Norwich;
and was born there on April 6, School. Her father, Mr. JOHN TRACY, was a man
eminent for vital and practical religion, who died on March 27, 1726, with such
comfortable views of another world, that he charged his friends to give him up,
and not hold him any longer with their prayers. He was very strict in the
religious education of his family, which this daughter of his was ever thankful
for as long as she lived; yet she was fully convinced that none of these things
would stand her in stead in the trying day, without a new heart; and she has
often mentioned to her children a work of conviction and conversion which she
experienced about the year 1721. And though I have not met with any record
thereof, yet in an old paper I find she has set down some hints of her
soul-exercises afterward, which discover an early concern to have her heart as
well as life conformed to God. In April 1725 she writes thus; by afflictions of
late I have been awakened to see I have been asleep, and I desire to be humbled
for my sin, and do desire the Lord would go on still to awaken me, and give me
a humble, meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price.
And she sets down this passage from Mr. Wilcox: It is well for us that it is
ill with us; if it were not bad, it would be worse. We ought to be thankful to
God for crossing us; for woe be to us if he let us alone; it is ten to one but
hearts desires and lean souls would go together. To which she subjoins these
words: Some time ago I met with some crosses, which overcame me with
melancholy, and almost disabled me for the doing of any duty: I happened to see
a passage in Mr. Baxter's treatise about overmuch sorrow, which convicted me of
my sin in this matter: It was this; the cause, says he, is sinful impatience:
Discontents and cares proceed from a sinful love of some bodily interest, and
not taking Heaven for a satisfying portion.

She was married to Mr. SAMUEL BACKUS January 18, 1716, with whom she lived in
great amity, as well as considerable prosperity, till he was taken away on
November 24, 1740, when she was left with eleven children, the youngest being
not six weeks old, and she in so weakly a state as not to be able to go to
meeting till the next summer. However she then found the truth of that word,
though weeping endures for a night, joy comes in the morning. The morning of
that glorious day of grace, in 1741, shed its kind beams on her family, (as
well as through the land) and hopefully brought a great part of her children to
the saving knowledge of HIM, who is a father of the fatherless, as well as a
judge of the widows, in his holy habitation. Some brief account of these things
I find written with her own hand thus; In the fall of the year 1740 we were all
taken sick with the measles, and it pleased God to afflict me in taking away my
husband. And now in this time of distress I saw so much of the evil and
wickedness of my own heart, that I thought God was justly afflicting of me: I
saw I had been asleep. -- As I was walking in my house in great heaviness,
these words were cast into my mind: In the world ye shall have tribulation:
They turned in my mind an hundred times, and were of great support to me.
Again, as I was musing on my own and family's circumstances at present (being
now left a widow, with many small children) and comparing it with what it had
been in times past, I found discontent to arise in my heart; but all on a
sudden it darted in my mind, what is required in the tenth commandment? Why
surely it requires full contentment with our own condition. These words turned
in my mind many times, until I felt a calm within, and I said, surely I have
reason to bless God's name for his goodness to me. -- And now some months after
this having examined my case often, and comparing the case of my soul now with
what it had been in months past, I could freely say from my heart, I could not
be willing to be again in that sleepy state of soul toward God, and the things
that concern my everlasting peace, no not to be in the most prosperous
condition in temporal things that ever I was in all my life. Now I can say, I
hunger and thirst after the word, it is the delight of my soul.

Thus our dear mother was taught and upheld by the divine hand, in the midst of
an evil world; and has lived a little beyond threescore years and ten. Her
posterity have increased to threescore, 52 of which are now living. I lived
with her, till I was called away to preach the gospel among the people to whom,
after my poor manner, I still minister; upon which our correspondence by letter
began, whereof I will give the reader some copies and extracts, whereby he may
be enabled to form some judgment of her manner of living.

LETTER I.
Norwich, January 11, 1747-8. Dear Child,
I RECEIVED your letters, bearing date December 17 and 31, which good news
rejoiced my heart, to hear of the goodness of our Lord in those parts. Our
family are all in good health, through the goodness of God. The Lord has
sweetly comforted and quickened my soul from time to time: I have had many sweet
love feasts: The Lord has brought me into his banqueting house, and his banner
over me was love. -- The Lord be with you, and keep you from all evil; which is
the desire of your loving mother,

ELIZABETH BACKUS.

LETTER II.
Norwich, October 21, 1748. Dear Child,
MY love in Jesus remembered to you, and all the saints with you. I had a sweet
taste of love that day you left us, in those words: But O what condescending
ways
He takes to teach his heavenly grace!
My eyes with joy and wonder see
What forms of love he bears for me.


The last Sabbath was a day much to be remembered. -- Your grandmother almost
left the body My father's mother, who experienced a remarkable change in her
younger years, and lived to a good old age. She died August 24, 1762.
. As to my (...) case, I have had a more abiding sense of the uncertainty of
visible things, and of the certainty of invisible things. --

LETTER III.
Norwich, April 6, 1749. Dear Child,
I LONG to see you: It made me glad to see you once more in writing. -- I have
met with many trials since I saw you, and the Lord has been my strength. Trust
ye in him at all times; he is a sure hiding place in trouble. -- Remember my
love in Christ to all the saints with you; and O that you and we may have our
eye upon our captain, and so not be tossed with every wave! O that we may meet
at the throne of grace daily! which is the earnest desire of your mother,

ELIZABETH BACKUS.

LETTER IV.
Norwich, March 26, 1750. My dear Son,
I LONG you should hear of, and rejoice with us in the work of God amongst us.
It began the fore part of February, and for three weeks or more it was as great
a time of conviction as I ever saw: Great flocking to hear the gospel preached;
meetings every day, especially among the children at our end of the town;
sundry of them converted, some backsliders come home, and such adoring free
grace, such calls and invitations to sinners, as make the town shake. Some that
(...) in opposition before, are constrained to (...) the work; others are
raging, and trying to hinder the work. It is still a time of conviction with
sinners and backsliders. The Lord works, and who can let or hinder it? It
has been a time of health here; our family are well. I want to hear from you,
and also to see you and your dear wife Mother had never seen her then, as we
were married but the fall before.
. I remember my love in Jesus to the saints in the house where you live, and to
all that little flock. From your loving mother,

ELIZABETH BACKUS.

LETTER V.
Norwich, August 27, 1750.
-- I WROTE you some account some time ago of the wonders of God among us; we
have seen more of it. Backsliders are constrained to bear witness for God. --
The Lord is sweetly giving us some drops and foretastes of his love; and,
blessed be his name, we shall quickly arrive where sorrow and sighing shall
flee away. --

LETTER VI.
Norwich, October 22, 1750. Dear Son,
O GIVE glory to God for his goodness to me, a poor worm! On the 5th of October
I took cold, and was at night seized with that they call hysteric colic, in
extremity of pain all that night, and part of next day; but behold the goodness
of God; a day or two before, he gave sweet views and foretastes of his love,
and of the glorious mansions above, which ravished my heart: I feeling the love
of God run so free, thought in myself, what sharp trial is before me? and when
it came I still had the relish of it, so that death was no terror to me; and in
the greatest extremity had strength to call upon my children, and warn them to
flee from the wrath to come. Glory to God for it! --

LETTER VII.
December 11, 1751. My dear Son,
I FIND God is faithful to fulfill his promise, and that promise to me, in the
world ye shall have tribulation. And I can sometimes say with feeling
experience, it is good for me that I have been afflicted; and that God has in
very faithfulness done it. By these things my heart is weaned from the world. O
my God, grant it more and more, and give me grace to press on toward the mark.
--

LETTER VII.
Norwich, May 18, 1753. My dear Children,
I HAVE heard of your afflictions, and the mercies mixed with them; and I can
sympathize with you, as being also afflicted; yea, and can say he has punished
us less than our iniquities do deserve; yea, and of his own free gift has
bestowed drops of heaven on a poor worm in my weakness. --

LETTER IX.
Norwich, March 20, 1754. Dear Son,
LAST Friday I was brought to a stand, and made to see the awfulness of
trifling away time. I had a view of the field of the slothful, all grown over
with thorns and nettles, and the stone wall broken down, and the dreadful
poverty that was come upon him. And blessed be God, I had also a view of that
strait and narrow way that leads to life. And now I saw again that a Christian
cannot enjoy God, and live in conformity to the world; and now I long that
Christians would arise and go forward. I live in daily expectation of my great
and last change. O that I might improve my time well!

LETTER X.
June 15, 1754.
-- I AM still in the furnace, wave after wave rolling over me; and my God is
graciously supporting, teaching and comforting my soul from time to time, in
the midst of my various trials: Blessed be his name. The case of Zion lies near
my heart, but there is hope in God, that is able to deliver. --

LETTER XI.
Norwich, January 19, 1756.
-- AS to my own case, God has been trying of me both with mercies and
afflictions; and he is good and just in them all; and in the night, when all
was in silence, I have often had some teachings and comfortable words set home
upon my mind. No one can tell without some experience, what it is to have a
child called away into the field of battle, and no hopes that his soul is in
the ark of safety. My soul has felt the trial. I knew nothing of Andrew's
going, till he had put down his hand to go; and my mind was tossed like a wave
of the sea an hour or two, till I (...) brought to see, and give him, and
myself, and (...), up into the hand of God. I saw there was no safety at home
nor abroad, but only in subjection and submission to the mind and will of God;
and this is what I want every day that I live. --

LETTER XII.
Norwich, August 28, 1756.
-- MY outer man is decaying apace; blessed be God for some drops of heaven
upon my poor soul, now when every thing here seems to be in a convulsion. There
are some with us under soul-concern, but more at Lebanon; I hear there have
been some conversions there lately: It is the best of news. We have sad news
from the fort Oswego taken by the French.
; and what shall we say when Israel falls before their enemies? Is there not an
Acan among them? O let us search our hearts and our houses, cast away the
abominable things, and turn to the living God, that it may be well with us.

LETTER XIII.
Norwich, March 6, 1757. My dear Son,
I AM waiting for my great and last change: Scarce one day has passed for some
months without some realizing of death and eternity; and though I am so full of
sin, Jesus has come over the mountains, and spoke peace to my soul. God by his
providence has taken away my daughter Abell Capt. Joshua Abell's wife, her
eldest daughter; who was hopefully converted in that glorious year 1741. She
died December 29, 1756, soon after the birth of her seventh child.
, and he gave me such strength and support in the time of it, as was wonderful.
Blessed be his name. These from your loving mother,

ELIZABETH BACKUS.

LETTER XIV.
Norwich, March 31, 1758. Dear Son,
I AM a poor crazy woman, full of aches both of body and soul, and have been so
great part of the winter, for which my soul does bless the Lord; as these
things have been a means to bring me nearer to God. Viewing the case both of
church and state, with the awful threatenings in Providence, and the carelessness
of people in general, I have had sometimes such distress of mind as I could no
ways have born; but by these I have been brought off from dependence upon the
creature, and led to the fountain and giver of all good. --

LETTER XV.
Norwich, October 30, 1758.
SEPTEMBER 19 I got up on my mare at my door, behind Simon, and she had scarce
gone her length before she sprang away, and left us both upon the ground. I
fell among the stones, and cut a hole in my head, which bled some, and the
jounce I had set me into hysteric fits in a minute, which followed me six or
seven hours. I had my senses all the while, and a sweet calm and peace in my
mind: I felt as well pleased and contented with the providence of God, as if he
had suffered me to go and visit my friends in town. O wonderful! --

LETTER XVI.
Norwich, April 6, O. S. 1759.
THIS is my birth day, and the same day of the week. Sixty-one years have I
lived in this evil world. Few and evil have the days of my life been. Time
looks short, and eternity near: O that I may live to the glory of God, the
little time I may live in the world! My dear son, I have heard nothing from you
since last December, till last week, but I have not forgot you: My desire is,
that you may be faithful in the place where God has set you, both in public
and in private, to warn sinners to flee from the wrath to come. --

LETTER XVII.
Norwich, June 16, 1760. Beloved Son,
I RECEIVED your letter of March 22, and I was much moved with sympathy, and am
now even blinded with tears while I write to you. And now I would call upon you
also to sympathize with us in the various dispensations of God toward us. It
has been a distressing dying time all round us with the pleurisy, and one of
the family died with it The person that died was a hired man, named Jeremiah
Lewis. John is her youngest child, peculiarly near to her.
. -- John was seized with it extreme bad, so there was little hopes of his
life. I tended him three weeks, and then I was taken with an ague three or four
hours, and a violent fever, sick and faint, all over full of pain; but O the
goodness of God to a poor worm! Death was no terror to me. I had a mind calm,
waiting to see what God would do with me; I cannot say I had any choice; if I
had, it was a rather to depart. --

LETTER XVIII.
Norwich, April 27, 1762. My dear Son,
IT IS with a great deal of satisfaction I sit down to write a line to you,
though I am full of pain and weakness. Your aunt Anne is gone before; Oh that I
may be ready to follow after! I have not been abroad since last fall but three
times. I went to see my sister before her death: It was trying to nature, and
yet comfortable, to see her courage in death This was Capt. Richard Hide's
wife. My brother's letter of the same date says, Aunt Anne Hyde died the 20th
inst. after a long and lingering illness, in which she manifested great
calmness of mind, and assurance of her well-being in another world; and seemed
to leave her family as freely as if it were only for a short journey, and then
expected to meet them again.

These are the words of my brother Simon Backus, whose exemplary behavior had
rendered him very dear to many; but death, which spares none, took him away in
the midst of his days, by a consumption. He died in a comfortable frame,
February 16, 1764, aged 35.


. --

LETTER XIX.
Norwich, October 31, 1765.
-- I HAVE been tried without and within. In October 4 I had a clear view of
the all-seeing presence of God, that it fills heaven and earth, and the room
where I was, and I saw myself a loathsome creature; and I could say with Job,
now mine eye sees thee, I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes. Now I
see I had been living to myself, and working for myself, when God's glory
should have been all my aim. And now this text is much in my mind; and ye are
Christ's, and Christ is God's. Now I felt love to the Christians, and to them
that are in the dark; O that they might see the light! And I want the
forgiveness of every one, and I ask it of you I could not transcribe this
passage without observing, that perhaps those who knew her, would have thought
she had as little need of others forgiveness as any in the land, and least of
all to ask it of a poor child; but the nearer the soul's views are of a holy
God, the farther it is from any (...) in its own doings.
.

Give my love to your wife and children, and to all that love Jesus. These in
haste from your loving mother,

ELIZABETH BACKUS.
I am a poor old woman, almost worn out, and at times I think I can feelingly
say those words of Dr. Watts, Jesus, my Lord, I know his name,
His name is all my trust;
Nor will he put my soul to shame,
Or let my hope be lost.




Mother's growing infirmities prevented her writing much more, so that I had
but two or three short letters from her after this; in one of which she says,
O! God is good to me! He comes over the mount of my sins, and speaks peace;
once by this word, I have chosen you in the furnace of affliction. And in the
last I ever had from her she says, I am here yet dragging along the poor
remains of life, and oh how many mercies! I have cause to sing of mercy as well
as judgment. About a month before she left the world she had such an ill turn,
that it was thought she could not continue long, after which she had some
revival, whereupon, as a letter informs me, she said to one of the brethren of
the church who came to see her, she desired his prayers for her, since it
seemed she must come back into this world again, for a little season, that God
would enable her to spend all to his glory. She said, if it had been God's
will, she should rather have gone and left the world. Mother had an
apprehension that she should drop away suddenly, and my brother, who lived with
her, says, she often told him, when going to bed, where he might find her grave
clothes on any sudden occasion; and such an occasion he had on January 26,
1769; when after sleeping a good part of the night, she awaked about five in
the morning with a coughing turn, and dropped way so soon, that her children in
the other part of the house had but just time to get in to see her breath her
last. I shall beg leave to close the whole with an address to my relations.

My beloved Friends,
I HAVE ventured so far to disclose intimate friendship, as to give a few
extracts, and some whole copies of letters, which in the course of twenty years
I have received from my dear mother; the originals of which, in her own
handwriting, you are welcome to see when you please. The tedious distance of
fourscore miles deprived me of the privilege of daily converse with her, and of
that enjoyment of her edifying example which others of you were favored with;
yet that disadvantage is now in some measure balanced with above fifty kind
epistles, wherein she being dead yet speaks. Thus a kind Providence makes all
things to work for our good. Had it not been for our former distance, I should
doubtless have been now more deprived of her company than I am; for I suppose
she rarely if ever wrote to any that were near; and I am fully persuaded, that
no others can draw her true picture so well as her own pen has done it,
notwithstanding her little practice in writing. Others might no doubt have set
her off with more polite language, and in more gaudy colors; but that, like
paint, mars true beauty. I shall desire you to pass by her expressions of
strong affection for a poor child, and fix your attention upon the lively
features which she has exhibited of a SINCERE CHRISTIAN.

What an union and due proportion appears in her of those two great points, a
trust alone in Christ's righteousness, with a strict regard to holiness? Who
can more fully renounce all kind of dependence on their own doings, than she
often does? Yet let the legalest produce an instance, if he can, of a more
strict and constant regard to a holy life, than she has shown. Again, here is a
strong assurance united with great diligence. How unshaken was her confidence
in her great Redeemer, which made her often say, "death is no terror to me;"
while she still saw the awfulness of trifling away time, and that a Christian
cannot enjoy God, and live in conformity to the world? She had higher motives
to engage her to improve time well than the fear of perishing. Here also
appears true humility, without diminishing of divine bounty. A feigned humility
often moves persons to deny or undervalue what God has wrought for them, or by
them; while pride will influence the creature to take the creator's gifts to
set off self with. Few I believe have steered clearer of those extremes than
our departed friend; and the nearer she got to heaven, the lower she lay before
God and man; seeing herself "a loathsome creature:" Not because she had fallen
into any outward scandal; no, but because she had been working for self, when
God's glory should have been all her aim: Therefore she could say, I abhor
myself; while her hope was still firm in Christ. Hence what a harmony do we
here see between godly sorrow and spiritual joy! Those scriptures were
eminently verified in her life, we glory in tribulation; and, as sorrowful, yet
always rejoicing.

Mistake me not, my friends, as though I was aiming to garnish the sepulcher of
a deceased parent. My aim is as much above any such thing, as the poet's plan
was above the painter's work, with regard to Mr. Hervey " Williams, it is yours
to bid the canvass wear.
"By art illusive, Hervey's form and air.
"Oh! with like happy labor could I trace
"Each virtue, each exalted Christian grace,
"Each heavenly gift with which his soul was blessed,
"And fix the bright assemblage in my breast;
"Then how transcendent far would be my plan:
" You paint his mimic shade: -- I Would live the man."
Hervey's Life.
. What I aim is to engage your attention to the beauties of holiness, which
shined in her, that you may imitate her lively and lovely example. One of the
most artful methods that the enemies to the power of godliness have taken in
our day, to promote their soul-destroying schemes, has been by representing,
that the indwellings of the Holy Ghost, and his quickening and comforting
influences, which those saints enjoyed that we read of in the bible, were
favors peculiar to the days of inspiration, or to the scenes of martyrdom, and
not to be expected in these times of reason and liberty; but as such notions
are directly contrary to the current of scripture, and exactly resemble the
language of those hypocrites who said, the Lord has forsaken the earth, and
the Lord sees us not, Ezekiel. ix. 9; so the Lord has not left himself without a
number of witnesses, even in these licentious times, to the divine reality of
his spiritual, life-giving and soul-comforting presence with and in his saints;
among which I believe this mother in our Israel ought to be reckoned as one:
Whose testimony therefore, I think, ought not to be forgotten nor concealed;
especially among her numerous posterity, who are doubtless willing to enjoy the
temporal legacies which she has left them: And can one of them be willing to
miss of this good part which shall not be taken away! We are all in an evil
world, where we are constantly exposed to changes, troubles and death: And who
would not think it a great favor, if seized with extremity of pain, to have,
sweet views and foretastes of God's love, and of the glorious mansions above,
so that death should be no terror to them? or upon a sudden fall or surprise,
to have their senses all the while, and a sweet calm and peace of mind, so as
to feel as well pleased and contented with the Providence of God, as if
visiting near friends? What are all the kingdoms and glories of this world in
comparison with such enjoyments! Well, my friends, this happiness, and more
than tongue can express, is freely held forth in the gospel, and the call is, O
taste and see that the Lord is good! And ever remember that you are to come and
eat without money and without price. In Christ there is the gift of
righteousness to deliver from our greatest guilt, and abundance of grace to
cleanse our souls, and supply all our needs, so as to make us holy and happy
for ever.

Man's foundation error is, an imagination that there is something better than
the will of God; some way better at present to walk in than his precepts, and
some interest better than to be at his disposal. This evil imagination moves us
to go astray, and to turn every one to his own way, instead of submitting to
divine government; but the natural as well as moral consequence of such conduct
cannot possibly be any other than misery; for when we pursue a separate interest
of our own, we must support and defend it* against all dangers and enemies. And
oh! how dreadful the task! How insupportable the burden!

The friend we now mourn was well sensible of this, and therefore said, in a
letter not before transcribed, dated March 24, 1757, I tell you I am quite sick
of myself, the more I am acquainted with my heart. But oh, how good is my Lord
to me, who does many a time speak a word to my soul, that gives it a lift, with
a view of the stability of the covenant, of his faithfulness and loving
kindness, and the sweetness of his kingly power in subduing us to himself!
Praised be his name. Take notice that his kingly power in subduing us to
himself is sweet to the gracious soul. So in a letter already recited she says,
I saw there was no safety at home nor abroad, but only in subjection and
submission to the mind and will of God: And this is what I want every day that
I live. And surely we all need it as much as she did. And oh! my brethren and
friends, let us all remember the doleful case of the Jews, who boasted of being
Abraham's children and Moses' disciples, while they neither believed Moses'
writings, nor performed Abraham's works. John v. 46. and viii. 39. It is
undoubtedly a great privilege to be born of pious parents; and the greatest
thing in it is, the enjoyment of their prayers, instruction and influence
concerning the way wherein we should go: Consequently those children who
disregard the same, will have the greater condemnation. How inexcusable then
shall we be found, if any of us neglect the great salvation exhibited in the
gospel, which has been clearly set before us, not only by public preaching, but
also by lively examples of near friends! On the other hand, those who are not
slothful, but followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the
promises, they will find, that though their present parting is grievous, yet
their meeting hereafter will be glorious, when they shall be caught up together
with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: And so shall we ever be
with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these words. Context, verse
17, 18.

FOR the readers satisfaction I would observe, that all the foregoing
testimonies are carefully transcribed from originals, in mother's own
handwriting, which I have to show to any who desire it; all the liberty I have
taken is, in a few places to leave out a word or two, where that would favor
the sense, but never to add a single word; and where I have left out a
sentence, or part of a letter, I have made a dash thus --

The errors of the press which have been observed correct thus; page 14, line
13, dele be. p. 17, l. 2, for is read it. p. 5 of the appendix, at the end of
the note, read aged 94.

ADVERTISEMENT.
LATELY published by the same Author, and to be Sold by PHILIP FREEMAN, in
Union-street, Boston, and by THOMAS GREEN, in Newport,

I. A SERMON, entitled, Family Prayer not to be neglected.

II. A DISCOURSE, entitled, True Faith will produce Good Works; with some
Remarks on Mr. Sandeman.

Where also may be had, his other WORKS.


