Dr. Chauncy's DISCOURSE Occasioned by the Death of The Revd. Dr. SEWALL.

A DISCOURSE OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF THE REVEREND Dr. JOSEPH SEWALL, Late
COLLEAGUE PASTOR of the SOUTH-CHURCH IN BOSTON: WHO DEPARTED THIS LIFE, On the
Evening of JUNE 27. 1769. In the 81st. YEAR of his AGE. Delivered the
LORD'S DAY after his Decease.

By CHARLES CHAUNCY, D. D. PASTOR of the First CHURCH in BOSTON.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by KNEELAND and ADAMS, in Milk-Street. MDCCLXIX.

A FUNERAL DISCOURSE.
HEBREWS XII. 6. That ye be -- Followers of them, who, through Faith and
Patience, inherit the Promises.


THERE is no way in which what is amiable can be better recommended, than by
holding up to view some eminent and unexceptionable example in it is kind. We
are formed for imitation, and find within ourselves an aptitude to resemble
those we live among, and are conversant with. While our propensities are on the
side of vice, as they will be until they are rectified by divine grace, we
shall be more inclined to copy after a vicious, than a virtuous character; but
this notwithstanding, few are corrupt to so great a degree as to be incapable
of perceiving the beauty of virtue, or of being put upon endeavors to become
possessed of it; especially when set in an agreeable light by the luster of some
excelling example.

Hence it is that the sacred penmen have taken care to exhibit to public view
the character of one and another, under the several dispensations of the
kingdom of God's grace, who were eminently holy in their day; strongly
recommending to universal observation these patterns of virtue, that such as
are acquainted with them may be influenced to copy after them, to the honor of
God, and the security of their own eternal well-being.

My text presents to the christian Jews such examples of faith and patience, as
they had been favored with; and exhorts to an imitation of them: Especially,
as it was through these graces, that they went to the enjoyment of the promised
heavenly inheritance. "Be ye followers of them, who, through faith and
patience, inherit the promises". In which words three particulars are
contained, which it may not be unprofitable, or unseasonable, to spend a few
thoughts upon.

I. An intimation of the happiness of departed saints. II. The described and
specified way, through which they came to this happiness. And, III. A
recommendation of their example to our special notice.
I. The first thing observable in the text is, an intimation of the blessedness
of departed saints. It is said of them, they "inherit the promises"; that is,
the happiness "promised" to be enjoyed in the future world. And what deserves a
particular remark, they are spoken of as NOW in the enjoyment of this
happiness. "Who inherit the promises". The words are a periphrasis, expressive
of the blessedness they are actually the subjects of in their unbodied state.
Not that the spirits of just men are in a state of complete happiness. This
will not commence, until the great day of judgment is over, when they shall
ascend, in body as well as soul, with their Redeemer, to the heavenly world,
and be fixed in those "mansions" of blessedness he is "gone before to prepare
for them". But previous to this, and instantly upon their death, they will
enter upon a state of happiness; a state suited to them as naked spirits; a
state wherein they shall be perfectly freed from all sin, temptation, and
sorrow; and in which they shall enjoy the blessed God, far beyond what they
ever did, or could do, while here on earth.

This truth, however uncertain from the deductions of mere reason, seems
plainly evident from what is said upon it in the revealed word of God. It does
not indeed, in a formal manner, speak of the spirits of good christians in
their separate state, particularly describing their happiness there; but it
says that concerning them, in so many places, and in language so positively
clear and express, as to leave it beyond all reasonable doubt, that they still
live, and that they live happy.

In the parable, recorded in the 16th chapter of Luke, Lazarus is spoken of as
received, immediately at his death, to joy in the invisible world. So the
account is, ver. 22. "And it came o pass, that the beggar died, and was carried
by the angels into Abraham's bosom". And, in the 25th ver. it is said, though
he had here received "evil things", yet that he was "now comforted". What can
these words intend, if his spirit was not in the enjoyment of happiness? This
seems to be one of the main thoughts, our Lord had in view to convey to us.

Very pertinent also to our purpose are those words of our Savior, Luke 23.43.
"Verily, I say unto thee, TO DAY shall thou be with me in paradise". They
contain a promise to a poor dying malefactor, which would have no meaning, if
it did not assure him, that, instantly upon his death, he should be admitted to
a place of happiness; for that is the scripture idea of the word, "paradise".
And what our Lord here promised to this thief, he promises also to all, who
like him, are sincerely penitent. They also shall "be with him in paradise",
upon their leaving this world. The day of their death will be to them a day of
blessedness.

I may also bring to view those words of the Apostle, Philip. 1.21. "For me to
live is Christ, and to die is gain". But how could death have been "gain" to
him, if he did not thereupon enter into a world in which he should be happy? He
adds, in the 23d ver. "for I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to
depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better". He here speaks of his
"departure by death", as his "going to be with Christ", and so as that it would
be "far better" for him, than to "abide in the flesh". But could there be a
possibility of this, unless it be supposed, that there is a happy state, in
which his soul would exist, after it is separation from his body? And why should
he be "in a strait", not knowing whether it was his "desire to depart, or
abide" here, if his departure would not have placed him, as to his spirit, in a
better state than that he was in at present?

I shall only add one text more, which deserves a more than ordinary notice; as
it is introduced with all imaginable solemnity, as it were on purpose, to
engage our attention. It is thus recorded, Rev. 14.13. "And I heard a voice
from heaven, saying unto me; write, blessed are the dead, which die in the
Lord, from henceforth: Yea, faith the spirit, that they may rest from their
labors, and their works do follow them". It is observable, they are dead saints
that are the subjects of this blessedness; they are "from henceforth", from the
day of their death, made thus blessed; and the special reason why they are thus
blessed, is signified by no less a person than the Spirit of God. "Yea, says
the spirit", for that "they rest from their labors, and their works do follow
them", that is, the reward of their works; which would be impossible, unless,
at death, they went into a state, in which they were favored with the enjoyment
of the blessed God, the supreme good?

How should this truth, we have been illustrating, support and comfort such as
have been bereaved of relatives, friends, or acquaintance, who were, in the eye
of hope, the true disciples of Jesus Christ. You have no reason to mourn on
their account. For, though their bodies may be laid in the dark and silent
grave, they are still alive in regard of their souls, and incomparably more
happy than they could have been, had they still continued here. Should not the
though it of this, compose your minds to silence, however desirable those taken
from you may have been, however bright their virtues, however amiable their
conversation in the world? The higher they had attained in grace here, the
greater is their reward in the state beyond the grave. --

I shall only add, such as are the faithful servants of God, have abundant
reason to be perfectly reconciled to the thought of dying themselves. If, at
death, the soul as well as body lay down senseless and inactive, it would be no
wonder, if, when they turned their view to the grave, shuddering horror was
excited in their breasts; though they knew, that, at the general resurrection,
they should be again brought to life to be made happy forever. Death would
appear, to the good man, in a melancholy gloomy form, if it stripped him of all
sense and life in soul, as well as body; and he might well be averse to pass
through so dull an event. But the truth is, his better and superior part, the
spirit God has formed within him, lives, and abides forever. His soul does
not, like his body, lie down stupid; but is "carried, by the angels of God, to
Abraham's bosom", where it exists happy in the enjoyment of that good, which is
laid up in the divine promises. And, as this is the result of death to the true
believer in Jesus, why should he be afraid to die? He should rather "desire to
depart, that he may be with Christ", where he will sin no more, nor be any more
subjected to the trials, and sorrows, that are inseparable from this present,
frail, mortal state. -- But I must proceed to the

II. Second thing contained in my next, which is, the way through which the
saints come to "inherit the promises"; namely, that of "faith and patience".
This is the way marked out in the "Gospel of the blessed God".

Without "faith", no christian was ever yet saved; nor will any one, in future
time, be admitted to the joy of his Lord. Our Savior, who surely knew the way
to heaven, has plainly declared, that it is through "faith" in him. You are all
acquainted with the texts to this purpose. Only, it should ever be remembered,
this faith is not an empty speculation. It is not an inactive, dead faith; but
a faith that "works by love", that "purifies the heart", and argues the subject
of it to be one "born of God", and an "overcomer of the world". It is that
faith, by which "the just do live", and that is an abiding, habitual, powerful
principle of all holy conformity to the will of God, both in heart and life, in
a way of suffering as well as doing.

And as it is "through faith", so is it likewise "through patience", that the
saints "inherit the promises". Hence that exhortation of the Apostle, Heb.
12.1. "Let us run with patience the race set before us". The way to the
heavenly inheritance is rough. It is strawed with difficulties of one kind, and
another. And those who would walk in this way, had need be armed with
"patience". They will often have occasion for the exercise of this grace; nor
can they, unless they are, in a measure, the subjects of it, ever make progress
toward the heavenly state. None have ever gone to "inherit the promises", but
through trials, and so many of them, as that, if they had not been endowed with
"patience", they would have given out. This grace in them has been often called
forth to exercise; and, in this way, they have attained to happiness in the
future state.

But it may more emphatically be said, with reference to some of the saints,
that, "through faith and patience", they are gone to "inherit the promises".

It was in this way that many of the first christians glorified God, and went
to the enjoyment of him. The trials and sufferings they were called to endure
for the name of Christ, were many, and grievously heavy. They had "the trial of
cruel mockings and scourgings; yea, of bonds and imprisonment". They were "sawn
asunder; and slain with the sword". They were "destitute, afflicted, and
tormented". And, under these circumstances of distress, how did they rely on
God! What full credit did they give to his word and promises! How cheerfully
did they resign up, even their very lives into his hands! And how exemplary was
their "patience"? They made no complaints against the conduct of heaven: They
did not murmur, or repine; but bore all that was laid upon them, with
composedness of mind. They were willing to suffer in the cause of Christ; and
"counted not their lives dear to them, so that they might finish their course
with joy".

And as it was with the first christians, so it has been with many since, and
with some even in these days; they went to the "inheritance" eminently "through
faith and patience". God's hand was laid heavy upon them. Many, various, and
sadly grievous were the trials it pleased the alwise, and righteous Governor of
the world to exercise them with. And, when distressed on every side, how bright
did the graces of "faith and patience" appear in them! They "set their hope in
God". -- They rested their souls on his promises. -- And the more sharp and
cutting their sorrows, the more firm was their faith in the revelations of God,
the more vigorous the actings of it. And, in stead of "resisting the will", or
"disputing the pleasure" of the almighty, they justified the wisdom of his
dealings with them, and "patiently" received correction from the hand of their
heavenly father. Their greatest concern was, lest they should reflect dishonor
on the name and religion of Christ, by a temper and behavior, unbecoming their
character as his disciples; and, by the aids of divine grace, they were enabled
to bear their trials, however severe, with meekness of wisdom, a calm, patient,
and submissive frame of mind. And in this way it was, that they went to
"inherit the promises".

We should herefrom learn to entertain just sentiments of the trials good men
are often called, in the providence of God, to conflict with. It is by these
occasion is given, and opportunity offered, for those discoveries of faith,
patience, and other christian graces, whereby God is, in a signal manner,
glorified, and his tried servants prepared for more distinguished mansions in
the place of future blessedness. Perhaps, there is no such school to train up,
and perfect the christian, as that of affliction. Those who have been called to
pass through the heaviest, and most numerous trials, have, by their
improvements under them, being assisted herein by the divine Spirit, been
enabled to shine with a peculiar luster, to the honor of Christ; and their
reward hereupon has been "great in heaven". Let not any esteem good men
unhappy, though they should be sorely afflicted: Neither should they think thus
of themselves. "If they suffer with Christ", in the exercise of faith and
patience, in imitation of him, they shall be "glorified with him". And "what
are the sufferings of this present life", when "compared with the glory", which
shall, in the next state, be "revealed in those who are the sons of God"? They
are not worthy to be mentioned. -- They are lighter than nothing. But I may not
enlarge.

III. The next thing observable in my next is, an exhortation to follow those,
who, "through faith and patience, inherit the promises".

We should be imitators of them in every thing, wherein they appeared amiable
and lovely. Have we beheld, in departed saints, any thing worthy of God, and of
their character as the disciples of his son Jesus Christ? We should not rest
satisfied in having seen these things; but should carefully place their example
before our view, and copy after it, wherein it was praiseworthy. It is a favor
of God, to have had such patterns of virtue, and his expectation that we make a
wise and good use of such an advantage: Nor can we, without sin, suffer such
examples to pass our notice; expressing little or no care to be imitators of
them. We should employ our thoughts on the virtues and graces, saints departed
exhibited, in their lives, learn therefrom our own duty, and encourage
ourselves heartily to engage in the practice of it. We should make use of their
good examples, both as a copy, and a motive: Only keeping in mind this needful
thought, that the best of men are but men, and to be imitated with subserviency
to the great rule of duty contained in the sacred books of scripture. Their
virtues, and not their frailties and imperfections, are to be remembered and
followed by us. We should be "followers of them, wherein they followed Christ";
and no farther.

And we should endeavor an imitation of departed saints, especially in their
"faith and patience". These are amiable, as well as important graces;
beautifying to the subjects of them, and nearly connected with their highest
interest in the coming world. It will therefore conduce to our own honor, and
best good, to become possessed of them; and that we may so do, we cannot be too
careful to copy after the pattern set us by those, who, as occasions were
offered therefore in the conduct of providence, have signalised themselves for
the exercise of these graces.

Have any, within the reach of our notice, been, in an uncommon degree,
exemplary for the firmness, constancy, and vigor of their "faith" in the
perfections, and revelations of God; ever repairing to him as the supreme
object of their trust, the ultimate refuge of their souls, in those lively
actings of "faith", which we could not but admire? We should not be forgetful
observers of such distinguishing faith in God, and in his son Jesus Christ; but
should keep it steadily in our view, that we also, under the influence of
heaven, may become eminent instances of "like precious faith".

So likewise, if we have had opportunity to behold the "patience" of those,
whose lot it has been to pass through numerous difficulties, and sore trials;
if we have seen them, under the heaviest pressures, calm, quiet, resigned to
God, and in a temper of mind, not to murmur and complain, but to acknowledge,
and say, "I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that in
faithfulness thou have afflicted me"; -- we should look upon ourselves as
instructed by God, and laid under obligations, should there be opportunity for
it, to be like examples ourselves of this grace, which has been thus gloriously
displayed in the conduct of others.

One design of God, in placing before our view these instances of "faith and
patience" is, that we might learn our duty, and be animated with zeal and
resolution to put it in practice. It should be our earnest endeavor to answer
this intention of heaven; taking all due care, that such examples of God's
grace may not, by our own non-improvement, or mis-improvement, of them, rise up
in judgment to our shame and condemnation.

The reflections, upon what has been discoursed, are as follow.

We should, while we admire and imitate what we have seen, that is amiable in
departed good christians, give God the glory of his grace bestowed on them.
Whatever we may have seen in them, that was lovely and beautiful, they were
beholden to God for it. He it was that made them to differ. While therefore we
take notice of what was virtuous and praiseworthy in them, we should remember
to acknowledge God. We should look through them to him, and be disposed to give
him the honor of that grace which appeared in them.

We should also take occasion, from the good example of other, to humble
ourselves wherein we have been unexemplary, and endeavor a reformation. We
cannot make a wiser and better improvement of the piety, the humility, the
meekness, the faith, the patience, and other christian graces, we may have seen
manifested in the lives of those we have been acquainted with, than by turning
our view to ourselves, and enquiring, with a becoming seriousness, how we have
had our conversation in the world. And wherein we are destitute of that, which
we could not but approve as exemplarily excellent in those that are gone before
us, we should be abased in a sense of our own negligent carelessness;
condemning ourselves, and resolving, in the strength of God, that we will take
better heed to our ways for the time to come. If we have been greatly deficient
in any of those virtues and graces, in which they shined with peculiar
brightness, we should look upon ourselves as admonished and warned of God; and
be instant, and arduous, in our endeavors to cause our light to shine with the
like luster. -- And if, in stead of being only defective in their graces, we
are defiled with the contrary vices, we should see ourselves reproached, and
solemnly called upon to repent and reform. Can we think of that grace of God,
which eminently appeared in this, or the other relative, or friend, or
neighbor, or minister, that is gone to "inherit the promises", and not feel
the resentments of an accusing conscience? We have certainly awful reason to
judge, and condemn ourselves. May we receive reproof, learn our folly, be
struck with the beauties of holiness in these patterns of it, and copy after
them, so as to exceed them in glory!

In fine, we are obviously taught, from what has been discoursed, our duty with
respect to departed saints. We should not pray for them, neither should we pray
to them. Such prayers, however common in the Roman church, are both needless
and senseless. But we should remember the grace of God, which appeared in their
faith, and patience, their holy, heavenly, and christian behavior in life; and
be excited herefrom to the greatest diligence, in the use of all proper means,
that we also may attain to a noble eminency in very thing that is virtuous.

This leads me to take some special notice of the occasion which put me upon
bringing you such a discourse at this time, the death of the Reverend Dr.
SEWALL; who was justly held in high reputation, throughout the town, and land,
for those excellent qualities, in which he shone with exemplary brightness,
both as a christian, and a minister, from a youth to protracted old age.

The father of Spirits was pleased to furnish him with valuable intellectual
powers. These, by the advantage of a good education, were happily cultivated
and improved; and, being sanctified by divine grace, were faithfully employed
in promoting the interest of "pure and undefiled religion".

He was early devoted to the service of the sanctuary by his father, that
upright CHIEF JUSTICE, the honorable Judge SEWALL, who, for a long course of
years, was a member of this Church, and one of it is greatest ornaments. And to
this service, from inclination, he freely devoted himself.

He was called by you of this Church to the work of the Gospel Ministry, the
25th of April, 1712; but he returned no answer to your call, until he had often
asked direction of God; setting apart some special seasons for this purpose by
himself alone, and once at least in union with his venerable, pious father, who
was ever ready to the business of prayer, and took great delight in it.

He was publicly and solemnly separated to the work, to which you had called
him, "by fasting, and prayer, and laying on of the hands of the presbytery",
the 16th of September, 1713; from which time, he labored in the
Gospel Ministry, among you, with as little intermission, by reason of those
infirmities to which we are all subject, as has been ordinarily known. Few
ministers ever enjoyed a more uninterrupted state of health, going on with more
steady constancy in his public labors for the Lord.

His discourses from the pulpit were chiefly upon the distinguishing, and most
important points of christianity, relative both to faith and practice. They
were the effect of study; composures discovering judgment, and an intimate
acquaintance with the holy scriptures. His manner in delivering them was
serious, grave, solemn; and sometimes he uttered himself with a voice so
elevated with zeal, and so modulated under the influence of a deeply affected
heart, as that he arrested the attention of his hearers; putting them under
advantage to be impressed with a just sense of the importance of what he was
saying to them. The blessed Jesus, in fulfillment of his promise, made to the
Apostles, and succeeding gospel ministers, was graciously present with him, to
enliven his faith, to comfort his heart, and to strengthen his hands in going
on with resolute, diligent, and persevering fidelity in discharging the great
trust it had pleased God to commit to him; and his labors, through the blessing
of heaven, were not in vain: Some, we trust, were by him, as the instrument in
the hands of Christ, "turned from darkness to light, and from the power of sin
and satan unto God"; while others, who had been walking "in the path of the
just", were enabled to walk on "shining more and more" until they arrived at
"perfect day". It is not to be doubted, but that, upon his entrance into the
invisible world, he became associated with those, among other "spirits of just
men made perfect", who were formed by his ministry, under the influence of the
holy Ghost, for their admission to such blessed company, beyond the grave.

He was in conversation agreably pleasant; and the more so, as his affability
was ever mixed with a becoming gravity. He seldom failed of introducing
discourse that tended to spiritual edification. This was more especially his
manner in the latter part of his life. I question, whether he allowed himself
to go out of company without dropping something of the religious kind; and he
did it so naturally, without any appearance of affectation, that he left a
testimony in the hearts of all, to the greatness of his piety.

This indeed was eminently his glory. He was "a dovout man, one that feared
God, and prayed always". I find, in his private papers, the record of numerous
days set apart for solemn prayer, often with fasting, mostly by himself alone,
and sometimes in union with others; at which times, you, the people of his
charge, were particularly remembered before the throne of mercy. He had upon
his mind an habitually prevailing sense of the superintending government of
God, both in the kingdom of providence, and of grace; and he accordingly ever
repaired to him as the alone all-sufficient help. And this was especially his
practice under the various trials he was called to pass through, some of which
were grievously heavy, and gave opportunity, as well as occasion, for the
signal exercise of that "faith and patience through which" he is gone to
"inherit the promises". His whole conduct indeed was a bright pattern of those
christian graces, which, being so often thrown out into act, became in him the
governing principles of life. You of this Society are "witnesses, and God also,
how holily, and justly, and unblamably he behaved" among you. "Whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, (decent, comely) whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are of good report": -- These were the things in which he was
an example to you, and to the whole town; who are all ready to rise up, and
speak of him as one they venerated for his conspicuous piety, uprightness, and
universal goodness.

His conscience, from his youthful days, was remarkably tender. This made him,
all along in life, watchful over his heart, and ways; and engaged his care to
"abstain from even the appearance of evil". The life of no one was more freed
from the defilements of sin. He was, in an uncommon degree, "blameless and
harmless; a son of God without rebuke in the midst of a perverse generation,
among whom he shined". Possibly, he might be scrupulous to an excess. And if he
was herefrom restrained, at any time, from those exertions which would have
tended to good, it ought to be ascribed to that "awe of God", which was
habitually and powerfully present in his mind. Whenever duty lay clearly open
to his view, he acted with vigor and boldness; as being influenced from that
love of God, which overpowered the fear of man.

He was distinguished among the Clergy for his wisdom, not "the wisdom of this
world", to which he was an utter stranger; but "the wisdom that is from above,
which is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good
(...), without partiality, and without hypocrisy". I know of no man that
discovered more prudent caution, through his whole behavior in life. He ever
acted, especially in affairs of importance, with deliberation, and upon having
viewed them in their circumstances, and probable consequences. No one, I
believe, can mention an instance wherein he conducted with precipitant rashness.

In consideration of the many good qualities in which he excelled, he was, so
long ago as the year 1724, upon the death of President Leverett, chosen, in his
room, to take the head ship of Harvard-College, in Cambridge. Upon the news of
this, which, as his own words are, was "surprising to him", I find him making
that pious reflection, "O Lord! what am I, a sinful worm, that there should be
any though it of me for so considerable a trust"! This choice of him to so
important a service, lay with great weight upon his mind, partly from his own
modest diffidence, but principally from the ardor of his affection toward you
of this Church and congregation. He often carried the case to God in humble
earnest prayer, and more than once set apart a day for solemn application to
him who dwells on high for direction in an affair of such consequence. On one
of these days, he writes thus; "I besought the Lord to give all needed
direction to the overseers, the flock I stand related to, and to my self. I
also endeavored to examine myself; -- and, if I know my own heart, my
inclination is to abide with my dear people, and to spend and be spent in the
work of the ministry here, if this be the will of God, and most for his glory.
I think I can truly say, that no prospect of greater worldly honor, or gain,
would prevail with me to leave this people; and that I do not account my life
too dear to be spent in the service of Christ among them". You, the people of
his charge, expressed a like affection toward him, in your voted unwillingness
to part with him. Upon which, your beloved Pastor, having again asked the
direction of heaven, thus writes; "I suppose that now God makes my way plain to
give an answer in the negative, which I accordingly did"; adding that wish of
piety, "Lord! provide a more suitable and sufficient person for that important
trust".

About four years after this, he was elected a member of the
College-corporation; which trust he accepted, and executed with conscientious
fidelity, and a becoming zeal to promote, among the sons of HARVARD, not only
learning in the liberal arts and sciences, but religion also both in it is
doctrinal and practical purity. He sustained this office, approving himself a
steady faithful friend to the truest interest of the College, until it became
inconvenient, by reason of his age, to attend the necessary services of it any
longer. He was more than once generously handsome in his donations to this
Society.

When Mr. Belcher returned from England, Governor of this Province, he brought
for him the honor of a Diaploma from the famous university at Edinburgh, in
Scotland, constituting him a Doctor in Divinity. This honor was conferred on
him without his seeking it, or indeed so much as knowing any thing relative to
it, until it was bestowed on him.

He was, for many years, one of the commissioners from the London-Corporation
for propagating the gospel in New England, and parts adjacent; as also a
correspondent-member of the Society in Scotland, for promoting christian
knowledge. And as his duty, in these trusts, respected the interest of Christ
among the INDIAN natives, a more suitable person could not have been selected,
and commissioned. His heart was strongly touched with pity toward these
perishing barbarous people; and, from a deep sense of their unhappiness,
through ignorance of the true God, and the only Savior, Jesus Christ, he was
ever disposed to do whatever lay in his power, in execution of the trust that
had been committed to him, to serve the interest of their souls, according to
the Gospel-plan of salvation.

It would be a great omission, if I did not make mention of him as one of those
"good men, for whom one would even dare to die". He was, in his temper,
pitiful, tenderhearted, courteous, kindly affectioned; and, from principle as
a christian, he "forgot not to do good, and communicate", as he had
opportunity, and according to his ability. It was his practice to lay by one
full tenth of his income for the uses of piety and charity. And sometimes, as
occasions in providence called for it, he went even beyond this. Many are gone
to heaven, and many still live on the earth, who were often relieved, under
straits and necessities, by the distributions of his bounty. I doubt not, our
Lord Jesus Christ will say to him, in the great day of judgment, "I was, in my
mystical body, an hungered, and thou gave me meat; I was thirsty, and thou
gave me drink; naked, and thou clothedst me: I was sick, and thou visitedst
me; I was in prison, and thou came unto me:" In consequence of which, we may
hope, he will bespeak him in those words of abounding grace, "come thou blessed
of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for thee from the foundation of the
world."

He was a strenuous asserter of our civil and ecclesiastical CHARTER-RIGHTS and
PRIVILEGES. He knew the value of them. -- He knew they were the purchase of
our forefathers at the expense of much labor, blood, and treasure. -- He could
not bear the thought of their being wrested out of our hands. -- He esteemed it
our duty, in all wise, reasonable, and legal ways, to endeavor the
preservation of them. -- And it was the earnest wish of his heart, that they
might be fully enjoyed by us, and transmitted from us, in the fullest extent,
to the latest generations.

On the evening of the 26th of last August, the day on which he completed
FOURSCORE YEARS, he spoke to you from this desk, with affectionate gratitude to
God upon such an extraordinary occasion, and so as to endeavor your spiritual
edification. He was not permitted, after this, to preach to you more than three
or four times. It seemed good to the wisdom of God to confine him several
months to his chamber; in which time he had opportunity to dispense, to the
many who went to visit him, those counsels and instructions of piety, which, if
it be not their own fault, may be of lasting spiritual advantage to them. And
occasion also was now offered him, in the providence of God, by the repeated
attacks that were made upon his naturally firm, but now breaking, constitution,
for the exemplary exercise of faith, patience, and those other virtues, which
adorned his character as a christian, and gospel-minister, and reflected honor
on his master and Lord, whose grace, bestowed on him, now shone with
conspicuous luster. It was pleasant to behold the peaceful, placid, resigned,
praying frame he was in. He could, while life remained in any considerable
degree of strength, speak of dying with a cheerful countenance, and as one that
"had a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better than to
abide in the flesh". I have sometimes heard him, with a solemnly engaging
pathos, express himself in these words, "Come Lord Jesus! come quickly"! His
fear was, lest he should not wait with due christian submission, until his
change should come. For some hours before his decease, he was unable to speak;
though he appeared to have the exercise of his understanding: And, doubtless,
he breathed out his soul, "calling upon God", and saying, in some such language
as that, "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit"! Which, we trust, he graciously did;
sending the holy angels, those "ministering spirits, who minister to them who
are heirs of salvation", to convoy it safe to that apartment of the invisible
world, which is the assigned place of residence for "the spirits of just men
made perfect".

I shall make no apology for having said so much to do honor to the memory of
Dr SEWALL: Had I said less, it would have needed one. Such examples of shining
virtue, and eminent usefulness, are highly instructive, and should be held up
to the view of the world; especially in this day of growing degeneracy. It
would be unsutably to withhold that, which would happily tend to promote the
honor of God, and the good of mankind, if no just notice should be taken of
those, who have so worthily served God, and their generation according to his
will.

It may have moved the passions of those nearly related to the deceased, while
attending to the character that has been given of him; but if they weep, it
should be for themselves, not for him; as they have such abundant reason to
believe, that he has "entered into the joy of his Lord". May they be enabled to
make a wise and holy use of this dispensation in the alwise providence of God!

We unite in our prayers for the only son, and immediate descendant from him
whose death we are solemnising. Be thankful to God for the signal advantage you
enjoyed in having so good a father, and in having him continued a blessing to
you for so protracted a space of time. His prayers for you, especially for your
spiritual welfare, were frequent and earnest. He scarce ever set apart a day
for prayer, which was a common thing with him, but you are mentioned by name,
in his records, as having had a special share in his supplications before the
throne of grace. May they be answered in the bestowment of all needed favors on
you, especially of spiritual and eternal blessings through Jesus Christ! Your
children are, some of them, in childhood, others in their youthful days. It
would be an occasion of joy to their grand-parent, even in paradise, could he
know that they are "found walking in the truth, as they have received a
commandment from the father". And could he speak to them from the excellent
glory, as he often did while here on earth, it would be in some such language
as that, "remember now your Creator in the days of your childhood and youth; --
know ye the God of your fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a
willing mind: If ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him,
he will cast you off forever". Let me, who was your grandfather's friend, and
relative, be permitted, in his stead, now he is gone, to exhort you, my
children, in your earliest days, to devote yourselves to the honor of your
maker, through Jesus Christ the redeemer; taking him to be your instructor,
guide, God, and everlasting portion. This will be your best guard against the
temptations of an evil world; this will yield you most satisfaction all along
in life; this will be your support and comfort in the day of death; and this,
of the rich mercy of God, through Jesus Christ, will secure your eternal
welfare in the state that is beyond the grave. The good Lord impress your young
and tender minds with a deep sense of these things, which are infinitely
important!

It may be esteemed a frown in providence, that the ELISHA of this christian
Society should not be present to see their ELIJAH taken away, and to assist
them in making a sanctified improvement of such a visitation. Had he been here,
he might with propriety have "cried, my father, my father, the chariot of
Israel, and the horsemen thereof"! Nor could he have made a better adapted
prayer for himself than that, "let a double portion of thy spirit rest upon
me"! May it please the Savior of his people to help him under his infirmities,
to prosper his long journey for the removal of them, and to return him to his
flock with a restored, confirmed state of health, and to continue him for many
years yet to come an eminently pious, diligent, faithful, and useful servant of
Jesus Christ, after the example of his departed father, and associate in the
Gospel Ministry! We cannot wish for him a greater blessing.

The death we are taking a religious notice of, is a loud call to the town in
general, and to it is ministers in particular; and the louder, as it was
preceeded, the week before, with the death of another of it is most ancient and
valuable laborers in the work of the Gospel. The like was never known, from the
first settlement of the town, until now. Such reiterated dispensations, in the
righteous and holy government of heaven, deserve a more than ordinary
attention. The voice of God, especially to the ministers here, is that, "be ye
also ready"; -- "work the work of him that sent you, while it is day: the night
comes when no man can work". May they "to day hear his voice, and not harden
their hearts"! This voice from God more especially speaks to those among us who
are advanced in years. We are told by it, that we shall "shortly put off these
our tabernacles". The Lord impress our hearts with a just sense of this serious
and important truth! And may we herefrom be powerfully guarded against being
"negligent to put" the people of our respective charges "in remembrance" of the
great truths of God and religion; and equally excited, "as long as we are in
these tabernacles, to stir them up" by calling their attention to these things,
which are infinitely interesting and important! And may we so "take need to
ourselves, and to our doctrine as to save both ourselves, and them that hear
us"!

Permit me now to leave a few seasonable words with the flock of Christ in this
place; which, if received in love, and duly deliberated on, may, by the
blessing of God, be profitable to you.

Be thankful to the great "head over all things to the church, which is his
body", for the rich gift you received from him, when he gave you your now
deceased pastor. -- Take a becoming notice of the uncommon kindness of heaven
in continuing him to you, with so little interruption in his work, for so long
a period as nearly fifty six years. -- Consider his death as brought about, as
to it is manner, and in all it is circumstances, under the super-intending agency
of that glorious Sovereign, "whose throne is in the heavens, and whose kingdom
rules over all"; and give him the honor of a profound submission to his alwise
and righteous pleasure.

Enquire each one of you, what effect the messages, God was pleased to send you
by this his servant, have had upon you. Some of you, it may be, have been
awakened to attend to the concerns of your souls. -- Do not rest satisfied,
until you have so gone to Christ, as to be in a state of safety, respecting the
eternal world! Some of you, it may be, have been savingly converted to God; --
while you ascribe to him the glory of his rich grace, retain in your minds a
becoming affection for the instrument used in the conveyance of it. Some of
you, it may be, have been supported and comforted under spiritual fears and
temptations, or outward distressing difficulties, while others have been
encouraged, and strengthened to go on with cheerfulness, speed, resolution and
vigor, in the way toward the heavenly kingdom; -- you will never forget him,
who, under God, has been so great a blessing to you. His name, with you, will
be as "precious ointment". Some of you, it may be, have turned a deaf ear to
die many warnings he has solemnly given you, from this desk, in the name of the
Lord; "setting at naught all his counsels", and practically throwing contempt
upon his reproofs: You have abundant reason for deep humiliation before God.
Let me urge you to arise out of your sleep in sin, and to call on God, if
perhaps he may grant you repentantce and forgiveness. This only will save you
from the wrath to come.

In a word, you should all frequently call to mind the great truths pertaining
to the kingdom of God, and of Jesus Christ, which you have had so pressingly
delivered to you. "I beseech you, brethren, and exhort you, by the Lord Jesus
Christ, that, as ye have received" of your deceased pastor "how ye ought to
walk, so ye would abound more and more". Be not "led away with the error of the
wicked" -- "fall not from your stedfastness; but "give all diligence to add to
your faith every other christian grace". For "if these things be in you, and
abound, ye shall never fall; but entrance shall be ministered to you abundantly
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ".

You are, by reason of the present distance of your surviving pastor, as sheep
without a shepherd. May it please "the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls" to
keep you from "going astray", to preserve your union in love, to direct your
steps, and govern your whole conduct, in your present circumstances, so as that
your spiritual advantage may thereby be promoted in the end!

I shall not think it impertinent, because not unseasonable, to say here,
though out of place, that Dr. SEWALL, after he had been excused, at his own
repeated desire, on account of the infirmities of age, from taking his turn at
the THURSDAY-LECTURE, was prevailed on to preach it once more, when he thought
it his duty to bear his last, and, as it were, dying testimony against the
shameful neglect with which this religious opportunity was treated; at the same
time, offering that which was powerfully adapted to awaken a concern in all
serious minds to improve this special season for their spiritual good, as they
might easily do it, in much greater numbers, without damage to their secular
business. The pious and well-judged address he was enabled to make, upon this
occasion, had a temporary good effect. The lecture was observably better
attended; -- but there soon came on a relapse into that same carelessness,
which he had reproved, and endeavored to guard against. Surely, our churches
here have lost their first love to God's worship, and zeal to improve suitable
opportunities for their edification in faith and holiness! And they should
"remember from whence they are fallen, and repent, and do their first works".
That prayer was never more pertinent, than at this day; "revive thy work, O
Lord", in these declining churches! And should it please God to do this, I may
venture to say, without pretending to the spirit of prophecy, that there will
not then be so thin, and scandalous an appearance at our FIFTH-DAY-LECTURE.

I shall only add, as occasion is given us, in the government of providence, to
adopt the language of scripture, and say, "our fathers where are they? and the
prophets do they live for ever"? We should be in the exercise of faith in the
only living God, with whom is "the residue of the Spirit"; trusting that he
will raise up, qualify, and send forth, a succession of those, who shall
support his cause, and shine more conspicuously in his Church, than any who
have gone before.

Now "to him who only has immortality"; who is "the same yesterday, to day,
and forever"; who is "God over all from everlasting to everlasting": -- To him
be given all glory and honor, dominion and blessing, by all creatures in heaven
and earth, throughout the endless ages of Eternity. AMEN AND AMEN.

APPENDIX. From the Boston Evening-Post, of July 3d. 1769.
BOSTON June 29. 1769.
ON Tuesday Evening last died the Reverend JOSEPH SEWALL, D. D. senior Pastor
of the South Church in this Town, in the 81st Year of his Age.

Dr. SEWALL's descent was honorable -- His Father The Hon. SAMUEL SEWALL, Esquire
was elected a Magistrate of the Massachusetts Colony 1684, was afterward
appointed one of the first Council under the present Charter, and was annually
elected until 1725, when he resigned his Seat at the Council Board -- He was
also many years Chief Justice of the Province and Judge of Probates for the
County of Suffolk, and was one of the most eminent Persons of his day for
piety, learning, wisdom, integrity and universal charity.

The Son was every way worthy of such an excellent Father. Scarce any one ever
passed through life with a more unblemished character, or performed its various
duties with more universal esteem.

He who forms the spirit of man within him, was pleased to favor him with
valuable intellectual endowments; these were rendered more bright and useful by
his literary acomplishments -- He particuarly excelled as a classic scholar;
and retained his classical learning to an uncommon degree in his advanced years
-- But the gifts of nature and all his acquired learning were eclipsed by his
exalted piety and exemplary virtue.

He was under the influence of religion from his early days. While but a youth,
there was such an uncommon seriousness and strict regularity in his whole walk,
as attracted the notice of all his acquaintance, and commanded respect even
from those who were superior to him in age. -- Though his family was among the
first in the country, both for dignity and estate, he aimed at nothing higher
than to serve God in the ministry of his Son. -- Divinity was always his
favorite study, not so much from duty as inclination. The subject suited his
taste, as it led him to a more intimate acquaintance with God, and tended to
improve his mind in piety and holiness.

The South Church no sooner had a taste of his gifts, than they invited him to
take part of the ministry with that great and good man the late Rev. Mr.
PEMBERTON. He was ordained over them Sept. 16, 1713, and continued almost
constantly to carry on the work of the ministry till the last year of his life.

From his childhood he knew the holy scriptures, his acquaintance with them
increased as he grew in years -- He could recite them with an exactness to
which few have attained, and knew how to explain and apply them with readiness
and propriety, both in public and in private. "From these he extracted his
Divinity; from these, the maxims of his conduct; and by these, was made wise to
salvation"

His preaching was solid, scriptural, instructive and pathetic -- He had a
clear and distinct apprehension of the truths of religion, and well understood
the analogy of faith -- He did not entertain his hearers with the subtleties of
the schools, or with curious and unprofitable speculations -- His chief care
was to explain and enforce the great articles of the christian faith and
evangelical rules of life; to teach what we must believe, and how we must live,
in order to be eternally happy -- He was in principle a Calvinist, and made the
doctrines, which are usually called the doctrines of Grace, the foundation, and
the chief subjects of his preaching; but he was far from the dangerous extremes
to which some have carried these doctrines. While he was solicitous to secure
the honor of divine grace, he was equally careful to show the necessity of holy
obedience, and earnestly pressed on unrenewed sinners the importance of their
improving the means of grace, if they had any desire to obtain an interest in
Christ, and to become his sincere disciples. He conveyed his sentiments in
easy, chaste language; and delivered himself with that becoming gravity, and
seriousness, that commanding elocution and decent affection, as almost
necessarily engaged the attention of the assembly, and greatly tended to
impress their minds and reach their hearts. He had an inward vital sense of
religion, that animated his discourses with the same divine passions he felt in
himself.

He discharged the other parts of his sacred trust with prudence and fidelity,
diligence and impartiality, warning every man and teaching every man in all
wisdom, not only publicly but from house to house, that he might present every
man perfect in Christ Jesus.

Having obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful, he did not run in vain nor
labor in vain. There is reason to believe, that no small number, now among the
spirits of just men made perfect, are blessing and praising God for him, as the
instrument of that happiness they now enjoy; and that there are many yet
living, who are the seals of his ministry, and will be his crown and joy in the
day of the Lord. His whole deportment was a proof of the truth of religion. It
is hard to say what virtues were most eminent in him, he sat such a shining
example of all. He always seemed to have a sense of God upon his mind, and
earnestly pressed after a nearer conformity to his Divine Master. He kept at a
great distance from that useless and trifling Manner of conversing, which
visibly disgraces the character of too many Christans. He scarce ever entered
into company but something serious and good dropped from his lips. His very
presence banished every thing of levity, and solemnized the minds of all who
were with him -- and yet there was such a mixture of decent cheerfulness that
every one was fond of his Society.

Prayer was the delight of his soul. He was frequent in his retired devotions,
and was ever ready to join with others in this sacred exercise. He seemed to
breathe his native air when he drew near to the throne of grace -- and was not
willing to engage in any affair of importance, without having first made his
religious acknowledgments to the God of heaven. His public prayers were
serious, pertinent and pathetic -- and he prayed always with all prayer almost
in a literal sense, as his mind was always heaven ward, and there was something
in his attitude and appearance that led us to think he was continually sending
up pious ejaculations; and yet his religion was so easy, so natural, and so
graceful, that none ever charged him with affectation, or imagined that he
aimed at the praise of men. His prayers were accompanied with alms -- He
constantly devoted a tenth part of his income to pious and charitable uses. --
He has dispersed, he has given to the poor, his righteousness endures
forever.

His heart was exceeding tender, and he sacredly adheared to the dictates of
conscience -- scrupulously afraid in all his transactions of doing wrong, no
arguments or persuasions could prevail with him to act at all, until he was
satisfied he should act right. A solidity and exactness of judgment, even in
cases of great difficulty; and a distinguishing prudence both in public and
private life, made him justly esteemed one of the wisest men of his day. His
natural caution, improved by religion unto holy watchfulness, rendered him to
the last degree careful not to give any just occasion of offense; but when the
cause of God required it, he was zealous, resolved and courageous. He bore a
faithful testimony against prevailing errors and fashionable vices, how great
soever the character of those who patronized them. "No pretense could make him
transgress his own line, and from the duties of his post nothing could move
him. His spirit was truly pacify, and could sacrifice every thing but duty for
peace; and accounted nothing too dear but truth and holiness, for the purchase
of it".

He had a great veneration for our excellent Fathers, and could not calmly hear
them reproached or vilified. He thought their magnanimity in encountering so
many dangers for the sake of preserving the rights of conscience, and their
wisdom and piety in laying such happy foundations, both civil and religious,
ought to cover any little mistakes they might have fallen into. He was greatly
alarmed with every motion to introduce the Hierarchy into these Colonies, whose
predecessors had, at the peril of every earthly comfort, fled from the face of
ecclesiastical tyranny. Nor was he less jealous of the attempts made to deprive
us of our civil liberties. Though he warmly pressed submission to the powers
that be, while they are the ministers of God for good to their subjects, yet he
was greatly affected with the encroachments lately made upon us, and could not
think a people were to be blamed for adhering to their rights and privileges,
that had been purchased at so dear a rate. These things lay with weight on his
mind as long as he lived, he spoke with freedom, and some degree of warmth, on
this interesting topic, and often addressed heaven to interpose for our relief.
His prayers, we trust, have been heard and will be graciously answered.

With such an assemblage of virtues, and such an uniform course of life, it is
no wonder Dr. SEWALL lived in the highest reputation; venerated by all, loved
and esteemed by the wise and good; he received the highest honors which were
consistent with his station of life. -- On the decease of the Hon. and Rev.
President LEVERETT, in the year 1724, he was chosen to preside over
Harvard-College, but his Church not consenting to resign him at the call of the
public, he respectfully declined the honorable trust to which he had been
invited. In 1728, on the resignation of Dr. COLMAN, he was elected a Fellow of
the Corporation, and faithfully attended the duties of that station until 1765,
when his age and infirmities obliged him to resign. He had a great and sincere
concern for the interest of religion and learning in that Society, and
expressed his regard by many important services. A few years since he made a
generous donation to the College in money, the income to be for the help of
indigent scholars. When Harvard Hall was consumed by fire, he was one of the
first to repair the loss, by a present of many chosen and valuable Authors out
of his own library.

In the year 1731, he was created Doctor of Divinity, by the University of
Glasgow -- He was appointed one of their Commissioners by the Honorable
Corporation in London for the propagation of the Gospel in New England and
parts adjacent; and once and again a correspondent member by the Society in
Scotland for promoting Christian Knowledge. Indeed, there was no public
institution suited to his station and character, in which the undertakers did
not think it an honor to have Dr. SEWALL an associate; none calculated to
promote the interest of Christ's kingdom, in which he did not willingly engage;
and when engaged, he punctually attended their respective meetings; being as
willing to do the duty, as to have the honor, of a public trust.

The Lord of life was pleased to continue his usefulness to a good old age; the
evening after he had completed his 80th year, he preached to a serious and
affected audience, when he took a humble and thankful notice of the sparing
mercy of God to him. The Lord's day following he was seized with a paralytic
disorder, which soon put an end to his public labors, and confined him to his
house. But though incapable of public service, he was still employed in his
Master's business. As he was visited by great numbers, desirous of hearing the
last words of the ascending Prophet, so he was incessant in his counsels,
directions and prayers. Here you might see the humble gracious saint. Others
were ready to applaud the rectitude and uniformity of his life, his diligence
and fidelity in his Lord's work. He, on the other hand, expressed his sense of
his own defects, acknowledged himself an unprofitable servant, bewailed the
remains of sin, and looked to the atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ for pardon
and acceptance. In his long and tedious sickness, he was a pattern of patience
and submission, as in his health he had been an example of holy living. He
encountered the apprehensions of death, like one who believed and hoped for
immortality. He enjoyed to the last a steady peace and serenity of mind, and
spoke of unseen and eternal things with a sensible gust and relish, as if his
soul had been upon the wing, and he had some foretaste of the joy, which we
have almost a sure and certain hope he now possesses. --

His Remains were this day attended to the Grave with every mark of respect due
to so excellent a Person. --


