Mr. Adams's DISCOURSES, On the General Fast. April 6. 1769.

A concise, historical view of the perils, hardships, difficulties and
discouragements which have attended the planting and progressive improvements
of New England; with a particular account of its long and destructive wars,
expensive expeditions, etc. With reflections, principally, moral And religious.
IN TWO DISCOURSES, Preached at Roxbury on the General FAST, April 6. 1769. And
published at the general Desire of the Hearers.

By AMOS ADAMS, A. M. Pastor of the First Church in Roxbury.

1 Samuel 12.7. Now therefore stand still, that I may reason with you before the
Lord, of all the righteous acts of the LORD, which he did to you and your
fathers.

Multa quoque et bello passus, dum conderet urbem,
-- Genus unde latinum.
Albanique patr^s, atque altae maenia Romae.
Tantrae molis erat Romanam condere gentem.
VIRG. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by KNEELAND and ADAMS, next to the Treasurer's
Office in Milk-Street.

MDCCLXIX.

An historical View of New England.
LUKE I.74, 75. That he would grant unto us, that we, being delivered out of
the hands of our enemies, might serve him, without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him, all the days of our lives.


THESE words are part of the song of Zacharias, at the birth of John. The good
man expresses his faith in Christ, who was quickly to appear, as the mercy
promised to our fathers, in sending whom God did remember his holy covenant,
the oath which he swear to our father Abraham. The character, in which he views
the Messiah, is that of a glorious deliverer coming, in the fullness of ages,
to rescue his people out of the hand of all their enemies. Whatever views
Zacharias might have of Christ, as a spiritual savior, coming to deliver
mankind from the tyranny of sin and satan: As also from the empire of death and
the grave, which have reigned from the fall; yet, it is not, that I know of, at
all absurd to suppose that he expected, when the Messiah should appear, that he
would also deliver Israel from their temporal enemies, from the Roman yoke,
under which they were groaning. This was the general expectation of the Jews,
and even the disciples of Christ, on every occasion, betrayed their raised
expectations of such a glorious deliverance.

The text naturally leads me to discourse on the enemies of God's people, and
the ways and means, the times and occasions, when and by which, Christ
accomplishes the deliverance of his people from their enemies. But my views, at
this time, are not so extensive; what I propose, as not unsuitable for our
meditation this day, is to take a concise view of the dealings of God with his
people in this land; and to show by what means he has delivered us out of the
hands of our enemies. -- Having done which, I shall point out our great
obligations, being thus delivered out of the hands of our enemies, to serve him
in holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives.

I. I shall briefly consider the enemies that God's people in this land have
been called to engage, the trials and difficulties they have met with, the
dangers they have escaped, and how God, at one time and another, has
graciously appeared for them, and delivered us out of the hand of our enemies.
In prosecution of this design I shall study all possible brevity, begging your
candor and patience, hoping what I shall say will not be unprofitable,
especially to our young people, who have not had considerable advantages to
know the wonderful acts of the Lord. And, from the whole, may we so feel our
hearts affected with the great things God has done for us, as to lead us to
repentance, and engage us to make them known to our children, that the
generations to come may know them -- that they may set their hope in God, and
not forget the works of God, but keep his commandments. Psalm. 78.5, 7.


The whole continent of America was, to the ancients, an unknown land. It is
not quite 300 years since the first discovery was made of this part of the
world, Columbus made the first discovery of America 1492.
the Spaniards began their settlements and the conquest of the vast kingdoms of
Mexico and Peru, about an hundred years before our fathers came into this
country. Cortes sailed from Spain 1518, and the next year began the conquest of
Mexico.
It is not certain that ever any European was at New England before the year
1602. Some feeble attempts were made to effect a settlement, in several parts
of this country, but none succeeded until the year 1620; when the adventurers
landed at Plymouth and began a settlement there, which may fitly be called the
beginning of New England. No considerable additions were made to the planters,
until the distressing times in England lead many worthy and serious persons to
seek a quiet habitation, in these desolate parts of the earth.

It is a truth, impossible to be denied, that the spiritual tyranny, under
which our fathers groaned, and their being inhibited the worship of God,
according to the light of their own consciences, was the cause of their leaving
their native country, to plant themselves in this howling wilderness. It was
this abridgment of the rights of conscience that began and mightily assisted in
the settlement of this country. The oppression under which a valuable part of
the nation groaned, has, in the hand of consummate wisdom, proved, in its
consequences, a great blessing to the world, and the occasion of a vast
addition to the British empire, and glory, as well, as of a glorious
enlargement of the kingdom of the redeemer. The Lord our God has turned the
curse into a blessing. -- He meant it for good to save much people alive, and
to raise up a new people, as the stars of heaven for multitude.

A few years after the settlement of New England began, the troubles in England
were greatly increased, and arbitrary measures were driven on, both in church
and state. Archbishop Laud, and the ruling ecclesiastics of that day, then
drove a multitude of conscientious puritans from their country. After some
fruitless attempts had been made to form settlements in other places, in the
year 1629 a considerable number of persons (350) seated themselves at Salem,
and established a church there. And the next year John Winthrop, and Thomas
Dudley, Esqrs; afterward governors of the colony, and several gentlemen of
distinction, with diverse worthy Ministers, and above 200 passengers arrived in
this Bay, began their settlements and founded churches: And by the continual
accession to their numbers, and the arrival of parties from diverse places in
England, in the space of seven years, there were, not only settlements began
and churches erected, in Charlestown, Boston, Dorchester, Roxbury, Cambridge
and Watertown, but, in that time, great numbers had emigrated as far as the
fertile banks of Connecticut river, and planted the now populous and
flourishing towns of Sprinfield, Hartford, Windsor and Weathersfield: And, by
the coming over of new inhabitants, the foundations were laid of the ancient
colonies of New Haven and Connecticut, since formed into one.

But what I design is not to give you an history of the progressive
improvements of the country, so much as to point out the hardships they
conquered, and the enemies out of whose hand God did deliver them.

It is impossible to describe the difficulties, straits, hardships and perils
which attend the settlement of a new country; especially, at the distance of a
thousand leagues from a civilized people. It must, in the first place, have
been a most affectionate parting, that they had with their native country,
their houses and lands; their friends and relatives, whom they were forsaking
without any prospect of ever meeting again in this world. The thought of
venturing over an extended ocean, then very much unknown, must have been
terrible to persons that never went to sea, and, especially, to women of tender
minds. The prospect of venturing on an unknown and barbarous shore, to the
first adventurers, must have been quite perplexing. But when all the trials and
difficulties were passed through, it was in hunger and cold, in peril and fear,
that they began and prosecuted their settlements. It is impossible for us to
conceive what many suffered by the fatigues of a long voyage, by cold and
famine, in a desolate country, where they were immediately exposed to the
severities of a rigid climate, without any convenient habitations to cover
them. The hardships they underwent brought many to their graves within a few
months after their arrival. Of the first 350 who arrived at Salem, not less
than 100 died the following winter, of diseases, principally, brought upon them
by the hardships they endured. Of the people, who first arrived at Plymouth,
two or three months swept half of them into the grave. Truly, we cannot but
admire the hand of God that supported and animated them under these trials.
Their principal comfort was, that, with all the distresses of a new country,
they found themselves out of the reach of prelatical tyranny; they could enjoy
God in his ordinances.

America, when first discovered, was found, in every part of it, inhabited by a
savage swarthy people. The learned have been much puzzled to determine the
original of the natives of this vast continent. Some have conjectured they were
originally Tartars who found a northern path into America; and some that they
are the descendents of the ten tribes, carried into captivity by Salmaneser,
and planted in the northern kingdoms of Asia. 2 Kings 18.11.
Others derive their origin from the ancient Phenicians who are famed for their
early skill in navigation, who certainly sent forth colonies in very early
ages. Others, and perhaps with greater probability, suppose that they were at
different times and on various occasions, either accidentally, or by design,
transplanted from various parts of the other continent; but when and how no man
can tell. After all our enquiries their origin is quite problematical. However,
this is certain, they must have been here many ages; for we find them scattered
throughout every part of North and South America: They inhabited, not only the
seacoasts, but the vast inland country also. The Spaniards found millions of
Indians in the countries they conquered, and the vast kingdoms of Peru, and
Mexico seem to have had the marks of considerable antiquity. Our fathers, upon
their arrival in this country, found every part of it was, or had been, peopled
with tribes or Indians, who could give no account of their original. One thing
is very remarkable in the dispensation of providence; a few years before the
arrival of the people at Plymouth, there is no doubt but God was pleased to
send a dreadful sickness among the natives, who were before very numerous, and
probably would have bestired themselves to hinder strangers from making
settlements in their country. By this visitation, it is said, great numbers
were swept off, and some whole tribes became, in a manner, extinct. The
Massachusetts tribe, particularly, are said to have been reduced from thirty
thousand, to three hundred fighting men. Some say nine tenths of the
barbarians, through the country, were swept off, and the land was, in a manner,
depopulated. Some have conjectured, because the small pox has proved so mortal
to Indians, that this was the distemper which depopulated the country, but the
Indians give an account of the disease that does not so well agree to the small
pox. According to them it was a pestilential putred fever. Some however, think
it was the plague, and tell us the savages showed those scars which proved it
to be the plague. But whatever the destemper was, it was a wonderful providence
thus to prepare the way for our fathers. When the most high would bring over a
vine and plant it, he prepared room before it, and by his own hand cut off the
heathen, who might otherwise have disappointed the designs of our fathers.
Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord. Psalm. 107.43.


At the beginning of these settlements Heaven was pleased wonderfully to lay
restraints upon the remaining savages, so that the Europeans gained a peaceable
settlement among them. When they were but a few men in number, yea very few and
strangers -- he suffered no man to do them wrong, yea he reproved kings for
their sakes, saying, touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm. Psalm.
105.12, 14, 15.
And lest, after all, the savages should prove too hard for them, in 1633, the
small pox made dreadful havoc among them, and swept away almost whole
plantations of Indians. This further conduced to the safety of the people, and,
probably, hindered the plotting of the natives to destroy their new neighbors.

It was not long, however, after their arrival, that our fathers found the
savages, with strong professions of friendship, conspiring, in one place and
another, to cut them off. In the first year after their arrival in this colony,
when a mortal sickness was daily lessening their numbers, when there was not
corn enough to feed them a fortnight, they were alarmed with the news of a
general conspiracy of the Indians to extirpate the English. Only two years
after (viz. in 1632) a conspiracy of the eastern Indians to cut off our
settlements was discovered, and by a stratagem prevented. The same year the
whole plantation was under fearful apprehensions of being driven off by the
French, by order of Cardinal Richlieu, which put them on providing for their
own defense. And it was nothing but the want of union among themselves that
restrained the savages from breaking up all our settlements, which were
generally utterly defenseless.

The first open war with the savages was what is called the Pequod war in 1637.
The tribe of that name was settled in Connecticut colony, and were very
mischevious to the English, falling upon them in their fields and in their
journeys, committing several murders among them. The several English
plantations found it necessary, for their own defense, to carry on a war with
this tribe, with their united force. This war was carried into the Pequod
country, where their garrisons were destroyed and their houses burnt; 700 of
that tribe were killed or taken prisoners, with very little loss on the side of
the English: In short, the whole nation was in a few months totally extirpated,
and this destruction struck such a terror into the other tribes, that they came
and begged for peace, and the land had rest for near forty years.

During the seven first years from the settlement of the Massachusetts Bay,
there was a great flocking into the country, so that in a few years not less
than 4000 planters had fixed themselves up and down in the country, and laid
the foundation of many flourishing towns and villages in New England. Above
seventy ministers accompanied them, generally, learned and pious divines: About
forty churches were gathered, and the foundation of that school of the prophets
was laid, which by its annual streams, has made glad the city of our God --
the wilderness began to be subdued, orchards were planted, and laws were
enacted for the government of the infant state.

But even in its infant state, New England was not without its enemies at home,
as well as in its own bosom. A.B. Laud, the grand enemy of civil and religious
liberty, while he was persecuting good men at home, kept a jealous eye upon
New England -- and employed enemies, false brethren secreted among themselves,
to give notice of every thing that passed; especially of what might be improved
to the disadvantage of the colony. He envyed the puritans an asylum in these
parts of the earth, and was plotting their ruin.

As early as 1637, he procured an order of court to prohibit the exportation of
inhabitants to New England, at which time such great men as Pym, Hampden, Sir
Arthur Haselreig, and Oliver Cromwell, afterward lord protector of England, were
prevented from settling themselves in this land. God in his providence reserved
them for more important services in their own country. And after all the
calumny and reproach, which have been cast on their memories for more than a
century of years, the world is obliged to acknowledge their greatness, and that
to them the nation is greatly obliged for the important liberties it has since
enjoyed. -- After the breaking out of the civil war, the cause of exile was, in
a manner, taken away; the accession of inhabitants greatly ceased, and some
returned from this, to their native country: Until the restoration of Charles
II. when the persecution against protestant dissenters was renewed with greater
vigor than ever.

In 1642, there was a general design among the Indians to cut off the English
inhabitants. They were to go, under pretense of trade, in small parties to the
English houses, and, while some secured the arms, others were to perpetrate the
dreadful massacre. This horrid conspiracy was discovered by some of the Indians
themselves. The discovery caused a dreadful consternation: But, by the
extraordinary pains taken by the inhabitants to prevent any surprise, the
savages were discouraged from their bloody attempt.

In 1653, a general alarm was spread through the colonies, by the information
given by the Indians, from several quarters, that the Dutch were privately
soliciting the Indians to a general confederacy, in order totally to extirpate
the English. But the discovery of the plot was, probably, the means of
preventing its execution.

For the space of near 40 years, from the Pequod war, though New England was
sometimes alarmed and put into great consternation, yet, in general, the
country had rest, and there was, during this time, a surprising increase of
inhabitants; until the breaking out of that, which is commonly called Phillip's
war, because it was begun and carried on by an Indian prince of that name, a
mortal enemy to the English. He resolved on nothing less than the total
destruction of the English. For this purpose he invited all the barbarous
tribes to join him, furnished them with arms, and suddenly began the most
distressing war that ever New England felt. This war endangered the very being
of the colony, and it was a question with some, whether the Indians would not
prevail to a total exterpation of the English inhabitants. Lieut. Gov.
Hutchinson's Hist. of the Mass. vol. 1 p. 275.
Several years were spent by the natives in preparations for a vigorous war,
and it was, probably, owing to its being accidentally begun, before they were,
in general, prepared, that they did not accomplish the great undertaking.

It was in 1675, June 24. the war was actually begun, by an attack on the town
of Swanzey, and the murder of several of the inhabitants. The troops of the
colony engaged and were overpowered by numbers. Soon after which Mendon and
Brookfield were attacked, and diverse places on Connecticut river. Hadley,
Hatfield, Windsor.
The whole Massachusetts colony was in the utmost consternation, many places,
in different parts of the colony, being attacked, almost at the same time;
houses burnt, and the people slain. The brave distressed inhabitants frequently
engaged the enemy, but were generally overpowered by numbers, and obliged to
retreat with loss. It was at this time Capt. Lothrop, with his whole company,
save seven or eight, consisting of eighty young men, belonging to the county of
Essex, were cut off, in an engagement with seven or eight hundred Indians,
between Deerfield and Hatfield. This was a heavy stroke on the county to which
they belonged.

These depredations of the enemy united the Colonies in an expedition against a
strong fortress of the savages, in the Narragansett-country. It was attacked by
a thousand men, taken and destroyed after an obstinate resistance, in which
five or six hundred Indian houses were burnt, and, in many of them, the women
and children perished. Some of the enemy confessed they lost 700 fighting men
that day, besides 300 more, who died of the wounds they received, or the
hardships they underwent. This battle proved bloody, and cost the Colonies the
lives of six brave captains, Johnson, Davenport, Gardener, Gallop, Siely and
Marshall.
and eighty-five private men. The whole number of killed and wounded was about
170; and the whole army was in the utmost danger of perishing, in their
retreat, through hunger and cold. This action was on December 16th.

It was hoped, that such a signal defeat would have cooled the courage of the
remaining savages, and disposed them to peace. But the event was quite
otherwise. The barbarians, reduced to an almost desperate condition by cold and
famine, and instigated by Phillip, took the first opportunity of joining their
forces, and, being encouraged by the governor of Canada, early on the
following spring (1676) made a furious onset upon diverse towns, Feb. 10.
Lancaster burnt, forty person killed and captivated. -- Marlborough, Sudbury
and Chelmsford, attacked about the same time. Feb 21. Medfield attacked, half
the town burnt, and eighteen killed. -- In March, Northampton, Springfield,
Groton, Sudbury, Marlborough, Warwick, Providence, Plymouth and Rehoboth,
suffered.
burning some towns wholly to the ground; others in part, killing multitudes of
the distressed inhabitants, and spreading universal consternation. It was about
this time Capt. Pierce was drawn into ambushment and slain, with his whole
company of fifty English and several Indians; and Capt. Wadsworth, marching to
relieve Sudbury, was cut off with his whole company of fifty men: The place is
shown, to this day, where they lie buried in one grave. Many persons were taken
by the savages, and some put to death with torments too dreadful to be named.

At the same time that these western parts of the Colony endured the miseries
of a bloody war, the eastern country, which before this time had considerable
settlements, was groaning under the same calamity. All the country, eastward of
Wells, was destroyed by fire and sword. Such was the deplorable situation of
our country at that day, that that of the Prophet was peculiarly applicable to
our land, the Syrians before, and the Philistines behind, and they shall devour
Israel with open mouth. Isai. 9.12.


This was an awful season indeed -- our fathers saw their country at once
invaded on every side: Scarce any plantation was out of danger. Look which way
they would, the smoke of their country ascended up, as the smoke of a great
furnace. Men, women and helpless babes, fell a sacrifice to barbarian cruelty.
Great numbers of the bravest men in these infant plantations fell in battle.
The enemy had signal advantages against them. No sooner had they made their
unexpected onsets, but they were retired into woods and mountains, where it was
impossible to follow, or overtake them. Hitherto the enemy had been generally
victorious -- A darker and more dreadful cloud never overspread New England. No
man thought his life secure: Nothing was talked of but fire and sword. All
forts of men put on sackcloth, and lay in ashes. Day after day was spent in
fasting and prayer. The priests, the ministers of the Lord, wept between the
porch and the altar, saying, spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine
heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them: Wherefore should
they say among the people, where is their God? Joel 2.17.


God was jealous for his land, and pitied his people; in the midst of judgment
did he remember mercy -- The triumphing of the heathen was but short. Our
troops, in several bloody encounters, were victorious. The enemy were pursued
to their lurking places, multitudes of them were put to the sword, great
numbers were taken prisoners. -- The death of Phillip, who was slain by an
Indian that had deserted from him, together with the losses they had sustained,
and their distress for want of provisions and ammunition, quite disheartened the
savages, and several tribes begged for peace: So that, in two years, this
bloody war was brought to a period; which, though for a time so formidable to our
fathers, yet, through the good providence of God, broke the power of the savage
tribes -- multitudes were slain, many were executed as rebels, great numbers
were made slaves, and some were sent into slavery to other countries: The
natives were never able to recover themselves.

Thus ended this distressing war, which once threatened the total destruction of
the Colony. These were not indeed such mighty battles as we read of in history,
nor such as have since determined the fate of America, but they were the
struggles of an infant colony. -- Many brave men -- many brave young men,
expired in this distressing war; their names deserve to be had in perpetual
remembrance.

But what pity! what relief had our fathers from the mother country, under all
these distressing calamities! Was the royal ear open to their complaints? Was
any kind of relief afforded, at a time when the savages awfully threatened their
total destruction? Were troops or ships or money sent to their relief? -- No --
If they cried there was none to hear. The heart of a licentious prince was
hardened to all their distresses; his ears were shut to their cries, but open
enough to the vile and malevolent misrepresentations of their worst enemies. On
the very year when the colonists were contesting with the natives the
possession of the country, at the time when they struggled hard to preserve
their footing in New England, complaints were sustained, and a prosecution set
on foot against them, which at length issued in the loss of all the privileges
of the royal charter.

The royal charter which encouraged our fathers to settle themselves in this
country, gave them to expect civil and religious liberty in a greater degree,
than their fellow subjects then enjoyed it in England. The country was claimed
by the crown of England only by right of discovery. To encourage the
settlement, an incorporation was thought necessary, but was purchased of the
crown at the expense of two thousand pounds sterling. Notwithstanding, it was
no longer than the next year after the arrival of the people in this Bay, in
1631, that there was an attempt to vacate it; but it happily proved
unsuccessful. And again, four years afterward, 1635, the charter was attempted,
but still the attempt proved unsuccessful. In 1638, there was a formal demand
of the charter to be given up, and a judgment was obtained, that the liberties
of the corporation should be seized into the king's hands. But, through the
goodness of God, the execution was never completed: The change of times in Old
England saved the privileges of New. At the restoration of king Charles, 1660,
the enemies of their liberties aroused themselves, and laid heavy and grievous
complaints against the Colony, in order to have their privileges taken away.
Baptists, Quakers, Episcopalians, united in preferring their complaints: But
God stirred up the hearts of several of the nobles, The Earl of Manchester,
Lord Bay, and Secretary Morris.
friends to the Colony, and puritans in principle, to interest themselves in
the cause, and so the attempt proved successless. From the restoration the
colony never stood well with the court. The principal persons here, in church
and state, were never without fearful apprehensions of having their invaluable
privileges taken from them. In 1665, commissioners were sent over with very
large and unconstitutional powers, an infraction thereby made upon the
charter-rights of the colony. Four gentlemen Col. Richard Nichols, George
Cartwright, Sir Robert Carr, and Samuel Maverick, Esqrs;
were named in the royal commission, some of them the professed enemies of
New England, vested with such extraordinary powers, as were like to subvert all
law and justice, and such as subjected the people to their arbitrary will and
pleasure. A day of solemn fasting and prayer was observed throughout the
jurisdiction, to implore the mercy of God in the dark state of their public
affairs, Extraordinary humiliations and prayers on important occasions and in
seasons of public anxiety, though derided by infidels, and censured as weakness
by modern historians, are nevertheless recommended, not only by scripture
examples, but by the general practice of all nations and ages, as agreeable to
natural sense and reason. This has been the laudable practice of this people
from their earliest times. In conformity to the truly pious example of our
fathers, when anxious for their liberties, days of fasting and prayer were
observed, in this country, a few months ago, when we were threatened with more
severe marks of the Royal displeasure. It was truly, a time of general
uneasiness and distress. The great seriousness and solemnity with which those
days were observed, give us reason to hope they were sacrifices pleasing to God.
A loyal petition, containing a decent and manly assertion of their right to
the privileges confirmed to the colony by royal charter, and setting forth the
great distress they were in, by being subjected to the arbitrary pleasure of
strangers, proceeding, not by any established laws, but their own arbitrary
will; also declaring, that, if things went on according to their present
appearance, they must either seek new dwellings, or sink under intolerable
burdens, was prepared and sent to the king. Every prudent measure was taken to
prevent the loss of the charter. At the same time the magistrates, with a
decent, and considering the infant state of the Colony, an admirable firmness,
withstood the commissioners in the exercise of their unconstitutional powers.
The consequence was, after a few years, this arbitrary commission was
discontinued. But at length, in 1676, in the height of the distress of the war,
and whilst the authority of the Colony was contending with the natives for the
possession of the soil, complaints were making in England, which struck at the
powers of government; and an enquiry was set on foot, which was continued from
time to time, until it finally issued in a quo war ranto, and judgment
thereupon against the charter. Vid. Gov. Hutchinson's Hist. of Mass. vol. 1. p.
311.
Distressing was the condition of this poor country: While engaged in a bloody
and extensive war, instead of the pity and regards of their prince, from whom
they justly expected protection and encouragement, they were threatened with the
loss of those privileges, which were dear to them as life, and on the hope of
which they left their country, and were bravely defending themselves in a
dismal wilderness. The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. Prove. 12.10. It
seems the Colony, distressed as it was, had but little pity; for the accounts
which were transmitted to England of the distresses of the Colony, during the
war, although they might excite compassion in the breasts of some, yet they
were improved by others, to render the Colony more obnoxious. Hist. of Mass.
vol. 1. p. 308.


The adversary and enemy; the grand accuser of the Colony, was Edward Randolph,
Randolph made eight voyages to England in nine years; was appointed collector
and surveyor of his Majesty's customs; was one of Sir Edmund Andross's council,
and was the person that boasted they were as arbitrary as the great Turk.
a man of most arbitrary principles, and indefatigable in his endeavors to
distress the Colony, and set up arbitrary government. He was at last the
"messenger of death," and arrived in 1673, with powers to demand an absolute
resignation of all the liberties of the Colony into the royal hands. But before
any new form of government could take place, king Charles II. died, and it was
not till 1686, that a commission arrived for setting up a new and arbitrary
government, under which the house of Deputies was laid aside, and consequently
the people were totally deprived of all power in the administration. The powers
of government were committed to a chosen council, of which a gentleman of this
place was appointed president. Joseph Dudley, Esquire
Soon after arrived Sir Edmund Andross, with a commission from king James, with
a number of assistants, to take upon him the absolute government of all the
New England Colonies with New York. Thus the people found themselves completely
stripped of all their privileges, civil and sacred, and subjected to a
governor and council, as to the ruling part of them, entirely devoted to the
will and pleasure of a popish prince, whole arbitrary measures will be
detested, while there are friends to the protestant religion, and the liberties
of the nation.

Sir Edmund Andross was supposed to be a biggoted papist. On his arrival, he
made high professions of regard to the public good and welfare of the people.
But, as one observes, Gov. Hutchinson's Hist. of Mass. vol. 1. p. 354.
Nero concealed his tyrannical disposition more years, than he did months. All
the affairs of government were managed by himself, with four or five of his
creatures. The distressed people were soon given to understand, they were not
to expect to enjoy the privileges of Englishmen. One of the first acts of
their tyranny, was the restraint of the press. Marriage was forbidden, but on
certain conditions of their own prescribing. The congregational ministers were
considered as mere laymen. The people were menaced, that the meeting houses
should be taken from them, and, that public worship, in the congregational way,
should not be tolerated. But while affairs were thus going on, and the
religious liberties of the country were just on the point of being lost, the
king's proclamation for universal toleration, put a stop to any further
proceedings.

But still the people saw their civil rights and personal property in the hands
of a tyrant. -- Swearing by the book was introduced, and such as scrupled it
were fined and imprisoned. -- Exorbitant and intolerable fees were exacted. --
The titles to lands were questioned, in order to oblige men to take out new
patents, at unreasonable prices. -- Estates, in some instances, were unjustly
alienated, and made over to those, that had no right to them in law or justice.
-- Property became every day more and more precarious: Under such a government,
no man could call any thing his own. Towns were forbidden, at their peril, to
assemble, except once or twice a year. The governor, with four or five, laid
taxes on the people, according to his sovereign will, and the officers who
refused to assess them, were imprisoned and fined -- The inhabitants were
cruelly forbid to garrison their own houses, in a time of war. -- A multitude
of lives were lost, in a foolish and fruitless expedition to the eastern
frontiers. -- Such were the arbitrary measures pursuing by a set of wretches,
who were making their fortunes out of the country's ruin. The people had no
where to cry but to him who rules in the armies of heaven, and among the
inhabitants of the earth. He was graciously pleased to appear. The glorious
revolution, which dethroned James, and placed a protestant king and queen on
the throne, sat New England at liberty from the cruel oppressions of arbitrary
government.

It must be remembered, that while the country was stripped of its invaluable
privileges, and groaning under arbitrary government, they were likewise
carrying on a war with the savages, which seems to have fallen chiefly on the
eastern frontiers. This war began in 1687, and lasted ten years; in all which
time, our frontiers were harrased, and, every year, more or less destruction
was made on our borders. It was during this war, viz. in 1690, that this brave
people, who, one would have thought quite disheartened, raised and sent 700 men,
who accomplished the reduction of Port Royal, which was given up seven years
after, at the treaty of Ryswick. In the same year an expedition was formed, and
carried on, under the command of Sir William Phips, for the reduction of
Canada. The expedition proved unsuccessful, and the consequences of it
distressing to the people. A thousand brave young men lost their lives, by a
train of disasters in that unfortunate undertaking. Mourning and woe were
brought on the country, and a load of debt which proved pernicious to them and
their posterity. A paper currency begun at that time.


Liberty is the most ardent wish of a brave and noble people. They bear the
yoke with reluctance, and never fail to improve the first opportunity to cast
it off. The sacred thirst for liberty brought our fathers hither. They endured
the yoke of slavery with great uneasiness. The first hints that William and
Mary had ascended the throne, aroused them to spirited measures; they seized
and imprisoned the instruments of their oppression, and preferred their humble
and earnest solicitations for the restoration of their charter-priviledges.
After three or four years the present charter was obtained, which, though it
enlarges the king's prerogative, and brings us to a nearer dependence on the
crown, we nevertheless consider as of inestimable worth. It Is privileges we
wish, and pray may be transmitted a fair inheritance to our children after us.
-- Only I would observe, that one of our ministers, the Rev. Dr. Increase
Mather, was a principal agent in obtaining the present charter. His praise is
in all the churches: His name will be remembered through many generations.

The arrival of the new charter, in 1692, did not put an end to the distresses
of this unhappy people. It is said of the Israelites, that, when the foundation
of the house of the Lord was laid, after the captivity, many of the priests and
levites, and chief of the fathers, that had seen the first house, when the
foundation of this house was laid before their eyes, wept with a loud voice,
and many shouted for joy. Ezra 3.12.
In like manner, on the arrival of the new charter, while some rejoiced at the
restoration of many of their former privileges, others mourned bitterly the
abridgment of the important liberties they had enjoyed under the former
charter, and forms of government. The state of the country was on other
accounts greatly distressed. -- The seacoasts were infested with the enemies
privateers, so that few of our vessels could escape. The inland frontiers, from
east to west, were harrassed with enemies, French and Indians. -- The late
unsuccessful expedition against Canada, had exposed the country to the
resentment of France, and bro't a distressing load of debt upon the people, and
the government were in the utmost perplexity to provide for carrying on the
war. Lastly, amidst all, the minds of the people were filled with horror at the
breaking out of what is called the witchcraft; a scene dreadful to be thought
on! Many of the people were credulous, and believed all they heard, and the few
that believed all was imposture, and design, were afraid to reveal their
sentiments, lest they should be accused themselves, for in that case they saw
little probability of escape.

However silly and romantic the stories of witchcraft may appear to us, in this
more enlightened age, it is but a few years since they were believed in all the
civilized nations of Europe; many, even in the last century, in the most
enlightened parts of Europe, were put to death for supposed witchcraft. The
unhappy tragedy, acted by our mistaken fathers, was principally confined to the
county of Essex; where the prosecution was carried on, for several months, with
mistaken zeal and unremitting vigor. The anguish, the horror and consternation
of the people were beyond imagination, when their relatives, their friends and
neighbors were accused, imprisoned: Many of them put on solemn trial for life,
and diverse condemned and executed. No one could look upon himself as safe: Many
fled their country for fear, and, before the imposture was discovered, such a
shocking tragedy was acted, as is enough to make the ears of every one that
hears to tingle. Nineteen persons were condemned and executed for witchcraft.
One was pressed to death for refusing to plead. Eight more lay under the
sentence of death. Fifty confessed and were pardoned. One hundred and fifty
were imprisoned, and two hundred, being accused, fled for their lives, See
Hutchinson on witchcraft, p. 58. -- In that excellent treatise the reader will
find the vulgar notions of witchcraft learnedly disproved, the true nature of
witchcraft, as spoken of in the law of Moses, clearly opened, with an ingenious
account of the witch of Endor.
May heaven forgive the innocent blood, that was shed; may future ages learn
wisdom from the mistakes of former times: Rather, much rather, may time draw a
dark vail over this scene of delusion.

At this time, and for several successive years, the natives carried on the war
upon our eastern and western frontiers; making sudden and unexpected onsets,
burning houses, killing and captivating the distressed inhabitants. This year
(1693) an army of French and Indians attacked Wells, but could not destroy the
garrison; and tortured a poor man to death. John Diamond.


In 1694, the enemy attacked a village in New Hampshire, Oyster-River.
and killed and captivated 100 persons. The same year they fell on diverse
places in the eastern parts, Kittery, Saco, etc.
and several persons fell victims to their rage.

In 1695, the savages continued their depredations, and committed several
murders on the frontiers, and, no farther from home than Billerica, they killed
and captivated fifteen persons.

On the next year, 1696, the English-fort at Pemaquid, the strongest garrison
in the eastern country, was taken and demolished. The news created great terror
through the country; and it was then expected the enemy would have marched
westward and brought fire and sword into the bowels of our country. A
considerable army Five hundred men.
was raised and sent to oppose them; but God was pleased to deliver the country
from their fears, and nothing extraordinary was attempted by the enemy. The
inhabitants, all along the frontiers, were obliged to shut themselves up in
garrisons, and were greatly hindered from their labors. The Indians were every
where upon the watch, and when an opportunity presented, seized or killed those
that ventured abroad. -- We, who sit every one under his own vine and figtree,
and have none to make us afraid, can hardly imagine the distressed situation of
families, every hour in peril of their lives; ever and anon alarmed with the
outrages of savages, and the relations of murders committed in one place and
another.

In 1697, we were threatened with a powerful invasion from France. -- The king
of France had his heart much set on this expedition. A large fleet was ordered
to sail from the ports of France, as early in the year as possible, to attack
Boston. A numerous army from Canada was destined to join the fleet, on the
eastern frontiers: The army was ready to march at a few days warning. The fleet
actually sailed from France, and arrived in America. The designed invasion was
known in the country, and every day expected, for several weeks together. A
report was spread in Boston, that a formidable fleet had been seen on the
coast. The inhabitants, as well they might be, were put into consternation and
amazement. They expected every day to be attacked; there were no hopes of a
British fleet to assist them. The best preparations were however made, by a
brave and distressed people, to receive their enemies -- The militia was held
in readiness to march to the seacoasts, and their principal fortresses were
put into the best posture of defense. The alarm continued for several weeks,
all which time, they daily expected to be attacked. But Heaven was pleased
graciously to appear for their help, and, by a train of disappointments,
frustrated the designs the enemy had formed against us. Besides, by reason of
the preparations making in Canada, to strike this important blow, our frontiers
had quiet until the latter part of the year, when a party of the enemy fell
upon Lancaster, and killed the minister, The Rev. Mr. Whiting.
and twenty or thirty of the inhabitants.

On the beginning of the next year, School, the Indians surprised Andover and
Haverhill, burned several houses, and killed many of the inhabitants, leading
some into dreadful captivity: And the treaty of Ryswick, which restored peace
to England and France, did not quickly deliver our frontiers from the Indian
enemy. Several attacks after, this were made on our eastern and western
borders. On Kittery, York and Hatfield.


In the year School, after many years incessant war with the French and Savages,
peace was restored to our frontiers. But it is duration was short. For on the
breaking out of Q. Anne's war with France, 1703, New England was again involved
in an expensive and distressing war, which, during the course of ten years,
required the utmost exertion of this people: It Is weight fell principally on
this unfortunate Colony. It grieves me to represent to you the sufferings,
distresses and disappointments of this unhappy people. But, as it may remind us
of our obligations to God, who has often appeared for us in seasons of peculiar
distress, I shall give you a summary view of the series of calamities, which
befell us, during that long war.

The first considerable onset of the Indians was on the town of Deerfield, on
the night following the 28th of February. -- In the dead of night the whole
town was attacked, by 300 French and Indians. They slew about forty persons,
and, the next morning, leaving the houses and barns in flames, they took their
departure, carrying away about 100 captives, among whom was the minister of the
town, Rev. Mr. Williams.
a native of this place, with his wife and five children, leaving two of his
children dead, and his house in flames. -- The tender husband was quickly
separated from his feeble spouse, and, not long after, had the affecting
tidings that she, fatigued with travel, had the hatchet of her cruel master
struck in her brains. -- Oh! the distress that an affectionate husband must
have felt at such a relation as this! -- Several expensive expeditions were
undertaken, which had no great effect, unless that they might strike terror
into the savages, and prevent their so frequent onsets on our settlements.

In 1704, the enemy were very active, and made several attacks upon our
unwalled villages. Three or four hundred French and Indians came down to
Lancaster, and burnt the meeting house, and many dwelling houses, and assaulted
the garrisons, but were not able to take them. Many other towns in this, and a
neighboring government, Almsbury, Haverhill, York, Exeter, Dover, etc.
suffered by the incursions of the savages; and the country was in a perpetual
alarm.

In 1705, I meet with no considerable devastations of the enemy. As it was a
time of war, the people on the frontiers must have lived in continual fear;
and, if they ventured into their fields, it must have been in great fear and
jeapordy of their lives. But,

In the beginning of the next year, 1706, several hundreds marched from Canada,
to fall upon the frontiers of New England. The intelligence of this design gave
a dreadful alarm, through all the frontiers the people not knowing where they
would fall on. Probably the enemy divided their forces; for they fell on
several places nearly at the same time. During the course of this year,
Dunstable, Sudbury, Chelmsford, Exeter, and diverse other places, had some of
their inhabitants killed, or taken; and a party ventured down to Reading,
within a few miles of our metropolis. Who can conceive the distress and anguish
of a whole country, every where lying open to the cruelties of barbarous
savages, aided and pushed on by our merciless neighbors the French!

In 1707, an unsuccessful expedition was formed against Port Royal. This Colony
sent a thousand men, which greatly increased the burden of a distressed people.
Nor did this expedition at all secure our frontiers. The savages still
continued their ravages, and committed many barbarous murders on the
defenseless inhabitants, As at Exeter, Kingston, Dover, York, Berwick, Wells,
Casco-Bay, etc.
and had confidence enough to venture down to Marlborough, an inland, town
where they did some damage.

In 1708, the country was alarmed with advices, that the governor of Canada was
collecting all the tribes of savages he could, for a powerful invasion of some
part of New England, to be commanded by French officers. Providence strangely
disconcerted their plan, and great numbers of Indians gave over the enterprise.
However, on the 29th of August, about 200 of the enemy fell upon Haverhill,
killed the minister, The Rev. Mr. Rolfe.
and thirty or forty persons; burnt great part of the buildings, and returned,
carrying several into captivity.

Nothwithstanding this Colony had been harrassed with long and perplexing wars,
yet, upon an intimation from the Crown, that an expedition was designed against
Canada, they cheerfully raised and kept in pay, for several months, their quota
of troops Viz. 900 men.
and transports, until advices were received, that the intended expedition was
laid aside. This was an additional disappointment and misfortune to a people,
already sinking under a load of debt. And, through the course of this year, the
ravages on the frontiers were continued; many places were attacked, on the
eastern and western frontiers. A large party of the enemy attacked Deerfield,
when the inhabitants were just returned from captivity -- several other places
had their inhabitants picked off, by parties of Indians, dispersed all over the
frontiers.

In 1710, the New England Colonies sent four regiments to reduce Port Royal; in
which they were assisted by several of the king's ships. The design was
accomplished -- During the whole summer, notwithstanding the expense of the
expedition to Port Royal, the Colony were obliged to keep large parties in pay,
to scour the woods and protect the outer settlements. But, notwithstanding all
their diligence, the frontiers were frequently alarmed, and mischief was done
in several places. Marlborough and Chelmsford were infested with savages, and,
at the latter, a brave officer was slain. Major Tyng.


Nothing further could be expected from an exhausted people, yet, perhaps
encouraged by the success of the preceding year, and well knowing that they
were never to expect any lasting peace and safety, so long as Canada was in the
hands of the French, upon advice of an expedition forming against Quebec, this
Colony, with almost unparaled readiness and dispatch, furnished two regiments,
their quota of troops, with provisions, and joined the king's troops arrived at
Boston, on the projected expedition. The whole armament, consisting of fifteen
sail of men of war, forty transports and 7000 troops sailed from Boston, July
30, 1711. They arrived in the river St. Lawrence, where, in the night, eight or
nine ships were wrecked upon the rocks, and a thousand of the king's troops
perished in the waves. This dreadful blow, at once, put an end to the
expedition. The navy and regular troops returned to England, and the
New England forces returned ashamed and confounded. The disappointment and
vexation was very great. The public debt was increased, and become now almost
insupportable. The country was still left to the merciless ravages of French
and Indians. Some pious minds give over all hopes of ever reducing Canada. So
many attempts blasted plainly indicated, as they conceived, that providence
never designed the whole northern continent of America for one European power.
And, to add still to the misfortune, it soon appeared, that every method was
taken to misrepresent and abuse this loyal Colony, and cast all the blame of
the failing of the expedition on us. Proper measures were taken to clear this
Colony from this undeserved abuse. A journal of all the proceedings was sent
home, in which, it was truly asserted, that one fifth part of the inhabitants
of the province, fit to bear arms, were in pay this summer. And further, to
complete their misfortunes, this year, a considerable part, the middle and best
inhabited part, of the town of Boston, was lain in ashes.

Early on the spring of the next year, 1712, the savages renewed their assaults
on the frontiers, killing and captivating in one place and another. Their
incursions were continued until 1713, when peace took place between the
contending powers of Europe: Soon after which the Indian tribes entered into a
treaty of peace, and professed themselves the very obedient faithful subjects
of the Crown of Great Britain.

We are come to a period memorable in the annals of Europe, for the peace of
Utrecht. This country had now, with very small intermissions, been in a state
of war for near forty years. In those long wars the country lost five or six
thousand of their bravest youth; and it was found, that in the space of fifty
years, the number of inhabitants in the province had not doubled. The defense
of the frontiers, and the numerous garrisons and fortifications they were
obliged to maintain, together with the various expensive expeditions in which
they were engaged, without any relief or compensation from the crown, must have
occasioned such an annual burden, as was not felt by any other subjects of
Great Britain; and the merit of the people of that day ought never to be
forgot. Hist. Mass. vol. 2. p 222.


From the year 1713, the land had rest and peace for about ten years. But, in
1723, the Indians broke out into a war (to which they were urged by the French)
that lasted about two years. During this war, the savages harrassed the
frontiers from east to west; falling upon diverse towns at the eastward, killing
and captivating many of the people. Scarborough, Falmouth, Berwick, Wells,
Arundel, etc.
They also fell on the western towns, particularly Rutland, where the minister
of the town The Rev. Mr. Willard.
fell a sacrifice to their rage. The English engaged the Indians in the East,
with various success, for some time, until their success in destroying the
Indian settlements at Norridgewalk, with a great part of the tribe of that
name, induced the savages in general, to treat of peace, which was established
by a solemn treaty in 1725. Commonly called Lieut. Gov. Dummer's treaty.
I would only add, it was during this war that Capt. Lovel, (with a company of
brave men) scouring the wilderness in quest of the enemy, was drawn into an
ambushment, and slain with several of his men.

From the peace in 1725, the country enjoyed peace for nineteen years; viz.
until the declaration of war between England and France, in 1744; when all our
frontiers were involved in the dangers and perplexities of an Indian war. Five
hundred men were immediately impressed and sent to guard the exposed
plantations. -- I am not able to give a minute account of the onsets and
murders committed by the savages in this war, and I am ready to think proper
care was not taken to preserve the memory of those events. -- But this many of
us well remember, many valuable settlements were deserted, and burnt up, by the
enemy; and many of our people were slain or carried into captivity. -- During
this war, viz. in 1745, the repeated attempts of the enemy upon
Annapolis-Royal, (which was preserved from falling into their hands, by a
seasonable reinforcement of the garrison with 200 men from this province) and
the imminent danger our trade and fishery were exposed to, aroused the martial
spirit of the New England Colonies to engage in an expedition against
Louisburg, a strong fortress on the Island of Cape-Breton. The expedition was
planned by the Governor of this province, Lieut. Gen Shirley.
and prosecuted with the greatest ardor and bravery. Many of us remember the
readiness with which thousands of our worthy inhabitants engaged themselves in
that hazardous enterprise. -- God was pleased to hear our fervent prayers, and
succeed our endeavors. A train of favorable, unforeseen and even astonishing
events facilitated the conquest of that important fortress. This success of
New England arms was very important, in it is consequences: It was the price
that purchased the peace of Europe. Cape-Breton was the single equivalent for
all the conquests of France in the Netherlands. This conquest cost the Colonies
dear. For though but a few were killed in the seige, yet the sickness, that
raged among the troops in garrison after the conquest, swept off many hundreds
of our worthy inhabitants.

The success of the expedition against Louisburg put the ministry upon forming
a plan for the total reduction of Canada. These Colonies had lost great numbers
of their best men, in the conquest and garrisoning of Louisburg; and that
expedition, together with the war on the frontiers, had sunk them, especially
this province, deep in debt. To which I may add, as a discouraging
consideration; all former attempts on Canada had proved unfortunate.
Nevertheless, upon an intimation of the royal pleasure, the Colonies readily
engaged in the great undertaking, and even exceeded the roval requisition, in
the number of troops they engaged to employ, 8200 were engaged by the Colonies.
The troops of this province were seasonably prepared, and waited, with
impatience, the arrival of the forces from Europe. But, unhappily for the
Colonies, the design was laid aside at home, and all our expenses and
preparations proved, in a manner, fruitless; at least they only served to
defend our own frontiers, and to protect Nova Scotia, where our people were
insidiously attacked by the French and Indians at Minas, and 160 were killed
and wounded in one night. In a word, in stead of a fleet and army from home to
undertake the conquest of Canada, we were left to the fearful apprehensions of
a powerful fleet and army, sent out from France, with orders to bombard and lay
waste all our maritine towns; without any considerable force to resist them.

England was not more alarmed with the Spanish Armada, in 1588, than Boston,
and the other North-American seaports were, with the arrival of this powerful
armament in their neighborhood. The fleet consisted of seventy sail, whereof
fourteen were capital ships, and twenty were smaller men of war; enough,
indeed, to strike terror into the bravest minds. -- Every measure for defense,
that was in our power, was immediately pursued -- our principal dependence from
abroad, was the seasonable arrival of a British fleet; but herein our
expectations were disappointed. But when our dependence failed, Heaven was
pleased to hear the prayers of a distressed people, and kindly undertook our
deliverance. He, that has all nature in his power, sent mortal sickness into
the enemy's fleet and army, and so diminished their numbers, that they were
obliged to burn several of their ships, for want of men to navigate and defend
them. Their general, a Duke of France, Duke De Anvil.
died on a sudden, or rather laid violent hands on himself. Some of the ships
we lost in a violent storm, and others taken in their return to France. So that
this great Armada, which employed near half the navy of France, was in a great
measure destroyed. -- Pious men could not but see and admire the hand of God,
interposing for our deliverance: We, literally, stood still and saw the
salvation of God. -- He saw that there was no man, -- therefore his own arm
brought salvation.

During the short peace between the two last wars, our plantations flourished,
and our settlements extended themselves further into the wilderness. But our
rest was short: We were soon called to arms. The necessity of the times
required us to furnish much greater armies than ever we had done before.
France, instead of conforming to articles of agreement for terminating all
disputes in America, was forming the vast plan (or rather prosecuting a plan
long since laid) of driving the English out of all North America; at least of
subjecting this vast extent of dominion to the crown of France. For this
purpose, they were building fortresses on our frontiers, imprisoning British
subjects; they attacked our garrisons, and were daily filling their Colonies
with regular troops, in order to execute the project formed as Versailes. These
perfideous transactions occasioned the last war, which was indeed begun, in
1755, though not formally declared until the next year. The events of that war
are yet recent in your memories -- greater armies were led into the field; more
important battles were fought; more difficult sieges were undertaken; more
dreadful defeats were experienced, and, in short, more glorious victories and
conquests were obtained, than ever were known in this part of the world;
America was more eminently the seat of war; our public affairs received an
importance they never had before; not only England and France, but all Europe
listened to our fate.

Two things are observable, in which the last war differed from all that
New England had been engaged in before.

The first is, that whereas the former Indian wars were principally confined to
New England, our frontiers were the only field of battle, and the other
provinces, in a manner, sat still, in profound tranquillity, while we were
struggling hard to defend and keep possession of our country; they put not
their hand to the war; in the last war, the interests of the several
governments became blended or connected together; they were obliged to join
their forces, and the cause became a common one, although it must be
acknowledged that New England, even then, bore the burden and heat of the day.

2dly. Whereas, in all preceding wars, our eastern and western frontiers were
open to the ravages of the savages, during the last war, as we acted on the
offensive, and carried the war into the enemy's country, they were obliged to
collect all their forces for their own defense, by which means our frontier
settlements were unmolested: And, through the whole war, were, in a manner,
safe from fear; a quiet habitation -- a happiness they never enjoyed in any
preceding war with France.

The beginning of the last war was unsuccessful in America. General Braddock,
at the head of two regiments, marching to remove the enemy's encroachments on
the Ohio, was attacked and slain, and a dreadful slaughter was made of the
troops under his command. In the latter end of the year, an army of French and
Indians under General Dieskau, was defeated by the provincial troops, and the
French inhabitants were, the same year, removed from Nova Scotia.

The next year (1756) our troops made an inactive campaign. Nothing of any
great moment happened, only the loss of the English garrison at Oswego, and
with it all our communication with the great lakes, or inland seas; which laid
all the frontiers of America open to the incursions of the enemy.

Seventeen hundred fifty seven, was a year of fear and of doubtful expectation
-- God was pleased to humble us before our enemies; we saw every thing run
counter to our wishes and expectations -- a large fleet and army designed for
the siege of Louisburg effected nothing. General Montcalm, at the head of an
army, crossed the lakes and demolished fort William-Henry, with many
circumstances of horror. The whole continent was alarmed at this success of our
enemies. We were ready to fear the worst, that the enemy would improve their
victory and brirg fire and sword into the interior parts of the country. The
ablest men amongst us thought it a dismal day; the hearts of many melted for
fear: People of the best discernment looked on our condition as very distressed
-- to say the least of it, it was "a day of darkness." We remember the wormwood
and the gall, our soul has them still in remembrance.

The critical state of the American war, and the hazard the Colonies were in
of being lost, aroused the fear of the nation, and obliged Great Britain to
send over a greater number of troops, with a powerful naval armament, to carry
on the war in America.

The events of the year 1758, were, in general, prosperous, though in some
instances our enemies had the advantage. Louisburg was invested and taken, and
the naval power of France was thereby greatly reduced. But the repulse of our
army before Ticonderoga, with the loss of not less than 2000 men, the flower of
the British troops, killed, wounded and missing, was a humbling stroke. -- This
defeat was in some measure repaired, by the successful expedition against
Frontenac, the grand French magazine for supplying the enemy's garrisons to the
westward, and the herds of savages, who, until then, were butchering the
defenseless inhabitants, on the frontiers of the western and southern Colonies.
Soon after the enemy deserted their garrison on the Ohio, and the depredations
of the Indians in a great measure ceased.

In 1759, our affairs began with the greatest probability of success. The
British and Provincial troops were commanded by able Generals, and the success
was equal to reasonable expectation. Many of you remember how our hearts leaped
for joy, on the arrival of the frequent messengers of our successes. This year
Niagara was besieged and taken -- Oswego preserved from a powerful attack of
the enemy -- a complete victory was obtained over a large body of French and
Indians, bending their way to raise the siege of Niagara -- the lines and
strong fortress of Ticonderoga, were entered with little resistance, and
Crown-Point, the very key of the enemy's country, was abandoned. Toward the
close of the campaign, a decisive and bloody battle was fought on the plains of
Abraham, in which, the Generals of both armies were slain. Genesis Wolf and Genesis
Montcalm.
To this succeeded the surrender of the city of Quebec, after a long siege.
These successes of the British troops broke the heart and power of the French,
and determined the fate of Canada.

The next year, 1760, is a glorious Era for New England, and all the American
Colonies -- an Era our fathers longed to see. The enemy early made some feeble
attempts to rescue and save their country, but all in vain. -- God, who of old
led his people through the Red Sea, on dry ground, and dried up the waters of
Jordan, conducted our armies through the watery avenues of their country. He
caused the fear and dread of them to fall upon our enemies; all hearts were
faint, and all hands were feeble. Upon the approach of the British troops, the
whole country of Canada was surrendered to the Crown of Great Britain, and the
entire conquest of the French in North America was completed. -- The extensive
countries, which the crown of France possessed, or claimed in North America,
which, in future ages, may contain many flourishing kingdoms, were, by the
following treaty of peace, forever annexed to the British empire. Then the Lord
delivered us from all our enemies -- then "the Lord turned the captivity of
Zion" -- then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing
-- then said they among the heathen, the Lord has done great things for them
-- the Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are glad. Psalm. 126.1, 2.


The last war was more interesting and important than any, that had taken place
in America: It was a contending for the empire, not of New England only, but of
all North America. Our Fathers, long since, predicted such an important
struggle. The crown of France hurried it on, by a vigorous pursuit of the plan
laid near an hundred years ago, to sorround and subject to itself the Colonies
of Great Britain. Had the British and French Colonies been left to contend with
one another, it is highly probable the English, by reason of their superior
numbers, had carried the day. But, as France was continually pouring troops
into her Colonies, and erecting impregnable fortresses in the most advantageous
places, we stood in absolute need of powerful aids from the mother country. The
loss of her Colonies must have been of the most dreadful consequence to
Great Britain, powerful succors were therefore readily sent over, not to
supersede, but to aid the utmost exertions of the Colonies. They did not take
this occasion to withdraw themselves from the burden of war, but, to their
utmost, yea, some of them, "beyond their ability," exerted themselves, from the
beginning to the end of the war. For several years, it is said, a fifth part of
the inhabitants of this province, fit to bear arms, were employed in the King's
service: And, if I mistake not, this single province had, one year, ten
thousand men employed in the service by sea and land. Though I never could find
that the number of the Colonists that perished in the last wars, was exactly
ascertained, yet several thousands, from this country, must have perished, in
so many years service; in so many long marches, laborious and difficult sieges,
and sharp encounters; and the debt contracted in the course of the war,
notwithstanding parliamentary grants, is still a heavy burden upon the people
of this province.

Since the British empire became unrivaled, in North America, New England has
been a quiet habitation. Our most exposed villages, that have been for ages
exposed to the barbarities of merciless savages, are now rejoicing in peace and
safety -- every one sits under his own vine and his own figtree, and there are
none to make us afraid. Our settlements are annually extending themselves into
the wilderness. Our numbers by the natural increase of the inhabitants, and by
accessions from foreign countries, are multiplying with great rapidity. New
towns are filling up and churches erecting: The wilderness does blossom as the
rose -- the solitary place does sing for joy.

We are not to expect perfect felicity in the most prosperous times. --
Government, in its most perfect form, is liable to mistakes; corruption creeps
into the best systems. The repose of these Colonies, a few years since, was
disturbed by an attempt of the mother country to lay upon them unconstitutional
taxes and burdens. The Stamp Act, which, had it operated in America, would have
greatly effected our liberty and property, was soon declared to be quite
unconstitutional, in the face of that Parliament, who, but one year before, had
passed the act, Particularly by these great men, Earl Chatham and (...)
and was presently repealed. This was a strange turn in favor of American
liberty, and shows us how easy it is with the most high to turn the hearts of
the children of men. --

Unhappily, I may say, unhappily for Great Britain and the Colonies too, we see
another parliamentary act put in execution, for the design of raising a
revenue, and of fixing the jurisdiction of Parliament, in such a manner as to
leave the Colonies without the power of disposing of their own property. This
act is generally reckoned quite unconstitutional, and, in many respects very
unfriendly to our liberties. -- It cannot be concealed, that great uneasiness
generally, almost universally, subsists in the Colonies, and there needs no
great penetration to foresee, that the continued enforement of this act will
have very disagreeable consequences; not only with regard to our liberty and
property, but as it tends to beget jealousies, suspicions, distrust and
alienation of affection, between the mother state and her children. -- We bear
true and faithful allegiance to our sovereign lord the King; we honor the
dignity of Parliament; we wish for nothing more than a perpetual union with,
and constitutional dependence on the mother country. We wish for no enlargement
of our constitutional privileges, only, that we may quietly enjoy those, which
have always been recognized by the high court of Parliament itself. We are
grieved to feel so severe marks of the royal displeasure, and, on the
slightiest and most trifling pretenses, to be represented and actually treated
as subjects meditating sedition and rebellion. But the most high rules in the
kingdoms of men. He that has delivered can deliver yet again. -- God has, at
sundry times, and in diverse manners, appeared for this people, in seasons of
the greatest public calamity. Liberty was the noble errand of our fathers over
the Atlantic; the most high has hitherto gloriously owned the cause, and, I
doubt not, he will still continue to support and preserve it. We trust in the
righteousness of our cause, and the uprightness of our intentions, that time
will rectify all mistakes; the extent of our liberties, and the perfection of
our obedience, will be better understood, and the grounds of disquietude be
removed. -- In the mean time, let us, while we are seeking redress in every
loyal and constitutional way, continue our fervent prayers, that the Throne may
be established in righteousness; that we may see the "good of his chosen," that
we may rejoice in the gladness of his nation, and glory with his inheritance;
leading quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty. Perhaps, by the
suppression of extravagance, and the improvement of trades and manufactures; by
the practice of frugality and industry, what was designed to bring us to a more
absolute dependence, may turn out, in its consequences, to be a blessing.

I have now led you through the most material and interesting changes and
events, from the beginning of our country, to this day. It is but a very
general and concise view I could give you, in these limited discourses; but
enough has been said to show you, that we have had many enemies to encounter,
and it is through many difficulties, hardships, and discouragements, we are
increased, from very small and feeble beginnings, until we are become a very
considerable people. You may now see the good hand of our God that has been
upon us: We must feel the obligations we are under to love and serve him --
only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth, with all your heart, for consider
what great things he has done for you. 1 Samuel 12.24.


I might now make a stand, and call you to look back on the series of divine
providence, and admire the power and goodness of God, in appearing so often,
and in such unexpected ways, for the salvation of his people, in this
wilderness.

For scores of years, with very little intermission, we have been engaged in
distressing wars with the savages, and those who stimulated them up against us.
The expense has been distressing, and kept us poor. The growth of our
settlements has been dreadfully impeded -- probably there would have been
hundreds of thousands of inhabitants, in the New England Colonies, more than
there are at this day, could the country have been settled in peace. And it is
impossible not to observe, that we have been commonly left alone to contend
with our enemies. We have not, in our most distressed circumstances, received
protection or relief from Great Britain, except, indeed, now and then some
ships of war to guard the seacoasts. I would be understood to speak of the
defense of our country; and the hard struggle we have had to withstand the
natives, encouraged and assisted by the French.
And although we have, from the beginning, guarded our frontiers, and often
engaged in heavy and expensive expeditions, to enlarge the kingdom, yet we were
always left to support the burden of debt thereby laid upon us. I am not able
to learn that this province have ever received any aid, in money, from the
mother country, before the reimbursement of the charges of taking Cape-Breton,
in 1745. Since that time we have, I confess, received parliamentary aids, yet
they have been in consideration of a debt incurred beyond our proportion in the
nation. Instead of royal donations, and parliamentary assistances, the truth of
the matter is, that, for 120 years, we were not only destitute of them, but in
that time have met with many discouragements from home to break the spirit of a
distressed infant Colony. Our fathers had often hard measure.

This country was at first sought and settled as an Assylum for liberty, civil
and religious: And it is worthy of observation, that the abettors of arbitrary
power, and ecclesiastical tyranny, have, all along, been the enemies of
New England. -- Charles I. under the influence of Archbishop Laud, (who always
kept a jealous eye over New England, and had his emisaries here, to make
representations of every thing that might set the Colonies in a bad light)
endeavored to cramp their growth, and threatened the assumption of their
privileges. His son, Charles II. listened to every one disaffected to our
prosperity, and begun the prosecution against the Charter. James II. unjustly
assumed our rights and erected an arbitrary unconstitutional government. On the
other side, if New England has had the good will of the Court, it has been in
the reigns of the Princes, whose names will be handed down to posterity, as the
protectors and restorers of the English liberties, as William III. and the
Sovereigns of the reigning house of Hanover; which house we sincerely pray God
to continue on the throne for ever. -- And this is what we may always expect,
that a government so popular and friendly to liberty, as this will always be
the envy and hatred of the abettors of tyranny, in Great Britain, as well as
among ourselves. Again,

I cannot but look back and adore the dealings of Heaven, all whose ways are
judgment, and his paths past finding our, in gradually cutting off the babarous
nations, to make room for us. The iniquity of the Canaanites was full, and for
their idolatry and wickedness, God caused the land to spue out its inhabitants;
but what these barbarians had done, to provoke the divine displeasure, we
cannot tell. God's ways are unsearchable. But this we have seen, though the
natives were very numerous before, and at the coming of our ancestors, yet they
have been ever since, to this day, diminishing until the whole race is in a
manner extinct. -- God did not cut them off at once; he left them, as he did
the Canaanites of old, to try his people, to be thorns in their sides, and
pricks in their eyes; but yet their destruction has proceeded with gradual,
sure and uninterrupted steps. Every war they waged bro't ruin, in the end, upon
themselves. Every year lessened their numbers; and even peace with us, and free
intercourse with our settlements: Yea, all our attempts to civilize and bring
them to a regular life, have proved pernicious to them, in the end, and
accelerated their destruction. And it is said that all the numerous nations of
Indians on the continent, at least all that have any intercourse with us, are
actually on the decrease. I am ready to think that, not only the extension of
our settlements, but all our attempts to civilize these barbarians, will be
found hereafter, as they always have been, to hasten their utter destruction.
-- This is the Lord's doings, and it is mavelous in our eyes. We can scarce
refrain a compassionate tear over an unhappy people, meeted out to be trodden
down and brought to utter destruction. But it is time to proceed to our second
general head of Discourse, which was to consider,

II. The obligations we are under, being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, to serve God, in holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives.
This I design as the moral, or religious improvement of all that has been said.
For my design in giving you the foregoing summary, was not so much to teach you
the history of your country, as to impress upon your hearts your obligations to
fear God, and serve him, "that it may go well with you and your children after
you." Deuteronomy. 4.40.


Walking before God "in holiness and righteousness," is descriptive of the
whole life of a good man. It is needless to point the several branches of that
holiness and righteousness, in which we are to walk before God. I shall only
point out some things essential to the holiness of a people, peculiarly worthy
of general attention.

The serious and conscientious observation of the Lord's Day, is a duty of the
highest importance to the life and power of religion among a people. Where do
we find the evidences of genuine seriousness and piety, in those that pay no
serious conscientious regard to the Lord's Day! It is a saying, founded on
observation, that religion prospers or declines among a people, according to
the respect that is shown to the Lord's Day; and even our reason shows us what
a mighty influence the serious observation of the Lord's day, with a careful,
diligent attendance on the word, sacraments and prayers, must have on the whole
tempers and lives of christians. So far as the Lord's Day becomes a season for
visiting, feasting, gaming and diversions, the life of christianity will
expire, and all manner of vices grow among a people. Only cast your eyes on
those places, where little regard is paid to the Lord's Day, and you will find
them, in a state of ignorance, and immorality, little or nothing better than
absolute heathenism. The puritans in England, so long ago as the reigns of
James I. and Charles I. distinguished themselves, by their serious observation
of holy time, and their opposition to sports and games on the Lord's Day.
Several eminent ministers were, if I mistake not, turned out of their livings
for refusing to read, in the churches, a proclamation for sports on the
Lord's Day. Our fathers were in general very strict and precise observers of
the Lord's Day They permitted no sports or diversions, and, when they were not
employed in public worship, they applied themselves to offices of piety, such
as reading, praying, catechizing, and singing in their own houses. Something, I
hope, of this excellent spirit still remains, in this land. We have yet good
laws enacted to prevent the profanation of holy time: And, I hope, there are
not wanting some, who have zeal and courage enough to put them into execution.
But it is not to be doubted that, through the country, in general, a serious
regard to the Lord's Day is on the decline. Under a notion of laying aside the
preciseness, or, as some call it, the scupolosity of our ancestors, I fear, we
are falling into the quite contrary extreme. Not only worldly discourses, but
even visiting, and riding from town to town, and walking for diversion, are
becoming common among us. But let me call upon you, my dear friends and
neighbors, to awaken your zeal for the precise observation of the Lord's Day.
Not only let us statedly frequent the public worship of Christ, but let us
carry our regards for holy time into private. Instead of worldly discourses,
needless visiting, or diversions of any kind, let us improve this day at home,
in prayers and devotions. Let us keep our families in due subjection, restrain
them from all levity and diversion, and bring them up in a serious and reverend
regard for holy time. Let us permit no idle company in our houses, and steadily
discourage and frown on every thing that tends to abate the reverence and
respect people ought to have for the sabbath. We cannot but be grieved for that
profanation of holy time, which comes under our observation: If we have
increasing examples of this, let them not abate our serious regard to our duty.
Otherwise we shall offend God, bring on a sad decay of real religion, and ruin
our posterity. -- While I recommend the observation of the Lord's Day, I plead
for that religion, which is our life, and by which we shall prolong our days in
the land which the Lord our God has given us.

Another thing, which the present moral state of the country leads me to
recommend to serious consideration, is an attendance on the Lord's supper. The
Lord's supper, as it is an express and plain, so it is an important and useful
institution of the redeemer. I am grieved to find there is such a general
neglect of it in this land. Many churches are awfully reduced in their numbers,
and, in some places, the neglect is become fashionable and almost universal.
Such great numbers absent themselves from the Communion that it is become in a
manner reputable to live and die in this sad and dangerous neglect. The common
disregard to this institution of Christ is, I am verily persuaded, one of the
crying sins of this people, and an astonishing instance of the want of love to
Christ, the life and power of christianity. -- It is an evidence how little
persons are concerned to be saved. It is probable some real christians may
absent themselves from the communion, through real fears and scruples. Many
things have been injudiciously said in past ages, which may cause an
unreasonable dread and fear of coming to the Lord's table. Prejudices are not
easily eradiated from men's minds. But, I confess, I have not that extensive
charity as to suppose but that, by far, the greater part of those, that live in
the neglect of the Lord's supper, do so from a low esteem for this ordinance of
Christ, or because they are afraid, that by so solemn a profession of
christianity, they shall bring themselves under the necessity of a more
circumspect life, or dishonor themselves by contradicting, in practice, their
own profession. After all that can justly be said in excuse for this general
omission, it argues at least, a prevailing infidelity of heart, a coldness in
religion, an awful want of regard to Christ, and a dreadful unconcernedness as
to the mercy of God in another world. Our fathers, perhaps to avoid the other
extreme, made the terms of christian communion too strait and narrow, which
might be offensive and discouraging to some; but, in most of our churches,
there is a more liberal spirit, and nothing is required, as a term of
communion, that any serious well-disposed person should scruple to comply with.
Oh that baptized persons; that professed christians would think of this great
duty! Oh! that all, who love the Lord Jesus, would, in their several places, do
all they can to wipe away the reproach that is cast on the precious redeemer of
souls, and the institution, by which his disciples are to be peculiarly
distinguished from all mankind. Let those who love Christ be earnest in prayer,
that God would pour out his Spirit; then shall we see men and women flying, as
the clouds, and as the doves to their windows, to this precious ordinance of
the redeemer.

Suffer me also to tell you, that the great increase of profane cursing and
swearing in the land does greatly provoke God, and cause the hearts of good men
to mourn. This country was once remarkable for its regard to the name of God.
Cursing and swearing were once rare, and accounted very dishonorable; and,
when known, severely punished by civil authority. I have heard of a man that
lived some time in New England, who upon his return to Old-England, declared,
he had lived seven years in a country, and all that time had never seen any one
drunk, nor heard a profane oath. But, alas! the times are sadly changed, and
that, as far as I can observe, not only in populous places, but in country
villages, and through the country in general. This has been a growing vice for
many years: But the late wars, wherein such great numbers of our young men were
employed in the army, have dreadfully corrupted our morals, and spread such
profaness as was never known in the country before. And our present disagreable
circumstances are, I fear, every day increasing profaness in the midst of us.
What multitudes are found who fear not to curse and swear, and take the awful
name of God into their mouths, on every occasion, in their common conversation?
It is impossible to walk the streets, in populous places, and not be obliged to
hear horrid oaths and imprecations. How many children, almost as soon as they
can speak, learn to swear? Good men, I fear, look with too little displeasure
on this sin. Children are not watched and warned against and punished for this
sin, as they ought to be. How seldom are the good laws against cursing and
swearing, put in execution? In short, it is, with many, no blot in a man's
character, to curse and swear: Men that are profane, (I might say obscene too)
notwithstanding pass, with many, for very good kind of men. This increase of
profaness, calls for humiliation: It calls for the united endeavors of
ministers and magistrates, and all who regard the interest of that religion
which is the life of any people. This matter particularly calls for your
serious attention, who live in a place of so much concourse and business. You
cannot be too watchful over your children, nor too careful to keep them out of
the way of temptation.

The spread of intemperance, and the excessive use of spirituous liquors, these
late years, calls for the serious consideration of all that regard the virtue
and welfare of their country. The first inhabitants of this country, were
remarkable for their temperance; but alas, how is the gold become dim, and the
most fine gold changed? Little use was, for a long time, made of spirituous
liquors, unless for a medicine -- for common refreshment they were seldom or
never taken. But our trade with the West India Islands, has abundantly
furnished us with the means of intemperance. The great plenty of spirituous
liquors has proved a temptation too hard for many to withstand, and truly
threatens the destruction of thousands of our inhabitants. That which once only
served for peculiar occasions, is now become the common drink of a great part
of our laboring people. Many have so habituated themselves to strong drink,
that they will perform no service without the liberal use of it. Only consider,
my Brethren, how many, by the excessive use of strong drink, become stupid,
idle, poor husbands; squander away their substance; wasting what they earn, or
laying out so great a part that they are poor and miserable. How many poor
people lay out almost all they earn for Rum, and therefore when any disaster
befalls them, they become a charge and burden to their neighbors, and the
community. Many spend their estates, and bring their families to poverty. How
many young men, who, in early life, bid fair to be useful members of society,
are debauched and spoiled by excessive drinking! How many break and enfeeble
their constitutions, and die before their time, by this accursed vice! Truly,
my hearers, I am warm when I speak of these things, and I cannot be otherwise.
I tremble to think what mischiefs this single vice is bringing on this, that
otherwise might be, the happiest people in the world. There is scarce any thing
I can hear of a friend, neighbor, or acquaintance, so shocking to me, as that
he indulges the common and liberal use of strong drink. When once the appetite
gets the rule; when once spirituous liquors become necessary, especially to the
carrying on business, I almost set that down as a gone, a ruined man: It
defeats every comfortable hope. Oh my friends, my dear countrymen, this
growing, this pestilential evil, calls for some speedy and effectual remedy. It
calls for the united opposition of magistrates, ministers, sober householders;
and of all that wish well to the prosperity of their country. Let us arise,
and, in our several places, make an effectual stand, or we are a poor miserable
enslaved people. Don't you see the destructive effects of this excess? Oh
banish it from your families. -- Let me earnestly enjoin it on the rising
generation, who have kept themselves free from the power of vicious appetites,
never to be brought into bondage. As for such as have used themselves to strong
drink, at their labor especially, and plead up for it, one had near as good
reason with the wind, or bid the sun not shine, as pretend to turn them from
what they dearly love. But as for you that are yet free from this folly, there
is hope you will take warning. Don't you see the pernicious consequences of
this vice; it is at your peril; your amazing peril, at the peril of your
health, character, prosperity; yea at the peril of your everlasting salvation,
that you make the common and daily use of strong liquors, in any way, necessary
unto you.

I have often and earnestly recommended industry and frugality, as virtues
absolutely necessary to public happiness: And I would again recommend to your
serious consideration, what I have said upon that interesting subject. It is
the happiness of New England that property is more equally divided than in any
other part of the world; and, I believe, the poor have advantages for acquiring
a comfortable subsistence, and, even, for laying up estates, beyond almost any
country whatsoever. But without industry and frugality, no people in the world
can flourish. If families live in idleness, if people go beyond their abilities
in living, building, dress, equipage, and the like; if children are not
carefully brought up to industry, there is no doubt they will be miserable,
with the greatest and best advantages. It is therefore highly necessary, if
considered only as the means of present public happiness, that children be
trained up to useful business that we retrench superfluities, that we content
our selves with the effects of our own industry. -- These things I urge, not
merely or chiefly as being at this time peculiarly necessary for answering
political purposes in Great Britain, but as now and always necessary to the
life and prosperity of a people. Once more,

Family government was very strict, in the first ages of the country. But, if
our fathers, in any instances, carried the matter too far then, we are
certainly gone very far into the other extreme now. Family government, through
the country, is generally too much relaxed. The reverence and obedience of
children to their parents, is too much lessened. Too little restraint is laid
on youth, which, left to it self, is vanity. Family prayer is in many places
most awfully neglected: The consequence is, as might be expected, youth are
loose, profane, untractable and unadvised. This want of family government is
seen in schools and colleges, and is justly lamented by persons of the best
judgment and observation. Families are the nurseries of virtue and happiness,
and the laying aside family religion, is striking a blow at the root. It is
high time for us to think of this matter. Let us all, this day, take up
Joshua's excellent resolution; -- "but as for me and my house we will serve the
Lord." Joshua 4.15.
Let us make our houses Bethels for prayer -- let us keep up the authority of
parents and masters -- let us lay our restraints on youth, when they would make
themselves vile, for a child, left to himself, brings his father to shame.
Oh! if we love our families, if we tender their present happiness or eternal
life: If we regard posterity, let us attend to the important work of family
religion and government. This is a matter that requires wisdom and prudence; by
too much severity and strictness, I know, it is possible children may be
discouraged, but, generally speaking, there is greater, far greater danger,
that they will be injured and ruined by too much indulgance.

I might go on to mention other things implied in walking before God, and
closely connected with the public weal. It is a maxim founded on the experience
of all ages, righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a reproach to any
people. Prove. 14.24.
But the time calls upon me to finish my discourse. --

Innumerable motives and arguments I could also set before you, to persuade you
to walk before the God of your fathers, taken from the consideration of
domestic and public happiness; from this world, and the world to come. -- This
is our life -- but here I am straightened by the want of time -- only let me
suggest a few thoughts.

The consideration of the noble design of planting this country, and of the
excellent characters of its first inhabitants should animate us to walk before
God, and maintain a religious character. The views on which this land was
settled were singular and noble: It was not trade and commerce, nor any worldly
views, but religion was the noble motive that brought our fathers hither, and
reconciled them to the perils of their wilderness state. They planted
themselves here with the real express views of serving God, and of training up
their posterity in the good ways of the Lord. They were indeed, in general a
very serious oonsciencious set of people. In some things they appear to us, at
this day, to have been narrow in their principles, but, if we reflect, we shall
find nothing singular in them on that account. The age they lived in was dark,
compared with ours. The church had but lately emerged from popish darkness, and
all sects of christians retained something of the old leaven, the persecuting
spirit of popery; and it is no wonder our fathers had a tincture of it. Time
and enquiry, experience and observation for more than an hundred years have
increased the light, and taught the more sensible part of christians
moderation, candor and forbearance. With all their mistakes, our ancestors
retain the character of singular exemplary christians; and, would to God, we
had more of their excellent spirit. Let us consider from whence we are fallen
and repent, that though we have superior light we have lost much of that
serious devout heavenly spirit, which so happily distinguished them. Let us
strive to recover and retain primitive piety. Let us keep in view the gracious
end which they pursued. May we never wholly lose that religious character for
which this land has so long been remarkable. May we guard against every
temptation to depart from the good way, our fathers walked in. Let us cleave to
God and one another in love, that we may be unto him for a name and for a
praise and for a glory, above any other people on the earth.

Should not love to God and gratitude to him, that has done such mavelous
things for us, engage us to serve him in holiness and righteousness? How can we
trace the paths of providence, from age to age working for us, and not feel the
goodness of God leading us to repentance! Can we ill requite the Lord -- can we
be evil and unthankful?

Let us consider our dependence on God for future prosperity. We have had an
awful example of God's severity in rooting out whole nations to make room for
us. He caused them to melt away as the dew before the rising sun: Their name
and memorial is, in a manner, perished out of the earth. Has not God the same
power over us? If we forsake him and serve other gods, or serve diverse lusts
and pleasures, divine providence will cast us out of its protection, we shall
sink under the weight of our own sins, as multitudes of ancient kingdoms and
nations have done; we shall perish from off the earth, and from under these
heavens. God has judgments enough in store -- Fear as-well as love ought to
engage us to serve God. Corruption and immorality are the natural, necessary
ruin of a people, and history presents us with striking examples of nations
that have sunk under the weight of their own vices. -- A people can never be
free and happy but in proportion as they are virtuous -- vice is slavery,
misery and certain ruin.

Finally: Let us all seriously lay to heart our probationary state, and the
amazing eternity into which we are going. The retrospect upon former ages,
gives us a striking, an affecting idea of the changing state of man. "One
generation passes away, and another comes." "Our fathers" that laid the
foundation of our present happiness, whose names are had in respected
remembrance, "where are they"? They have finished their wearisome pilgrimage,
made their bed in the dust, and their sepulchers are with us to this day. As
all our fathers, we are but strangers and sojourners in this land. This century
will house, by far, the greatest part of this assembly in the dust. -- May
divine grace enable us to act our part well on the stage of life, and, when we
are taken out of this wilderness to Canaan above, may we leave this fair
inheritance to our children, and they to theirs. As for man, his days are as
grass, as a flower of the field, so it flourishes, for the wind passes over
it and it is gone, and the place thereof shall know it no more. But the mercy
of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his
righteousness to childrens children; to such as keep his covenant, and that
remember his commandments to do them. Psalm 103.15, -- 18.


FINIS.
ERRATA. Title page for tantrae, r. tantae. p. 9. l. 33 f. the, r. these. p 22.
l. 4. add was p 24. l 6. f. 1673. r. 1683. p. 28. l. 12. f. forms, r. form p.
30 l. 15. f home, r. hence. p. 35. l. 29. f. were, r. was. p 36. l 10 f.
unparaled, r unparaleled, p 37. l. 10. f. lain, r. laid. p 41. l. 18 f. we, r.
were.


