SOME SERIOUS and AWFUL CONSIDERATIONS, Recommended to ALL, particularly the
YOUTH, IN A REPRESENTATION of the Uncertainty of a Deathbed REPENTANCE. ALSO
SOME CHRISTIAN INSTRUCTIONS, Agreeable to the Precepts of our blessed Savior
JESUS CHRIST; Under the Character of a devout PARENT advising his CHILDREN.
Extracted from a late pious AUTHOR.

DEUTERON. XI. 18. Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and
in your soul.

And ye shall teach them your children speaking of them when thou sit in
thine house, when thou walk by the way, when thou lie down, and when thou
risest up.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Second-street, two Doors below
the Corner of Chesnut-street.

ALL that has been said by the greatest saints and dying men, when the fullest
of light and divine knowledge, of the necessity of piety, of the excellency of
virtue, of our duty to God, of the vanity of worldly enjoyments; and all the
maxims of the wisest philosophers, when in their highest state of wisdom, are
proper objects of meditation for the serious minded, and ought, particularly,
to constitute the daily lessons of youthful minds. Such was the education of
the youth who attended Plato and Socrates; their every day's instruction were
so many lectures upon the nature of man, his true end, and the right use of his
faculties. Now as Christianity has set every thing that is reasonable, wise,
holy and desirable, in its true point of light, so it might well be expected,
that the education of the youth should be as much bettered and amended by
Christianity, as the faith and doctrines of religion are. But, alas, our modern
education is not of this kind, whatever way of life we intend the youth for, we
apply to the fire of their minds, and exhort them to improvement from corrupt
motives. We generally stir them to action from principles of covetousness, or a
desire of distinction, that they may accumulate wealth, excel others, and shine
in the eyes of the world. We repeat and inculcate these motives upon them, till
they think it a part of their duty to make gain and worldly distinction the
chief object of their desire. That this is generally the nature of the
education of our sons, is too plain to need any proof. And it is much to be
lamented that our daughters, whose right education is of the utmost importance
to human life, should not only be brought up in pride, but in the lowest and
most contemptible part of it; such as a fondness for their persons, a desire of
beauty, and a love of dress; and indeed almost every thing they meet with seems
to conspire to make them think of little else. And after all this we complain
of the pernicious effects that pride and covetousness have in the world; we
wonder to see grown persons actuated and governed by these pernicious
principles, not considering that they were all the time of their youth called
upon to form their actions and industry upon the same principles. An education
under Plato and Socrates had no other end, but to teach youth to think, judge,
act and follow such rules of life as Plato and Socrates used, and is it not our
indispensable duty to use our best endeavor that the end of a christian
education, may be to teach our youth how to think and judge, and act, and live
agreeable to the precepts and practice of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

The Uncertainty of a DEATHBED REPENTANCE, illustrated under the Character of
PENITENS.
PENITENS was a busy notable tradesman, and very prosperous in his dealings,
but died in the thirty-fifth year of his age.

A little before his death, when the doctors had given him over, some of his
neighbors came one evening to see him; at which time he spoke thus to them:

I see, says he, my friends, the tender concern you have for me, by the grief
that appears in your countenances, and I know the thoughts that you now have
about me. You think how melancholy a case it is, to see so young a man, and in
such flourishing business, delivered up to death. And, perhaps, had I visited
any of you in my condition, I should have had the same thoughts of you.

But now, my friends, my thoughts are no more like your thoughts, than my
condition is like yours.

It is no trouble to me now to think, that I am to die young, or before I have
raised an estate.

These things are now sunk into such meet nothings, that I have no name little
enough to call them by. For if in a few days, or hours, I am to leave this
carcass to be buried in the earth, and to find myself either for ever happy in
the favor of God, or eternally separated from all light and peace, can any
words sufficiently express the littleness of every thing else?

Is there any dream like the dream of life, in which we are amused with vain
and empty things? whilst we are neglecting and disregarding that which is
substantially valuable. Is there any folly like the folly of most men and
women, who think themselves too wise, and are too busy to hearken to the voice
of Jesus Christ calling in the heart? which, if carefully attended to, would
occasion these serious reflections; but for want of attending to this divine
instructor, that enemy of mankind the Devil, is suffered to fill our minds with
unreasonable affections and foolish opinions; so that when we consider death as
a misery, we only think of it as a miserable separation from the enjoyments of
this life. We seldom mourn over an old man that dies rich, but we lament the
young, that are taken away in the progress of their fortune. You yourselves
look upon me with pity, not that I am going unprepared to meet the Judge of the
quick and the dead, but that I am to leave a prosperous trade in the flower of
my life.

This is the wisdom of our manly thoughts. And yet what folly of the silliest
children is so great as this?

For what is there miserable or dreadful in death, but the consequences of it?
When a man is dead, what does any thing signify to him, but the state he is
then in?

Our poor friend Lepidus died, you know, as he was dressing himself for a
feast; do you think it is now part of his trouble, that he did not live till
that entertainment was over? Feasts, and business, and pleasures, and
enjoyments, seem great things to us, whilst we think of nothing else; but as
soon as we add death to them, they all sink into an equal littleness; and the
soul, that is separated from the body, no more laments the loss of business,
than the losing of a feast.

If I am now going into the joys of GOD, could there be any reason to grieve,
that this happened to me before I was forty years of age? could it be a sad
thing to go to Heaven, before I had made a few more bargains or stood a little
longer behind a counter?

And if I am to go amongst lost spirits, could there be any reason to be
content, that this did not happen to me till I was old, and full of riches?

If good Angels were ready to receive my soul, could it be any grief to me,
that I was dying upon a poor bed in a garret?

And if GOD has delivered me up to evil spirits, to be dragged by them to
places of torments, could it be any comfort to me, that they found me upon a
bed of state?

When you are as near death as I am, you will know, that all the different
states of life, whether of youth or age, riches or poverty, greatness or
meaness, signify no more to you, than whether you die in a poor or stately
apartment.

The greatness of those things which follow death, makes all that goes before
it sink into nothing.

Now that judgment is the next thing that I look for, and everlasting happiness
or misery is come so near me, all the enjoyments and prosperities of life seem
as vain and insignificant, and to have no more to do with my happiness, than
the clothes that I wore before I could speak.

But, my friends, how am I surpised, that I have not always had these
thoughts? How an I surpised to find, that for want of yielding obedience, to
that degree of light and grace, with which God has enlightened? the words of
our blessed Savior have been fulfilled in me, darkness has been suffered to
come over me, and these great things have been hid from me; for what is there
in the terrors of death, in the vanities of life, or the necessities of piety,
but what I might have as easily and fully seen in any part of my life?

What a strange thing is it, that a little health, or the poor business of a
shop, should keep us so senseless of these great things, that are coming so
fast upon us!

Just as you came into my chamber, I was thinking with myself, what numbers of
souls there are now in the world, in my condition at this very time, surpised
with a summons to the other world; some taken from their shops and farms,
others from their sports and pleasures, these at suits at law, those at
gaming-tables, and all seized at an hour when they thought nothing of it;
frighted at the approach of death, confounded at the vanity of all their
labors, designs and projects, astonished at the folly of their past lives, and
not knowing which way to turn their thoughts, to find any comfort. Their
consciences flying in their faces, bringing all their sins to their
remembrance, tormenting them with the deepest convictions of their own folly,
presenting them with the sight of the angry Judge, the worm that never dies,
the fire that is never quenched, the gates of hell, the powers of darkness, and
the bitter pains of eternal death.

Oh my friends! bless God that you are not of this number, that you have time
and strength to employ yourselves in such works of piety, as may bring you
peace at the last.

And take this along with you, that there is nothing but a life of great piety,
or a death of great stupidity, that can keep off these apprehensions.

Had I now a thousand worlds, I would give them all for one year more, that I
might present unto God, one year of such devotion and good works, as I never
before so much as intended.

You perhaps, when you consider that I have lived free from scandal and
debauchery, and in the communion of the Church, wonder to see me so fall of
remorse and self-condemnation at the approach of death.

But, alas! what a poor thing is it, to have lived only free from murder, theft
and adultery, which is all that I can say for myself.

You know indeed, that I have never been reckoned a sot, but you are at the
same time witnesses, and have been frequent companions of my intemperance,
sensuality, and great indulgence. And if I am now going to a judgment, where
nothing will be rewarded but good works, I may well be concerned, that though I
am no sot, yet I have no Christian sobriety to plead for me.

It is true, I have lived in the communion of the Church, and generally
frequented its worship and service on Sundays, when I was neither too idle, or
not otherwise disposed of by my business and pleasures. But then my conformity
to the public worship has been rather a thing of course, than any real
intention of doing that which the service of the Church supposes; had it not
been so, I had been oftener at Church, more devout when there, and more fearful
of ever neglecting it.

But the thing that now surprises me above all wonders, is this, that I never
had so much as a general intention of living up to the piety of the Gospel.
This never so much as entered into my heart. I never once in my life considered
whether I was living as the laws of Religion direct, or whether my way of life
was such, as would procure me the mercy of God at this hour.

And can it be thought, that I have kept the Gospel terms of salvation, without
ever so much as intending in any serious deliberate manner either to know them,
or keep them? Can it be thought, that I have pleased God with such a life as he
requires, though I have lived without ever considering, what he requires, or how
much I have performed? How easy a thing would salvation be, if it could fall
into my careless hands, who have never had so much serious thoughts about it,
as about any one common bargain that I have made?

In the business of life I have used prudence and reflection, I have done every
thing by rules and methods. I have been glad to converse with men of experience
and judgment, to sind out the reasons why some fail, and others succeed in any
business. I have taken no step in trade but with great care and caution,
considering every advantage or danger that attended it. I have always had my
eye upon the main end of business, and have studied all the ways and means of
being a gainer by all that I undertook.

But what is the reason that I have brought none of these tempers to Religion?
What is the reason that I, who have so often talked of the necessity of rules
and methods, and diligence in worldly business, have all this while never once
thought of any rules, or methods, or managements, to carry me on in a life of
piety?

Do you think any thing can astonish, and confound a dying man like this? What
pain do you think a man must feel, when his conscience lays all this folly to
his charge when it shall show him how regular, exact, and wise he has been in
small matters, that are passed away like a dream, and how stupid and senseless
he has lived, without any reflection, without any rules, in things of such
eternal moment, as no heart can sufficiently conceive them!

Had I only my frailties and imperfections to lament at this time, I should lie
here humbly trusting in the mercies of God. But alas! how can I call a general
disregard, and a thorough neglect of all religious improvement, a frailty or
imperfection; when it was as much in my power to have been exact, and careful,
and diligent in a course of piety, as in the business of my trade.

I could have called in as many helps, have practiced as many rules, and been
taught as many certain methods of holy living, as of thriving in my shop, had I
but so intended and desired it.

Oh my friends! a careless life, unconcerned and unattentive to the duties of
Religion, is so without all excuse, so unworthy of the mercy of God, such a
shame to the sense and reason of our minds, that I can hardly conceive a
greater punishment, than for a man to be thrown into the state that I am in, to
reflect upon it.

Penitens was here going on, but had his mouth stopped by a convulsion, which
never suffered him to speak any more. He lay convulsed about twelve hours, and
then gave up the ghost.

Now if every reader would imagine this Penitens to have been some particular
acquaintance or relation of his, and fancy that he saw and heard all that is
here described, that he stood by his bedside when his poor friend lay in such
distress and agony, lamenting the folly of his past life, it would in all
probability teach him such wisdom as never entered into his heart before. If to
this, he should consider, how often he himself might have been surprised in the
same state of negligence, and made an example to the rest of the world, this
double reflection, both upon the distress of his friend, and the goodness of
that God, who had preserved him from it, would in all likelihood soften his
heart into holy tempers, and make him turn the remainder of his life into a
regular course of piety.

Christian Admonitions from a pious Father to his Children.
THE little time that you have been in the world, my children, you have spent
wholly with me; and my love and tenderness to you, has made you look upon me as
your only friend and benefactor, and the cause of all the comfort and pleasure
that you enjoy. But, my children, you are now in the hands, and under the
tender care of a much greater father and friend than I am, whose love to you is
far greater than mine, and from whom you receive such blessings as no mortal
can give.

That God whom I daily call upon to bless both you and me, and all mankind;
whose wondrous acts are recorded in those scriptures which you constantly read.

That God who created the heavens and the earth, who brought a flood on the old
world; who saved Noah in the ark; who was the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
whom Job blessed and praised in the greatest afflictions; who delivered the
Israelites out of the hands of the Egyptians; who was the protector of
righteous Joseph, Moses, Joshua and holy Daniel; who sent his son Jesus Christ,
to redeem mankind; and gave his holy spirit to be our leader, our comforter and
director in the path of righteousness and truth.

This God who has done all these great things; who has created so many millions
of men; who lived and died before you were born, with whom the spirits of good
men that are departed this life now live, whom infinite numbers of angels now
worship in Heaven; this great God is your loving father and friend, your good
creator and nourisher, from whom, and not from me, ye receive your being.

You see, my children, this wide and large firmament over our heads, where the
sun and moon, and all the stars appear in their turns: If you were to be
carried up to any of these bodies at this vast distance from us, you would
still discover others as much above you, as the stars that you see here are
above the earth. Were you to go up or down, East or West, North or South, you
would find the same height without any top, and the same depth without any
bottom.

And, my children, so great is God, that all those bodies added together, are
but as a grain of sand in his sight. And yet you are as much the care of this
great God and father of all worlds, and all spirits, as if he had no other
children but you.

He numbers the hairs of your heads, watches over you sleeping and waking, and
has preserved you from a thousand dangers, which neither you nor I know any
thing of.

Therefore, my children, fear and worship and love God. Your eyes indeed cannot
see him, but every thing you see, are so many marks of his power and presence,
and he his nearer to to you, than any thing that you can see.

Take him for your Lord, and father, and friend; look upon him as the fountain
and cause of all the good that you have received through my hands, and
reverence me only as the bearer and minister of God's good things unto you. And
he that blessed my father before I was born, will bless you when I am dead.

Your youth and little minds are only yet acquainted with my family, and
therefore you think there is no happiness out of it. But, my children, you
belong to a greater family than mine, you are members of the family of this
almighty father of all nations, who has created infinite orders of angels, and
numberless generations of men, to be fellow members of one and the same society
in heaven.

You do well to reverence and obey my authority, because God has given me power
over you, to bring you up in his fear, and to do for you, as the holy fathers
recorded in scripture did for their children, who are now in rest and peace
with God.

I shall in a short time die, and leave (...) God and yourselves; and if God
forgiveth my sins I shall go to his Son Jesus Christ, and live amongst
patriarchs and prophets, saints and martyrs.

Let your thoughts often leave these gardens, these fields and farms, to
contemplate upon God and heaven; to consider upon angels and the spirits of
good men living in light and glory.

God keeps a book of life wherein all the actions of all men are written;
your names are there my children, and when you die, this book will be laid open
before men and angels, and according as your actions are there found, you will
either be received to the happiness of those holy men who have died before you,
or be turned away amongst wicked spirits, that are never to see God any more.

Never forget this book my children, for it is written, and it must be opened,
you must see it, and you must be tried by it: Strive therefore to fill it with
your good deeds, that the handwriting of God may not appear against you.

God, my children, is all love, and wisdom, and goodness; and every thing that
he has made, and every action that he does, is the effect of them all.
Therefore you cannot please God, but so far as you strive to walk in love,
wisdom and goodness.

When you love that which God loves, you act with him, you join yourselves to
him; and when you love what he dislikes, then you oppose him, and separate
yourselves from him. This is the true and the right way, think what God loves,
and do you love it with all your heart.

Next to this, love your neighbor, which is all the world, with such
tenderness and affection as you love yourself.

Think how God loves all mankind, how merciful he is to them, how tender he is
of them, how careful he preserves them, and then strive to love the world as
God loves it. God would have all men to be happy, therefore do you will, and
desire the same.

As God has created all things for the common good of all men, so let that part
of them, which falls to your share, be employed as God would have all employed,
for the common good of all.

Therefore do good my children, first of all to those that most deserve it, but
remember to do good to all. The greatest sinners receive daily instances of
God's goodness toward them, he nourishes and preserves them, that they may
repent, and return to him; do you therefore imitate God, and think no one too
bad to receive your relief and kindness, when you see that he wants it.

And my children consider, this as a most principal thing which I shall
remember you of, as long as I live with you; hate and despise all human glory,
for it is nothing else but human folly. It is the greatest snare, and the
greatest betrayer, that you can possibly admit into your heart.

Love humility in all its instances, practice it in all its parts; for it is
the most noble state of the soul of man; it will set your heart and affections
right toward God, and fill you with every temper that is tender and
affectionate toward men.

And above all, mark this, never do any thing through strife, or envy, or
emulation, or vain glory. Never do any thing in order to excel other people,
but in order to please God, and because it is his will, that you should do
every thing in the best manner that you can.

When you come to be more conversant with the world, and see what customs, and
pleasures, and troubles and projects, employ the hearts and time of mankind,
you will scarce believe that things can be as I have told you. But don't let
this affect you, for the devil the god of this world has so blinded the eyes of
those who refuse to comply with the calls of grace, that it may, indeed, be
said that the world is in a dream, and that few people are awake in it: We
fancy that we fall into darkness when we die; but, alas, we are most of us in
the dark till then; and the eyes of our souls only begin to see when our bodily
eyes are closing.

For this reason, my discourses with you have been to acquaint you with
yourselves, and to accustom you to such books and devotion as may best instruct
you in this greatest of all knowledge.

When I tell you that you are all of you spirits: I don't mean that you have
not bodies that want meat and drink, and sleep and clothing, but that all that
deserves to be called you, is nothing else but spirit.

A being, spiritual and rational in its nature, that is made in the image of
God to live for ever, never to cease any more, but to enjoy life, and reason,
and knowledge and happiness in the presence of God, and the society of angels
and glorious spirits to all eternity.

Every thing that you call yours, besides this spirit, is but like your
clothing; something that is only to be used for a while, and then to end, and
die, and wear away, and to signify no more to you, than the clothing and
bodies of other people.

You are not only in this manner spirits, but you are fallen spirits, that
began your life in a state of corruption and disorder, full of tempers and
passions, that blind and darken the reason of your minds, and incline you to
that which is hurtful.

And observe this, my children, as a most solemn consideration, That in this
fallen condition you are utterly unable, by any power of your own, to restore
yourselves. It is God alone, by his almighty power, who can, and who is
desirous to, perfect this great work in you.

Your bodies are not only poor and perishing like your clothes, but they are
like infected clothes, that sill you with ill disease and distempers, which
oppress the soul with sickly appetites and vain cravings. So that all of us are
like two beings, that have as it were two hearts within us: With the one we
see, and taste, and admire reason, purity and holiness; with the other we
incline to pride, vanity and sensual delights.

This internal war we always feel within us more or less, and if you would know
the one thing necessary to all the world, it is this, that by a constant and
fervent application to God for divine help, we may through the effectual workings
of the redeeming power of our Savior Jesus Christ in our hearts, be enabled to
preserve and perfect all that is rational, holy and divine within us, and
mortify, remove and destroy all that vanity, pride and sensuality, which
springs from the corruption of our nature.

You see then your state my children; you are by the help of divine grace, to
honor, improve and perfect the spirit that is within you; to preserve it from
the errors and vanities of the world; to save it from those false delights, and
sensual tempers which the body tempts it with: That you may taste, and relish
and desire that eternal state, which is to begin when this life ends.

And you, my dear daughters, consider yourselves as mothers, and sisters, and
friends and relations, to all that want your assistance, and never allow
yourselves to be idle, whilst others are in want of any thing that your hands
can make for them! When you go abroad, let humility, modesty, and a decent
carriage, be all the state you take upon you; and let tenderness, compassion,
and good nature, be all the fine breeding that you show in any place. If evil
speaking, scandal or backbiting, be the conversation where you happen to be,
keep your hearts and tongues to yourselves; be as much grieved as if you were
amongst cursing and swearing, and retire as soon as you can.

Contract no foolish friendships, or vain fondness for particular persons; but
love them most that most turn your love toward God, and your compassion
toward all the world. And be particularly careful to avoid the conversation of
fine bred fops and beaux, hate nothing more than that idle discourse, the
flattery and compliment of that sort of men, for they are the shame of their
own sex, and ought to be the abhorence of yours.

Though you intend to marry, yet let the time never come till you find a man
that has those perfections, which you are laboring after yourselves, who is
likely to be a friend to all your virtues, and with whom it is better to live,
than to want the benefit of his example.

Love poverty, and reverence poor people for many reasons, and particularly for
this, because our blessed Savior was one of the number, you will often find
simplicity, innocence, patience, and piety amongst them, and where they are not
so, your good example may amend them.

Never consider yourselves, as persons that are to be seen, admired and courted
by men; but as poor sinners, that are to save yourselves from the vanities and
follies of a miserable world, by watching and prayer, by humility and
self-denial. Think upon the vanity and shortness of human life, and let death
and eternity be often in your minds, for these thoughts will strengthen and
exalt your minds, make you wise and judicious and truly sensible of the
littleness of all human things.

Strive to do every thing that is praise worthy, but do nothing in order to be
praised; nor think of any reward for all your labor of love and virtue, till
Christ comes with all his holy angels.

And above all, my children, have a care of vain and proud thoughts of your own
virtue: For as soon as ever people live different from the common way of the
world, and despise its vanities, the devil represents to their minds the height
of their own perfections, and is content they should excel in good works,
provided that he can make them proud of them.

The time of practicing these precepts, my children, will soon be over with
you; the world will soon slip through your hands, or rather you will soon slip
through it: It seems but the other day since I received these same instructions
from my dear father, that I am now leaving with you; and the God that gave me
ears to hear, and a heart to receive what my father said unto me, will, I hope,
give you grace to love and follow the same instructions.

LUKE ix. 23. And he said to them all, If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me. For whosoever will
save his life shall lose it; but whosoever will lose his life for my sake, the
same shall save it. For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world,
and lose himself, or be cast away. For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of
my words, of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed when he shall come in his own
glory, and in his father's, and of the holy angels.


THAT grand enemy of mankind, the devil, is very justly called in scripture the
prince and god of this world, for indeed he has great power in it, many of its
rules, and principles being invented by this evil spirit, the father of all
lies and falsehood, to separate us from God, and prevent our return to
happiness: For, according to the spirit and vogue of this world, whose corrupt
air we have all breathed, there are many things that pass for great and
honorable, and most desirable, which yet are so far from being-so, that our
true greatness and honor consists in not desiring them. To abound in wealth,
to have fine houses and rich clothes, to be attended with splendour and
equipage, to be beautiful in our persons, to have titles of dignity, to be
above our fellow creatures, to be looked on with admiration, to overcome our
enemies with power, to heap up treasures upon earth, to add house to house and
field to field, and delight ourselves in the most costly manner, these are the
great, the honorable, the desirable things, to which the spirit of the world
turns the eyes of most people. And many a man is afraid of standing still, and
not engaging in the pursuit of these things, lest the same world should take
him for a fool.

Yet the history of the gospel, is chiefly the history of Christ's conquest
over this spirit of the world, and the number of true Christians, is only the
number of those who, following the spirit of Christ, have lived contrary to
this spirit of the world.

This is the mark of Christianity, Whosoever is born of God overcomes the
world. 1 John v. 4. Set your affections on things above, and not on things on
earth, for ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. Col. iii. 2.
Love not the world, nor the things of the world. If any man love the world, the
love of the Father is not in him; for all that is in the world, the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life is not of the Father; but is
of the world. 1 John ii. 15. Know ye not that the friendship of the world is
enmity with God, whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy
of God. James iv. 4. Be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by
the renewing of your mind. Romans xii. 2.

This is the language of the whole new testament. You are to be dead to the
world, and to live a new life in Christ Jesus our Lord. But notwithstanding the
clearness and plainness of these doctrines by which believers in Christ are
required thus to renounce the world, yet great part of the christians live and
die slaves to the customs and tempers of the world. Learn of me, says our
blessed Savior, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and you shall find rest to
your souls. Matthew. xi. 29. Now this meek, this lowly state, that constitutes
the true rest of the soul, cannot subsist in any mind, but so far as it is thus
dead to the world, and has parted with the desires of enjoying its riches,
pleasures and honors. So that in order to be truly humble, you must unlearn
all these notions, which you have been all your life learning from this corrupt
spirit of the world. You can make no stand against the assaults of pride, the
meek affections of humility can have no place in your souls, till you stop the
power of the world over you, and resolve against a blind obedience to its laws.
And when you are once advanced thus far, as to be able to stand still in the
torrent of worldly fashions, and opinions and examine the worth and value of
things, which are most admired and valued in the world, you have gone a great
way in the gaining of your freedom, and have laid a good foundation for the
amendment of your heart. Think upon the rich, the great, and the learned
persons, that have made great figures, and been high in the esteem of the
world, many of them died in your time, and yet they are sunk, and lost and
gone, and as much disregarded by the world, as if they had been only so many
bubbles of water. And is it worth your while to lose the smallest degree of
virtue, for the sake of pleasing so bad master, and so false a friend as the
world is. Is it worth your while to bow the knee to such an idol, as this, that
so soon will have neither eyes, nor ears, nor a heart to regard you; instead of
serving that great, and holy, and mighty God, that will make all his servants
partakers of his own eternity.

Our blessed Savior Jesus Christ gave himself for our sins, that he might
deliver us from this present evil world. Gal. i. 4. Christianity therefore
implies a deliverance from this world; and he that professes it, professes
to live contrary to every thing, and every temper, that is peculiar to this
evil world. The apostle John declares this opposition to the world in this
manner: They are of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the world
hears them: We are of God, etc. 1 John iv. 5. This is the description of the
followers of Christ; and it is proof enough, that no people are to be reckoned
christians in reality, who in their hearts and tempers belong to this world. We
know, says the same apostle, that we are of God, and the whole world lies in
wickedness. Chap. v. 19. Christians therefore can no farther know that they are
of God, than so far as they know they are not of the world, that is, that they
don't live according to the ways and spirit of the world. And he is only of
God, or born of God, in Christ Jesus, who has overcome this world, that is, who
has chosen to live by faith, and govern his actions by the principles of a
wisdom revealed from God, by Christ Jesus. They are not of this World, as I am
not of this World, says our blessed Savior. This is the state of Christianity
with regard to this world, the profession of Christians requiring them to live
as citizens of the new Jerusalem, and to have their conversation in heaven. If
you are not thus out of, and contrary to the world, you want the distinguishing
mark of Christianity; you don't belong to Christ, but by being out of the
world, as he was out of it. We may deceive ourselves, if we please, with vain
and softning comments upon these words; but they are, and will be understood in
their first simplicity, and plainness, by every one that reads them in the same
spirit, that our blessed Lord spoke them. And to understand them in any lower,
less significant meaning, is to let carnal wisdom explain away that doctrine,
by which itself was to be destroyed.

Our blessed Savior suffered, and was a sacrifice, to make our suffering, and
sacrifice of ourselves fit to be received by God. And we are to suffer, to be
crucified, to die, and to rise with Christ; or else his crucifixion, death, and
resurrection will profit us nothing. The necessity of this conformity to all
that Christ did, and suffered upon our account is very plain from the whole
tenor of scripture. First, As to his sufferings, this is the only condition of
our being saved by them. If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. 2 Timothy ii. 11. Secondly, As to his crucifixion, Knowing this, that our old man is
crucified with him. Romans vi. 6. Here you see Christ is not crucified in our
stead; but unless our old man be really crucified with him, the cross of Christ
will profit us nothing. Thirdly, As to the death of Christ, the conditions is
this: If we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him,
ver. 8. If therefore Christ be dead alone, if we are not dead with him, we are
as sure from this scripture, that we shall not live with him. Lastly, As to the
resurrection of Christ, the scripture shows us, how we are to partake of the
benefit of it: If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above,
where Christ sits on the right hand of God. Col. iii. 1. It was for this
reason, that the holy Jesus said of his disciples, and in them of all true
believers, They are not of this world, as I am not of this world. Because all
true believers conforming to the sufferings, crucifixion, death, and
resurrection of Christ, live no longer after the spirit and temper of this
world, but their life is hid with Christ in God. This is the state of
separation from the world, to which all orders of christians are called. They
must so far renounce all worldly tempers, be so far governed by the things of
another life, as to show, that they are truly and really crucified, dead, and
risen with Christ. If any man be in Christ he is a new creature, old things are
passed away, behold all things are become new. 2 Cor. v. 17.

Even the ancient Philosophers began all their virtue in a total renunciation
of the spirit of this world; they saw with the eyes of heaven, that darkness
was not more contrary to light, than the spirit and wisdom of this world was
contrary to divine wisdom: Therefore they allowed of no progress in virtue, but
so far as a man had overcome himself, and the spirit of this world. This gave a
true solidity to all their instructions, and proved them to be masters of true
wisdom. But the doctrine of the cross of Christ, the last, the highest, the
most finishing stroke given to the spirit of this world, that speaks more in
one word, than all the philosophy of volumnious writers, is yet professed by
those, who are in more friendship with the world, than was allowed to the
disciples of Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato or Epictetus. Nay, if those ancient
sages were to start up amongst us with their enlightened wisdom, they would bid
fair to be treated by the sons of the gospel, if not by some fathers of the
church, as dreaming Enthusiasts. But, this is a standing truth, the world can
only love its own, and wisdom can only be justified of her children. The
heaven-born Epictetus told one of his scholars, That then he might first look
upon himself as having made some true proficiency in virtue, when the world
took him for a fool; an oracle like that, which said, the wisdom of this world
is foolishness with God.

If you ask what is the apostasy of these last times, or whence is all the
degeneracy of the present christian church, it must be placed to a wordly
spirit. If here you see open wickedness, there only form of godliness, if here
supersicial holiness, political piety, there haughty sanctity, partial zeal, if
almost every where, you see a Jewish blindness, and hardness of heart, and the
church trading with the gospel, as visibly, as the old Jews bought and sold
beasts in their temple, all this is only so many forms, and proper fruits of
the worldly spirit. This is the great net, with which the devil becomes a
fisher of men; and be assured of this, that every son of man is in this net,
till through and by the spirit of Christ he breaks out of it. I say the spirit
of Christ, for nothing else can deliver him from it. If you trust to any kind
or form of religious observances, to any kind of learning, or effort of human
prudence, then I will tell you what your case will be, you will overcome one
temper of the world, only and merely by cleaving to another: For nothing can
overcome or renounce the world, but singly and solely the spirit of Christ.
Hence it is, that many learned men, with all the rich furniture of their brain,
live and die slaves to the spirit of this world, the spirit of Christ is not
the only thing that is the desire of their hearts, and therefore their learning
only works in and with the spirit of this world, and becomes itself no small
part of the vanity of vanities.

Would you know the evil nature and effect of a spirit given up to the world,
and not subjected to the spirit of grace, you need only look at the blessed
effect of a continual state of watching, a continual humble application to God
in the true spirit of prayer, for the one goes downwards with the same
strength, as the other goes upwards, the one betroths, and weds to an earthly
nature, with the same certainty, as the other espouses, and unites to Christ.
The spirit of continual watchings and prayer, is a pressing forth of the soul
out of this earthly life, it is a stretching with all its desire after the life
of God, it is a leaving as far as it can, all its own spirit, to receive a
spirit from above, to be one life, one love, one spirit with Christ in God.
This prayer, which is an emptying itself of all its own lusts and natural
tempers, and an opening itself for the light and love of God to enter into it,
is the prayer in the name of Christ, to which nothing is denied; for the love
which God bears to the soul, is an eternal never ceasing desire to open the
birth of his holy word and spirit in it, and stays no longer than till the door
of the heart open for him; and nothing does or can keep God out of the soul, or
hinder his union with it, but the desire of the heart turned from it. What the
soul desires, that is the fuel of its sire, and as its fuel is, so is the
flame of its life. As we sow we shall reap; if to the spirit, we shall reap
life and peace; if to the flesh, we shall of the slesh reap corruption.
Wherever and in whatsoever the will chooses to dwell and delight, that becomes
the soul's food, its clothing and habitation. Since this is the case, let us
stop a while, let our hearing be turned into feeling. Let us consider, whether
there is any thing in life, that deserves a thought, but how to keep in a
continual state of watching and prayer, that we may attain to that purity of
heart, which alone can see, find and possess God.

A short account of the progress and effects of the Plague, the last time it
spread in the city of London, viz. in the year 1665.
AMONGST the many calamities with which the Almighty is pleased to visit the
children of men, in order to reduce them to a just sense of their own weakness
and entire dependence upon him, there is scarce any that are more productive of
true penitent humiliation, and of a sight of what is really good and truly
evil, than those contagious distempers, which an offended God sometimes suffers
to rage amongst the people. In the year 1665 the city of London was sorely
visited by the plague: An account of the progress and effects of that
visitation was kept by a citizen who remained there during the whole time of
the sickness, and appears to have been candid and judicious in his remarks
thereon. I trust my readers may, in a short description of that memorable
judgment, meet with such lessons of best wisdom, which nothing can so
effectually produce, as a close and serious converse with death and the grave.
The introduction of this contagion in London was by some goods imported from
Holland, which had been brought thither from the Levant. It first broke out in
the house where those goods were opened, from whence it spread to other houses.
In the first. house that was infected there died four persons: A neighbor who
went to visit them returning home, gave the distemper to her family, and died
with all her household. The parish officers who were employed about the sick
persons being also infected, the physicians perceived the danger, and, upon
narrow inspection, assured, that it was indeed the plague with all its
terrifying particulars, and that it threatened a general infection. The people
began now to be alarmed all over the town; the usual number of burials within
the bills of mortality for a week were generally about 240 to 300, but from the
17th to the 24th Jan. the printed bill was 474. However this went off again,
and the frost continuing very severe till near the end of February, the bills
decreased again, and people began to look upon the danger as good as over; but
in May the bills greatly increased, and the weather becoming hot, the infection
spread again, in a dreadful manner.

I lived, says the author, without Aldgate, and as the distemper had not
reached to that side of the city, our neighborhood continued easy; but at the
other end of the town the consternation was very great, and the nobility and
gentry thronged out of the town with their families in an unusual manner;
nothing was to be seen but wagons, carts and coaches with goods and people,
and horsemen attending them, hurrying away; then empty wagons and carts
appeared, who were apparently returning to fetch more people, besides
innumerable numbers of people on horseback, fitted out for traveling. This was
a very melancholy prospect; indeed there was nothing else of moment to be seen;
it filled my mind with very serious thoughts of the misery that was coming upon
the city, and the unhappy condition of those that would be left in it. By the
end of July the contagion had spread and increased to a great degree: Sorrow
and sadness sat upon every face; and though some parts were not yet
overwhelmed, all looked deeply concerned. London might well be said to be all
in tears, the mourners did not go about the streets, for nobody made a formal
dress of mourning for their nearest relations, but the voice of mourning was
indeed heard in the streets; the shrieks of women and children at the windows
and doors of their houses where their dearest relations were dying, were so
frequent to be heard as we passed the streets, that it was enough to pierce the
stoutest heart in the world. Tears and lamentations were seen almost in every
house, especially in the first part of the visitation; for toward the latter
end people did not so much concern themselves for the loss of their friends,
expecting that themselves should be summoned the next hour.

It was a time of very unhappy breaches amongst us; in matters of religion,
divisions and separate opinions prevailed; the Church of England was lately
restored, and the Presbyterians and other professions had set up their meetings
for worship, apart, in which they were frequently disturbed, the government
endeavoring to suppress their meetings. But this dreadful visitation
reconciled the different parties, and took away all manner of prejudice and
scruple from the people. But after the sickness was over, that spirit of
charity subsided, and things returned to their own channel again. Here we may
observe, that a nearer view of death would soon reconcile men of good
principles to one another, and that it is chiefly owing to our easy situations
in life, and our putting these things far from us, that our breaches are
formented, and that there is so much prejudice and want of christian charity
and union amongst us. A close view and converse with death, or with diseases
that threaten death, would scum off the gall of our temper, remove our
animosities, and bring us to see with different eyes. On the other side of the
grave we shall all be brethren again.

The inns of court were now all shut up, there was but few lawyers to be seen
in the city, indeed there was no need of them, for quarrels and divisions about
interest had ceased; every body was at peace.

It was also worthy of observation, as well as fruitful of instruction, to
observe with what alacrity the people of all persuasions embraced the
opportunities they had of attending upon the public worship, and other
appointed times of devotion, as humiliations, fastings and public confessions
of sins, to implore the mercy of God, and avert the judgment which hung over
their heads. The churches were so thronged, that there was often no coming
near, no, not to the very door of the largest churches. There was also daily
prayers appointed morning and evening, at which the people attended with
uncommon devotion.

All plays and interludes which had lately began to increase amongst us, were
forbid to act; the gaming-tables, public dancing-rooms and musick-houses,
which multiplied and began to debauch the manners of the people, were shut up
and suppressed, finding indeed no trade; for the minds of the people were
generally humbled and agitated with other things, death was before their eyes,
and every body began to think of their graves.

The infection still gradually increased till the middle of August, when there
died a thousand a day, by account of the weekly bills, though they never gave a
full account by many thousands; many of the parish officers were taken sick
themselves and died when their account was to be given in. The parish of
Stepney alone had within the year, one hundred and sixteen sextons,
grave-diggers and carriers of the dead, etc. Indeed the work was not of a
nature to allow them leisure to take an exact tale of the dead bodies, which
were all thrown together in the dark in a pit, to which no man could come near
without the utmost peril.

I had, says the author, the care of my brother's house, which obliged me
sometimes to go abroad. In these walks I had dismal scenes before my eyes, as,
particularly, of persons falling dead in the streets, terrible shrieks of
women, who in their agonies would throw open their chamber-windows, and cry out
in a dismal surprising manner; it is impossible to describle the varicty of
postures in which the passions of the poor people would express themselves.
Passing through Token-House yard, of a sudden a casement violently opened just
over my head, and a woman gave three frightful screeches, and then cried: Oh!
Death, Death, Death, which struck me with horror and a chilness in my very
blood. There was nobody to be seen in the whole street, neither did any window
open, for people had no curiosity now in any case. I went on to pass into
Bell-Alley, where there was a greater cry than that; I could hear women and
children run screaming about the rooms like distracted, when a garret-window
opened, and somebody from a window on the other side asked, What is the matter?
Upon which it was answered, Oh Lord! my old master has hanged himself. The
other asked again, Is he quite dead? And the first answered, Ay, ay quite dead
and cold. This person was a Deputy-Alderman and very rich. But this is but one
instance; it is scarce credible what dreadful cases happened in particular
families every day. People in the rage of the distemper or in the torment of
the swelling, which was indeed intolerable, becoming raving and distracted,
oftentimes laid violent hands upon themselves, throwing themselves out of
windows, or breaking out of the houses, would dance naked about the streets,
not knowing one ecstasy from another; others, if not prevented, would run
directly down to the river, and plunge into the water. Some dying of mere grief
as a passion, and some of fright and surprise, without having received the
infection. It often pierced my very soul, to hear the groans and cries of those
who were thus tormented; but this of the swellings was accounted the most
promising particular in the whole infection; for if these swellings could be
brought to break and run, the patient generally recovered. Whereas those who
were struck with death at the beginning of the distemper, and had spots come
upon them, often went about indifferent easy, till a little before they died,
and some till the moment they dropped down; such would be taken suddenly very
sick, and would run to some convenient place, or to their own houses if
possible, and there sit down, grow faint and die.

Death did not now hover over every one's head only, but looked into their
houses and chambers, and even stared in their very faces; and though there was
some stupidity and dullness of mind, yet there was a great deal of just alarm
sounded in the inmost soul: Many consciences were awakened; many hard hearts
melted into tears; many a penitent confession was made of crimes long
concealed. People might be heard even in the streets as we passed along calling
upon God for mercy, through Jesus Christ, and saying: I have been a thief; I
have been an adulterer; I have been a murderer, and the like; and none durst
stop to make inquiry into such things, or to administer comfort to the poor
creature, who in the anguish both of soul and body thus cried out. Many were
the warnings that were then given by dying penitents to others, not to put off
and delay their repentance to a day of distress, that such a time of calamity
as this was no time for repentance. I wish says the author, I could repeat the
very sound of those groans and exclamations that I heard from some poor dying
creatures, when in the height of their agonies and distress, and that I could
make him that reads this; hear as I imagine, I now hear them, for the sound
seems still to ring in my ears. In the beginning of September the number of
burials increasing, the churchwardens of Aldgate parish ordered a large pit to
be dug, to hold all the dead which might die in a month, it was about forty
feet long and sixteen broad; some blamed the churchwardens for suffering such
a frightful gulf to be dug; nevertheless in two weeks they had thrown more than
eleven hundred bodies into it, when they were obliged to sill it up, as the
bodies were come within 6 feet of the surface. My curiosity drove me to go and
see this pit, when there had been near four hundred people buried in it. I got
admittance into the churchyard, by means of the sexton, who was a sensible,
religious man. He would have persuaded me not to go, saying, That it was indeed
their duty to venture, and in it they might hope to be preserved; but that, as
I had no apparent call, he thought, my curiosity could not justify my running
that hazard. I told him, I had been pressed in my mind to go, and that perhaps
it might be an instructing sight. Nay, says the good man, if you will venture
upon that score, in the name of God go in; it will be a sermon to you, it may
be the best you ever heard in your life. His discourses had shocked my
resolution, and I stood wavering for a good while; but just then I heard the
bell-men, and the cart, loaded with dead bodies, appearing, I went in. There
was nobody, as I could perceive, at first with the cart but the buriers, and
the man that led the cart; but when they came to the pit, they saw a man
muffled in a cloak who appeared in great agony; the buriers immediately
gathered about him, supposing he was one of those poor delirious or desperate
creatures, that would sometimes run to the pit, wrapped in blankets, and throw
themselves in, and as they said bury themselves. When the buriers came to him,
they soon found he was neither desperate nor distempered in mind, but one
oppressed with a dreadful weight of grief, having his wife and several children
all in the cart, that was just come in with him, and he followed in agony and
excess of sorrow. He calmly desired the buriers to let him alone, said he would
only see the bodies thrown in, and go away; so they left importuning him. But
no sooner was the cart turned round, and the bodies shot into the pit
promiscously, which was a surprise to him, for he at least expected, they would
have been decently laid in, though indeed he was afterward convinced that was
impracticable, I say, no sooner did he see the sight, out he cried out aloud,
unable to contain himself, and fell down in a swoon; the buriers ran to him,
and took him up, and when he was come to himself, led him to a place where he
was taken care of. He looked into the pit again, as he went away, but the
buriers had covered the bodies so immediately with throwing earth, that nothing
could be seen. The cart had in it sixteen or seventeen bodies. Some were wrapped
up in linen sheets, some in rugs, some little other than naked, or so loose,
that what covering they had fell from them, in the shooting out of the cart,
and they sell quite naked among the rest; but the matter was not much to them,
or the indecency much to any one else, seeing they were to be huddled together
into the common grave of mankind; for here was no difference made, but poor and
rich went together; there was no other way of burials, neither was it possible
there should.

John Hayward, under-sexton, that is, grave digger and bearer of the dead,
never had the distemper at all, but lived about twenty years after it. His wife
was employed to nurse the infected people; yet she herself never was infected.
The only preservative he used against the infection, was holding garlic and
rue in his mouth, and smoking tobacco; this I had from his own mouth. His
wife's remedy was washing her head in vinegar, and sprinkling her head-clothes
so with vinegar, as to keep them always moist; and if the smell of any of those
she waited on was more than ordinary offensive, she snuffed vinegar up into her
nose, sprinkled her head-clothes and held a handkerchief wetted with vinegar to
her mouth.

And here I must not omit mentioning the disposition of the people of that day,
with respect to their charity to the poor, which indeed was very large both in
a public and a private way. Some pious ladies were so zealous in this good
work, and so consident in the protection of providence in the discharge of this
great duty, that they went about themselves distributing alms, and visiting the
poor families that were infected, in their very houses, appointing nurses and
apothecaries to supply them with what they wanted; thus giving their blessings
to the poor in substantial relief, as well as hearty prayers for them. I will
not undertake to say, that none of these charitable people were suffered to die
of the plague, but this I may say, that I never knew any of them miscarried,
which I mention for the encouragement of others in case of like distress; and
doubtless, if they, that give to the poor, lend to the Lord, and he will repay
it, those that hazard their lives to give to the poor, and to comfort and
assist them in such a misery as this, may hope to be protected therein.

From the middle of August to the middle of September the infection still
increased and spread itself, with an irresistible fury; it was reckoned, that
during that time there died no less than sixteen hundred a day, one day with
another. It was then that the confusion and terror was inexpressible; the
courage of the people appointed to carry away the dead, began to fail them; the
vigilance of the magistrates was now put to the utmost trial. At last the
violence of the distemper came to such a height that the people sat still
looking at one another, and seemed quite abandoned to despair. In a word,
people began to give themselves up to fear, that there was nothing to be
expected but a universal desolation. This despair made people bold and
adventurous, they were no more shy of one another, as expecting there was now
no avoiding the distemper, but that all must go, this brought them to crowd
into the churches, they inquired no more what condition the people who sat near
them, were in, but looking upon themselves also as so many dead corpse, they
came to the churches without the least caution, and crowded together, as if
their lives were of no consequence, compared to the work which they were come
about: Indeed, their zeal in coming, and the earnestness and affectionate
attention they showed to what they heard, made it manifest what value people
would put upon the worship of God, if they thought, every day they attended at
the church, would be their last. It was in the height of this despair, that it
pleased God to stay his hand, and to slacken the fury of the contagion, in a
manner as surprising as that of its beginning, and which demonstrated it to be
his own particular hand above the agency of means; nothing but omnipotent power
could have done it; the contagion, despised all medicine; death raged in every
corner, and had it gone on as it did then, a few weeks more would have cleared
the town of all its inhabitants. In that very moment when thirty thousand were
dead in three weeks, nay, when it was reported three thousand died in one
night, and an hundred thousand more were taken sick, when we might well say,
Vain was the help of man, it pleased God to cause the fury of it to abate, and
by his immediate hand to disarm the enemy. It was wonderful! The physicians
were surprised, wherever they visited, to find their patients better, and in a
few days every body was recovering: Nor was this by any medicine found out, or
any new method of cure discovered, but it was evidently from the secret
invisible hand of him that had at first sent this disease, as a judgment upon
us. Let the philosophers search for reasons in nature to account for it, and
labor as much as they will to lessen the debt they owe to their maker; those
physicians who had the (...) share of religion in them, were obliged to
acknowledge, that it was all supernatural. The streets were now full of poor
recovering creatures, who appeared very sensible and thankful to God for their
unexpected deliverance: Yet I must own, that as for the generality of the
people, it might too justly be said of them, as was said of the children of
Israel, after they had been delivered from the host of Pharaoh, that they sung
his praise, but they soon forgot his works.

The author, who was preserved unhurt with his whole family, during the time of
the sickness, gives in his memoirs a particular account of the many reasonings
and fears which affected his mind, before he could come to a fixed conclusion,
whether to stay, and take his lot in the station in which God had placed him,
or by leaving the city, run the hazard of unsettling himself, and lose his
effects which lay scattered among the merchants. At the earnest solicitations
of his brother he had concluded to go; but being always crossed in this design
by several accidents, it came one morning, as he expresses it, very warmly in
his mind, whether these repeated disappointments were not intimations to him,
that it was the will of heaven he should not go, which was succeeded by a
further thought, that if this suggestion was from God, he was able effectually
to preserve him in the midst of all deaths and dangers that would surround him,
and that if he attempted to secure himself, by fleeing from his habitation, and
acted contrary to these intimations, which he believed to be divine, it was a
kind of flying from God, who could cause his justice to overtake him, when and
where he thought fit.

But what finally fixed him in a resolution to stay, and cast himself entirely
upon the protection and good pleasure of the Almighty, was, that at a time,
when his thoughts were more than commonly seriousupon this weighty subject,
turning over the bible which lay before him, he cried out, Well, I know not
what to do, Lord direct me! at that juncture happening to stop and casting his
eye on the second verse of the 91st Psalm, he read to the 10th, as follows,
viz. I will say of the Lord, he is my refuge and my fortress, my God, in him
will I trust. Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and
from the noisome pestilence. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under
his wings shall thou trust: His truth shall be thy shield and buckler. Thou
shall not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the arrow that flies by
day, nor for the pestilence that walks in darkness, nor for the destruction
that wastes at noonday. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand
at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee. Only with thine eyes shall
thou behold and see the reward of the wicked. Because thou have made the Lord
which is thy refuge, even the most high thy habitation: There shall no evil
befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling, etc.

AN eminent servant of God, who had known deliverance from the dark powers, and
experimentally felt the powers of the world to come, a few hours before his
death, expressed himself in the following words: There is a spirit which I
feel, that delights to do no evil, nor to revenge any wrong, but delights to
endure all things, in hopes to enjoy its own in the end; its hope is to outlive
all wrath and contention, and to weary out all exaltation and cruelty, or
whatsoever is of a nature contrary to itself; it sees to the end of all
temptations; as it bears no evil in itself, so it conceives none in thought to
any other; for its ground and spring is the mercies and forgiveness of God; its
crown is meekness; its life is everlasting love unfeigned, and takes its
kingdom with entreaty, and not with contention, and keeps it by lowliness of
mind; in God alone it can rejoice, though none else regard it, or can own its
life; it is conceived in sorrow, and brought forth without any to pity it, nor
does it murmur at grief and oppressions; it never rejoiceth but through
sufferings, for with the world's joy it is murdered. I found it alone, being
forsaken: I have fellowship therein with those that lived in dens and desolate
places of the earth, who through death obtained resurrection and eternal holy
life.

A Strong testimony to the superior excellency of gospel-love, and to the
vanity and emptiness of worldly enjoyments, is given by Sir John Mason, who
though but 63 years old at his death, yet had lived and flourished in the reign
of 4 princes, viz. Henry 8th, Edward the 6th, Queen Mary and Elizabeth; and was
privy-counsellor to them all, and an eyewitness of the various revolutions and
vicissitudes of those times. Toward his latter end, being on his deathbed, he
called his clark and steward, and spoke thus to them, -- Lo! here have I lived
to see five princes, and have been privy-counsellor to four of them. I have
seen the most remarkables in foreign parts, and have been present at most
transactions for 30 years together, and I have learned this after so many years
experience, that seriousness is the greatest wisdom, temperance the best
physic, and a good conscience the best estate; and were I to live again, I
would change the court for a cloister, my privy-counsellor's bustle, for an
hermit's retirement, and the whole life I have lived in the palace for an
hour's enjoyment of God in the chapel. All things else forsake me, beside my
God, my duty, and my prayers."

SECRETARY Walsingham, is also a remarkable instance of the same kind. He was a
man of very great note, in Queen Elizabeth's days. In a letter to his
fellow-secretary, Burleigh, then lord treasurer of England, he writes thus, We
have lived enough to our country, our fortunes, our sovereign: It is high time
we begin to live to ourselves, and to our God: Which giving occasion for some
court-droll to visit and try to divert him. Ah, said he, while we laugh, all
things are serious round about us, God is serious, when he preserves us, and
has patience toward us; Christ is serious when he dies for us; the Holy
Ghost is serious when he striveth with us; the whole creation is serious in
serving God and us: they are serious in hell and in heaven. And shall a man
that has one foot in the grave, jest and laugh?

SELDOM, one of the greatest scholars and antiquaries of his time; who had
taken a diligent survey of what knowledge was considerable amongst the Jews,
Heathens and Christians; at last professes this toward the end of his days,
that not witstanding he had been so laborious in his inquiries, and curious in
his coliections, and had possessed himself of a treasure of books and manuscripts
upon all ancient subjects. yet he could rest his soul on none save the
scripture. And above all, that passage lay most remarkably upon his spirit,
Titus, ii. 11. etc. For the grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared
unto all men; teaching us, that denying ungodliness and wordly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for that
blessed hope and glorious appearing of the great God and our savior Jesus
Christ; who gave himself for us, that be might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works: These things
speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority.

FINIS.

