COPIES of LETTERS FROM Governor BERNARD, etc, to the Earl of HILLSBOROUGH.
Copy of a Letter from Governor BERNARD to the Earl of HILLSBOROUGH, dated
Boston, November 1, 1768. N. 5.
My LORD,
I Now proceed to conclude my narrative of my endeavors to get quarters for
the King's troops until I found myself at the end of my string, and could do
nothing more.

On Saturday October 15, General Gage arrived here with his officers to look to
the quartering the troops himself. On Monday I called a Council in the morning,
and introduced the General. He told them that he was resolved to quarter the
two Regiments now here in Town, and demanded Quarters; and that he should
reserve the Barracks at the Castle for the Irish Regiments or such part of them
as they would contain; which has since been determined to be only one Regiment.
After the General had left the Board, I sat at it until Eight o'Clock at night;
two hours after Dinner time excepted. The whole was a scene of Perversion, to
avoid their doing any thing toward quartering the Troops, unworthy of such a
Body. In the course of the Questions I put to them, they denied that they knew
of any Building belonging to the Province in the Town of Boston that was proper
to be fitted up for Barracks; and they denied that the Manufactory House was
such a Building. This was so notoriously contrary to Truth, that some Gentlemen
expressed their Concern that it should remain upon the Minutes; and to induce
me to consent to its being expunged a motion was made in writing that the
Governor be desired to order the Manufactory House to be cleared of its present
Inhabitants that it might be fitted up for the Reception of such part of the
two Irish Regiments as could not be accommodated at the Castle Barracks. This
was violently opposed, but was carried in the affirmative 6 to 5: Upon this I
ordered the former answers to be expunged. This Resolution amounting to an
assignment of the Castle Barracks for the Irish Regiments effectually put an
End to the Objection before made that no Quarters were due in Town until the
Castle Barracks were filled.

The next thing to be done was to clear the Manufactory House, the preventing
of which was a great Object of the Sons of Liberty. For this purpose about six
or seven Weeks before, when the Report of Troops coming here was first
confirmed, all kinds of people were thrust into this Building; and the
Workhouse itself was opened, and the People confined there were permitted to go
into the Manufactory House. This was admitted to be true in Council by one of
the Board who is an Overseer of the Poor and a principal therein. And after the
Order of Council was known, several of the Chiefs of the Faction went into the
Manufactory House, advised the people there to keep Possession against the
Governor's Order, and promised them Support. And when some of them signified
their Intention to quit the House, they were, that if they quit the House, they
must quit the Town, for they would be killed if they staid in it.

I had the advice of the best Lawyers that according to the Law and Usage of
this Country the Owners of an House occupied by Tenants at Sufferance, or
wrongful Possessors might enter by any Means they could and turn them out of
Possession without bringing an action. It was also certain that the Governor
and Council, when the Assembly was not sitting, were perfect Owners of the
Estates belonging to the Province, except for Alienation. Upon these two
principles I appointed the Sheriff and two of his Deputies Bailiffs of the
Governor and Council for the purpose of removing the People out of the
Manufactory House. The Sheriff was refused admittance: upon which the Chief
Justice went with him and advised them to give up the House; He was answered
that they had the Opinion of the best Lawyer in the Province to keep
Possession. Upon a third attempt the Sheriff finding a Window open, entered;
upon which the People gathered about him and shut him up; he than made a Signal
to an Officer without, who brought a Party of Soldiers, who took Possession of
the Yard of the Building and relieved the Sheriff from his Confinement. -- This
occasioned a great Mob to assemble with some of the Chiefs of the Faction, they
were very abusive against the Soldiers, but no Mischief was done. They kept the
House blockaded all that Day, and best part of the next Day. When some of the
Council declaring that it was not intended to use Force, although they knew it
could not be done without, and the Building not being immediately wanted, the
Soldiers were withdrawn on the Evening of the second Day. Thus this Building
belonging to the Government and assigned by the Governor and Council for his
Majesty's Use, is kept filled with the Outcast of the Workhouse, and the Scum
of the Town to prevent it is being used for the accommodations of the King's
Troops.

After this was over there was nothing more to be done with the Council until
the Soldiers were billited in the Public Houses as far as they would go. This
we knew would never be done; but it must be attempted; and the Council left
this Business to me alone without offering their assistance, which in other
Cases has been usual, Indeed I did not ask them, as I did not think the
Business would be forwarded by my associating them. I therefore summoned all
the acting Justices to meet me in the Council. Twelve of them appeared; I
acquainted them that the General demanded Quarters for the 2 Regiments
according to the Act of Parliament. They desired to take it into Consideration
among themselves. I consented, and we parted. Two Justices, two Days after
this, attended me with an Answer in writing, whereby the whole Body refused to
billet the Soldiers. But these Gentlemen informing me that the Justices had
been much influenced by the Argument that the Barracks at the Castle ought to
have been first filled, etc. I showed them the Minutes of the Council whereby
the Barracks at the Castle were assigned to the Irish Regiments, and they must
be considered as full. This was quite new to them, the Council themselves
having overlooked the Effect of their Vote. I gave them a Copy of this Vote,
and returned the Answer desiring them to reconsider it. Three Days after the
same Gentlemen informed me that they had resolved against billeting the
Soldiers, but could not agree upon the Reasons to be assigned for refusing it;
but the next Day they gave me an Answer in writing, (a Copy of which is here
enclosed) signed by Eight of the Justices; two others were against billeting,
and gave other Reasons for their Refusal; two others were for billeting, but
declined acting by themselves after so large a Majority of the whole Body had
declared for the contrary Opinion.

To show the futility of these Pretenses, I must observe that the Act directs
the billeting to be by Constables, Tything Men, Magistrates, and other Civil
Officers, and in their Default or Absence by any one Justice of Peace. The
usual Construction of this Act has been that Magistrates, should grant the
Billets, and Constables deliver them; and the latter being Ministerial cannot
grant Billets without a Magistrate or Justice ordering them; By Magistrates
have been always understood the Magistrates of Corporations, and where a Town
is not a Corporation, the Justices are the only Magistrates who are applied to
in England, and they deliver the Billets to the Constables, who serve them upon
the Public Houses. Now in this Town of Boston there are no Persons come under
the Denominations but Justices and Constables. As to the Selest-Men to whom the
Justices are supposed to refer, they have been declared by themselves, by the
Council, and by the Governer to be neither Magistrates, nor Civil Officers; and
they certainly are not, for they can neither grant nor execute a Warrant. This
I explained fully to the Justices before they gave their final Answer; but to
no purpose; they being determined to refuse at all Events. Thus we have an Act
of Parliament which is become a great Favorite; for with the comments it has
received here it is become in fact An Act to prevent His Majesty's Troops being
quartered in the Town of Boston.

Immediately after I held a Council, and informed the Board of the refusal of
the Justices to billet the Soldiers. I said that I was now at the end of my
Tether; for as they had declared before, that they would adhere to the Act of
Parliament, and had refused to act in that liberal way which I thought was
their Duty when the King's necessary Service was obstructed, I could propose
nothing further to them. For I foresaw that if I proposed to hire and fit up
Houses etc. for the Troops, they would answer that it did not become their
Business 'till the Public Houses were full. But if any Gentleman thought it was
to any purpose to put such a question I was ready to do it: this was declined
by Silence. I then informed them that by reason of this general Refusal of
Quarters, the General found himself obliged to hire and fit up Houses at the
Expense of the Crown for the Reception of the Troops, who now (Oct. 26)
especially they who were Encamped, began to feel the want of warm Quarters and
as he thought the Expense would ultimately fall upon the Province, he desired
that I would appoint a Commissary to join with and assist his Officers in
providing such Houses, especially with regard to the economy of the Expense. I
therefore desired their Advice and Assistance in making such appointment. This,
after a long Debate, was refused, they saying that if they should join in such
Appointment it would be admitting that the Province ought to be charged with
the Expense; and I could appoint Auditors to examine the Accounts without them.
I thereupon put an End to this Business, having been Employed in it from Sept.
19th to Oct. 26th in all 38 Days, without any prospect of doing any thing to
purpose, but under an Obligation of trying every Effort before I gave it up.

During this time the General, who foresaw how this Negotiation would end, had
employed his Officers to hire and fit up Houses for the Troops; so that by the
time I had received the definitive Refusal, complete Quarters were provided for
all the Troops. But now another difficulty arose; If the Soldiers should be put
into Barracks, though provided by the Crown, without the intervention of a
Magistrate, the military Officers who placed them there would be chargeable
with taking upon them to quarter Soldiers otherwise than by this Act, and being
convicted of it by two Justices of Peace would be Cashired ipso facto. This
Clause was depended upon to oblige the Soldiers to quit the Town after they had
found it impracticable to get Quarters according to the Act of Parliament, and
was part of the Original Plan which I mentioned to your Lordship very early.
And it could not be expected that the Justices who had refused to billet the
Soldiers would place them in other quarters, for that would be to contradict
themselves. I therefore took upon myself to remove that difficulty, and by a
Commission, wherein I recited his Majesty's Command to me to take every
necessary Step for the accommodation of the said Troops, and the several means
by which the Execution of the Act for providing Quarters for the Troops was
defeated, and the Obligation I was thereby put under to provide Quarters for
the Troops in the best manner I could, I authorized a person therein named, to
place the said two Regiments in such Buildings and Houses as could be procured
at the expense of the Crown with the consent of the Owners. Thus has ended the
Business of Quartering the two Regiments. -- As for Provision for them at
Boston, according to the Act of Parliament, I have already shown how the Order
of Council for that purpose was annulled and avoided in the Origination of it.
Provision has been made at Castle William by an Order of Council being made
that the Provincial Commissary should take care of it. But they have refused to
make such an Order for the Troops at Boston; and therefore it is not done nor
like to be done.

I am with great Respect, my Lord, your Lordship's most Obedient, and most
humble Servant. FRA. BERNARD.
January 27, 1769.
A true Copy

Geo: White. Clerk of the Papers to the House of Commons.



The Right Honorable The Earl of Hillsborough.
Copy of a Letter from Governor BERNARD to the Earl of HILLSBOROUGH, dated
Boston, November 5, 1768. (Copy)
My LORD,
WHEN I received your Lordship's Letter No. 16. I immediately communicated it
to the Lieutenant Governor; and we both agreed in Opinion, that it could not be
advisable to lay before the Council any part of it except what related to the
providing for the Troops, until the Troops were got into Quarters: as we
foresaw that the business of quartering the Troops would occasion a good deal
of Trouble and possible some Commosion, and it would not be advisable to bring
on too much business at once; at least until the Town was a little settled.
This business of quartering your Lordship will observe, kept me employed 'till
October 26th, on which day I had summoned a General Council. On this day I had
19 Counselors, that is all but 3: I therefore chose this Time to communicate
the other Parts of your Lordship's Letter, except what relates to the calling
the Assembly, which I had reserved until I had received further Orders about
it. I made this communication by an Extract, which after it was read I left in
the Secretary's Hands, that the Gentlemen might peruse it at their leisure: I
cautioned the Secretary against suffering a Copy to be taken, but did not
restrain him from permitting it being read. I also gave another Copy of the
same extract to the first Commissioner of the Customs, engaging him to keep it
in his own Hands and not let a Copy be taken.

Immediately after I had an Occasion to move a Matter that would show their
Disposition to pay a proper Regard to his Majesty's Commands. The Commissioners
had wrote to me, desiring that I would take the Advice of Council whether they
might return to Town, and reassume their functions, with Safety to themselves
and Officers. I communicated this Letter to the Council and put the Question to
them. This was very embarrassing: If they answered Yea, they would be
chargeable with advising the Return of the Commissioners: if they said No, they
would contradict all their Assertions that there was no Occasion for Troops to
support the Civil Power. They therefore, for above two Hours together, used all
kind of evasions to avoid giving an Answer. I was told that they were not
obliged to give Opinions: I answered that they were obliged to give Advice; and
the Question was put, whether they would advise me to assure the Commissioners
that they might return with Safety. At last I was obliged to tell them that if
they would not give me an Answer, I would take their refusal for an Answer in
the Negative: For if they could answer in the Affirmative, no Reason could be
supposed why they should not give an Answer; and if they could not answer in
the Affirmative, they must reconcile it with their public Declarations of the
Loyalty and Peaceableness of the Town as well as they could. At length I got an
Answer, 12 answering in the Affirmative, 5 declining answering because they
lived out of Town, and 2 giving written Answers, condemning the Commissioners
for going out of the Town, and therefore refusing Advice about their Return,
but concluding that all Persons would be safe. In this Council I sat from 11 to
9, two intermediate Hours excepted; and all the Business might have been very
well done in an Hour or Two by practicable Men,

Before this Council met, I had been informed that some of the Board had been
preparing an Address to the General, to remove the Troops from hence, that at
this Meeting they might get a great number of Hands to it. When the Council
broke up, I heard some of them making an Appointment to meet there the next
Morning. I told them that I understood that they were going on with Business as
a Council seperately from me; but I cautioned them against proceeding. It was
answered that they should not act as a Council, but as private Gentlemen. I
then desired that they would not give their Meetings the appearance of a
Council, by holding them in the Council Chamber. They met the next Day and
settled the Address, which was very much softened from the first Draught, which
I am told was much more virulent against the Commissioners. It was signed by 15
of the Council, among whom were the 5 who knew not enough of the Town to Vote
for the safety of the Commissioners returning, but knew enough to join in an
invective against them; 4 refused to sign. It was then presented to the
General, who observed to them, that the Resolves of the Town-Meeting were a
sufficient Cause for sending Troops here, though there had been no Riots: It was
answered that they were the productions of a few imprudent wrong-headed Men.
The General replied that they were said to be unanimiously resolved in a full
Town-Meeting. The next Monday it appeared in all the public Papers, from whence
I send your Lordship the enclosed Copy.

I shall make but few Observations on the Writings, the Intent of it being
plain enough. -- 1. It is well known to your Lordship that this Kind of
Writings is designed for the People and not for the Persons to whom thy are
addressed, This is notorious in the present case: The Gentlemen who moved this
Business knew very well that the General could not move the Troops from this
Town, if he could have been disposed to do it; because they were sent hither by
Order of his Majesty, and not placed here by the Discretion of the General. The
General himself had told them so, and I had repeated it to them again and again
to induce them to assist the Quartering. As therefore they could not expect the
Troops would be withdrawn, we must look for another purpose of this Address;
and it appears to be, as indeed it is the principal subject of it, the Abuse of
the Commissioners. -- 2. This was surely very ill timed: the very day after
they had been made acquainted with his Majesty's Command and Expectation that
the Commissioners should return to Boston and resume their function, and would
return without Resistance and with Safety, to publish a Manifesto against them,
which as it had nothing new in it could only serve to revive the popular
Prejudices against them, and thereby encourage Resistance, and make their
Safety precarious, is unaccountable in Men of this Rank, and inconsistant with
their public Professions of their Regard for the King's Service. -- 3. This is
also very unreasonable, it being the Day after the Commissioners had signified
their Apprehensions of Danger in returning to Boston, and desired the Advice of
the Council concerning it, and the Council had given their Opinion, that they
might return with Safety. For these Counselors who had one Day encouraged
their coming to Town, the very next Day to issue a Writing under their Hands
holding them forth to the People "As Men whose Avarice having smothered in
their Breasts every Sentiment of Humanity toward this Province, has impelled
them to oppress it to the utmost of their Power," is utterly irreconcilable
with my ideas of Truth, Justice and Humanity, and shocks me the more, as I know
that the Wives of two of the Commissioners, who have young Children, did not
want to have their Fears increased by this Publication.

It would have been unaccountable how so many Persons of so respectable a
Station, and many of them of a respectable Character, could join in signing
such a Paper, if we did not consider that in public and popular Proceedings the
Leaders are few and the followers many; and that the People called upon to sign
Papers, frequently act without Consideration, and sometimes against their
Judgment. And the virulence with which the Commissioners have been treated
seems to be too violent to be the effect of public Zeal only, without the
Inteferance of private Animosity, which at Present I cannot take upon me to
account for, I can only condemn and lament such Proceedings in a Body for which
I have always had and still retain a great Regard.

I am with great Respect, my Lord, your Lordship's most Obedient, and most
humble Servant, FRA. BERNARD.
January 27, 1769.
A true Copy,

GEO: WHITE, Clerk of the Papers to the House of Commons.



The Right Honorable the Earl of Hillsborough.
Copy of a Letter from Governor BERNARD to the Earl of HILLSBOROUGH, dated
Boston, November 12, 1768. (No. 9.)
My LORD,
AFTER I had communicated your Lordships Letter to the Council, I considered
that some farther Notification of it would be necessary in regard to what
related to the preservation of the Peace and the Protection of the Officers of
the revenue, especially as the Commissioners had fixed upon this Week for their
return to Boston. A Proclamation was not thought Proper, as the Business was in
a manner confined to the Town of Boston. I therefore thought of a Letter from
myself to the Justices of Boston, and accordingly drew one up wherein I recited
such part of your Lordship's Letter as related to them, and their Business, and
thereto added Injunctions and Admonitions of my own. I communicated this to the
Council last Wednesday, proposing, if it had their Approbation, to call the
Justices together, and deliver it to them by word of Mouth, and then gave them
Copies of it. But though no exceptions were taken to particulars the whole was
objected too strongly for this Reason; that if they were to consent to this
Letter they should appear to approve of the Censures your Lordship has passed
upon the Town, which they would not admit it had deserved. I told them that I
would not enter into an Argument which might tend to impeach the Truth or
Justice of your Lordship's Letter, but I observed that both of them were very
desensible, being founded upon notorious facts, which could not be denied or
undoubted.

I then proposed another method of informing the Justices; which was to call
the Justices together, and after reading such part of your Lordship's Letter as
related to their Business. to give them a general Admonition concerning their
future Conduct. This was objected to, for that an admonition implied a Censure.
This I answered by showing, that they really did deserve Censure, and by
declaring that I would use them tenderly in that Respect. But I found that I
should never prevail with the Council to act in this Business: that they would
not advise to any method of notifying, enjoining or enforcing the Orders
contained in your Lordship's Letter; and that I could make nothing of them but
passive Associates. I proposed therefore that they should meet in the Council
the next morning, and I would of my own accord and without their Advice, order
the Justices to attend, and would admonish them as I had before proposed. This
was at length assented to; though not without one Gentleman's protesting
against it. I accordingly the next day assembled the Justices and in the
presence of the Council having caused an Extract of your Lordship's Letter to
be read, I entered into a full Explanation of the Nature of their Office and
their Duty therein; and avoiding as much as I could, censuring them for their
former Conduct, I showed what would be expected of them for the future; and I
concluded that if they had a mind to retrieve the Credit of the Town, it was
not to be done by denying what was past, but by regulating what was to come: As
soon as I had done, a Gentleman of the Council said aloud he liked this very
well; and the Justices seemed satisfied with this proceeding; and several of
them gave assurances that they would do the best to preserve the good order of
the Town.

These two conferences with the Council passed with good Humor; and in the
course of them I had an opportunity to observe upon and lament the Servility,
in regard to the People, with which the Business of Council was now done in
comparison to what used to be. This was not denied; and one Gentleman said,
That he did not now enter the Council Chamber with that free Mind he used to
have: But he liked to be concerned in public Business, and did not choose to
quit his Place in the Council, and therefore must be content to hold it upon
such Terms as he could. So fair a confession deserves not to be passed
unnoticed. But I should not trouble your Lordship with such trifling Anecdotes
if they did not seem to me to be the best method to convey a true Idea of the
present State of this Government, and to point out the chief causes of its
Decease, and I must myself resort to the cause I am now treating of, to show
why I have not executed the King's Commands in as full a manner as may be
expected from me. But my Lord, the Council themselves have for above four
Months past taken great pains to show from whence the imbicility of this
Government arises; and have brought more forcible Arguments, than any one else
could have urged, to show how necessary it is become that the King should have
the Council Chamber in his own Hands. How this can be done may be a Question,
the Exigency of it is (...)

I am with great Respect, my Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient, and most
humble Servant, FRA. BERNARD.
January 27, 1769.
A true Copy,

GEO. WHITE, Clerk of the Papers to the House of Commons.



The Right Honorable the Earl of Hillsborough.
Governor Bernard's Letter to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated Boston, November
14, 1768.
My LORD,
I come now to consider that part of my Orders which relates to the reforming
the bench of Justices: This is to be done by two ways, 1. by adding new
Justices to the present Bench, either by engaging Gentlemen who are already in
the Commission to qualify themselves, or by granting new Commissions to fit
Persons who will undertake to Act; 2. by removing such Persons in the
Commission who are known to be infected with principles of Disaffection to the
constitutional Authority of Parliment. The first of these is practicable in
both its Branches; the second is at present absolutely impracticable, and will
remain so while the Council make the humouring the People their chief Object.

In regard to the first I have already made some Attempts to engage some
Gentlemen now in the Commission to qualify themselves, and shall pursue it; And
notwithstanding the Undertaking is very discouraging, I expect I shall have
some Success. I have also made an Essay to appoint new Justices who would
engage to Act, by naming one very fit Person. It was received very cooly by the
Council and upon my asking the Reason, I was told he was not popular; I replied
that if he had been I should not have named him. As he was allowed to be in
every other Respect a most unexceptionable Man, it passed unanimously: but it
gave me to know what I must expect if I proposed a Man who was not popular
against whom any Exception could be taken. But I shall try soon again.

As for removing Persons for their Opposition to the Authority of Parliament by
means of a Council the majority of which has (indirectly at least) avowed the
same Principles, and now appears to Act in Concert with that Party from whence
the Opposition to Parliament originated, it would be an Attempt contrary to all
Rules of Policy and Prudence. It would require to be done by a public Enquiry,
which would receive all the Obstruction and embarrassment which the Chicanery
of Law could invent; and if after all, full proof of Disaffection to the
Authority of Parliament should be made, it would be declared not to be relevant
to infer such a Censure. It would be therefore in vain to attempt to punish
Disaffection to the Authority of Parliament, until the Criminality is better
established than it is at present. To support this Conjecture in what manner
the Council would Act in such a Proceeding, I need only refer your Lordship to
their Conduct and the Papers they have published within these two Months last
past.

And yet, My Lord, I would not insinuate that we have no fit Objects for such a
Censure; the Sons of Liberty have not been without Magistrates. We have seen
Justices attending at Liberty tree; One to Administer an Oath to the Stamp
Master, when he was obliged to swear that he would not execute his Office,
Another to perform the Function of Toast Master; a third, but lately, to
consult about fortifying the Town; others to make up a Procession of 45
Carriages and 92 Persons on the 14th of August last. All these are included in
two Lists which your Lordship has, that of the 5 Selectmen who signed the
Circular Letter for the Convention, of which all but the first are in the
Commission, and that of the S Justices who signed the Refusal to Pillet the
Soldiers. Now if the Censure of these Proceedings should produce an Order to me
to Supercede the Commissions of these Gentlemen, It would be a Trial of the
Power of the Governor: It seems at present that the Council would not enable me
to execute such an Order.

It is a great Defect in this Government that the King has no Power over the
Commissions, which are granted in his Name and under his Seal. He can by Order
in Council disallow a Law which has passed by the Governor, Council and House
of Representatives; But yet he cannot supercede a Commission which has been
granted by the Governor and Council. And yet the Council of this Province is as
much out of the Control of the King as the House of Representatives is.
Wherefore it seems as reasonable that the King should be allowed to correct the
Mistakes of the Governor and Council, as of the Governor, Council and House. As
it is, when the Governor has once set the King's Seal to a Commission, it is
for ever out of the hands of the Crown, and the Persons who has obtained it may
thenceforth defy the King, oppose his Laws and insult his Government and be in
no Danger of losing his Commission. It is true, the Governor with the Advice of
Council can supercede him; but if he acts in a Popular Cause, under which
Opposition to Government finds it easy to shelter itself, the Council, who are
themselves the creatures of the People, will never join with the Governor in
censuring the overflowings of Liberty. It may be said that the Governor should
take care not to appoint any one whose Character is not well known. But the
Governor does not personally know half of those whom he appoints to Offices: it
is not therefore in his Power to guard against Imposition, let him be ever so
cautious. Besides a man's political Caracter often does not appear 'till he is
got into an Office and thereby held forth to the Public: Hence it is not
unusual for a Person, who has distinguished himself in Political Matters, to
get himself recommended to the Governor, as a Man well disposed to Government;
and as soon as he has received his Commission to declare for the Party of the
Sons of Liberty. The Governor may resent the Imposition as he pleases; but
cannot undo what he has done. Thus the Commissions of the King like his Cannon
upon another occasion, are turned against him.

It would serve to remedy this abuse and strengthen Government, if the King was
enabled by Order in his Privy Council to supercede Commissions granted in his
Name, and under his Seal, when they shall appear to be granted to improper
Persons, or made use of for improper purposes. This must be done by Act of
Parliament: and I don't see the Impropriety of such an Act; it seems to me to
be a proper power to be vested in the Crown; especially at a time when the
Crown wants to be strengthened by all legal means, in this Country. And it
seems that it would be better to be done by a general Act than a partial one;
for such a Power may be wanted in the Royal Governments* notwithstanding the
Control the King has over the Councils. For is is very possible, considering
the Spirit which now prevails, that even a Royal Council may support a Popular
Magistrate against the Interest of the Crown. And if the Colonies should
prevail to have the Judges Commissions during good behavior, which some of
them are now very earnest about, it might be proper that the King in Council
should be empowered to judge and determine upon such Misbehaviour as would
avoid the Commission.

But this will not be necessary if the general Instructions of granting no
Commissions but during Pleasure be continued and observed; nor will it be
necessary that such an Act should be general; It is more wanted in this
Government than in all the others together: and even hear the Defect would be
cured by a Royal Council.

I am with great Respect, my Lord, your Lordship's most Obedient and most humbe
Servant. FRA. BERNARD.
January 27, 1769.
A true Copy,

GEO: WHITE, Clerk of the Papers to the House of Commons.



The Right Honorable the Earl of Hillsborough.
Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Boston Nov. 30, 1768.
My Lord,
I Think it proper to inform your Lordship that I communicated to the Council
that part of your Lordship's Letter No. 19, in which your Lordship signified
his Majesty's gracious Reception of the Petition of the Council, which I
transmitted in July last, and added, that the Petition with my reasoning in
support of it would have full Consideration. Upon which Mr. Bowdoin who has all
along taken the Lead of the Council in their late extraordinary proceedings,
charged me with having misrepresented the purpose of their Petition, by taking
Advantage of an Expression of theirs, "drawing a Revenue from the Colonies,"
and there from insinuating that their Objection lay not so much against the
raising money, as the carrying it out of the Country and not expending it here.
And to Justify this, he quoted a transitory Conversation he had with me on the
day of the Public Commencement at the College in July last. I told him that if
the Conversation had made such an impression upon him, is was a pity he had not
mentioned it before. Whilst my Memory could interpose in my behalf. That at
this distance of time 5 months, I could not recollect every trifling
Conversation; for such I was assured this was from his Report of it. But I
could be certain whether I had or had not misrepresented their Petition by
inspecting my own Books. And before I looked at them, I could declare that I
had not.

My Letter Books were at my Country House, where I generally write all my
Letters. As soon as I got at them, I had the Letter in Question, No, 11. July
16. copied: And as soon as I returned to Town, I read that part of it which
related to this Business to three or four of the Council; and I let two of them
and the Secretary read the whole Letter; they were greatly surprised to find it
so very clear of Mr. Bowdoin's charge, at the next Council I produced the
Letter and read the whole Passage referred to: from whence it appeared that in
mentioning the Prayer of their Petition, I used their own words without adding
a single word of my own: and also that the Argument I used in behalf of the
Prayer went against Taxation in general, more than the Disposal of the money:
This appeared satisfactory to the whole Council except Mr. Bowdoin. But he
still persisting in justifying himself mentioned something more of the
Conversation referred to which explained the whole, and showed that what I said
upon that occasion was entirely in Joke. This was confirmed by a Councellor,
who recollected that on that day, being a day of Festivity, I did joke with
some of them upon their Petition, to the same purpose as Mr. Bowdoin quoted,
but in Terms that one could not have imagined could have been taken seriously,
and really were quite inoffensive to every one else.

This is a very trifling matter to trouble your Lordship with: but it has
already been the subject of Debates in Council, and Libels in the Newspapers.
It would have have also produced a formal Remonstrance to your Lordship, which
I am told was actually prepared by the Gentlemen who made the charge, if it had
not been prevented by my making Communications which, but for saving Trouble to
your Lordship, I would not have submitted to. But it will vent itself in
another and more public way; of which I shall be able to give your Lordship an
Account in a few days. Your Lordship may depend upon it that my Informations
have been and shall be dictated by the Spirit of Truth and Candor: but I
cannot make Facts other than they are, nor can I excuse myself communicating
such Observations and Reflections as occur to me, and appear to be material to
the Subject.

I am with great Respect, my Lord, Your Lordships most obedient and most humble
Servant, FRA. BERNARD.
January 27. 1769.
A true Copy,

GEO. WHITE. Clerk of the Papers to the House of Commons.



The Right Honorable The Earl of Hillsborough
Copy of a Letter from Governor Bernard to the Earl of Hillsborough, dated
Boston December 5th, 1768.
My LORD,
THE Council have been for a week past preparing Petitions to the two Houses of
Parliament against the American Acts of Revenue, that is, as I understand,
against all the Acts imposing Port Duties. They signified their intention to
me, and desired that I would either join with them, or authorize their sitting
for that purpose. I reminded them that I had refused to be concerned in this
Business in July last, and the impropriety of this Measure was much stronger
now than then. I added, that if they would be advised by me, they would not
pursue this intention: which could do no good and might turn to evil; that if
the Parliament was disposed to indulge the Americans in another Repeal, there
were Petitions enough before them to ground it upon; and their Petition at best
would be but a Makeweight; on the other hand it might contain something that
might give Offense, and add to the Ill humor which I feared already prevailed
against this Province. But all this and more had no Effect: The movers of this
Business called the Council together seperatety from the Governor in the
Council Chamber according to the new method, for which they apologized in the
Petition. After several days Meeting, the Petition was settled and approved:
Upon which there was a dispute how it should be signed, whether by every one as
private Persons as in the Address to General Gage, or by the President in the
name of the Body; in which latter Case they must be understood to act as the
Legislative Council, there being no President of the Privy Council but the
Governor. However it was resolved it should be signified in the latter way.

As soon as I Learned it was finished, I sent for Mr. Danforth the President,
and desired to see it: he went and procured it for me. I found it was signed
"in the name and by the order of a Majority of the Council S. Danforth." Mr.
Danforth said he was not present when this manner of signing was resolved upon;
and when he sat his name to it, he did not set the word "President" after his
name: this was a poor Excuse, but serves to show how little free Agency there
is in a Business of this kind: He also added that if he could get the Council
to meet again, he was in hopes they would undo this Business; for several of
them had signified their Disapprobation of it. But I had no such Expectation;
for the Council is brought under such an awe of their Constituents by the
frequent Removals of the Friends of Government, that there is very little
Exercise for private Judgment in popular Questions.

If by the Majority of the Council, in whose name the President is to sign,
they mean a Majority of the whole Board, I cannot conceive that all the Persons
who met at the several Meetings upon this Occasion put together amount to the
Number 12, which is the Majority of the whole. But if they mean a Majority of
those present when the Resolution was formed, it may fall very short of the
Majority of the Body: Four Persons will make a Majority of a Quorum of the
Council. In the present case I doubt whether the Number of those who really
approved of this Measure was much more: For it seemed to be rather submitted to
than joined in. As for the Petition itself, it is very lengthy, being six Folio
Pages, but has nothing new in it, nothing I believe, but what is to be found
among the Writings of the House of Representatives. It differs from the
Petition to the King in this: The latter carefully avoids all Claim of Right
against the Parliament; this is not so clear of it: It has indeed no positive
Assertions of Right, but several Intimations of it too plain to be unnoticed.
This Account is taken only from once reading it, and therefore may not be free
from Mistakes, though I believe it is right as to the general Idea.

I am with great Respect, my Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient, and most
humble Servant, FRA. BERNARD.

The Right Honorable the Earl of Hillsborough.
P. S.
Since I wrote the foregoing I have got a List of the Gentlemen who passed upon
the Petition, Mr. Danforth, Royal, Erving, Bowdoin, Hubbard, Tyler, Pitts,
Dexter. Upon November the 30th they agreed upon the Petition to the Lords and
Commons to be signed by Mr. Danforth as President. Of these 8 I have been
informed of two who wanted to have it undone, and I can fix upon another who I
dare say acquiesced rather than concurred.


January 27, 1769.
A true Copy,

GEO: WHITE, Clerk of the Papers to the House of Commons.



Copy of a Letter from General GAGE to the Earl of HILLSBOROUGH, dated Boston,
October 31, 1768. (No. 3)
My LORD,
IN my last from New York, I had the Honor to acquaint your Lordship of my
intention to go to Boston; I arrived here on the 12th Inst. And though Lieutenant
Colonel Dairymple had done every thing in his Power previous to my Arrival to
procure Quarters for the two Regiments from Hallifax, I found one of those
Regiments encamped, and the other lodged in the Market-Hall.

I immediately made Application in Person to the Governor in Council, that the
Troops might have Quarters in the public Houses, as far as they could be
Accommodated therein, and that Orders might be given for that Purpose to the
inferior Magistrates: and that Out Houses, etc. might be prepared for the
remainder; to which I Begged a decisive Answer, that I might fall upon Measures
to put the Troops under Cover, as the Winter approached.

I soon found that the Council had put a Construction upon the Mutiny Act for
North America, which rendered it of no Effect, for the Purposes of Marching and
Quartering the Troops, viz. That whatever Place in a Province the King's Troops
should be ordered to, they could not be Quartered in that Place, 'till all the
Barracks in the Province, however distant from it, were first filled with
Troops; from thence the Council inferred, that no Quarters could be had in the
Town, till the Barracks in Castle Island were filled; and further, that the
Business of Quartering did not come properly before them, but in the last
Instance, when not only the Barracks in Question, but also the public Houses
should be filled with Troops, which belonged to the Magistrates to do, and was
an affair that did not belong to them; It was in vain to set forth that the
Barracks in Castle Island would be occupied by the Troops expected from
Ireland, or to urge the absurdity of a Construction of the Act of Parliament,
which annihilated the Act; as it absolutely impeded the March of the Troops
through the Province, as well as the King's Right to order his Troops to any Town
or Village where his Service might require them to be ordered to

The next Step to be taken was, to make Application to the Magistrates, to
Quarter the Troops in the Public Houses; and a Question arose, who were the
Magistrates? The Select-Men refused being concerned, and declared they were not
Magistrates, which was agreed to; and it then became necessary to apply to the
Justices of the Peace, the Difficulty then was, to find any of the Justices who
would act in the Business of Billeting, and some of them were to be tried, who
gave Assurances of their readiness to carry on the King's Service, but said it
was hard, that they only should be pitched upon for such an undertaking, and to
become the Objects of public Odium, when there were so many more Justices in
the Town, to take their Share of it. This produced a Resolution to assemble all
the Justices of the Town, and I attended Governor Bernard to their Meeting,
where he required it of them conjunctly, and of each seperately, to Billet the
Troops in the Public Houses, according to the Act of Parliament: they desired
Time to consider of a Measure which they said must be very disagreeable to the
People, and might be attended with bad Consequences. After some days
Consideration, they returned for Answer, that the Act did not require them to
Quarter Troops, or words to that Effect.

I relate the above Transactions to your Lordship, in a summary Way, leaving it
to Governor Bernard to transmit to your Lordship, the particular Resolves of
his Council at their several Meetings on the Subject of providing Quarters as
well as a Copy of the Resolution of the Justices upon the same Subject.

There was no Disappointment in the bad Success of these several Applications;
it was known before hand that they would have no Effect; but it was proper to
try, to get the Laws enforced. Governor Bernard therefore agreed in the
Necessity of making Preparations to put the Troops under Cover, by hiring of
empty Houses, or other Buildings proper for the Purpose, and that a particular
Account should be kept of the Expenses incurred therein, as also of all
Necessaries required in Quartering, that the Governor may require a
Reimbursement of the same, from the first Assembly, that shall be Summoned to
meet. But as it may be uncertain where the Expense will fall in the End, I have
endeavored to have every Thing prepared, with as much Frugality as possible,
and the King's Barrack Master is ordered to repair here from Hallifax with all
the spare Bedding and Utensils in those Stores, and a large quantity of Coals,
carried thither by the Troops from Louisbourg.

The Council after some time, gave Governor Bernard a power over the Barracks
at Castle Island as well as over a public Building in the Town, called the
Manufactory House: The Barracks are said to have been built, to hold one
thousand Men, but I find they were only temporary Lodgments for Soldiers during
the last War, before they embarked, and the short time they staid, made it
immaterial whether they were crowded or not. I find upon examination they will
not hold above one Regiment, upon the present Establishment, and that by
putting 12 Men in a Room of 18 Feet square. As for the Manufactory House, there
are People in it who have been spirited up to maintain Possession, and some
Measures were taken, though without Effect, to remove them, which occasioned a
little Disturbance of no Consequence, and only served to show a most obstinate
spirit of Opposition to every measure of Government. When the Regiments arrive
from Ireland, one of them will be quartered in the Barracks in Castle Island,
and the other must be lodged in the Town, in the same manner as the two
Regiments from Hallifax.

Castle William remains garrisoned by the Company kept up by the Province, and
I find there is a Provincial military Establishment supported there, under the
Command of the Governor, of some Use and Emolument to him and the
Lieutenant Governor, upon that account, and not seeing any absolute necessity
for it, I have not interfered in any Matters concerning the Fort, or insisted
on putting a Garrison of the King's Troops into it. But if the King should
incline to make any alteration in the dispositions of his Forces, by stationing
one or two Regiments in this Province for the time to come, his Majesty may
think it right to put Castle William into the Possession of his own Troops; but
as in that Case, I apprehend the Province would grant no Funds to maintain it,
the Expense thereof will fall upon the Crown. The Fort may be made to contain
two or thee Companies of Foot, and a Detachment of the Royal Regiment of
Artillery. But as for the Barracks near it, situated on a small Island, where
there is not room for Troops to move, and at such a distance from the Town of
Boston, they will not answer any design or purpose of stationing Troops there
for the service of the Town. And if any Number of Troops should be fixed in
this Province, I would take the liberty to propose, that Barracks should be
built for them within the Town, on a vacant Spot called Fort-Hill, an
advantageous Situation, whereon a Fort formerly stood; and Governor Bernard
tells me it belongs to the Crown. A new Fort may hereafter be erected there, if
his Majesty's Affairs should require it.

Every Art and Evasion has been tried by the major part of the People of every
Degree, to force the Troops to quit the Town for want of Quarters, whilst
those, who may have acted or made known their Sentiments in favor of Government
declared they durst not stay in the Town, but must remove with their Families
and Effects, if the Troops should leave it. When the Houses where ready to
receive the Troops, the Officers were threatened with the Clause of the Mutiny
Act against Officers, who presume to take upon themselves to quarter Troops,
etc and to prevent their being put to any trouble on that account by perverting
the Act in that particular, as had been done in so many others, Governor
Bernard gave a particular Warrant to a Commissary, against. whom no Action
could lie, to quarter the Soldiers in the Houses fitted up for their Reception.
I would take the liberty, my Lord, to represent, that the Clause in question is
by no means calculated for the Circumstances of this Country, where every Man
studies Law, and interprets the Laws as suits his purposes, and where the
Measures of Government are opposed by every Evasion and Chicane that can be
devised. An Officer, of Rank and long Service may be cashiered by the
management of two Justices of the Peace, the best of them the Keeper of a
paltry Tavern, who shall find Evasions to disobey the Clauses of the Mutiny
Act, which they dislike, and to pervert the Sense and Meaning of others to
serve their Designs against him, and unhappily it might be found in some
Places, that those who should reverse iniquitous Convictions of Justices of the
Peace, were no better than the Justices who should have granted the
Certificates of Conviction. I troubled his Majesty's Secretary at War some time
ago with some very unwarrantable Proceedings against an Officer on account of
the Clause in question, which happened to the Southward.

After other Methods had been tried to get the Troops away. I received an
Address from a number of Gentlemen Members of the Council, in which they aim at
justifying the People against many Misrepresentations of their Conduct, blaming
the Commissioners of his Majesty's Customs, and begging the Troops may be
withdrawn from the Town. I have the honor to transmit your Lordship the Address
and Answer thereto.

Those who would justify or rather palliate the Proceedings of the People here,
complain, that they have been grossly misrepresented, and every little
Disturbance that has happened, been magnified into dangerous Riots; that the
Disturbance in March was trifling, that of the 10th of June was occasioned
solely by the Imprudence of the Commissioners: they excuse the Resolves made at
the Town Meetings, by attributing them only to the extravagance of a few mad
People, and aver that the Convention was called with no other Intent, than to
take proper Measures, to preserve the Peace and Tranquillity of the Province.

I am to observe upon the above, that according to the best Information I have
been able to procure, the Disturbance in March was trifling, that considering
what had happened respecting Seizures, the Commissioners of the Customs had
Reason to act as they did, respecting the Seizure which occasioned the Riots on
the 10th of June which was considerable; and though I do not find that they were,
at that time personally attacked, yet the Assault upon some of their Officers,
and the threats daily thrown out against themselves was certainly a sufficient
Reason to make them apprehensive of Danger to their own Persons. Whether any
harm would have actually happened to them, had they remained in the Town, it is
not possible to judge. With respect to the Resolves procured by some mad People
at the Town Meetings, those mad People have governed the Town, and influenced
the Province, a very long Time, and after Publishing their very dangerous
Resolves in the Town Meeting of the 13th of September last, carried the Motion
for convening Deputies from the several Towns; and the Deputies convened
accordingly. I shall only observe on this that their intentions were
suspicious, and that I am happy, the Troops from Halifax arrived at the time
they did.

The Commissioners of the Customs are still in Castle William, and upon being
asked about their Return to Boston, one of them said, there were Troops now to
support them, but desired to know if there was any, or what Civil Officer, who
would undertake to ask the Assistance of the Troops, if there should be
Occasion for it. The Governor and Lieutenant Governor were present, but neither
could be answerable that any Civil Officer would undertake it.

Your Lordship will naturally imagine that since the Troops are here to support
the Dignity of Government and a due Execution of the Laws that the Powers of
Government are reverted into the Hands, where the Constitution has Placed them,
and that the Civil Officers would immediately avail themselves of so good an
Opportunity to restore Affairs to their proper Order, and put the Laws in
Execution, against those who should dare to violate them; This is not yet the
Case, and it is plainly seen even amongst the few Magistrates, of whom it is
said, that they have a real Wish, and desire to support Government, and do
their Duty, that there is a fear of acting contrary to the general Sentiments
of their Fellow Citizens, and a desire to maintain a certain degree of
Popularity amongst them, which prevents them from being particular in the
Execution of their Offices: All now hoped for is, that things being in a more
quiet state than they were, the violent Temper of the People will abate in a
little time* and their Minds be more composed, when the Magistrates may do
their Duty with less fear of becoming obnoxious to the People; the Town has
been under a kind of Democratical Despotism for a considerable time, and it has
not been safe for People to act, or speak contrary to the Sentiments of the
ruling Demagogues; and surprising as it may appear, those fears are not yet
annihilated.

If it is asked, why the Governor does not turn all the Justices of Peace out
of Commission, and put others in, who will do their Duty? It is answered, that
the Governor can neither appoint Justices, or turn them out, but by consent of
Council; and that the Council opposes every thing proposed to the Governor, for
the Service of Government, that is unpopular.

From what has been said, Your Lordship will conclude, that there is no
Government in Boston, there is in truth very little at present, and the
Constitution of this Province leans so much to the Side of Democracy, that the
Governor has not the power to remedy the disorders which happen in it.

I have the Honor to be with the greatest Respect, Regard and Esteem my Lord,
Your Lordship's most Obedient and most Humble Servant. THO. GAGE.


