BOSTON, 25 January, 1769.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Sir George Cornwell, A Gentleman lately arrived from
England, with a Design to travel Incog. through the Continent of America, AND Mr.
Flint, An Independent Gentleman, descended from a good Family of the first
Settlers of New England, that is neither Placed nor Pensioned.

Honi soit qui Mal y Pense.

Printed in LONDON, And Reprinted in BOSTON, 1769.

A DIALOGUE, etc.
SIR GEO.) WELL Mr. Flint, though I acknowledge that the late revenue acts,
restrictions, regulations, and new constructed admiralty courts, are absurd in
themselves, as well as hurtful to both the mother country and these colonies;
and that they are now seen to be so by almost all the sensible part of the
nation; yet, there is one thing that has always surprised us very much in
England, and that is, we have been told that ye are as much divided among
yourselves in sentiments about these affairs as we are in England; nay it has
been represented to us by top hands, that the better sort of people in the
colonies acquiesce in those measures, and that it is only a small Faction that
oppose them.


Mr. FLINT.) I am sensible, sir, that it has been so represented, but in the
course of your travels through this country, I doubt not but you will find it
quite otherwise; you will find that the late measures are disliked by all orders
of people through the continent, a few individuals excepted, that have rewards in
view for professing different sentiments; I say professing, for there is no man
that can entertain real sentiments in favor of either the justice or policy of
the late measures; but I will not enter upon the subject now; let us take a walk
upon 'change.


SIR GEO.) With all my heart; this is your goal that was burnt down the other
night, I suppose, and that your state house?


Mr. FLINT.) Yes, this, sir, is what we call our town house: Here our
politicians, lawyers, merchants, and idle people walk an hour before dinner to
settle the nation, while they are creating an appetite. Do you observe you
group of people upon those steps at the north side of the 'change? those are
the people that have assumed to themselves the name of prerogative men, while
in fact every man has in view some reward for putting on that character; for
you must know that the real disinterested prerogative men, are those who have
been represented home as Sons of Liberty and licentiousness. And I must now
tell you, however surprising, that those now distinguished by the name of
prerogative men, are altogether composed of these four sorts of people; high
jacobites, men that have made all that they have by smuggling* officers of the
R -- e that have defrauded the Crown of all that they are worth; -- and poor
indigent creatures that are seeking little places or pensions from G -- t:
These are the sort of people that wholly compose that prerogative group, as
they are ironically styled in this place.


Sir GEO.) Ah! you surprise me very much: Pray who is that meager Tall-Man
among 'em, that they seem so attentive to?


Mr. FLINT.) That Sir, -- (under Verres) is their chief leader; he is now a
provincial state officer, with a pension; was once an unsuccessful smuggler and
merchant in this town; he is the idol of that group, and some few more in the
country, but has lost the confidence and esteem of the people, which was once
his glory; he has two passions that prevail with great strength; ambition and
avarice, all others being totally absorbed; these are in great force indeed,
and frequently interfere with each other, yet his most intimate friends cannot
determine which most predominates, they are alternately uppermost, and having
none of the common passions of life to disturb him, he remains a man of
assiduity and application; in whatever he undertakes, he is thoro'ly
accomplished in every art both to make a friend, or take off an enemy, as he
may have occasion, and is the masterpiece of human nature for dissimulation
and disguise.


Sir GEO) I have heard of him in England -- but in a very different character
from that you give, -- though lately his duplicity has been suspected by those he
pays court to there; pray who is that grave, significant Spanish Phiz by the
side of him?


Mr. FLINT.) That Sir, is a retailer of tea in this town; he has been all his
life poor till within a few years, -- his private life is good; and as he is
supposed to have laid by two or three thousand pounds, he has a great
inclination to the county bench, which his countenance is well suited for; yet
for all that important spanish gravity, discourse him for a whole year
together, and you will find that that appearance incloses nothing but lead;
having the place I have mentioned in view, he is a down right prerogative man
Sir, quite stanch indeed, and humbly devoted to the Tall-Man.


Sir GEO.) And who is that sharp faced, peevish looking man, that is talking to
his gravity?


Mr. FLINT.) That, Sir, was once a partner to his gravity in trade, and having
saved something pretty, he is now retired to a neighboring village, and is a
man that does not want sense so much as Philanthropy; he has made many
unsuccessful pushes both for the senate and bench, he is, however, not
discouraged, having secured the friendship and interest of Verres and the
Tall-Man, by becoming high in prerogative, prophesying direful disasters that
will happen to this town and country for mentioning the word Rights; he is at
present only a brevet county bench man, and a kind of oracle with the young
gentlemen of the village that are seeking preferment in -- Philanthrop's path.


Sir GEO.) And who is that young old man, with a sword by his side.


Mr. FLINT.) That, Sir, is indeed a young, old man; he is a county state
officer, though not yet empowered to impannel the J -- y: He is (next to Charles
Froth) his Ex -- y's favorite butterfly, and a very high prerogative man, Sir,
with very slender ideas of either honor or sincerity.


Sir GEO.) An excellent character! and pray who is that pock broken, red-faced
man in a surtout?


Mr. FLINT.) That, Sir, is a gentleman from C --; he held a place for some
years in the R -- e of about L. 200 a year, but it was generally thought that
he made of it as many thousands, and is now retired into the country upon about
six or eight thousand pounds; he lives genteelly; and having done with an
office, he is a very high prerogative man, Sir, and maintains that all acts of
p -- t whatever, are binding upon the colonies, and that they are rebels that
speak otherwise: His taking this character, and the court he pays the C -- rs,
he thinks may prevent an enquiry into his past conduct.


Sir GEO) And very probably it may for the present -- but who is that short
pugg-faced man, that holds up his face and says nothing?


Mr. FLINT.) That, Sir, is a dealer in the iron-mongery way; he lived a
bachelor many years, much respected, but having married into good blood, he
was bid to be a man of mettle, and keep company with great folks, which Verres
told him could not be without his appearing on the right side, (which should be
pointed out to him) and then he would be somebody; upon which he became an
high prerogative man, Sir, with good madeira at his table, but precious little
sense or conversation to entertain his company with; he, however, possesses
some good qualities, and by his old acquaintance, is yet, more pitied than
despised.


Sir GEO.) Why? it looks like a queer little thing indeed; and who is that
pale, sickly old man?


Mr. FLINT.) That, Sir, is one that had set his heart greatly upon an handsome
income if the stamp act had gone through, -- but that failing -- bro't on a
weakness of mind and body, which he has never yet recovered; you see that he
looks upon the decline, yet his only comfort is that he shall get something for
being a prerogative man; he had once the esteem of the people, but that is now
at an end; he has however some share of their pity as an unhappy lost man.


Sir GEO.) Ah! and he has my pity too, but mixed with a large share of
contempt, if that is his character! -- And pray who is that lopsided crooked
figure, that looks so like Churchill's prophecy of famine.


Mr. FLINT.) That, Sir, is brother to the Tall-Man, he is of the quorum, and
upon the county bench, is as sour in temper, as he looks in person, and is
waiting with great impatience to succeed his brother in lucrative places,
which, he is encouraged to hope for from Verres, and the Tall-Man, when the
latter takes the helm.


Sir GEO.) Ay! then he certainly will be disappointed, for the Tall Man never
will get to the helm, for this reason, that it is now well known in England he
has sacrificed every consideration to obtain it: Pray who is that gentleman
with a smiling countenance?


Mr. FLINT) That Sir, is a gentleman from R-x-y, of a very good private
character; he has retired upon a pretty fortune, and is well respected by his
acquaintance, who are sorry to see that -- he is an high prerogative man -- in
almost blind conformity to the sentiments of the Tall Man.


Sir GEO.) And who is that truss down-looking man among them?


Mr. FLINT.) That, Sir, is a native of a neighboring town; he served his time
to a wealthy merchant, whose daughter he married, by whom he got an handsome
fortune for this country, which by an indolent life, and not much economy, he
is though it to have somewhat impaired; he is at present in the Senate, but by his
past conduct has little reason to expect a continuance there, under the present
constitution, which he is continually wishing may be destroyed, that he may
have a chance for a mandamus. He has also a great inclination to a seat upon
the county-bench. These considerations have made him the very Jackall of Verres
and the Tall-Man; and -- a downright prerogative man, Sir -- a staunch friend
to government, without education, sense, or judgment to discern the first
principle of it.


Sir GEO.) Then he is an able statesman indeed; and who is that other truss man
that looks up with so much pomposity?


Mr. FLINT.) That, Sir, is a gentleman that bettered himself by marrying a
worthy lady with seven or eight thousand pounds, which to do him justice, he is
though it to have preserved: His private life is not bad, but his ambition is
unbounded: He has long had a wishful eye to the Senate, and by as long
experience found himself without the esteem of the people: (and therefore
little probability of being elected into the Senate) He is paying court to
Verres in hopes of a mandamus, should the constitution be altered; and on that
account, he is a very great prerogative man. Sir, and as truly pompose as he
appears to you.


Sir GEO.) And pray who is that creature with a blue surtout, a bush wig, and
the hat dropping to the left shoulder, that looks so like one of our northern
saw-gelders?


Mr. FLINT.) That, Sir, is a Bretton, that made the best of his way out of
Scotland very soon after a certain affair that took place in 1745. He lived
obscure, and intimate with poverty for several years in one of our southern
colonies, and is now here a hanger on, upon a worthy sister that advantageously
married to a superanuated gentleman of fortune: He is now of the quorum, and
one of Verres's private council, and nocturnal informers, ready, and waiting to
receive any little favor that the Com -- rs or his Ex -- cy can procure him;
for which he is (Culloden out of the question) a very staunch prerogative man
Sir, braying out passive obedience in the truebroadScotch accent.


Sir GEO.) Why you have a curious collection of them; and pray who is that
parrot-toed, mean looking thing, like one of our Cumberland crabs?


Mr. FLINT.) Oh! that Sir, is a poor indolent creature -- a retailer of --
drugs and simple waters; but for taking upon himself the name only of a
prerogative man, he is become a J -- e of P -- e of the last emission, upon the
new reforming plan of Verres.


Sir GEO.) He must indeed be an excellent advocate for the crown, an able
supporter of the cause: But who is that little bashful creature by the side of
him?


Mr. FLINT.) That, Sir, is a -- creature from New London, once a professor of
medicine, but now a r -- e-officer; he is a true prerogative man, Sir, with the
Pretenders sacred picture next to his skin; not doubting but that my Lord B --
e will be able to bring about a revolution in a new way. It Is said his errand
here, is to prepare for the Press, a full and clear answer to the FARMER'S
letters.


Sir GEO) Ah! he must be clever indeed, beyond his appearance to answer them:
And pray who is that pale-^^^^r'd faced-creature, bobbing about amongst them? I
don't mean any of the Gentlemen; he with his button behind, that looks so like
one of our candle-snuffers at the playhouse.


Mr. FLINT.) Oh! that Sir is a curious creature indeed: He was bred a brazier
in this town, and without any other education, somehow or other got into the
good graces of a gentleman's daughter, a very good woman, with whom he had two
or three thousand pounds. Upon this acquisition, he took to an indolent idle
life, read romances, plays, newspapers and pamphlets; and in his own insensate
imagination became a man of letters, wrote a satirical piece upon his neighbor
Sir Charles Froth, and is now (through poverty) become the pimp and spy to that
very man, fetches and carries news, throws anonymous letters into peoples
yards, conveys -- seditious papers to the officers of the army and navy (as
from the people) or any other such kind of business, as Charles may have
occasion to transact; for which, it is said, he is encouraged to hope for a
Waiter's birth at Marblehead, Cape-Ann, or some of those kind of places; and on
that account he is a very high prerogative man Sir, has refuted many of Mr.
Locke's best arguments in favor of civil liberty, and is himself truly obedient
to all acts of parliament, except such as oblige a man to pay his debts. --
These Sir, are the sort of people that assume the name of prerogative men.


Sir GEO.) Yes, they do the K -- g great honor indeed; but there is one thing
that strikes me, and that is, I observe there are many of these people that are
aiming at, and seeking for, a seat on the bench: Pray is that a valuable thing
that they are so desirous of it?


Mr. FLINT.) Why! no Sir, it is worth but little; (...) then its generally for
life; and there is a kind of reverence and respect attending it, that is very
taking to weak minds.


Sir GEO.) And are these -- people really so lost to all the noble feelings of
man, as to sacrifice their country and their consciences for such trifling
considerations, when one could hardly think it possible that they would do it
for any consideration whatever.


Mr. FLINT.) Why, so it is, and I Am sorry for it; but I will not entertain you any
longer upon this subject; let us go to dinner, and if you please, I Will do
myself the pleasure to wait on you to the assembly this evening, where you will
see our ladies and gentlemen (such of them as go there) but that is very few.
There are officers enough; and above all, you will see Verres and the
Commissioners, striking figures indeed! Shylock is a masterpiece from St.
George's church Hanover-Square, a gentleman well accomplished under Fielding,
in the tip-staff way; the other, late a custom-house clerk, will speak for
himself (in Parody if you please) and if you catch his countenance, (which is
not very easy to do) you may read ignorance, stupidity and meanness upon the
osfrontis. Ap- Morgan and Froth's pictures you may have already seen at large.


Sir GEO.) With all my heart, I will go with you to the assembly; but I must
endeavor to disguise myself; for as I go to St. George's church when I am in
London, possibly Shylock may have received contribution from me, and may
discover who I am, which would destroy my plan. But who are those two gentlemen
in black, passing through the Townhouse?


Mr. FLINT.) They are two clergymen from the North, that have been well
respected, one of them very much esteemed, but being blindly devoted to the
Tall-man, they are, (in oppugnation to all sense and reason, as well as -- to
their former sentiments) become down right prerogative men Sir. to the loss of
a great share of that esteem and respect they once had from the good people of
this province.


Sir GEO.) Why! the few that this Tall-man has got hold of, seem to be
implicitly de^^ted to him.


Mr. FLINT.) Yes, I have told you he has every art of dissimulation and
hypocrisy; but when these few find him out (as they certainly will) he then
will be as much despised by them, as he now is by the rest of the people, to
whom he is more obnoxious than even Verres himself.


Sir GEO.) Sir your humble servant, I Have got enough of it. I hope these people
will soon appear in their true colors, and that the M -- y may see the truth,
that their late measures produce great cry, but little wool.


Mr. FLINT.) That I think they certainly must. But what think you of Verres?
Don't you think he has made vast progress, upon such false ground, considering
that the whole is supported altogether by artful misrepresentation and disguise.


Sir GEO) Why yes, I think him quite a finished character, and those two lines
may with great truth and justice be applied to him,


His private and his public Life are known,
Void of all Virtue, every Vice his own.
POPE.
