THE FARMER'S and MONITOR'S LETTERS, TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE BRITISH COLONIES.

WILLIAMSBURG: Printed by WILLIAM RIND, MDCCLXIX.

THE PREFACE.
IT may perhaps seem strange to slight consideration, that these LETTERS which
have already passed through all America, should now a second time be produced
before the Public in their present form. But a little further reflection will
show the UTILITY of this WORK. The sacred cause of liberty is of too great
consequence, and the necessity of freedom for the security of human happiness
too obvious, not to render every precaution wise, that tends to prevent the
introduction of slavery. Notwithstanding therefore, these letters have been
already published, yet here, they have been seen only in the Gazettes, which,
from the incertainty of their dispersion, and the length of time passing
between the reception of newspapers in the country, may probably have prevented
much of the benefit to be derived from a collective, uninterrupted view of the
manly reasoning, the timely information, and the true constitutional principles
of liberty with which these letters every where abound. Whoever considers again
that the nature of men in authority is inclined rather to commit two errors
than to retract one Clarendon's History of the Rebellion.
, will not be surprised to see the Stamp Act followed by a Bill of Right,
declaring the power of Parliament to bind us in all cases whatsoever; and this
act followed again by another, imposing a duty on paper, paint, glass, etc.
imported into these colonies. But however unbounded may be the wish of power to
extend itself, however unwilling it may be to acknowledge mistakes, it is surely
the duty of every wise and worthy American, who at once wishes the prosperity
of the Mother country and the colonies, to point out all invasions of the
public liberty, and to show the proper methods of obtaining redress. This has
been done by the Authors of the following LETTERS with a force and spirit
becoming freemen, English freemen, contending for our just and legal possession
of property and freedom. A possession that has its foundation on the clearest
principles of the law of nature, the most evident declarations of the English
constitution, the plainest contract made between the Crown and our forefathers,
and all these sealed and sanctified by the usage of near two hundred years.
American rights thus resting on the best and strongest ground, it behooves all
her inhabitants with united heads, hearts, and hands, to guard the sacred
deposit committed by their fathers to their care, as well to bless posterity as
to secure the happiness of the present generation. In vain it is for some few
(and very few I hope they are) who, governed either by base principles of fear,
or led by vile hopes of gain, the reward of prostituted virtue, to say, "your
rights are indeed invaded, but Great Britain is too strong. What can we do
against superior strength?" Let these evil designing men remember what the
highest authority has told us, "that the race is not always to the swift, nor
the battle to the strong." And if inspiration needed to receive assistance from
genius, Shakespeare says, "thrice is he armed that has his quarrel just, and he
but naked, though locked up in steel, whose conscience, with injustice, is
oppressed." History also informs us, that Xerxes with his armed millions could
not accomplish his purpose of reducing to slavery the much weaker but free
States of Greece. Three hundred brave men at Thermophyl^e, contending for
liberty, destroyed twenty thousand who attempted its ruin. In later times we
see the States of Holland free, and the generous Corsicans likely to be so,
although the far greater powers of Spain, Germany, and France, have at
different periods combined to enslave these noble nations.

THE truth is, that the great Author of nature has created nothing in vain, and
having with the life of man joined liberty, the virtuous enjoyment and free
possession of property honestly gained, has undoubtedly furnished all nations
with the means of defending their natural rights, if they have but wisdom and
fortitude to make the proper use of such means. In this instance we find
ourselves three thousand miles removed from Great Britain, we possess a country
abounding with woods in all parts, and in many with mountains of difficult and
dangerous access. The ease with which the staple colonies could put an entire
stop to the exportation of their commodities, and the peaceable but vital
injury that this would convey to those who might insist on oppressing them, are
truths so plain as to require no further animadversion. Ver^um sapienti sat
est. The nature of the climate, the soil, and its various produce, point out
the ease and extent with which manufactures may be conducted here. These things
are mentioned as a proof of what is above asserted, that the bountiful Author
of nature has furnished his creatures with the means of securing their proper
rights, and that the event depends much upon their own wise and brave
determinations. A benevolent mind indeed, cannot but lament that either
ambition, avarice, or ill-placed resentment, should ever be so exercised as to
force men into the investigation of those methods by whi^^ they may be secured
from the operation of these bad passions. For certain it is, that there is
nothing more becoming to human nature than well ordered government, or more
valuable than liberty: How ignominious then must his conduct be who turns the
first into confusion, and the latter into slavery? But whatever may be the
opinion, or the design of a rapacious ill-advised Minister, the Americans have
in their view this happy prospect; that the people of Great Britain are
generous and brave, they know the value of liberty, because they have purchased
that knowledge with much of their blood: and therefore they cannot but esteem
us their children for venerating the good old cause which they themselves have
contended for in many a well-fought field. It is really wonderful that this
unhappy dispute between Great Britain and her colonies should ever have
existed, when a moment's retrospection shows the Mother country for near two
centuries exercising legislative authority here without complaint, while she
abstained from that single destructive claim of taking our money from us
without the consent of our representatives. The exercise of which claim, would
indeed reduce America, to a state of slavery more deplorable and more
ignominious than has ever yet been known in the world. But to what purpose this
should be desired is still more amazing, when Britain from her exclusive trade
to these colonies, and from the manner in which she tied up our manufacturing
hands, not only received the entire produce of the lands and labor of these
countries, but has besides involved the people here in a heavy debt, which
agriculture, without arts, and a trade so confined, will probably never pay.
Mr. Grenville it seems had the honor of devising this new system of American
policy.

-- Till one shall rise
Of proud ambitious heart, who not content
With fair equality, fraternal state,
Will arrogate dominion undeserved
Over his brethren, and quite dispossess
Concord and the law of nature from the earth,
Hunting --
With war and hostile snare such as refuse
Subjection to his empire tyrannous.
-- O execrable son so to aspire
Above his brethren, to himself assuming
Authority usurped, from God not given:
He gave us only over beast, fish, fowl,
Dominion absolute; that right we hold
By his donation; but man over men
He made not lord; such title to himself
Reserving, human left from human free.
-- Justly thou abhorrest
That son, who on the quiet state of men
Such trouble brough^. --
MILTON'S PARADISE LOST, B. XII. L. 24. et seq. LETTERS FROM A FARMER.
LETTER I.
My dear COUNTRYMEN,
I AM a Farmer, settled, after a variety of fortunes, near the banks of the
river Delaware, in the province of Pennsylvania. I received a liberal
education, and have been engaged in the busy scenes of life; but am now
convinced, that a man may be as happy without bustle, as with it. My farm is
small; my servants are few, and good; I have a little money at interest; I wish
for no more my employment in my own affairs is easy; and with a contented
grateful mind, undisturbed by worldly hopes or fears, relating to myself, I am
completing the number of days allotted to me by Divine goodness.

BEING generally master of my time, I spend a good deal of it in library, which
I think the most valuable part of my small estate; and being acquainted with
two or three Gentlemen of abilities and learning, who honor me with their
friendship, I have acquired, I believe, a greater knowledge in history, and the
laws and constitution of my country, than is generally attained by men of my
class, many of them not being so fortunate as I have been in the opportunities
of getting information.

FROM my infancy I was taught to love humanity and liberty. Enquiry and
experience have since confirmed my reverence for the lessons then given me, by
convincing me more fully of their truth and excellence. Benevolence toward
mankind, excites wishes for their welfare, and such wishes endear the means of
fulfilling them. Th^se can be found in liberty only, and therefore her sacred
cause ought to be espoused by every man, on every occasion, to the utmost of
his power. As a charitable, but poor person does not withhold his mite, because
he cannot relieve all the distresses of the miserable, so should not any honest
man suppress his sentiments concerning freedom, however small their influence
is likely to be. Perhaps he "may touch some wheel POPE.
, " that will have an effect greater than he could reasonably expect.

THESE being my sentiments, I am encouraged to offer to you, my countrymen, my
thoughts on some late transactions, that appear to me to be of the utmost
importance to you. Conscious of my own defects, I have waited some time, in
expectation of seeing the subject treated by persons much better qualified for
the task; but being therein disappointed, and apprehensive that longer delays
will be injurious, I venture at length to request the attention of the public,
praying, that these lines may be read with the same zeal for the happiness of
British America, with which they were wrote.

WITH a good deal of surprise I have observed, that little notice has been
taken of an act of Parliament, as injurious in its principle to the liberties
of these colonies, as the Stamp Act was: I mean the act for suspending the
legislation of New York.

THE Assembly of that government complied with a former act of Parliament,
requiring certain provisions to be made for the troops in America, in every
particular, I think, except the articles of salt, pepper, and vinegar. In my
opinion they acted imprudently, considering all circumstances, in not complying
so far as would have given satisfaction, as several colonies did: But my
dislike of their conduct in that instance, has not blinded me so much, that I
cannot plainly perceive, that they have been punished in a manner pernicious to
American freedom, and justly alarming to all the colonies.

IF the British Parliament has a legal authority to issue an order, that we
shall furnish a single article for the troops here, and to compel obedience to
that order, they have the same right to issue an order for us to supply those
troops with arms, clothes, and every necessary; and to compel obedience to that
order also; in short, to lay any burdens they please upon us. What is this but
taxing us at a certain sum, and leaving to us only the manner of raising it?
How is this mode more tolerable than the Stamp Act? Would that act have
appeared more pleasing to Americans, if being ordered thereby to raise the sum
total of the taxes, the mighty privilege had been left to them, of saying how
much should be paid for an instrument of writing on paper, and how much for
another on parchment?

AN act of Parliament, commanding us to do a certain thing, if it has any
validity, is a tax upon us for the expense that accrues in complying with it;
and for this reason, I believe, every colony on the continent, that chose to
give a mark of their respect for Great Britain, in complying with the act
relating to the troops, cautiously avoided the mention of that act, lest their
conduct should be attributed to its supposed obligation.

THE matter being thus stated, the Assembly of New York either had, or had not,
a right to refuse submission to that act. If they had, and I imagine no
American will say they had not, then the Parliament had no right to compel them
to execute it. If they had not this right, they had no right to punish them for
not executing it; and therefore no right to suspend their legislation, which is
a punishment. In fact, if the people of New York cannot be legally texed but by
their own representatives, they cannot be legally deprived of the privilege of
legislation, only for insisting on that exclusive privilege of taxation. If
they may be legally deprived in such a case, of the privilege of legislation,
why may they not, with equal reason, be deprived of every other privilege? Or
why may not every colony be treated in the same manner, when any of them shall
dare to deny their assent to any impositions, that shall be directed? Or what
signifies the repeal of the Stamp Act, if these colonies are to lose their
other privileges, by not tamely surrendering that of taxation?

THERE is one consideration arising from this suspension, which is not
generally attended to, but shows its importance very clearly. It was not
necessary that this suspension should be caused by an act of Parliament. The
Crown might have restrained the Governor of New York, even from calling the
Assembly together, by its prerogative in the Royal governments. This step, I
suppose, would have been taken, if the conduct of the Assembly of New York had
been regarded as an act of disobedience to the Crown alone: but it is regarded
as an act of See the act of suspension.
"disobedience to the authority of the British legislature." This gives the
suspension a consequence vastly more affecting. It is a Parliamentary assertion
of the supreme authority of the British legislature over these colonies, in the
point of taxation, and is intended to COMPEL New York into a submission to that
authority. It seems therefore to me as much a violation of the liberties of the
people of that province, and consequently of all those colonies, as if the
Parliament had sent a number of regiments to be quartered upon them till they
should comply. For it is evident, that the suspension is meant as a compulsion;
and the method of compelling is totally indifferent. It is indeed probable,
that the sight of red coats, and the hearing of drums, would have been most
alarming; because people are generally more influenced by their eyes and ears,
than by their reason. But whoever seriously considers the matter, must
perceive, that a dreadful stroke is aimed at the liberty of these colonies. I
say, of these colonies; for the cause of one is the cause of all. If the
Parliament may lawfully deprive New York of any of her rights, it may deprive
any, or all the other colonies of their rights; and nothing can possibly so
much encourage such attempts, as a mutual inattention to the interests of each
other. To divide, and thus to destroy, is the first political maxim in
attacking those, who are powerful by their union. He certainly is not a wise
man, who folds his arms, and reposes himself at home, viewing, with unconcern,
the flames that have invaded his neighbor's house, without using any
endeavors to extinguish them. When Mr. Hampden's ship money cause, for Three
Shillings and Four Pence, was tried, all the people of England, with anxious
expectation, interested themselves in the important decision; and when the
slightest point, touching the freedom of one colony, is agitated, I earnestly
wish, that all the rest may, with equal ardour, support their sister. Very much
may be said on this subject; but I hope, more at present is unnecessary.

WITH concern I have observed, that two Assemblies of this province have sat
and adjourned, without taking any notice of this act. It may perhaps be asked,
what would have been proper for them to do? I am by no means fond of
inflammatory measures; I detest them. I should be sorry that any thing should
be done, which might justly displease our Sovereign, or our Mother country: But
a firm, modest exertion of a free spirit, should never be wanting on public
occasions. It appears to me, that it would have been sufficient for the
Assembly, to have ordered our agents to represent to the King's Ministers,
their sense of the suspending act, and to pray for its repeal. Thus we should
have borne our testimony against it; and might therefore reasonably expect
that, on a like occasion, we might receive the same assistance from the other
colonies.

Concordia res parvae cres^unt.
Small things grow great by concord.
November 5. The day of King WILLIAM the Third's landing.
A FARMER.

LETTER II.
My dear COUNTRYMEN,
THERE is another late act of Parliament, which appears to me to be
unconstitutional, and as destructive to the liberty of these colonies, as that
mentioned in my last letter; that is, the act for granting the duties on paper,
glass, etc.

THE Parliament unquestionably possesses a legal authority to regulate the
trade of Great Britain, and all her colonies. Such an authority is essential to
the relation between a Mother country and her colonies; and necessary for the
common good of all. He, who considers these provinces as states distinct from
the British empire, has very slender notions of justice, or of their interests.
We are but parts of a whole; and therefore there must exist a power somewhere,
to preside, and preserve the connection in due order. This power is lodged in
the Parliament; and we are as much dependant on Great Britain, as a perfectly
free people can be on another.

I HAVE looked over every statute relating to these colonies, from their first
settlement to this time; and I find every one of them founded on this
principle, till the Stamp Act administration. For the satisfaction of the
reader, recitals from the former acts of Parliament relating to these colonies
are added. By comparing these with the modern acts, he will perceive their
great difference in expression and intention.

The 12th Charles, Chap. 18, which forms the foundation of the laws-relating to
our trade; by enacting that certain productions of the colonies should be
carried ^o England only, and that no goods shall be imported from the
plantations but in ships belonging to England, Ireland, Wales, Berwick, or the
Plantations, etc. begins thus: "For the increase of shipping, and encouragement
of the navigation of this nation, wherein, under the good providence and
protection of GOD, the wealth, safety, and strength of this kingdom is so much
concerned, "etc.

The 15th Charles II. Chap. 7. enforcing the same regulation, assigns these
reasons for it. "In regard his Majesty's plantations, beyond the seas, are
inhabited and peopled by his subjects of this his kingdom of England; for the
maintaining a greater correspondence and kindness between them, and keeping
them in a firmer dependence upon it, and rendering them yet more beneficial and
advantageous unto it, in the further employment and increase of English
shipping and seamen, vent of English woollen, and other manufactures and
commodities, rendering the navigation to and from the same more safe and cheap,
and making this kingdom a staple, not only of the commodities of those
plantations, but also of the commodities of other countries and places for the
supplying of them; and it being the usage of other nations to keep their
plantations trade to themselves, "etc.

The 25th Charles II. Chap. 7, made expressly "for the better securing the
plantation trade, " which imposes duties on certain commodities exported from
one colony to another, mentions this cause for imposing them: "Whereas by one
act, passed in the 12th year of your Majesty's reign, entitled, An act for
encouragement of shipping and navigation, and by several other laws, passed
since that time. It is permitted to ship, etc. sugars, tobacco, etc. of the
growth, etc. of any of your Majesty's plantations in America, etc. from the
places of their growth, etc. to any other of your Majesty's plantations in
those parts, etc. and that without paying custom for the same, either at the
lading or unlading the said commodities, by means whereof the trade and
navigation in those commodities, from one plantation to another, is greatly
increased, and the inhabitants of diverse of those colonies, not conten^in
themselves with being supplied with those commodities for their own use, free
from all (...) (while the subjects of this your kingdom of England have paid
great customs and impositions for what of them have been spent here) but*
contrary to the express letter of the aforesaid laws, have brought into diverse
parts of Europe great quantities thereof, and do also vend great quantities
thereof to the shipping of other nations, who bring them into diverse parts of
Europe, to the great hurt and dimination of your Majesty's customs, and of the
trade and navigation of this your kingdom; for the prevention thereof, etc.

The 7th and 8th William III. Chap. 22, entitled, "An act for preventing
frauds, and regulating abuses in the plantation trade," recites that,
"notwithstanding diverse acts, etc. great abuses are daily committed, to the
prejudice of the English navigation, and the loss of a great part of the
plantation trade to this kingdom, by the artifice and cunning of ill disposed
persons; for remedy whereof, etc. And whereas in some of his Majesty's American
plantations, a doubt or misconstruction has ar^sen upon the before mentioned
act, made in the 25th year of the reign of King Charles II. whereby certain
duties are laid upon the commodities therein enumerated (which by law may be
transported from one plantation to another, for the supply of each others
wants) as if the same were, by the payment of those duties in one plantation,
discharged from giving the securities intended by the aforesaid acts, made in
the 12th, 22d and 23d years of the reign of King Charles II. and consequently
be at liberty to go to any foreign market in Europe," etc.

The 6th Anne, Chap. 37. reciting the advancement of trade, and encouragement
of ships of war, etc. grants to the captors the property of all prizes carried
into America, subject to such customs and duties, as if the same had been first
imported into any part of Great Britain, and from thence exported, etc.

This was a gift to persons acting under commissions from the Crown, and
therefore it was reasonable that the terms prescribed in that gift, should be
complied with -- more especially as the payment of such duties was intended to
give a preference to the productions of British colonies, over those of other
colonies. However, being found inconvenient to the colonies, about four years
afterward, this act was, for that reason, so far repealed, that by another act
"all prize goods, imported into any part of Great Britain, from any of the
plantations, were made liable to such duties only in Great Britain, as in case
they had been of the growth and produce of the plantations."

The 6th George II. Chap. 13, which imposes duties on foreign rum, sugar and
melasses, imported into the colonies, shows the reasons thus -- "Whereas the
welfare and prosperity of your Majesty's sugar colonies in America, are of the
greatest consequence and importance to the trade, navigation and strength of
this kingdom; and whereas the planters of the said sugar colonies, have of late
years fallen into such great discouragements, that they are unable to improve
or carry on the sugar trade, upon an equal footing with the foreign sugar
colonies, without some advantage and relief be given to them from
Great Britain; for remedy whereof, and for the good and welfare of your
Majesty's subjects," etc.

The 29th George II. Chap. 26, and the 1st George III. Chap. 9. which continue
the 6th George II. Chap. 13, declare, that the said act has, by experience,
been found useful and beneficial, etc. These are all the most considerable
statutes relating to the commerce of the colonies; and it is thought to be
utterly unnecessary to add any observations to these extracts, to prove that
they were all intended solely as regulations of trade.


All before, are calculated to regulate trade, and preserve or promote a
mutually beneficial intercourse between the several constituent parts of the
empire; and though many of them imposed duties on trade, yet those duties were
always imposed with design to restrain the commerce of one part, that was
injurious to another, and thus to promote the general welfare. The raising a
revenue thereby was never intended. Thus the King, by his Judges in his courts
of justice, imposes fines, which all together amount to a very considerable
sum, and contribute to the support of government: But this is merely a
consequence arising from restrictions, that only meant to keep peace, and
prevent confusion; and surely a man would argue very loosely, who should
conclude from hence, that the King has a right to levy money in general upon
his subjects. Never did the British Parliament, till the period abovementioned,
think of imposing duties in America, for the purpose of raising a revenue. Mr.
Grenville first introduced this language, in the preamble to the 4th of George
III. Chap. 15, which has these words, "And whereas it is just and necessary
that a revenue be raised in your Majesty's said dominions in America, for
defraying the expenses of defending, protecting, and securing the same: We your
Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects, the Commons of Great Britain, in
Parliament assembled, being desirous to make some provision in this present
session of Parliament, toward raising the said revenue in America, have
resolved to give and grant unto your Majesty the several rates and duties
herein after mentioned, etc.

A FEW months after came the Samp-Act, which reciting this, proceeds in the
same strange mode of expression, thus -- And whereas it is just and necessary,
that provision be made for raising a further revenue within your Majesty's
dominions in America, toward defraying the said expenses, we your Majesty's
most dutiful and loyal subjects, the Commons of Great Britain, etc. give and
grant," etc. as before.

THE last act, granting duties upon paper, etc. carefully pursues these modern
precedents. The preamble is, "Whereas it is expedient that a revenue should be
raised in your Majesty's dominions in America, for making a more certain and
adequate provision for defraying the charge of the administration of justice,
and the support of civil government in such provinces, where it shall be sound
necessary; and toward the further defraying the expenses of desending,
protecting and securing the said dominions, we your Majesty's most dutiful and
loyal subjects, the Commons of Great Britain, etc. give and grant, etc." as
before.

HERE we may observe an authority expressly claimed and exerted to impose
duties on these colonies; not for the regulation of trade; not for the
preservation or promotion of a mutually beneficial intercourse between the
several constituent parts of the empire, heretofore the sole objects of
Parliamentary institutions; but for the single purpose of levying money upon us.

THIS I call an innovation "It is worthy observation how quietly subsidies,
granted in forms usual and accustomable (though heavy) are borne; such a power
has use and custom. On the other side, what discontentments and disturbances
subsidies framed in a new mould do raise (such an inbred hatred novelty does
hatch) is evident by examples of former times."

-- Lord Coke's 2d Institute, p. 33.


; and a most dangerous innovation. It may perhaps be objected, that
Great Britain has a right to lay what duties she pleases upon her exports Some
people think that Great Britain has the same right to impose duties on the
exports to these colonies, as on the exports to Spain and Portugal, etc. Such
persons attend so much to the idea of exportation, that they entirely drop that
of the connection between the Mother country and her colonies. If Great Britain
had always claimed, and exercised an authority to compel Spain and Portugal to
import manufactures from her only, the cases would be parallel: But as she
never pretended to such a right, they are at liberty to get them where they
please; and if they choose to take them from her, rather than from other
nations, they voluntarily consent to pay the duties imposed on them.
, and it makes no difference to us, whether they are paid here or there.

To this I answer. These colonies require many things for their use, which the
laws of Great Britain prohibit them from getting any where but from her. Such
are paper and glass.

THAT we may legally be bound to pay any general duties on these commodities,
relative to the regulation of trade, is granted; but we being obliged by her
laws to take them from Great Britain, any special duties imposed on their
exportation to us only, with intention to raise a revenue from us only, are as
much taxes upon us, as those imposed by the Stamp Act.

WHAT is the difference in substance and right, whether the same sum is raised
upon us by the rates mentioned in the Stamp Act, on the use of paper, or by
these duties, on the importation of it. It is only the edition of a former
book, shi^ting a sentence from the end to the beginning.

SUPPOSE the duties were made payable in Great Britain?

IT signifies nothing to us, whether they are to be paid here or there. Had the
Stamp Act directed, that all the paper should be landed at Floriad, and the
duties paid there, before it was brought to the British colonies, would the act
have raised less money upon us, or have been less destructive of our rights? By
no means: ^or as we were under a necessity of using the paper, we should have
been under the necessity of paying the duties. Thus, in the present case, a
like necessity will subject us, if this act continues in force, to the payment
of the duties now imposed.

WHY was the Stamp Act then so pernicious to freedom? It did not enact, that
every man in the colonies should buy a certain quantity of paper -- No: It only
directed, that no instrument of writing should be valid in law, if not made on
stamped paper, etc.

THE makers of that act knew full well, that the confusions that would arise
from the disuse of writings, would compel the colonies to use the stamped
paper, and therefore to pay the taxes imposed. For this reason the Stamp Act
was said to be a law that would execute itself. For the very same reason, the
last act of Parliament, if it is granted to have any force here, will execute
itself, and will be attended with the very same consequences to American
liberty.

SOME persons perhaps may say, that this act lays us under no necessity to pay
the duties imposed, because we may ourselves manufacture the articles on which
they are laid; whereas by the Stamp Act no instrument of writing could be good,
unless made on British paper and that too stamped.

SUCH an objection amounts to no more than this, that the injury resulting to
these colonies, from the total disuse of British paper and glass, will not be
so afflicting as that which would have resulted from the total disuse of
writing among them; for by that means even the Stamp Act might have been
eluded. Why then was it universally detested by them as slavery itself? Because
it presented to these devoted provinces nothing but a choice Either the disuse
of writing, or the payment of taxes imposed by others without our consent.
of calamities, imbittered by indignities, each of which it was unworthy of
freemen to bear. But is no injury a violation of right but the greatest injury?
If the eluding the payment of the taxes imposed by the Stamp Act, would have
subjected us to a more dreadful inconvenience, than the eluding the payment of
those imposed by the late act; does it therefore follow, that the last is no
violation of our rights, though it is calculated for the same purpose the other
was, that is, to raise money upon us, without our consent?

THIS would be making right to consist, not in an exemption from injury, but
from a certain degree of injury.

BUT the objectors may further say, that we shall suffer no injury at all by
the disuse of British paper and glass. We might not, if we could make as much
as we want. But can any man, acquainted with America, believe this possible? I
am told there are but two or three Glass-Houses on this continent, and but very
few Paper-Mills; and suppose more should be erected, a long course of years
must clapse, before they can be brought to perfection. This continent is a
country of planters, farmers, and fishermen* not of manufacturers. The
difficulty of establishing particular manufactures in such a country, is almost
insuperable. For one manufacture is connected with others in such a manner,
that it may be said to be impossible to establish one or two, without
establishing several others. The experience of many nations may convince us of
this truth.

INEXPRESSIBLE therefore must be our distresses in evading the late acts, by
the disuse of British paper and glass. Nor will this be the extent of our
misfortune, if we admit the legality of that act.

GREAT BRITAIN has prohibited the manufacturing iron and steel in these
colonies, without any objection being made to her right of doing it. The like
right she must have to prohibit any other manufacture among us. Thus she is
possessed of an undisputed precedent on that point. This auhtority, she will
say, is founded on the original intention of settling these colonies; that is,
that she should manufacture for them, and that they should supply her with
materials. The equity of this policy, she will also say, has been universally
acknowledged by the colonies, who never have made the least objection to
statutes for that purpose; and will further appear by the mutual benefits
flowing from this usage, ever since the settlement of these colonies.

OUR great advocate, Mr. Pit, in his speeches on the debate concerning the
repeal of the Stamp Act, acknowledged, that Great Britain could restrain our
manufactures. His words are these -- "This kingdom, as the supreme governing
and legislative power, has always bound the colonies by her regulations and
restrictions in trade, in navigation, in manufactures -- in every thing, except
that of taking their money out of their pockets, without their consent." Again
he says, "We may bind their trade, confine their manufactures, and exercise
every power whatever, except that of taking their money out of their pockets,
without their consent."

HERE then, my dear countrymen, rouse yourselves, and behold the ruin hanging
over your heads. If you ONCE admit, that Great Britain may lay duties upon her
exportations to us, for the purpose of levying money on us only, she then will
have nothing to do, but to lay those duties on the articles which she prohibits
us to manufacture -- and the tragedy of American liberty is finished. We have
been prohibited from procuring manufactures, in all cases, any where but from
Great Britain (excepting linens, which we are permitted to import directly from
Ireland.) We have been prohibited, in some cases, from manufacturing for
ourselves; and may be prohibited in others. We are therefore exactly in the
situation of a city besieged, which is surrounded by the works of the besiegers
in every part but one. If that is closed up, no step can be taken, but to
surrender at discretion. If Great Britain can order us to come to her for
necessaries we want, and can order us to pay what taxes she pleases before we
take them away, or when we land them here, we are as abject slaves as France
and Poland can show in wooden shoes, and with uncombed hair The peasants of
France wear wooden shoes; and the vassals of Poland are remarkable for matted
hair, which never can be combed.
.

PERHAPS the nature of the necessities of dependant states, caused by the
policy of a governing one, for her own benefit, may be elucidated by a fact
mentioned in history. When the Carthaginians were possessed of the island of
Sardinia, they made a decree, that the Sardinians should not raise corn, nor
get it any other way than from the Carthaginians. Then, by imposing any duties
they would upon it, they drained from the miserable Sardinians any sums they
pleased; and whenever that oppressed people made the least movement to assert
their liberty, their tyrants starved them to death or submission. This may be
called the most perfect kind of political necessity.

FROM what has been said, I think this uncontrovertible conclusion may be
deduced, that when a ruling state obliges a dependant state to take certain
commodities from her alone, it is implied in the nature of that obligation; is
essentially requisite to give it the least degree of justice; and is
inseparably united with it, in order to preserve any share of freedom to the
dependant state; that those commodities should never be loaded with duties, for
the sole purpose of levying money on the dependant state.

UPON the whole, the single question is, whether the Parliament can legally
impose duties to be paid by the people of these colonies only, for the sole
purpose of raising a revenue, on commodities which she obliges us to take from
her alone, or, in other words, whether the Parliament can legally take money
out of our pockets, without our consent. If they can, our boasted liberty is
but Vox et praeterea nihil.
A sound and nothing else.


A FARMER.

LETTER III.
My dear COUNTRYMEN,
I REJOICE to find that my two former letters to you, have been generally
received with so much favor by such of you, whose sentiments I have had an
opportunity of knowing. Could you look into my heart, you would instantly
perceive a zealous attachment to your interests, and a lively resentment of
every insult and injury offered to you, to be the motives that have engaged me
to address you.

I AM no further concerned in any thing affecting America, than any one of you;
and when liberty leaves it, I can quit it much more conveniently than most of
you: But while Divine Providence that gave me existence in a land of freedom,
permits my head to think, my lips to speak, and my hand to move, I shall so
highly and gratefully value the blessing received, as to take care, that my
silence and inactivity shall not give my implied assent to any act, degrading
my brethren and myself from the birthright, wherewith Heaven itself "has made
us free GAL. V. I.
"

SORRY I am to learn, that there are some few persons, who shake their heads
with solemn motion, and pretend to wonder, what can be the meaning of these
letters. "Great Britain, " they say, "is too powerful to contend with; she is
determined to oppress us; it is in vain to speak of right on one side, when
there is power on the other; when we are strong enough to resist, we shall
attempt it; but now we are not strong enough, and therefore we had better be
quiet; it signifies nothing to convince us that our rights are invaded, when we
cannot defend them; and if we should get into riots and tumults about the late
act, it will only draw down heavier displeasure upon us."

WHAT can such men design? What do their grave observations amount to, but this
-- "that these colonies, totally regardless of their liberties, should commit
them, with humble resignation, to chance, time, and the tender mercies of
Ministers."

ARE these men ignorant, that usurpations, which might have been successfully
opposed at first, acquire strength by continuance, and thus become
irresistible? Do they condemn the conduct of these colonies, concerning the
Stamp Act? Or have they forgot its successful issue? Ought the colonies at that
time, instead of acting as they did, to have trusted for relief, to the
fortuitous events of futurity? If it is needless "to speak of rights" now, it
was as needless then. If the behavior of the colonies was prudent and glorious
then, and successful too; it will be equally prudent and glorious to act in the
same manner now, if our rights are equally invaded, and may be as successful.
Therefore it becomes necessary to enquire, whether our rights are invaded." To
talk of "defending" them, as if they could be no otherwise "defended" than by
arms, is as much out of the way, as if a man having a choice of several roads
to reach his journey's end, should prefer the worst, for no other reason, but
because it is the worst.

As to "riots and tumults, " the Gentlemen who are so apprehensive of them, are
much mistaken, if they think, that grievances cannot be redressed without such
assistance.

I WILL now tell the Gentlemen, what is "the meaning of these letters." The
meaning of them is, to convince the people of th^se colonies, that they are at
this moment exposed to the most imminent dangers; and to persuade them
immediately, vigorously, and unanimously, to exert themselves, in the most
firm, but most peaceable manner, for obtaining relief.

THE cause of liberty is a cause of too much dignity, to be fullied by
turbulence and tumult. It ought to be maintained in a manner suitable to her
nature. Those who engage in it, should breathe a sedate, yet servent spirit,
animating them to actions of prudence, justice, modesty, bravery, humanity and
magnanimity.

To such a wonderful degree were the ancient Spartans, as brave and free a
people as ever existed, inspired by this happy temperature of soul, that
rejecting even in their battles the use of trumpets, and other instruments for
exciting heat and rage, they marched up to scenes of havoc and horror Plutarch
in the life of Lyourgus. Archbishop P^tter's Archaeologia Graeca.
, with the sound of flutes, to the tunes of which their steps kept pace --
"exhibiting," as Plutarch says, "at once a terrible and delightful light, and
proceeding with a deliberate valor, full of hope and (...) assurance, as if
some Divinity had sensibly assisted them."

I HOPE, my dear countrymen, that you will, in every colony, be upon your guard
against those, who may at any time endeavor to stir you up, under pretenses of
patriotism, to any measures disrespectful to our sovereign and our Mother
country. Hot, rash, disorderly proceedings, injure the reputation of a people,
as to wisdom, valor, and virtue, without procuring them the least benefit. I
pray GOD, that he may be pleased to inspire you and your posterity, to the
latest ages, with a spirit of which I have an idea, that I find a difficulty to
express. To express it in the best manner I can, I mean a spirit, that shall so
guide you, that it will be impossible to determine whether an American's
character is most distinguishable, for his loyalty to his Sovereign, his duty
to his Mother country, his love of freedom, or his affection for his native
soil.

EVERY government at some time or other falls into wrong measures. This may
proceed from mistake or passion. But every such measure does not dissolve the
obligation between the governors and the governed. The mistake may be
corrected; the passion may subside. It is the duty of the governed to endeavor
to rectify the mistake, and to appease the passion. They have not at first any
other right, than to represent their grievances, and to pray for redress,
unless an emergence is so pressing, as not to allow time for receiving an
answer to their applications, which rarely happens. If their applications are
disregarded, then that kind of opposition becomes justifiable, which can be
made without breaking the laws, or disturbing the public peace. This consists
in the prevention of the oppressors reaping advantage from their oppressions,
and not in their punishment. For experience may teach them, what reason did
not; and harsh methods cannot be proper, till milder ones have failed.

IF at length it becomes undoubted, that an inveterate resolution is formed to
annihilate the liberties of the governed, the English history affords frequent
examples of resistance by force. What particular circumstances will in any
future case justify such resistance, can never be ascertained, till they
happen. Perhaps it may be allowable to say generally, that it never can be
justifiable, until the people are fully convinced, that any further submission
will be destructive to their happiness.

WHEN the appeal is made to the sword, highly probable is it, that the
punishment will exceed the offense; and the calamities attending on war
outweigh those preceding it. These considerations of justice and prudence,
will always have great influence with good and wise men.

To these reflections on this subject, it remains to be added, and ought for
ever to be remembered, that resistance, in the case of colonies against their
Mother country, is extremely different from the resistance of a people against
their Prince. A nation may change their King, or race of Kings, and, retaining
their ancient form of government, be gainers by changing. Thus Great Britain,
under the illustrious house of Brunswick, a house that seems to flourish for
the happiness of mankind, has found a felicity, unknown in the reigns of the
Stewarts. But if once we are separated from our Mother country, what new form
of government shall we adopt, or where shall we find another Britain, to supply
our loss? Torn from the body, to which we are united by religion, liberty,
laws, affections, relation, language and commerce, we must bleed at every vein.

IN truth -- the prosperity of these provinces is founded in their dependence
on Great Britain; and when she returns to her "old good humor, and her old
good nature, " as Lord Clarendon expresses it, I hope they will always think it
their duty and interest, as it most certainly will be, to promote her welfare
by all the means in their power.

WE cannot act with too much caution in our disputes. Anger produces anger; and
differences, that might be accommodated by kind and respectful behavior, may,
by imprudence, be enlarged to an incurable rage. In quarrels between countries,
as well as in those between individuals, when they have risen to a certain
height, the first cause of dissension is no longer remembered, the minds of the
parties being wholly engaged in recollecting and resenting the mutual
expressions of their dislike. When feuds have reached that fatal point, all
considerations of reason and equity vanish; and a blind fury governs, or rather
confounds all things. A people no longer regards their interest, but the
gratification of their wrath. The sway of the Cleons Cleon was a popular
fireband of Athens, and Clodius of Rome; each of whom plunged his country into
the deepest calamities.
and Clodius's, the designing and detestable flatterers of the prevailing
passion, becomes confirmed. Wise and good men in vain oppose the storm, and may
think themselves fortunate, if, in attempting to preserve their ungrateful
fellow citizens, they do not ruin themselves. Their prudence will be called
baseness; their moderation will be called guilt; and if their virtue does not
lead them to destruction, as that of many other great and excellent persons has
done, they may survive to receive from their expiring country the mournful
glory of her acknowledgment, that their counsels, if regarded, would have saved
her.

THE constitutional modes of obtaining relief, are those which I wish to see
pursued on the present occasion; that is, by petitions of our Assemblies, or
where they are not permitted to meet, of the people, to the powers that can
afford us relief.

WE have an excellent Prince, in whose good dispositions toward us we may
conside. We have a generous, sensible and humane nation, to whom we may apply.
They may be deceived, they may by artful men, be provoked to anger against us.
I cannot believe they will be cruel or unjust; or that their anger will be
implacable. Let us behave like dutiful children, who have received unmerited
blows from a beloved parent. Let us complain to our parent; but let our
complaints speak at the same time the language of affliction and veneration.

IF, however, it shall happen, by an unfortunate course of affairs, that our
applications to his Majesty and the Parliament for redress, prove ineffectual,
let us then take another step, by withholding from Great Britain all the
advantages she has been used to receive from us. Then let us try, if our
ingenuity, industry, and frugality, will not give weight to our remonstrances.
Let us all be united with one spirit, in one cause. Let us invent -- let us
work -- let us save -- let us, continually, keep up our claim, and incessantly
repeat our complaints -- But, above all, let us implore the protection of that
infinitely good and gracious Being, "by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree
justice PROVE. viii. 15.
."

Nil desperandum.
Nothing is to be despaired of.
A FARMER.

LETTER IV.
My dear COUNTRYMEN,
AN objection, I hear, has been made against my second letter, which I would
willingly clear up before I proceed. "There is, " say these objectors, "a
material difference between the Stamp Act and the late act for laying a duty on
paper, etc. that justifies the conduct of those who opposed the former, and yet
are willing to submit to the latter. The duties imposed by the Stamp Act were
internal taxes; but the present are external, and therefore the Parliament may
have a right to impose them."

To this I answer, with a total denial of the power of Parliament to lay upon
these colonies any "tax" whatever.

THIS point, being so important to this, and to succeeding generations, I wish
to be clearly understood.

To the word "tax, " I annex that meaning which the constitution and history of
England require to be annexed to it; that is -- that it is an imposition on the
subject, for the sole purpose of levying money.

IN the early ages of our monarchy, certain services were rendered to the Crown
for the general good. These were personal It is very worthy of remark, how
watchful our wise ancestors were, lest their services should be increased
beyond what the law allowed. No man was bound to go out of the realm to serve
the King. Therefore, even in the conquering reign of Henry the Fifth, when the
martial spirit of the nation was highly enflamed by the heroic courage of their
Prince, and by his great success, they still carefully guarded against the
establishment of illegal services. "When this point (says Lord Chief Justice
Coke) concerning maintenance of wars out of England, came in question, the
Commons did make their continual claim of their ancient freedom and birthright,
as in the first of Henry the Fifth, and in the seventh of Henry the Fifth, etc.
the Commons made a PROTEST, that they were not bound to the maintenance of war
in Scotland, Ireland, Calice, France, Normandy, or other foreign parts, and
caused their PROTESTS to be entered into the Parliament rolls, where they yet
remain; which, in effect, agrees with that which, upon like occasion, was made
in the Parliament of 25th Edward 1." 2d Inst. p. 528.
But, in process of time, such institutions being sound inconvenient, gifts and
grants of their own property were made by the people, under the several names
of aids, tallages, tasks, taxes and subsidies, etc. These were made, as may be
collected even from the names, for public service upon "need and necessity 4th
Inst. p. 28.
." All these sums were levied upon the people by virtue of their voluntary gift
Reges Angliae, nihil tale, nisi convocatis primis ordinibus, et assentiente
populo suscipiunt. Phil. Comines. 2d Inst.

These gifts entirely depending on the pleasure of the donors, were
proportioned to the abilities of the several ranks of people who gave, and were
regulated by their opinion of the public necessities. Thus Edward I, had in his
11th year a thirtieth from the Laity, a twentieth from the Clergy; in his 22d
year a tenth from the Laity, a sixth from London, and other corporate towns,
half of their benefices from the Clergy; in his 23d year an eleventh from the
Barons and others, a tenth from the Clergy, a seventh from the Burgesses, etc.
Hume's Hist* of England.

The same difference in the grants of the several ranks is observable in other
reigns.

In the famous statute de tallagio non concedendo, the King enumerates the
several classes, without whose consent, he and his heirs never should set or
levy any tax -- "nullum tallaguium, vel auxilium per nos, vel haeredes nostros
in regno nostro ponatur seu levetur, sine voluntate ^t assensu
archiepiscoporum, episcoporum, comitum, baronum, militum, burgensium, et
aliorum liberorum com* de regno nostro." 34th Edward I.

Lord Chief Justice Coke, in his comment on these words, says -- "for the
quieting of the Commons, and for a perpetual and constant law for ever after,
both in this and other like cases, this act was made." These words are plain,
without any scruple, absolute, without any saving." 2d Coke's Inst. p. 532,
533. Little did the venerable judge imagine, that "other like cases" would
happen, in which the spirit of this law would be despised by Englishmen, the
posterity of those who made it.


. Their design was to support the national honor and interest. Some of those
grants comprehended duties arising from trade; being imposts on merchandises.
These Lord Chief Justice Coke classes under "subsidies, " and "Parliamentary
aids." They are also called "customs." But whatever he name was, they were
always considered as gists of the people to the Crown, to be employed for
public uses.

COMMERCE was at a low ebb, and surprising instances might be produced how
little it was attended to for a succession of ages. The terms that have been
mentioned, and, among the rest, that of "tax, " had obtained a national,
Parliamentary meaning, drawn from the principles of the constitution, long
before any Englishman thought of imposition of duties, for the regulation of
trade.

WHENEVER we speak of "taxes" among Englishmen, let us therefore speak of them
with reference to the principles on which, and the intentions with which they
have been established. This will give certainty to our expression, and safety
to our conduct: But if, when we have in view the liberty of these colonies, we
proceed in any other course, we pursue a Juno The Goddess of Empire, in the
Heathen Mythology; according to an ancient fable, Ixion pursued her, but she
escaped in a cloud.
indeed, but shall only catch a cloud.

IN the national, Parliamentary sense insisted on, the word "tax In this sense
Montesquieu uses the word "tax," in his 13th book of Spirit of Laws.
" was certainly understood by the congress at New York, whose resolves may be
said to form the American" bill of rights."

The third, fourth, fifth, and sixth resolves are thus expressed.

III. "THAT it is inseparably essential to the freedom of a people, and the
undoubted right of Englishmen, that NO TAX The rough draught of the resolves of
the congress at New York are now in my hands, and from some notes on that
draught, and other particular reasons, I am satisfied, that the congress
understood the word "tax" in the sense here contended for.
be imposed on them, but with their own consent, given personally, or by their
representatives."

IV. "THAT the people of the colonies are not, and from their local
circumstances, cannot be represented in the House of Commons in Great Britain."

V. "THAT the only representatives of the people of the colonies, are the
persons chosen therein by themselves; and that NO TAXES ever have been, or can
be constitutionally imposed on them, but by their respective legislatures."

VI. "THAT all supplies to the Crown, being free gifts of the people, it is
unreasonable, and inconsistent with the principles and spirit of the British
constitution, for the people of Great Britain to grant to his Majesty the
property of the colonies."

HERE is no distinction made between internal and external taxes. It is evident
from the short reasoning thrown into these resolves, that every imposition "to
grant to his Majesty the property of the colonies," was thought a "tax;" and
that every such imposition, if laid any other way, than "with their consent,
given personally, or by their representatives, " was not only "unreasonable,
and inconsistent with the principles and spirit of the British constitution, "
but destructive "to the freedom of a people."

THIS language is clear and important. A "tax" means an imposition to raise
money. Such persons therefore as speak of internal and external "taxes, " I
pray may pardon me, if I object to that expression, as applied to the
privileges and interests of these colonies. There may be internal and external
impositions, founded on different principles, and having different tendencies;
every "tax" being an imposition, though every imposition is not a "tax." But
all taxes are founded on the same principle; and have the same tendency.

EXTERNAL impositions, for the regulation of our trade, do not "grant to his
Majesty the property of the colonies." They only prevent the colonies acquiring
property, in things not necessary, in a manner judged to be injurious to the
welfare of the whole empire. But the last statute respecting us, "grants to his
Majesty the property of the colonies," by laying duties on the manufactures of
Great Britain which they must take, and which she settled them, on purpose that
they should take.

WHAT "tax It seems to be evident, that Mr. Pit, in his defense of America,
during the debate concerning the repeal of the Stamp Act, by "internal taxes, "
meant any duties "for the purpose of raising a revenue;" and by "external
taxes, " meant duties imposed "for the regulation of trade." His expressions
are these -- "If the Gentleman does not understand the difference between
internal and external taxes, I cannot help it; but there is a plain distinction
between taxes levied for the purposes of raising a revenue, and duties imposed
for the regulation of trade, for the accommodation of the subject, although, in
the consequences, some revenue might incidentally arise from the latter."

These words were in Mr. Pitt's reply to Mr. Grenville, who said he could not
understand the difference between external and internal taxes.

In every other part of his speeches on that occasion, his words confirm this
construction of his expressions. The following extracts will show how positive
and general were his assertions of our right.

"It is my opinion that this kingdom has no right to lay a tax upon the
colonies." -- "The Americans are the sons, not the bastards of England.
Taxation is no part of the governing or legislative power." -- "The taxes are a
voluntary gift and grant of the Commons alone. In legislation the three estates
of the realm are alike concerned, but the concurrence of the Peers and the
Crown to a tax, is only necessary to close with the form of a law. The gift and
grant is of the Commons alone." -- "The distinction between legislation and
taxation is essentially necessary to liberty." -- "The Commons of America,
represented in their several Assemblies, have ever been in possession of the
exercise of this their constitutional right, of giving and granting their own
money. They would have been SLAVES, if they had not enjoyed it." "The idea of a
virtual representation of America in this House, is the most contemptible idea
that ever entered into the head of man. -- It does not deserve a serious
refutation."

He afterward shows the unreasonableness of Great Britain taxing America, thus
-- "When I had the honor of serving his Majesty, I availed myself of the means
of information, which I derived from my office, I speak therefore from
knowledge. My materials were good. I was at pains to collect, to digest, to
consider them; and I will be ^old to affirm, that the profit to Great Britain
from the trade of the colonies, through all its branches, is two millions a
year. This is the fund that carried you triumphantly through the last war. The
estates that were rented at two thousand pounds a year, threescore years ago,
are three thousand pounds at present. Those estates fold then from fifteen to
eighteen years purchase; the same may now be sold for thirty. You owe this to
America. This is the price that America pays you for her protection." -- "I
dare not say how much higher these profits may be augmented." -- "Upon the
whole, I will beg leave to tell the House what is really my opinion; it is,
that the Stamp Act be repealed absolutely, totally, and immediately. That the
reason for the repeal be assigned, because it was founded on an er^oneous
principle."


" can be more internal than this? Here is money drawn, without their consent,
from a society, who have constantly enjoyed a constitutional mode of raising
all money among themselves. The payment of this tax they have no possible
method of avoiding; as they cannot do without the commodities on which it is
laid, and they cannot manufacture these commodities themselves. Besides, if
this unhappy country should be so lucky as to clude this act, by getting
parchment enough, in the place of paper, or by reviving the ancient method of
writing on wax and bark, and by inventing something to serve instead of glass,
her ingenuity would stand her in little stead; for then the Parliament would
have nothing to do but to prohibit such manufactures, or to lay a tax on ha^s
and woollen cloths, which they have already prohibited the colonies from
supplying each other with; or on instruments and tools of steel and iron, which
they have prohibited the provincials from manufacturing at all "And that pig
and bar iron, made in his Majesty's colonies in America, may be further
manufactured in this kingdom, be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that from and after the twenty fourth day of June, 1750, no mill, or other
engine, for slitting or rolling of iron, or any plating forge, to work with a
tilt hammer, or any furnace for making steel, shall be erected: o^, after such
erection, continued in any of his Majesty's colonies in America." 23d George
II. Chap. 29, Sect 9.
: And then, what little gold and silver they have, must be torn from their
hands, or they will not be able, in a short time, to get an ax Though these
particular^ are mentioned as being absolutely necessary, yet perhaps they are
not more so than glass in our severe winters, to keep out the cold from our
houses; or than paper, without which such inexpressible confusions must ensue.
, for cutting their firewood, nor a plough, for raising their food* In what
respect, therefore, I beg leave to ask, is the late act preferable to the
Stamp Act, or more consistent with the liberties of the colonies? For my own
part, I regard them both with equal apprehension; and think they ought to be in
the same manner opposed.

(...) quidem senatus consultum, -- tanquam gladium in vagina repositum.
We have a statute, laid up for future use, like a sword in the scabbard.
A FARMER.

LETTER V.
My dear COUNTRYMEN,
PERHAPS the objection to the late act, imposing duties upon paper, etc. might
have been safely rested on the argument drawn from the universal conduct of
Parliaments and Ministers, from the first existence of these colonies, to the
administration of Mr. Grenville.

WHAT but the indisputable, the acknowledged exclusive right of the colonies to
tax themselves, could be the reason, that in this long period of more than one
hundred and fifty years, no statute was ever passed for the sole purpose of
raising a revenue on the colonies? And how clear, how cogent must that reason
be, to which every Parliament, and every Minister, for so long a time
submitted, without a single attempt to innovate?

ENGLAND, in part of that course of years, and Great Britain, in other parts,
was engaged in several fierce and expensive wars; troubled with some tumultuous
and bold Parliaments; governed by many daring and wicked Ministers; yet none of
them ever ventured to touch the Palladium of American liberty. Ambition,
avarice, faction, tyranny, all revered it. Whenever it was necessary to raise
money on the colonies, the requisitions of the Crown were made, and dutifully
complied with. The Parliament, from time to time, regulated their trade, and
that of the rest of the empire, to preserve their dependence, and the
connection of the whole in good order.

THE people of Great Britain, in support of their privileges, boast much of
their antiquity. It is true they are ancient; yet it may well be questioned, if
there is a single privilege of a British subject, supported by longer, more
solemn, or more uninterrupted testimony, than the exclusive right of taxation
in these colonies. The people of Great Britain consider that kingdom as the
sovereign of these colonies, and would now annex to that sovereignty a
prerogative never heard of before. How would they bear this, was the case their
own? What would they think of a new prerogative claimed by the Crown? We may
guess what their conduct would be, from the transports of passion into which
they fell about the late embargo, though laid to relieve the most emergent
necessities of state, admitting of no delay; and for which there were numerous
precedents. Let our liberties be treated with the same tenderness, and it is
all we desire.

EXPLICIT as the conduct of Parliaments, for so many ages, is, to prove that no
money can be levied on these colonies by Parliaments, for the purpose of
raising a revenue, yet it is not the only evidence in our favor.

EVERY one of the most material arguments against the legality of the
Stamp Act, operates with equal force against the act now objected to; but as
they are well known, it seems unnecessary to repeat them here.

THIS general one only shall be considered at present: That though these
colonies are dependent on Great Britain; and though she has a legal power to
make laws for preserving that dependence; yet it is not necessary for this
purpose, nor essential to the relation between a Mother country and her
colonies, as was eagerly contended by the advocates for the Stamp Act, that she
should raise money on them without their consent.

COLONIES were formerly planted by warlike nations, to keep their enemies in
awe; to relieve their country, overburthened with inhabitants; or to discharge
a number of discontented and troublesome citizens. But in more modern ages, the
spirit of violence being, in some measure, if the expression may be allowed,
sheathed in commerce, colonies have been settled by the nations of Europe for
the purposes of trade. These purposes were to be attained, by the colonies
raising for their Mother country those things which she did not produce
herself; and by supplying themselves from her with things they wanted. These
were the national objects in the commencement of our colonies, and have been
uniformly so in their promotion.

To answer these grand purposes, perfect liberty was known to be necessary; all
history proving, that trade and freedom are nearly related to each other. By a
due regard to this wise and just plan, the infant colonies, exposed in the
unknown climates and unexplored wildernesses of this new world, lived, grew,
and flourished.

THE Parent country, with undeviating prudence and virtue, attentive to the
first principles of colonization, drew to herself the benefits she might
reasonably expect, and preserved to her children the blessings, on which those
benefits were founded. She made laws, obliging her colonies to carry to her all
those products which she wanted for her own use; and all those raw materials
which she chose herself to work up. Besides this restriction, she forbad them
to procure manufactures from any other part of the globe, or even the products
of European countries, which alone could rival her, without being first brought
to her. In short, by a variety of laws, she regulated their trade in such a
manner as she thought most conducive to their mutual advantage, and her own
welfare. A power was reserved to the Crown of repealing any laws that should be
enacted: The executive authority of government was also lodged in the Crown,
and its representatives; and an appeal was secured to the Crown from all
judgments in the administration of justice.

FOR all these powers, established by the Mother country over the colonies; for
all these immense emoluments derived by her from them; for all their
difficulties and distresses in fixing themselves, what was the recompense made
them? A communication of her rights in general, and particularly of that great
one, the foundation of all the rest -- that their property, acquired with so
much pain and hazard, should be disposed of by none but themselves The power of
taxing themselves, was the privilege of which the English were, "with reason, "
particularly jealous. HUME 's Hist. of England.
-- or, to use the beautiful and emphatic language of the sacred scriptures,
"that they should sit every man under his vine, and under his fig tree, and
none should make them afraid. Mic. iv. 4.
"

CAN any man of candor and knowledge deny, that these institutions form an
affinity between Great Britain and her colonies, that sufficiently secures
their dependence upon her? Or that for her to levy taxes upon them, is to
reverse the nature of things? Or that she can pursue such a measure, without
reducing them to a state of vassalage?

IF any person cannot conceive the supremacy of Great Britain to exist, without
the power of laying taxes to levy money upon us, the history of the colonies,
and of Great Britain, since their settlement, will prove the contrary. He will
there find the amazing advantages arising to her from them -- the constant
exercise of her supremacy -- and their filial submission to it, without a
single rebellion, or even the thought of one, from their first emigration to
this moment -- And all these things have happened, without one instance of
Great-Britain's laying taxes to levy money upon them.

How many British authors It has been said in the House of Commons, when
complaints have been made of the decay of trade to any part of Europe," That
such things were not worth regard, as Great Britain was possessed of colonies
that could consume more of her manufactures than she was able to supply them
with.

"As the case now stands, we shall show that the plantations are a spring of
wealth to this nation, that they work for us, that their treasure centers all
here, and that the laws have tied them fast enough to us; so that it must be
through our own fault and mismanagement, if they become independent of England."

DAVENANT on the Plantation Trade.
"It is better that the islands should be supplied from the Northern colonies
than from England; for this reason, the provisions we might send to Barbados,
Jamaica, etc. would be unimproved product of the earth, as^grain of all kinds,
or such product where there is little got by the improvement, as ma^^, salt,
beef and pork; indeed the exportation of salt fish thither would be more
advantage^^s, but the goods which we send to the Northern colonies, are such,
whose improvement may be justly said, one with another, to be near four fifths
of the value of the whole commodity, as apparel, household furniture, and many
other things."

Idem.


"New England is the most prejudicial plantation to the kingdom of England; and
yet, to do right to that most industrious English colony, I must confess, that
though we lose by their unlimited trade with other foreign plantations, yet we
are very great gainers by their direct trade to and from Old England. Our
yearly exportations of English manufactures, malt and other goods, from hence
thither, amounting, in my opinion, to ten times the value of what is imported
from thence; which calculation I do not make at random, but upon mature
consideration, and* peradventure, upon as much experience in this very trade,
as any other person will pretend to; and therefore, whenever reformation of our
correspondency in trade with that people shall be thought on, it will, in my
poor judgment, require great tenderness, and very serious circumspection."

Sir JOSIAH CHILD 's Discourse on Trade.
"Our plantations spend mostly our English manufactures, and those of all sorts
almost imaginable, in egregious quantities, and employ near two thirds of all
our English shipping; so that we have more people in England, by reason of our
plantations in America."

Idem.


Sir JOSIAH CHILD says, in another part of his work, "That not more than fifty
families are maintained in England by the refining of sugar." From whence, and
from what Davenant says, it is plain, that the advantages here said to be
derived from the plantations by England, must be meant chi^^ly of the
continental colonies.

"I shall sum up my whole remarks on our American colonies, with this
observation, that as they are a certain annual revenue of several millions
sterling to their Mother country, they ought carefully to be protected, duly
encouraged, and every opportunity that presents, improved for their increment
and advantage, as every one they ^an possibly reap, must at last return to us
with interest."

BEAWES 's Lex Merc. Red.


"We may safely advance, that our trade and navigation are greatly increased by
our colonies, and that they really are a source of treasure and naval power to
this kingdom, since they work for us, and their treasure centers here. Before
their settlement, our manufactures were few, and those but indifferent; the
number of English merchants were very small, and the whole shipping of the
nation much inferior to what now belongs to the Northern colonies only. These
are certain facts. But since their establishment, our condition has altered for
the better, almost to a degree beyond credibility. Our manufactures are
prodigiously increased, chiefly by the demand for them in the plantations,
where they at least take off one half, and supply us with many valuable
commodities for exportation, which is as great an emolument to the Mother
kingdom, as to the plantations themselves."

-- POSTLETHWAYT 's Univ. Dict. of Trade and Commerce.

"Most of the nations of Europe have interfered with us, more or less, in
diverse of our staple manufactures, within half a century, not only in our
woollen, but in our lead and tin manufactures, as well as our fisheries."

-- POSTLETHWAYT, ibid.

"The inhabitants of our colonies, by carrying on a trade with their foreign
neighbors, do not only occasion a greater quantity of the goods and
merchandises of Europe being sent from hence to them, and a greater quantity of
the product of America to be sent from them hither, which would otherwise be
carried from, and brought to Europe by foreigners, but an increase of the
seamen and navigation in those parts, which is of great strength and security,
as well as of great advantage to our plantations in general. And though some of
our colonies are not only for preventing the importations of all goods of the
same species they produce, but suffer particular planters to keep great runs of
land in their possession uncultivated, with design to prevent new settlements,
whereby they imagine the prices of their commodities may be affected; yet if it
be considered, that the markets of Great Britain depend on the markets of ALL
Europe in general, and that the European markets in general depend on the
proportion between the annual consumption and the whole quantity of each
species annually produced by ALL nations; it must follow, that whether we or
foreigners are the producers, carriers, importers and exporters of American
produce, yet their respective prices in each colony (the difference of freight,
customs and importations considered) will always bear proportion to the general
consumption of the whole quantity of each sort, produced in all colonies, and
in all parts, allowing only for the usual contingencies that trade and
commerce, agriculture and manufactures, are liable to in all countries."

-- POSTLETHWAYT, ibid.

"It is certain, that from the very time Sir Walter Releigh, the father of our
English colonies, and his associates, first projected these establishments,
there have been persons who have found an interest, in misrepresenting, or
lessening the value of them -- The attempts were called chimerical and
dangerous. Afterward many malignant suggestions were made about sacrificing so
many Englishmen to the obstinate desire of settling colonies in countries which
then produced very little advantage. But as these difficulties were gradually
surmounted, those complaints vanished. No sooner were these lamentations over,
but others arose in their stead; when it could be no longer said, that the
colonies were useless, it was alleged that they were not useful enough to
their Mother Country; that while we were loaded with taxes, they were
absolutely free; that the planters lived like Princes, while the inhabitants of
England labored hard for a tolerable subsistence."

-- POSTLETHWAYT, i^id.

"Before the settlement of these colonies," says Postlethwayt, "our
manufactures were few, and those but indifferent. In those days we had not only
our naval stores, but our ships from our neighbors. Germany furnished us with
all things made of metal, even to nails. Wine, paper, linens, and a thousand
other things came from France. Portugal supplied us with sugar; all the
products of America were poured into us from Spain; and the Venetians and
Genoese retailed to us the commodities of the East Indies, at their own price.

"If it be asked, whether foreigners, for what goods they take of us, do not
pay on that consumption a great portion of our taxes? It is admitted they do."

-- POSTLETHWAYT 's Great-Britain's True System.

"If we are afraid that one day or other the colonies will revolt, and set up
for themselves, as some seem to apprehend, let us not drive them to a necessity
to feel themselves independent of us; as they will do, the moment they perceive
that "they can be supplied with all things from within themselves, " and do not
need our assistance. If we would keep them still dependent upon their Mother
country, and, in some respects, subservient to her views and welfare; let us
make it their interest always to be so."

-- TUCKER on Trade.

"Our colonies, while they have English blood in their veins, and have
relations in England, and while they can get by trading with us, the stronger
and greater they grow, the more this Crown and kingdom will get by them; and
nothing but such an arbitrary power as shall make them desperate, can bring
them to rebel."

-- DAVENANT on the Plantation Trade.

"The Northern colonies are not upon the same footing as those of the South;
and having a worse soil to improve, they must find the recompense some other
way, which only can be in property and dominion: Upon which score, any
innovations in the form of government there, should be cautiously examined, for
fear of entering upon measures, by which the industry of the inhabitants be
quite discouraged. It Is always unfortunate for a people, either by consent, or
upon compulsion, to depart from their primitive institutions, and those
fundamentals, by which they were first united together."

-- Idem.

"The most effectual way of uniting the colonies, is to make it their common
interest to oppose the designs and attempts of Great Britain.

"All wise states will well consider how to preserve the advantages arising
from colonies, and avoid the evils. And I conceive that there can be but two
ways in nature to hinder them from throwing off their dependence; one to keep
it out of their power, and the other, out of their will. The first must be by
force; and the latter, by using them well, and keeping them employed in such
productions, and making such manufactures, as will support themselves and
families comfortably, and procure them wealth too, and at least not prejudice
their Mother country.

"Force can never be used effectually to answer the end, without destroying the
colonies themselves. Liberty and encouragement are necessary to carry people
thither, (...) keep them together when they are there; and violence will hinder
both. Any body of troops, considerable enough to awe them, and keep them in
subjection, under the direction too of a needy Governor, often sent thither to
make his fortune, and at such a distance from any application for redress, will
soon put an end to all planting, and leave the country to the soldiers alone,
and if it did not, would eat up all the profit of the colony. For this reason,
arbitrary countries have not been equally successful in planting colonies with
free ones; and what they have done in that kind, has either been by force, at a
vast expense, or by departing from the nature of their government, and giving
such privileges to planters as were denied to their other subjects. And I dare
say, that a few prudent laws, and a little prudent conduct, would soon give us
far the greatest share of the riches of all America, perhaps drive many of
other nations out of it, or into our colonies for shelter.

"There are so many exigencies in all states, so many foreign wars, and
domestic disturbances, that these colonies can never want opportunities, if
they watch for them, to do what they shall find their interest to do: and
therefore we ought to take all the precautions in our power, that it shall
never be their interest to act against that of their native country; an evil
which can no otherwise be averted, than by keeping them fully employed in such
trades as will increase their own, as well as our wealth; for it is much to be
feared, if we do not find employment for them, they may find it for us; the
interest of the Mother country, is always to keep them dependent, and so
employed; and it requires all her address to do it; and it is certainly more
easily and effectually done by gentle and insensible methods, than by power
alone." -- CATO 's Letters.


have demonstrated, that the present wealth, power and glory of their country,
are founded upon these colonies? As constantly as streams tend to the ocean,
have they been pouring the fruits of all their labors into their mother's lap.
Good Heaven! and shall a total oblivion of former tendernesses and blessings,
be spread over the minds of a good and wise nation, by the fordid arts of
intriguing men, who, covering their selfish projects under pretenses of public
good, first enrage their countrymen into a frenzy of passion, and then advance
their own influence and interest, by gratifying the passion, which they
themselves have basely excited.

HITHERTO Great Britain has been contented with her prosperity. Moderation has
been the rule of her conduct. But now, a generous humane people, that so often
has protected the liberty of strangers, is enflamed into an attempt to tear a
privilege from her own children, which, if executed, must, in their opinion,
sink them into slaves: And for what? For a pernicious power, not necessary to
her, as her own experience may convince her; but horribly dreadful and
detestable to them.

IT seems extremely probable, that when cool, dispassionate posterity, shall
consider the affectionate intercourse, the reciprocal benefits, and the
unsuspecting confidence, that have subsisted between these colonies and their
Parent country, for such a length of time, they will execrate, with the
bitterest curses, the infamous memory of those men, whose pestilential ambition
unnecessarily, wantonly, cruelly, first opened the sources of civil discord
between them; first turned their love into jealousy; and first taught these
provinces, filled with grief and anxiety, to enquire -- Men's ubi materna est?
Where is maternal affection?


A FARMER.

LETTER VI.
My dear COUNTRYMEN,
IT may perhaps be objected against the arguments that have been offered to the
Public, concerning the legal power of the Parliament, "that it has always
exercised the power of imposing duties, for the purposes of raising a revenue
on the productions of these colonies carried to Great Britain, which may be
called a tax on them." To this objection I answer, that this is no violation of
the rights of the colonies, it being implied in the relation between and
Great Britain, that they should not carry such commodities to other nations, as
should enable them to interfere with the Mother country. The imposition of
duties on these commodities, when brought to her, is only a consequence of her
parental right; and if the point is thoroughly examined, the duties will be
found to be laid on the people of the Mother country. Whatever they are, they
must proportionably raise the price of the goods, and consequently must be paid
by the consumers. In this light they were considered by the Parliament in the
25th Charles II. Chap. 7, Sect. 2, which says, that the productions of the
plantations were carried from one to another free from all customs, "while the
subjects of this your kingdom of England have paid great customs and
impositions for what of them have been spent here, etc.

BESIDES, if Great Britain exports these commodities again, the duties will
injure her own trade, so that she cannot hurt us, without plainly and
immediately hurting herself; and this is our check against her acting
arbitrarily in this respect.

If any one should observe that no opposition has been made to the legality of
the 4th George III. Chap. 15, which is the first act of Parliament that ever
imposed duties on the importations into America, for the expressed purpose of
raising a revenue there; I answer -- First, That though the act expressly
mentions the raising a revenue in America, yet it seems that it had as much in
view the "improving and securing the trade between the same and Great Britain,"
which words are part of its title: And the preamble says, "Whereas it is
expedient that new provisions and regulations should be established for
improving the revenue of this kingdom, and for extending and securing the
navigation and commerce between Great Britain and your Majesty's dominions in
America, which by the peace have been so happily extended and enlarged, "etc.
Secondly, All the duties mentioned in that act are imposed solely on the
productions and manufactures of foreign countries, and not a single duty laid
on any production or manufacture of our Mother country. Thirdly, The authority
of the provincial Assemblies is not therein so plainly attacked as by the last
act, which makes provision for defraying the charges of the "administration of
justice," and the "support of civil government." Fourthly, That it being
doubtful, whether the intention of the 4th Geroge III. Chap. 15. was not as
much to regulate trade, as to raise a revenue, the minds of the people here
were wholly engrossed by the terror of the Stamp Act, then impending over them,
about the intention of which there could be no doubt.

These reasons so far distinguish the 4th George III. Chap. 15, from the last
act, that it is not to be wondered at, that the first should have been
submitted to, though the last should excite the most universal and spirited
opposition. For this will be found, on the strictest examination, to be, in the
principle on which it is founded, and in the consequences that must attend it,
if possible, more destructive than the Stamp Act. It is, to speak plainly, a
prodigy in our laws; not having one British feature.


IT may be perhaps further objected, "that it being granted that statutes made
for regulating trade, are binding upon us, it will be difficult for any
persons, but the makers of the laws, to determine, which of them are made for
the regulating of trade, and which for raising a revenue; and that from hence
may arise confusion."

To this I answer, that the objection is of no force in the present case, or
such as resemble it; because the act now in question, is formed expressly "for
the sole purpose of raising a revenue."

HOWEVER, supposing the design of Parliament had not been expressed, the
objection seems to me of no weight, with regard to the influence which those
who may make it might expect it ought to have on the conduct of these colonies.

IT is true, that impositions for raising a revenue, may be hereafter called
regulations of trade: But names will not change the nature of things. Indeed we
ought firmly to believe, what is an undoubted truth, confirmed by the unhappy
experience of many states heretofore free, that unless the most watchful
attention be exerted, a new servitude may be slipped upon us, under the
sanction of usual and respectable terms.

THUS the Caesar's ruined the Roman liberty, under the titles of tribunicial and
dictatorial authorities -- old and venerable dignities, known in the most
flourishing times of freedom. In imitation of the same policy, James II. when
he meant to establish popery talked of liberty of conscience, the most sacred
of all liberties; and had thereby almost deceived the Dissenters into
destruction.

ALL artful rulers, who strive to extend their power beyond its just limits,
endeavor to give to their attempts as much semblance of legality as possible.
Those who succeed them may venture to go a little further; for each new
encroachment will be strengthened by a former. "That which is now supported by
examples, growing old, will become an example itself, Tacitus.
" and thus support fresh usurpations.

A FREE people therefore can never be too quick in observing, nor too firm in
opposing the beginnings of alteration either in form or reality, respecting
institutions formed for their security. The first kind of alteration leads to
the last: Yet, on the other hand, nothing is more certain, than that the forms
of liberty may be retained, when the substance is gone. In government, as well
as in religion, "the letter kills, but the spirit gives life. 2 Cor. iii. 6.
"

I WILL beg leave to enforce this remark by a few instances. The Crown, by the
constitution, has the prerogative of creating Peers. The existence of that
order, in due number and dignity, is essential to the constitution; and if the
Crown did not exercise that prerogative, the peerage must have long since
decreased so much as to have lost its proper influence. Suppose a Prince, for
some unjust purposes, should from time to time, advance so many needy,
profligate wretches to that rank, that all the independence of the House of
Lords should be destroyed: there would then be a manifest violation of the
constitution, under the appearance of using legal prerogative.

THE House of Commons claims the privilege of forming all money bills, and will
not suffer either of the other branches of the legislature to add to, or alter
them; contending that their power simply extends to an acceptance or rejection
of them. This privilege appears to be just: But under pretense of this just
privilege, the House of Commons has claimed a license of tacking to money
bills, clauses relating to things of a totally different kind, and thus forcing
them in a manner on the King and Lords. This seems to be an abuse of that
privilege, and it may be vastly more abused. Suppose a future House, influenced
by some displaced, discontented demagogues, in a time of danger, should tack to
a money bill, something so injurious to the King and Peers, that they would not
assent to it, and yet the Commons should obstinately insist on it; the whole
kingdom would be exposed to ruin by them, under the appearance of maintaining a
valuable privilege.

IN these cases it might be difficult for a while to determine, whether the
King intended to exercise his prerogative in a constitutional manner or not; or
whether the Commons insisted on their demand sactiously, or for the public
good: But surely the conduct of the Crown, or of the House, would in time
sufficiently explain itself.

OUGHT not the people therefore to watch? to observe facts? to search into
causes? to investigate designs? And have they not a right of judging from the
evidence before them, on no slighter points than their liberty and happiness?
It would be less than trifling, wherever a British government is established,
to make use of any arguments to prove such a right. It is sufficient to remind
the reader of the day, on the anniversary of which the first of these letters
is dated.

I WILL now apply what has been said to the present question.

THE nature of any impositions laid by Parliament on these colonies, must
determine the design in laying them. It may not be easy in every instance to
discover that design. Wherever it is doubtful, I think submission cannot be
dangerous; nay, it must be right; for, in my opinion, there is no privilege
these colonies claim, which they ought in duty and prudence more earnestly to
maintain and defend, than the authority of the British Parliament to regulate
the trade of all her dominions. Without this authority, the benefits she enjoys
from our commerce, must be lost to her: The blessings we enjoy from our
dependence upon her, must be lost to us. Her strength must decay; her glory
vanish; and she cannot suffer without our partaking in her misfortune. Let us
therefore cherish her interests as our own, and give her every thing that it
becomes freemen to give or to receive.

THE nature of any impositions she may lay upon us may, in general, be known,
by considering how far they relate to the preserving, in due order, the
connection between the several parts of the British empire. One thing we may be
assured of, which is this -- Whenever she imposes duties on commodities, to be
paid only upon their exportation from Great Britain to these colonies, it is
not a regulation of trade, but a design to raise a revenue upon us. Other
instances may happen, which it may not be necessary at present to dwell on. I
hope these colonies will never, to their latest existence, want understanding
sufficient to discover the intentions of those who rule over them, nor the
resolution necessary for asserting their interests. They will always have the
same rights, that all free states have, of judging when their privileges are
invaded, and of using all prudent measures for preserving them.

Quocirca vivite fortes
Fortiaque adversis opponite pectora rebus.
Wherefore keep up your spirits, and gallently oppose this adverse course of
affairs.
A FARMER.

LETTER VII.
My dear Countrymen,
THIS letter is intended more particularly for such of you, whose employments
in life may have prevented your attending to the consideration of some points
that are of great and public importance: For many such persons there must be
even in these colonies, where the inhabitants in general are more intelligent
than any other people whatever, as has been remarked by strangers, and it seems
with reason.

SOME of you, perhaps, filled, as I know your breasts are, with loyalty to our
most excellent Prince, and with love to our dear Mother country, may feel
yourselves inclined, by the affections of your hearts, to approve every action
of those whom you so much venerate and esteem. A prejudice thus flowing from
goodness of disposition, is amiable indeed. I wish it could be indulged without
danger. Did I think this possible, the error should have been adopted, and not
opposed by me. But in truth, all men are subject to the frailties of nature;
and therefore whatever regard we entertain for the persons of those who govern
us, we should always remember that their conduct, as rulers, may be influenced
by human infirmities.

WHEN any laws, injurious to these colonies, are passed, we cannot suppose,
that any injury was intended us by his Majesty, or the Lords. For the assent of
the Crown and Peers to laws, seems, as far as I am able to judge, to have been
vested in them, more for their own security, than for any other purpose. On the
other hand, it is the particular business of the people, to enquire and
discover what regulations are useful for themselves, and to digest and present
them in the form of bills, to the other orders, to have them enacted into laws.
Where these laws are to bind themselves, it may be expected, that the House of
Commons will very carefully consider them: But when they are making laws that
are not designed to bind themselves, we cannot imagine that their deliberations
will be as Many remarkable instances might be produced of the extraordinary
inattention with which bills of great importance, concerning these colonies,
hafe passed in Parliament; which is owing, as it is supposed, to the bills
being brought in by the persons who have haste of business, to discover their
tendency.

The following instances show the truth of this remark. When Mr. Grenville, in
the violence of reformation, formed the 4th of George III. Chap. 15th, for
regulating the American trade, the word "Ireland" was dropped in the clause
relating to our iron and lumber, so that we could send these articles to no
part of Europe, but to Great Britain. This was so unreasonable a restriction,
and so contrary to the sentiments of the legislature* For many years before,
that it is surprising it should not have been taken notice of in the House.
However the bill passed into a law. But when the matter was explained, this
restriction was taken off by a subsequent act. I cannot positively say how long
after the taking off this restriction, as I have not the act, but I think, in
less than 18 months, another act of Parliament passed, in which the word
"Ireland" was left out, just as it had been before. The matter being a second
time explained, was a second time regulated.

Now if it be considered, that the omission mentioned struck off with one word
so very great a part of our trade, it must appear remarkable; and equally so is
the method, by which rice because an enumerated commodity.

"The enumeration was obtained (says Mr. [a] Gee) by one Cole, a Captain of a
ship, employed by a company then trading to Carolina; for several ships going
from England thither, and purchasing rice for Portugal, prevented the aforesaid
Captain of a loading. Upon his coming home, he possessed one Mr. Lowndes, a
member of Parliament (who was very frequently employed to prepare bills) with
an opinion, that carrying rice directly to Portugal, was a prejudice to the
trade of England, and privately got a clause into an act, to make it an
enumerated commodity; by which means he secured a freight to himself. But the
consequence proved a vast loss to the nation."

I find that this clause, "privately got into an act, "for the benefit of
Captain Cole, to the "vast loss of the nation, " is foisted into the 3d and 4th
Anne, Chap. 5th, entitled, "An act for granting to her Majesty a further
subsidy on wines and merchandises imported, with which it has no more
connection, than with 34th Edward I. the 34th and 35th of Henry VIII. and the
25th of Charles II. which provide, that no person shall be taxed but by himself
or his representative.

[a] Gee on Trade, page 32.


cautious and scrupulous, as in their own case.

I AM told, that there is a wonderful address frequently used in carrying
points in the House of Commons, by persons experienced in these affairs. --
That opportunities are watched -- and sometimes votes are passed, that if all
the members had been present, would have been rejected by a great majority.
Certain it is, that when a powerful and artful man has determined on any
measure against these colonies, he has always succeeded in his attempt. Perhaps
therefore it will be proper for us, whenever any oppressive act affecting us is
passed, to attribute it to the inattention of the members of the House of
Commons, and to the malevolence or ambition of some factious great man, rather
than to any other cause.

Now I do verily believe, that the late act of Parliament, imposing duties on
paper, etc. was formed by Mr. Grenville, and his party, because it is evidently
a part of that plan, by which he endeavored to render himself popular at home;
and I do also believe, that not one half of the members of the House of
Commons, even of those who heard it read, did perceive how destructive it was
to American freedom. For this reason, as it is usual in Great Britain, to
consider the King's speech as the speech of the Ministry, it may be right here
to consider this act as the act of a party, perhaps I should speak more
properly, if I was to use another term.

THERE are two ways of laying taxes. One is, by imposing a certain sum on
particular kinds of property, to be paid by the user or consumer, or by rating
the person at a certain sum. The other is, by imposing a certain sum on
particular kinds of property, to be paid by the s^ller.

WHEN a man pays the first sort of tax, he knows with certainty that he pays so
much money for a tax. The consideration for which he pays it, is remote, and it
may be, does not occur to him. He is sensible too, that he is commanded and
obliged to pay it as a tax; and therefore people are apt to be displeased with
this sort of tax.

THE other sort of tax is submitted to in a very different manner. The
purchaser of any article, very seldom reflects that the seller raises his
price, so as to indemnify himself for the tax he has paid. He knows that the
prices of things are continually fluctuating, and if he thinks about the tax,
he thinks at the same time, that he might have paid as much, if the article he
buys had not been taxed. He gets something visible and agreeable for his money;
and tax and price are so confounded together, that he cannot separate, or does
not choose to take the trouble of separating them.

THIS mode of taxation therefore is the mode suited to arbitrary and oppressive
governments. The love of liberty is so natural to the human heart, that
unfeeling tyrants think themselves obliged to accommodate their schemes as much
as they can to the appearance of justice and reason, and to deceive those whom
they resolve to destroy, or oppress, by presenting to them a miserable picture
of freedom, when the inestimable original is lost.

THIS policy did not escape the cruel and rapacious Nero. That monster,
apprehensive that his crimes might endanger his authority and life, thought
proper to do some popular acts, to secure the obedience of his subjects. Among
other things, says Tacitus," he remitted the twenty-fifth part of the price on
the sale of slaves, but rather in show than reality; for the seller being
ordered to pay it, it became part of the price to the buyer Tacitus's Ann. Book
13. 31.
.

THIS is the reflection of the judicious historian; but the deluded people gave
their infamous Emperor full credit for his false generosity. Other nations have
been treated in the same manner the Romans were. The honest, industrious
Germans, who are settled in different parts of this continent, can inform us,
that it was this sort of tax that drove them from their native land to our
woods, at that time the seats of perfect and undisturbed freedom.

THEIR Princes, enflamed by the lust of power, and the lust of avarice, two
furies that the more they are gorged, the more hungry they grow, transgressed
the bounds they ought, in regard to themselves, to have observed. To keep up
the deception in the minds of subjects, "there must be," says a very learned
author Montesquieu's Spirit of Laws, Book 13, Chap. 8.
, "some proportion between the impost and the value of the commodity; wherefore
there ought not to be an excessive duty upon merchandises of little value.
There are countries in which the duty exceeds seventeen or eighteen times the
value of the commodity. In this case the Prince removes the illusion. His
subjects plainly see they are dealt with in an unreasonable manner, which
renders them most exquisitely sensible of their slavish situation." From (...)
it appears, that subjects may be ground down into misery by this sort of
taxation, as well (...) former. They will be as much impoverished, if their
money is taken from (...) this way as in the other; and that it will be taken,
may be more evident, by attending to a few more considerations.

THE merchant or importer, who pays the duty at first, will not consent to be
so much money out of pocket. He therefore proportionably raises the price of
his goods. It may then be said to be a contest between him and the person
offering to buy, who shall lose the duty. This must be decided by the nature of
the commodities, and the purchaser's demand for them. If they are mere
luxuries, he is at liberty to do as he pleases, and if he buys, he does it
voluntarily: But if they are absolute necessaries, or conveniences, which use
and custom have made requisite for the comfort of life, and which he is not
permitted, by the power imposing the duty, to get elsewhere, there the seller
has a plain advantage, and the buyer must pay the duty. In fact, the seller is
nothing less than a collector of the tax for the power that imposed it. If
these duties then are extended to the necessaries and conveniences of life in
general, and enormously increased, the people must at length become indeed
"most exquisitely sensible of their slavish situation." Their happiness
therefore entirely depends on the moderation of those who have authority to
impose the duties.

I SHALL now apply these observations to the late act of Parliament. Certain
duties are thereby imposed on paper and glass imported into these colonies. By
the laws of Great Britain we are prohibited to get these articles from any
other part of the world. We cannot at present, nor for many years to come,
though we should apply ourselves to these manufactures with the (...) industry,
make enough ourselves for our own use. That paper and glass (...) not (...)
convenient, but absolutely necessary for us, I imagine very few will contend.
Some perhaps, who think mankind grew wicked and luxurious, as soon as they
found out another way of communicating their sentiments than by speech, and
another way of dwelling than in caves, may advance so whimsical an opinion. But
I presume no body will take the unnecessary trouble of refuting them.

FROM these remarks I think it evident, that we must use paper and glass; that
what we use, must be British; and that we must pay the duties imposed, unless
those who sell these articles, are so generous as to make us presents of the
duties they pay.

SOME persons may think this act of no consequence, because the duties are so
small. A fatal error. That is the very circumstance most alarming to me. For I
am convinced, that the authors of this law would never have obtained an act to
raise so trifling a sum as it must do, had they not intended by it to establish
a precedent for future use. To that is set for us, praising the neatness of the
workmanship. Suppose the duties imposed by the late act could be paid by these
distressed colonies with the utmost ease, and that the purposes to which they
are to be applied, were the most reasonable and equitable that can be
convinced, the contrary of which I hope to demonstrate before these letters are
concluded; yet even in such a supposed case, these colonies ought to regard the
act with abhorrence. For who are a free people? Not those, over whom government
is reasonably and equitably exercised, but those, who live under a government
so constitutionally checked and controuled, that proper provision is made
against its being otherwise exercised.

THE late act is founded on the destruction of this constitutional security. If
the Parliament have a right to lay a duty of Four Shillings and Eight-Pence on
a hundred weight of glass, or a ream of paper, they have a right to lay a duty
of any other sum on either. They may raise the duty, as the author before
quoted says has been done in some countries, till it "exceeds seventeen or
eighteen times the value of the commodity." In short, if they have a right to
levy a tax of one penny upon us, they have a right to levy a million upon us:
For where does their right stop? At any given number of Pence, Shillings or
Pounds? To attempt to limit their right, after granting it to exist at all, is
as contrary to reason -- as granting it to exist at all, is contrary to
justice. If they have any right to tax us -- then, whether our own money shall
continue in our own pockets or not, depends no longer on us, but on them.
"There is nothing which" we "can call our own; or, to use the words of Mr.
Lock -- what property have we in that, which another may, by right, take, when
he pleases, to himself?" Lord Camden's speech.


THESE duties, which will inevitably be levied upon us -- which are now levying
upon us -- are expressly laid for the sole purpose of taking money. This is the
true definition of "taxes." They are therefore taxes. This money is to be taken
from us. We are therefore taxed. Those who are taxed without their own consent,
expressed by themselves or their representatives, are slaves. We are taxed
without our own consent, expressed by ourselves or our representatives. We are
therefore -- SLAVES. "It is my opinion, that this kingdom has no right to lay a
tax upon the colonies." -- "The Americans are the sons, not the bastards of
England." -- "The distinction between legislation and taxation is essentially
necessary to liberty." -- "The Commons of America, represented in their several
Assemblies, have ever been in possession of this their constitutional right, of
giving and granting their own money. They would have been slaves, if they had
not enjoyed it." "The idea of a virtual representation of America in this
House, is the most contemptible idea, that ever entered into the head of man.
-- It does not deserve a serious refutation." -- Mr. Pitt's speech on the
Stamp Act.

That great and excellent man Lord Camden, maintains the same opinion. His
speech in the House of Peers, on the declaratory bill of the sovereignty of
Great Britain over the colonies, has lately appeared in our papers. The
following extracts so perfectly agree with, and confirm the sentiments avowed
in these letters, that it is hoped the inforting them in this note will be
excused.

"As the affair is of the utmost importance, and in its consequences may
involve the fate of kingdoms, I took the strictest review of my arguments; I
re-examined all my authorities; fully determined, if I found myself mistaken*
publicly to own my mistake, and give up my opinion: But my soarches have more
and more convinced me, that the British Parliament have "no right to tax" the
Americans."" -- "Nor is the doctrine new; it is as old as the constitution; it
grew up with it; indeed it is its support." -- "Taxation and representation are
inseparably united. GOD has joined them: No British Parliament can separate
them: To endeavor to do it is to stab our vitals."

"My position is this -- I repeat it -- I will maintain it to my last hour --
taxation and representation are inseparable -- this position is founded on the
laws of nature; it is more, it is itself an eternal law of nature; for whatever
is a man's own, is absolutely his own; no man has a right to take it from him
without his consent, either expressed by himself or representative; whoever
attempts to do it, attempts an injury; whoever does it, commits a robbery; he
throws down the distinction between liberty and slavery." -- "There is not a
blade of grass, in the most obscure corner of the kingdom, which is not, which
was not ever represented, since the constitution began: There is not a blade of
grass, which, when taxed, was not taxed by the consent of the proprietor." "The
forefathers of the Americans did not leave their native country, and subject
themselves to every danger and distress, to be reduced to a state of slavery.
They did not give up their rights: They looked for protection, and not for
chains, from their Mother country. By her they expected to be defended in the
possession of their property, and not to be deprived of it: For should the
present power continue, there is nothing which they can call their own; or, to
use the words of Mr. Lock, "what property have they in that, which another
may, by right, take, when he pleases, to himself?"

It is impossible to read this speech, and Mr. Pitt's, and not be charmed with
the generous zeal for the rights of mankind that glows in every sentence. These
great and good men, animated by the subject they speak upon, seem to rise above
all the former glorious exertions of their abilities. A foreigner might be
tempted to think they are Americans, asserting, with all the ardour of
pratriotism, and all the anxiety of apprehension, the cause of their native
land -- and not Britons, striving to stop their mistaken countrymen from
oppressing others. Their reasoning is not only just -- it is, as Mr. Hume says
of the eloquence of Demosthenes," vehement." It is disdain, anger, boldness,
freedom, involved in a continual stream of argument.




Miserabile vulgus.
A miserable tribe.
A FARMER.

LETTER VIII.
My dear COUNTRYMEN,
IN my opinion, a dangerous example is set in the last act relating to these
colonies. The power of Parliament to levy money upon us for raising a revenue,
is therein avowed and exerted. Regarding the act upon this single principle. I
must again repeat, and I think it my duty to repeat, that to me it appears to
be unconstitutional.

No man, who considers the conduct of the Parliament since the repeal of the
Stamp Act, and the disposition of many people at home, can doubt, that the
chief object of attention there, is to use Mr. Grenville's expression,
"providing that the dependence and obedience of the colonies be asserted and
maintained."

UNDER the influence of this notion, instantly on repealing the Stamp Act, an
act passed declaring the power of Parliament to bind these colonies in all
cases whatever. This however was only planting a barren tree, that cast a shade
indeed over the colonies, but yielded no fruit. It being determined to enforce
the authority on which the Stamp Act was founded, the Parliament having never
renounced the right, as Mr. Pit advised them to do; and it being thought
proper to disguise that authority in such a manner, as not again to alarm the
colonies; some little time was required to find a method, by which both these
points should be united. At last the ingenuity of Mr. Grenville and his party
accomplished the matter, as it was thought, in "an act for granting certain
duties in the British colonies and plantations in America, for allowing
drawbacks, "etc. which is the title of the act laying duties on paper, etc.

THE Parliament having several times before imposed duties to be paid in
America, it was expected, no doubt, that the repetition of such a measure would
be passed over, as an usual thing. But to have done this, without expressly
"asserting and maintaining" the power of Parliament to take our money without
our consent, and to apply it as they please, would not have been, in Mr.
Grenville's opinion, sufficiently declarative of its supremacy, nor
sufficiently depressive of American freedom.

THEREFORE it is, that in this memorable act we find it expressly" provided,"
that money shall be levied upon us without our consent, for purposes, that
render it, if possible, more dreadful than the Stamp Act.

THAT act, alarming as it was, declared, the money thereby to be raised, should
be applied "toward defraying the expenses of defending, protecting and
securing the British colonies and plantations in America:" And it is evident
from the whole act, that by the word "British," were intended colonies and
plantations settled by British people, and not generally, those subject to the
British crown. That act therefore seemed to have something gentle and kind in
its intention, and to aim only at our own welfare: But the act now objected to,
imposes duties upon the British colonies, "to defray the expenses of defending,
protecting and securing his Majesty's dominions in America."

WHAT a change of words! What an incomputable addition to the expenses intended
by the Stamp Act! "His Majesty's dominions" comprehend not only the British
colonies, but also the conquered provinces of Canada and Florida, and the
British garrisons of Nova Scotia; for these do not deserve the name of colonies.

WHAT justice is there in making US pay for "defending, protecting and
securing" these places? What benefit can WE, or have WE ever derived from them?
None of them was conquered for US; nor will "be defended, protected or secured"
for US.

IN fact, however advantageous the subduing or keeping any of these countries
may be to Great Britain, the acquisition is greatly injurious to these
colonies. Our chief property consists in lands. These would have been of much
greater value, if such prodigious additions had not been made to the British
territories on this continent. The natural increase of our own people, if
confined within the colonies, would have raised the value still higher every
fifteen or twenty years: Besides, we should have lived more compactly together,
and have been therefore more able to resist any enemy. But now the inhabitants
will be thinly scattered over an immense region, as those who want settlements,
will choose to make new ones, rather than pay great prices for old ones.

THESE (...) the consequences to the colonies, of the hearty assistance they
gave to Great Britain in the late war -- a war undertaken solely for her own
benefit. The objects of it were, the securing to herself the rich tracts of
land on the back of these colonies, with the Indian trade; and Nova Scotia,
with the fishery. These, and much more, has that kingdom gained; but the
inferior animals, that hunted with the lion, have been amply rewarded for all
the sweat and blood their loyalty cost them, by the honor of having sweated
and bled in such company.

I WILL not go so far as to say, that Canada and Nova Scotia are curbs on
New England; the chain of forts through the back woods on the Middle Provinces;
and Florida on the rest: But I will venture to say, that if the products of
Canada, Nova Scotia and Florida deserve any consideration, the two first of
them are only rivals of our northern colonies, and the other of our southern.

IT has been said, that without the conquest of these countries, the colonies
could not have been "protected, defended and secured." If that is true, it may
with as much propriety be said, that Great Britain could not have been
"defended, protected and secured," without that conquest: For the colonies are
parts of her empire, which it as much concerns her as them to keep out of the
hands of any other power.

BUT these colonies, when they were much weaker, defended themselves, before
this conquest was made, and could again do it, against any that might properly
be called their ememies. If France and Spain indeed should attack them, as
members of the British empire, perhaps they might be distressed; but it would
be in a British quarrel.

THE largest account I have seen of the number of people in Canada, does not
make them exceed 90, 000. Florida can hardly be said to have any inhabitants.
It is computed that there are in our colonies 3, 000, 000. Our force therefore
must increase with a disproportion to the growth of their strength, that would
render us very safe.

THIS being the state of the case, I cannot think it just that these colonies,
laboring under so many misfortunes, should be loaded with taxes, to maintain
countries, not only not useful, but hurtful to them. The support of Canada and
Florida cost yearly* it is said, half a million sterling. From hence we may
make some guess of the load that is to be laid upon US; for WE are not only to
"defend, protect and secure" them, but also to make "an adequate provision for
defraying the charge of the administration of justice, and the support of civil
government, in such provinces where it shall be found necessary."

NOT one of the provinces of Canada, Nova Scotia, or Florida, has ever defrayed
these expenses within itself: And if the duties imposed by the last statute are
collected, all of them together, according to the best information I can get,
will not pay one quarter as much as Pennsylvania alone. So that the British
colonies are to be drained of the rewards of their labor, to cherish the
scorching sands of Florida, and the icy rocks of Canada and Nova Scotia, which
never will return to us one farthing that we send to them.

GREAT BRITAIN -- I mean, the Ministry in Great Britain, has cantoned Canada
and Florida out into five or six governments, and may form as many more. There
now are fourteen or fifteen regiments on this continent; and there soon may be
as many more. To make "an adequate provision" for all these expenses, is, no
doubt, to be the inheritance of the colonies.

CAN any man believe that the duties upon paper, etc. are the last that will be
laid for these purposes? It is in vain to hope, that because it is imprudent to
lay duties on the exportation of manufactures from a Mother country to
colonies, as it may promote manufactures among them, that this consideration
will prevent such a measure.

AMBITIOUS artful men have made it popular, and whatever injustice or
destruction will attend it in the opinion of the colonists, at home it will be
thought just and salutary. "So credulous as well as obstinate, are the people
in believing every thing, which flatters their prevailing passion.


THE people of Great Britain will be told, and have been told, that they are
sinking under an immense debt -- that great part of this has been contracted in
defending the colonies -- that these are so ungrateful and undutiful, that they
will not contribute one mite to its payment -- nor even to the support of the
army now kept up for their "defense and security" -- that they are rolling in
wealth, and are of so bold and republican a spirit, that they are aiming at
independence -- that the only way to retain them in "obedience," is to keep a
strict watch over them, and to draw off part of their riches in taxes -- and
that every burden laid upon them, is taking off so much from Great Britain. --
These assertions will be generally believed, and the people will be persuaded
that they cannot be too angry with their colonies, as that anger will be
profitable to themselves.

IN truth, Great Britain alone receives any benefit from Canada, Nova Scotia,
and Florida; and therefore she alone ought to maintain them. The old maxim of
the law is drawn from ^eason and justice, and never could be more properly
applied, than in this case.

Qui sentit commodum, sentire debet et onus.
They who feel the benefit, ought to feel the burden.
LETTER IX.
My dear Countrymen,
I HAVE made some observations on the purposes for which money is to be levied
upon us by the late act of Parliament. I shall now offer to your consideration
some further reflections on that subject: And unless I am greatly mistaken, if
these purposes are accomplished according to the expressed intention of the
act, they will be found effectually to supersede that authority in our
respective Assemblies, which is essential to liberty. The question is not
"whether some branches shall be lopped off -- The axe is laid to the root of
the tree; and the whole body must infallibly perish, if we remain idle
spectators of the work.

No free people ever existed, or can ever exist, without keeping, to use a
common, but strong expression, "the purse strings," in their own hands. Where
this is the case, they have a constitutional check upon the Administration,
which may thereby be brought into order without violence: But where such a
power is not lodged in the people, oppression proceeds uncontrouled in its
career, till the governed, transported into rage, seek redress in the midst of
blood and confusion.

THE elegant and ingenious Mr. Hume, speaking of the Anglo Norman government,
says -- "Princes and Ministers were too ignorant, to be themselves sensible of
the advantage attending an equitable administration, and there was no
established Council or Assembly, which could protect the people, and by
withdrawing supplies, regularly and peaceably admonish the King of his duty,
and ensure the execution of the laws."

THUS this great man, whose political reflections are so much admired, makes
this power one of the foundations of liberty.

THE English history abounds with instances, proving that this is the proper
and successful way to obtain redress of grievances. How often have Kings and
Ministers endeavored to throw off this legal curb upon them, by attempting to
raise money by a variety of inventions, under pretense of law, without having
recourse to Parliament? And how often have they been brought to reason, and
peaceably obliged to do justice, by the exertion of this constitutional
authority of the people, vested in their representatives?

THE inhabitants of these colonies have, on numberless occasions, reaped the
benefit of this authority lodged in their Assemblies.

IT has been for a long time, and now is, a constant instruction to all
Governors, to obtain a PERMANENT support for the offices of government. But as
the author of The Administration of the Colonies says, "this order of the Crown
is generally, if not universally, rejected by the legislatures of the colonies."

THEY perfectly know how much their grievances would be regarded, if they had
no other method of engaging attention, than by complaining. Those who rule, are
extremely apt to think well of the constructions made by themselves in support
of their own power. These are frequently erroneous, and pernicious to those
they govern. Dry remonstrances, to show that such constructions are wrong and
oppressive, carry very little weight with them, in the opinion of persons who
gratify their own inclinations in making these constructions. They CANNOT
understand the reasoning that opposes their power and desires. But let it be
made their interest to understand such reasoning -- and a wonderful light is
instantly thrown upon the matter; and then, rejected remonstrances become as
clear as "proofs of holy writ. Shakespeare.
"

THE three most important articles that our Assemblies, or any legislatures can
provide for, are, First -- the defense of the society: Secondly -- the
administration of justice: And thirdly -- the support of civil government.

NOTHING can properly regulate the expense of making provision for these
occasions, but the necessities of the society; its abilities; the convenience
of the modes of levying money in it; the manner in which the laws have been
executed; and the conduct of the officers of government: All which are
circumstance, that cannot possibly be properly known, but by the society
itself; or if they should be known, will not probably be properly considered
but by that society.

IF money be raised upon us by others, without our consent, for our "defense,"
those who are the judges in levying it, must also be the judges in applying it.
Of consequence the money said to be taken from us for our defense, may be
employed to our injury. We may be chained in by a line of fortifications --
obliged to pay for the building and maintaining them -- and be told, that they
are for our defense. With what face can we dispute the fact, after having
granted that those who apply the money, had a right to levy it? For surely, it
is much easier for their wisdom to understand how to apply it in the best
manner, than how to levy it in the best manner. Besides, the right of levying
is of infinitely more consequence, than that of applying. The people of
England, who would burst out into fury, if the Crown should attempt to levy
money by its own authority, have always assigned to the Crown the application
of money.

As to the "administration of justice" -- the judges ought, in a well regulated
state, to be equally independent of the executive and legislative powers. Thus
in England judges hold their commissions from the Crown "during good
behavior," and have salaries, suitable to their dignity, settled on them by
Parliament. The purity of the courts of law since this establishment, is a
proof of the wisdom with which it was made.

BUT in these colonies, how fruitless has been every attempt to have the judges
appointed "during good behavior?" Yet whoever considers the matter will soon
perceive, that such commissions are beyond all comparison more necessary in
these colonies, than they were in England.

THE chief danger to the subject there, arose from the arbitrary designs of the
Crown; but here, the time may come, when we may have to contend with the
designs of the Crown, and of a mighty kingdom. What then must be chance, when
the laws of life and death are to be spoken by judges totally dependent on that
Crown, and that kingdom -- sent over perhaps from thence -- filled with British
prejudices -- and backed by a STANDING army -- supported out of OUR OWN
pockets, to "assert and maintain" OUR OWN "dependence and obedience."

BUT supposing that through the extreme lenity that will prevail in the
government through all future ages, these colonies will never behold any thing
like the campaign of Chief Justice Jeffreys, yet what innumerable acts of
injustice may be committed, and how fatally may the principles of liberty be
sapped, by a succession of judges utterly independent of the people? Before
such judges, the supple wretches, who cheerfully join in avowing sentiments
inconsistent with freedom, will always meet with smiles; while the honest and
brave men, who disdain to sacrifice their native land to their own advantage,
but on every occasion boldly vindicate her cause, will constantly be regarded
with frowns.

THERE are two other considerations relating to this head, that deserve the
most serious attention.

BY the late act, the officers of the customs are "empowered to enter into any
HOUSE, warehouse, shop, cellar, or other place, in the British colonies or
plantations in America, to search for or seize prohibited or unaccustomed
goods, "etc. on "writs granted by the superior or supreme court of justice,
having jurisdiction within such colony or plantation respectively."

IF we only reflect, that the judges of these courts are to be during pleasure
-- that they are to have "adequate provision" made for them, which is to
continue during their complaisant behavior -- that they may be strangers to
these colonies -- what an engine of oppression may this authority be in such
hands?

I AM well aware, that writs of this kind may be granted at home, under the
seal of the Court of Exchequer: But I know also, that the greatest asserters of
the rights of Englishmen have always strenuously contended, that such a power
was dangerous to freedom, and expressly contrary to the common law, which ever
regarded a man's house as his castle, or a place of perfect security.

IF such power was in the least degree dangerous there, it must be utterly
destructive to liberty here. For the people there have two securities against
the undue exercise of this power by the Crown, which are wanting with us, if
the late act takes place. In the first place, if any injustice is done there,
the person injured may bring his action against the offender, and have it tried
before independent judges, who are The writs for searching houses in England,
are to be granted "under the seal of the Court of Exchequer," according to the
statute -- and that seal is kept by the Chancellor of the Exchequer. 4 th Inst.
page 104.
no parties in committing the injury. Here he must have it tried before
dependent judges, being the men who granted the writ.

To say, that the cause is to be tried by a jury, can never reconcile men who
have any idea of freedom, to such a power. For we know that sheriffs in almost
every colony on this continent, are totally dependent on the Crown; and packing
of juries has been frequently practiced even in the capital of the British
empire. Even if juries are well inclined, we have too many instances of the
influence of over-bearing unjust judges upon them. The brave and wise men who
accomplished the revolution, thought the independency of judges essential to
freedom.

THE other security which the people have at home, but which we shall want
here, is this.

IF this power is abused there, the Parliament, the grand resource of the
oppressed people, is ready to afford relief. Redress of grievances must precede
grants of money. But what regard can we expect to have paid to our Assemblies,
when they will not hold even the puny privilege of French Parliaments -- that
of registering, before they are put in execution, the edicts that take away our
money.

THE second consideration above hinted at, is this. There is a confusion in our
laws, that is quite unknown in Great Britain. As this cannot be described in a
more (...) or exact manner, than has been done by the ingenious author of the
history of New York, I beg leave to use his words. "The state of our laws opens
a door to much controversy. The uncertainty, with respect to them, renders
property precarious, and greatly exposes us to the arbitrary decision of bad
judges. The common law of England is generally received, together with such
statutes as were enacted before we had a legislature of our own; but our courts
exercise a sovereign authority, in determining what parts of the common and
statute law ought to be extended: For it must be admitted, that the difference
of circumstances necessarily requires us, in some cases, to REJECT the
determination of both. In many instances, they have also extended even acts of
Parliament, passed since we had a distinct legislature, which is greatly adding
to our confusion. The practice of our courts is no less uncertain than the law.
Some of the English rules are adopted, others rejected. Two things therefore
seem to be absolutely necessary for the public security. First, the passing an
act for settling the extent of the English laws. Secondly, that the courts
ordain a general set of rules for the regulation of the practice."

How easy it will be, under this "state of our laws," for an artful judge, to
act in the most arbitrary manner, and yet cover his conduct under specious
pretenses; and how difficult it will be for the injured people to obtain
relief, may be readily perceived. We may take a voyage of 3000 miles to
complain; and after the trouble and hazard we have undergone, we may be told,
that the collection of the revenue, and maintenance of the prerogative, must
not be discouraged -- and if the misbehaviour is so gross as to admit of no
justification, it may be said, that it was an error in judgment only, arising
from the confusion of our laws, and the zeal of the King's servants to do their
duty.

IF the commissions of judges are during the pleasure of the Crown, yet if
their salaries are during the pleasure of the people, there will be some check
upon their conduct. Few men will consent to draw on themselves the hatred and
contempt of those among whom they live, for the empty honor of being judges.
It is the forbid love of gain, that tempts men to turn their backs on virtue,
and pay their homage where they ought not.

As to the third particular, "the support of civil government," -- few words
will be sufficient. Every man of the least understanding must know, that the
executive power may be exercised in a manner so disagreeable and harrassing to
the people, that it is absolutely requisite, that they should be enabled by the
gentlest method which human policy has yet been ingenious enough to invent,
that is, by shutting their hands, to "ADMONISH" (as Mr. Hume says) certain
persons "of their duty."

WHAT shall we now think when, upon looking into the late act, we find the
Assemblies of these provinces thereby stripped of their authority on these
several heads? The declared intention of the act is, "that a revenue should be
raised in his Majesty's DOMINIONS in America, for making a more certain and
adequate provision for defraying the charge of the administration of justice,
and the support of civil government in such provinces where it shall be found
necessary, and toward further defraying the expenses of defending, protecting
and securing the SAID DOMINIONS."

LET the reader pause here one moment -- and reflect -- whether the colony in
which he lives, has not made such "certain and adequate provision" for these
purposes, as is by the colony judged suitable to its abilties, and all other
circumstances. Then let him reflect -- whether if this act takes place, money
is not to be raised on that colony without its consent, to make "provision" for
these purposes, which it does not judge to be suitable to its abilities, and
all other circumstances. Lastly, let him reflect -- whether be taken from them
under the notion of right, when they have refused to give it.

FOR my part, I think I have good reason for vindicating the honor of the
Assemblies on this continent, by publicly asserting, that THEY have made as
"certain and adequate provision" for the purposes abovementioned, as they ought
to have made, and that it should not be presumed, that they will not do it
hereafter. Why then should these most important trusts be wrested out of their
hands? Why should they not now be permitted to enjoy that authority, which they
have exercised from the first settlement of these colonies? Why should they be
scandalized by this innovation, when their respective provinces are now, and
will be, for several years, laboring under loads of debt, imposed on them for
the very purpose now spoken of? Why should all the inhabitants of these
colonies be, with the utmost indignity, treated as a herd of despicable stupid
wretches, so utterly void of common sense, that they will not even make
"adequate provision" for the "administration of justice, and the support of
civil government" among them, or for their own "defense" -- though without such
"provision" every people must inevitably be overwhelmed with anarchy and
destruction? Is it possible to form an idea of a slavery more complete, more
miserable, more disgraceful than that of a people, where justice is
administered, government exercised, and a standing army maintained, at the
expense of the people, and yet without the least dependence upon them? If we
can find to relief from this infamous situation, it will be fortunate for us,
if Mr. Grenville, setting his fertile fancy again at work, can, as by one
exertion of it he has stripped us of our property and liberty, by another deprive
us of so much of our understanding, that, unconscious of what we have been or
are, and ungoaded by tormenting reflections, we may bow down our necks, with
all the stupid serenity of servitude, to any drudgery, which our lords and
masters shall please to command.

WHEN the charges of the "administration of justice," the "support of civil
government," and the expenses of "defending, protecting and securing" us, are
provided for, I should be glad to know, upon what occasions the Crown will ever
call our Assemblies together. Some few of them may meet of their own accord, by
virtue of their charters. But what will they have to do, when they are met? To
what shadows will they be reduced? The men, whose deliberations heretofore had
an influence on every matter relating to the liberty and happiness of
themselves and their constituents, and whose authority in domestic affairs at
least, might well be compared to that of Roman senators, will now find their
deliberations of no more consequence, than those of constables They may perhaps
be allowed to make laws for the yoking of hogs, or pounding of stray cattle.
Their influence will hardly be permitted to extend so high, as the keeping
roads in repair, as that business may more properly be executed by those who
receive the public cash.

ONE most memorable example in history is so applicable to the point now
insisted on, that it will form a just conclusion of the observations that have
been made.

SPAIN was once free. Their Cortes resembled our Parliaments. No money could be
raised on the subject, without their consent. One of their Kings having
received a grant from them to maintain a war against the Moors, desired, that
if the sum which they had given, should not be sufficient, he might be allowed,
for that emergency only, to raise more money without assembling the Cortes. The
request was violently opposed by the best and wisest men in the Assembly. It
was, however, complied with by the votes of a majority; and this single
concession was a PRECEDENT for other concessions of the like kind, until at
last the Crown obtained a general power of raising money, in cases of
necessity. From that period the Cortes ceased to be useful, -- the people
ceased to be free.

Venienti occurrite morbo.
Oppose a disease at its beginning.
A FARMER.

LETTER X.
My dear COUNTRYMEN,
THE consequences, mentioned in the last letter, will not be the utmost limits
of our misery and infamy, if the late act is acknowledged to be binding upon
us. We feel too sensibly, that any Ministerial measures "The Gentleman must not
wonder he was not contradicted, when, as Minister, he asserted the right of
Parliament to tax America. I know not how it is, but there is a modesty in this
House, which does not choose to contradict a Minister. I wish Gentlemen would
get the better of this modesty. If they do not, perhaps the collective body may
begin to abate of its respect for the representative." -- Mr. Pitt's speech.
relating to these colonies, are soon carried successfully through the
Parliament. Certain prejudices operate there so strongly against us, that it
may be justly questioned, whether all the provinces united, will ever be able
effectually, to call to an account before the Parliament, any Minister who
shall abuse the power by the late act given to the Crown in America. He may
divide the spoils torn from us in what manner he pleases, and we shall have no
way of making him responsible. If he should order, that every Governor shall
have a yearly salary of 5000l. sterling; every Chief justice of 3000l. every
inferior officer in proportion; and should then reward the most pro^^^gate,
ignorant, or needy dependents on himself or his friends, with places of the
greatest trust, because they were of the greatest profit, this would be called
an arrangement in consequence of the "adequate provision for defraying the
charge of the administration of justice, and the support of the civil
government:" And if the taxes should prove at any time insufficient to answer
all the expenses of the numberless offices, which Ministers may please to
create, surely the members of the House of Commons will be so "modest, " as not
to "contradict a Minister, " who shall tell them, it is become necessary to lay
a new tax upon the colonies, for the laudable purposes of defraying the charges
of the "administration of justice, and support of civil government" among them.
Thus, in fact, we shall be taxed "Within this act (statute de tallagio non
concedendo) are all new offices erected with new fees, or old offices with new
fees, for that is a rallage put upon the subject, which cannot be done without
common assent by act of Parliament. And this does notably appear by a petition
in Parliament in anno 13 Henry IV. where the Commons complain, that an office
was erected for measurage of cloths and canvas, with a new fee for the same, by
color of the King's letters patent, and pray that these letters patent may be
revoked, for that the King could erect no offices with new fees to be taken of
the people, who may not so be charged but by Parliament." -- 2 d Inst. p. 533.
by Ministers. In short, it will be in their power to settle upon us any civil,
ecclesiastical, or military establishment, which they choose.

WE may perceive, by the example of Ireland, how eager Ministers are to seize
upon any settled revenue, and apply it in supporting their own power. Happy are
the men, and happy the people who grow wise by the misfortunes of others.
Earnestly, my dear countrymen, do I beseech the author of all good gifts, that
you may grow wise in this manner; and if I may be allowed to take such a
liberty, I beg leave to recommend to you in general, as the best method of
attaining this wisdom, diligently to study the histories of other countries.
You will there find all the arts, that can possibly be practiced by cunning
rulers, or false patriots among yourselves, so fully delineated, that, changing
names, the account would serve for your own times.

IT is pretty well known on this continent, that Ireland has, with a regular
consistency of injustice, been cruelly treated by Ministers in the article of
pensions; but there are some alarming circumstances relating to that subject,
which I wish to have better known among us.

An enquiry into the legality of pensions on the Irish establishment, by
Alexander M'Auly, Esquire; one of the King's Council, etc.

Mr. M'Auly concludes his piece in the following beautiful manner. "If any
pensions have been obtained on that establishment, to serve the corrupt
purposes of ambitious men. -- If his Majesty's revenues of Ireland have been
employed in pensions, to debauch his Majesty's subjects of both kingdoms. -- If
the treasure of Ireland has been expended in pensions, for corrupting men of
that kingdom to betray their country; and men of the neighboring kingdom, to
betray both. -- If Irish pensions have been procured, to support gamesters and
gaming-houses; promoting a vice which threatens national ruin. -- If pensions
have been purloined out of the national treasure of Ireland, under the mask of
salaries annexed to public offices, useless to the nation; newly invented, for
the purposes of corruption. -- If Ireland, just beginning to recover from the
devastations of massacre and rebellion, be obstructed in the progress of her
cure, by swarms of pensionary vultures preying on her vitals. -- If, by
squandering the national substance of Ireland, in a licentious, unbounded
profusion of pensions, instead of employing it in nourishing and improving her
infant agriculture, trade and manufactures, or in enlightening and reforming
her poor, ignorant, deluded, miserable natives (by nature most amiable, most
valuable, most worthy of public attention) -- If, by such abuse of the national
substance, sloth and nastiness, cold and hunger, nakedness and wretchedness,
popery, depopulation and barbarism, still maintain their ground; still deform a
country, abounding with all the riches of nature, yet hitherto destined to
beggary. -- If such pensions be found on the Irish establishment; let such be
cut off: And let the perfidious advisers be branded with indelible characters
of public infamy; adequate, if possible, to the dishonor of their crime."


THE revenue of the Crown there arises principally from the Excise granted "for
pay of the army, and defraying other PUBLIC charges, in defense and
preservation of the kingdom" -- from the tonnage and additional poundage
granted "for protecting the trade of the kingdom at sea, and augmenting the
PUBLIC revenue" -- from the hearth money granted -- as a "PUBLIC revenue, for
PUBLIC charges and expenses." There are some other branches of the revenue,
concerning which there is not any express appropriation of them for PUBLIC
service, but which were plainly so intended.

OF these branches of the revenue the Crown is only trustee for the Public.
They are unalienable. They are inapplicable to any other purposes, but those
for which they were established; and therefore are not legally chargeable with
pensions.

THERE is another kind of revenue, which is a private revenue. This is not
limited to any public uses; but the Crown has the same property in it, that any
person has in his estate. This does not amount, at the most, to fifteen
thousand pounds a year, probably not to seven, and is the only revenue, that
can be legally charged with pensions.

IF Ministers were accustomed to regard the rights or happiness of the people,
the pensions in Ireland would not exceed the sum just mentioned: But long since
have they exceeded that limit; and in December 1765, a motion was made in the
House of Commons in that kingdom, to address his Majesty on the great increase
of pensions on the Irish establishment, amounting to the sum of 158, 685 l. in
the last two years.

ATTEMPTS have been made to gloss over these gross encroachments, by this
specious argument -- "That expending a competent part of the public revenue in
pensions, from a principle of charity or generosity, adds to the dignity of the
Crown; and is therefore useful to the public." To give this argument any
weight, it must appear, that the pensions proceed from "charity or generosity
only" -- and that it "adds to the dignity of the Crown," to act directly
contrary to law. --

FROM this conduct toward Ireland, in open violation of law, we may easily
foresee what we may expect, when a Minister will have the whole revenue of
America in his own hands, to be disposed of at his own pleasure: For all the
moneys raised by the late act are to be "applied by virtue of warrants under
the sign manual, countersigned by the High Treasurer, or any three of the
commissioners of the Treasury." The RESIDUE indeed is to be "paid into the
receipt of the Exchequer, and to be disposed of by Parliament." So that a
Minister will have nothing to do, but to take care, that there shall be no
residue, and he is superior to all control.

BESIDES the burden of pensions in Ireland, which have enormously increased
within these few years, almost all the offices in that poor kingdom, have been,
since the commencement of the present century, and now are bestowed upon
strangers. For though the merit of persons born there, justly raises them to
places of high trust when they go abroad, as all Europe can witness, yet he is
an uncommonly lucky Irishman, who can get a good post in his NATIVE country.

WHEN I consider the manner In Charles the Second's time, the House of Commons,
influenced by some factious demagogues, were resolved to prohibit the
importation of Irish cattle into England. Among other arguments in favor of
Ireland it was insisted -- "That by cutting off almost entirely the trade
between the kingdoms, all the natural bands of union were dissolved, and
nothing remained to keep the Irish in their duty, but force and violence."

"The King (says Mr. Hume, in his History of England) was so convinced of the
justness of these reasons, that he used all his interest to oppose the bill,
and he openly declared, that he could not give his assent to it with a safe
conscience. But the Commons were resolute in their purpose." -- "And the spirit
of tyranny, of which nations are as susceptible as individuals, had animated
the English extremely to exert their superiority over their dependent state. No
affair could be conducted with greater violence than this by the Commons. They
even went so far in the preamble of the bill, as to declare the importation of
Irish cattle to be a nuisance. By this expression they gave scope to their
passion, and at the same time barred the King's prerogative, by which he might
think himself entitled to dispense with a law, so full of injustice and bad
policy. The Lords expunged the word, but as the King was sensible that no
supply would be given by the Commons, unless they were gratified in all their
prejudices, he was obliged both to employ his interest with the Peers, to make
the bill pass, and to give the Royal assent to it. He could not, however,
forbear expressing his displeasure, at the jealousy entertained against him,
and at the intention which the Commons discovered, of retrenching his
prerogative.

This law brought great distress for some time upon Ireland, but it has
occasioned their applying with greater industry to manufactures, and has proved
in the issue beneficial to that kingdom."

Perhaps the same reason occasioned the "barring the King's prerogative" in the
late act suspending the legislation of New York.

This we may be assured of, that we are as dear to his Majesty, as the people
of Great Britain are. We are his subjects as well as they, and as faithful
subjects; and his Majesty has given too many, too constant proofs of his piety
and virtue, for any man to think it possible, that such a Prince can make any
unjust distinction between such subjects. It makes no difference to his
Majesty, whether supplies are raised in Great Britain, or America; but it makes
some difference to the Commons of that kingdom.

To speak plainly, as becomes an honest man on such important occasions, all
our misfortunes are owing to a lust of power in men of abilities and influence.
This prompts them to seek popularity by expedients profitable to themselves,
though ever so destructive to their country.

Such is the accursed nature of lawless ambition, and yet -- What heart but
melts at the thought! -- Such false, detestable patriots, in every state, have
led their blind, con^iding country, shouting their applauses, into the jaws of
shame and ruin. May the wisdom and goodness of the people of Great Britain,
save them from the usual fate of nations.

" -- mentem mortalia ^angant."


in which that island has been uniformly depressed for so many years past, with
this pernicious particularity of their Parliament The last Irish Parliament
continued 33 years, during all the late King's reign. The present Parliament
there has continued from the beginning of this reign, and probably will
continue till this reign ends.
continuing as long as the Crown pleases, I am astonished to observe such a
love of liberty still animating that loyal and generous nation; and nothing can
raise higher my idea of the integrity and public spirit I am informed, that
within these few years, a petition was presented to the House of Commons,
setting forth "that herrings were imported into Ireland from some foreign parts
of the north so cheap, as to discourage the British herring fishery, and
therefore praying that some remedy might be applied in that behalf by
Parliament." --

That upon this petition, the House came to a resolution, to impose a duty of
Two Shillings sterling on every barrel of foreign herrings imported into
Ireland; but afterward dropped the affair, for fear of engaging in a dispute
with Ireland about the right of TAXING her.

So much higher was the opinion, which the House entertained of the spirit of
Ireland, than of that of these colonies.

I find, in the last English papers, that the resolution and firmness with
which the people of Ireland have lately asserted their freedom, have been so
alarming in Great Britain, that the Lord Lieutenant, in his speech on the 20th
of last October, "recommended to that Parliament, that such provision may be
made for securing the Judges in the enjoyment of their offices and
appointments, during their good behavior, as shall be thought most expedient."

What an important concession is thus obtained, by making demands becoming
freemen, with a courage and perseverance becoming freemen!


of a people, who have preserved the sacred fire of freedom from being
extinguished, though the altar on which it burnt, has been overturned.

IN the same manner shall we unquestionably be treated, as soon as the late
taxes laid upon us, shall make posts in the "government," and the
"administration of justice" here, worth the attention of persons of influence
in Great Britain. We know enough already to satisfy us of this truth. But this
will not be the worst part of our case.

THE principals, in all great offices, will reside in England, making some
paltry allowance to deputies for doing the business here. Let any man consider
what an exhausting drain this must be upon us, when Ministers are possessed of
the power of creating what posts they please, and of affixing to such posts
what salaries they please, and he must be convinced how destructive the late
act will be. The injured kingdom lately mentioned, can tell us the mischiefs of
ABSENTEES; and we may perceive already the same disposition taking place with
us. The government of New York has been exercised by a deputy. That of Virginia
is now held so; and we know of a number of secretary-ships, collectorships, and
other offices, held in the same manner.

TRUE it is, that if the people of Great Britain were not too much blinded by
the passions, that have been artfully excited in their breasts, against their
dutiful children the colonists, these considerations would be nearly as
alarming to them as to us. The influence of the Crown was thought by wise men,
many years ago, too great, by reason of the multitude of pensions and places
bestowed by it. These have been vastly increased since One of the reasons urged
by that great and honest statesman, Sir William Temple, to Charles the Second,
in his famous remonstrance, to dissuade him from aiming at arbitrary power,
was, that the King "had few offices to bestow. "Hume's Hist. of England.

"Though the wings of prerogative have been clipped, the influence of the Crown is
greater than ever it was in any period of our history. For when we consider in
how many boroughs the government has the votes at command; when we consider the
vast body of persons employed in the collection of the revenue, in every part
of the kingdom, the inconceivable number of placemen, and candidates for places
in the customs, in the excise, in the post office, in the dock-yards, in the
ordnance, in the salt-office, in the stamps, in the navy and victualling
offices, and in a variety of other departments; when we consider again the
extensive influence of the money corporations, subscription jobbers and
contractors, the endless dependencies created by the obligations conferred on
the bulk of the Gentlemen's families throughout the kingdom, who have relations
preferred in our navy and numerous standing army; when I say, we consider how
wide, how binding a dependence on the Crown is created by the above enumerated
particulars, and the great, the enormous weight and influence which the Crown
derives from this extensive dependence upon its favor and power, any Lord in
waiting, any Lord of the Bedchamber, any man may be appointed Minister."

A doctrine to this effect is said to have been the advice of L -- H --. Late
Newspaper.


, and perhaps it would be no difficult matter to prove that the people have
decreased.

SURELY therefore, those who wish the welfare of their country, ought seriously
to reflect, what may be the consequence of such a new creation of offices, in
the disposal of the Crown. The army, the administration of justice, and the
civil government here, with such salaries as the Crown shall please to annex,
will extend Ministerial influence as much beyond its former bounds, as the late
war did the British dominions.

BUT whatever the people of Great Britain may think on this occasion, I hope
the people of these colonies will unanimously join in this sentiment, that the
late act of Parliament is injurious to their liberty, and that this sentiment
will unite them in a firm opposition to it, in the same manner as the dread of
the Stamp Act did.

SOME persons may imagine the sums to be raised by it, are but small, and
therefore may be inclined to acquiesce under it. A conduct more dangerous to
freedom, as before has been observed, can never be adopted. Nothing is wanted
at home but a PRECEDENT "Here may be observed, that when any ancient law or
custom of Parliament is broken, and the Crown possessed of a precedent, how
difficult a thing it is to restore the subject again to his former freedom and
safety." -- 2 d Coke's Inst. page 529.

"It is not almost credible to foresee, when any maxim or fundamental law of
this realm is altered (as elsewhere has been observed) what dangerous
inconveniences do follow." -- 4 th Coke's Inst. page 41.


, the force of which shall be established, by the tacit submission of the
colonies. With what zeal was the statute erecting the post office, and another
relating to the recovery of debts in America, urged and tortured, as precedents
in support of the Stamp Act, though wholly inapplicable. If the Parliament
succeeds in this attempt other statutes will impose other duties. Instead of
taxing ourselves, as we have (...) accustomed to do, from the first settlement
of these provinces, all our usual taxes will be converted into Parliamentary
taxes on our importations; and thus the Parliament will levy upon us such sums
of money as they choose to take, without any other limitation than their
pleasure.

WE know how much labor and care have been bestowed by th^se colonies, in
laying taxes in such a manner, that they should be most easy to the people, by
being laid on the proper articles; most equal, by being proportioned to every
man's circumstances; and cheapest, by the method directed for collecting them.

BUT Parliamentary taxes will be laid on us, without any consideration, whether
there is any easier mode. The only point regarded will be, the certainty of
levying the taxes, and not the convenience of the people on whom they are to be
levied; and therefore all statutes on this head will be such as will be most
likely, according to the favorite phrase, "to execute themselves."

TAXES in every free state have been, and ought to be, as exactly proportioned
as is possible to the abilities of those who are to pay them. They cannot
otherwise be just. Even a Hottentot would comprehend the unreasonableness of
making a poor man pay as much for "defending" the property of a rich man, as
the rich man pays himself.

LET any person look into the late act of Parliament, and he will immediately
perceive, that the immense estates of Lord Fairfax, Lord Baltimore Maryland and
Pennsylvania have been engaged in the warmest disputes, in order to obtain an
equal and just taxation of their Proprietors estates: But this late act of
Parliament does more for those Proprietors, than they themselves would venture
to demand. It totally exempts them from taxation -- though their vast estates are
to be "secured" by the taxes of other people.
, and our Proprietaries, which are amongst his Majesty's other DOMINIONS to be
"defended, protected and secured" by the act, will not pay a single farthing
for the duties thereby imposed, except Lord Fairfax wants some of his windows
glazed; Lord Baltimore and our Proprietaries are quite secure, as they live in
England.

I MENTION these particular cases, as striking instances how far the late act
is a deviation from that principle of justice, which has so constantly
distinguished our own laws on this continent, and ought to be regarded in all
laws.

THE third consideration with our continental Assemblies in laying taxes, has
been the method of collecting them. This has been done by a few officers, with
moderate allowances, under the inspection of the respective Assemblies. No more
was raised from the subject, than was used for the intended purposes. But by
the late act, a Minister may appoint as many officers as he pleases for
collecting the taxes; may assign them what salaries he thinks "adequate;" and
they are subject to no inspection but his own.

IN short, if the late act of Parliament takes effect, these colonies must
dwindle down into "common corporations, " as their enemies, in the debates
concerning the repeal of the Stamp Act, strenuously insisted they were; and it
seems not improbable that some future historian may thus record our fall.

"THE eighth year of this reign was distinguished by a very memorable event,
the American colonies then submitting, for the FIRST time, to be taxed by the
British Parliament. An attempt of this kind had been made about two years
before, but was defeated by the vigorous exertions of the several provinces, in
defense of their liberties. Their behavior on that occasion rendered their
name very celebrated for a short time all over Europe; all states being
extremely attentive to a dispute between Great Britain, and so considerable a
part of her dominions. For as she was thought to be grown too powerful, by the
successful conclusion of the late war she had been engaged in, it was hoped, by
many, that as it had happened before to other kingdoms, civil discords would
afford opportunities of revenging all the injuries supposed to be received from
her. However, the cause of dissension was removed, by a repeal of the statute
that had given offense. This affair rendered the submissive conduct of the
colonies so soon after, the more extraordinary; there being no difference
between the mode of taxation which they opposed, and that to which they
submitted, but this, that by the first, they were to be continually reminded
that they were taxed, by certain marks stamped on every piece of paper or
parchment they used. The authors of that statute triumphed greatly on this
conduct of the colonies, and insisted, that if the people of Great Britain had
persisted in enforcing it, the Americans would have been, in a few months, so
fatigued with the efforts of patriotism, that they would have yielded obedience.

"CERTAIN it is, that though they had before their eyes so many illustrious
examples in their Mother country, of the constant success attending firmness
and perseverance, in opposition to dangerous encroachments on liberty, yet they
quietly gave up a point of the "last importance." From thence the decline of
their freedom began, and its decay was extremely rapid; for as money was always
raised upon them by the Parliament, their Assemblies grew immediately useless,
and in a short time contemptible: And in less than one hundred years, the
people sunk down into that tameness and supineness of spirit, by which they
still continue to be distinguished."

Et majores vestros and posteros cogitate.
Remember your ancestors and your posterity.
A FARMER.

LETTER XI.
My dear COUNTRYMEN,
I HAVE several times, in the course of th^se letters, mentioned the late act
of Parliament, as being the foundation of future measures injurious to these
colonies; and the belief of this truth I wish to prevail, because I think it
necessary to our safety.

A PERPETUAL jealousy, respecting liberty, is absolutely requisite in all free
states. The very texture of their constitution, in mixed governments, demands
it. For the cautions with which power is distributed among the several orders,
imply that each (...) that share which is proper for the general welfare, and
therefore that any further acquisition must be pernicious. Machiavel
Machiavel's Discourses -- Book 3. Chap. I.
employs a whole chapter in his discourses, to prove that a state, to be long
lived, must be frequently corrected, and reduced to its first principles. But
of all states that have existed, there never was any, in which this jealousy
could be more proper than in these colonies. For the government here is not
only mixed, but dependent, which circumstance occasions a peculiarity in its
form, of a very delicate nature.

Two reasons induce me to desire, that this spirit of apprehension may be
always kept up among us, in its utmost vigilance. The first is this -- that as
the happiness of these provinces indubitably consists in their connection with
Great Britain, any separation between them is less likely to be occasioned by
civil discords, if every disgusting measure is opposed singly, and while it is
new: For in this manner of proceeding, every such measure is most likely to be
rectified. On the other hand, oppressions and dissatisfactions being permitted
to accumulate -- if ever the governed throw off the load, they will do more. A
people does not reform with moderation. The rights of the subject therefore
cannot be too often considered, explained or asserted: And whoever attempts to
do this, shows himself, whatever may be the rash and peevish reflections of
pretended wisdom, and pretended duty, a friend to those who injudiciously
exercise their power, as well as to them, over whom it is so exercised.

HAD all the points of prerogative claimed by Charles the First, been
separately contested and settled in preceding reigns, his fate would in all
probability have been very different; and the people would have been content
with that liberty which is compatible with regal authority. But The author is
sensible that this is putting the gentlest construction on Charles's conduct;
and that is one reason why he chooses it. Allowances ought to be made for the
errors of those men, who are acknowledged to have been possessed of many
virtues. The education of this unhappy prince, and his confidence in men not so
good or wise as himself, had probably filled him with mistaken notions of his
own authority, and of the consequences that would attend concessions of any
kind to a people, who were represented to him, as aiming at too much power.
he thought, it would be as dangerous for him to give up the powers which at
any time had been by usurpation exercised by the Crown, as those that were
legally vested in it. This produced an equal excess on the part of the people.
For when their passions were excited by multiplied grievances, they thought it
would be as dangerous for them to allow the powers that were legally vested in
the Crown, as those which at any time had been by usurpation exercised by it.
Acts, that might by themselves have been upon many considerations excused or
extenuated, derived a contagious malignancy and odium from other acts, with
which they were connected. They were not regarded according to the simple force
of each, but as parts of a system of oppression. Every one therefore, however
small in itself, became alarming, as an additional evidence of tyrannical
designs. It was in vain for prudent and moderate men to insist, that there was
no necessity to abolish Royalty. Nothing less than the utter destruction of
monarchy, could satisfy those who had suffered, and thought they had reason to
believe, they always should suffer under it.

THE consequences of these mutual distrusts are well known: But there is no
other people mentioned in history, that I recollect, who have been so
constantly watchful of their liberty, and so successful in their struggles for
it, as the English. This consideration leads me to the second reason, why I
"desire that the spirit of apprehension may be always kept up among us in its
utmost vigilance."

THE first principles of government are to be looked for in human nature. Some
of the best writers have asserted, and it seems with good reason, that
"government is founded on Opinion is of two kinds, viz. opinion of INTEREST,
and opinion of RIGHT. By opinion of interest, I chiefly understand, the sense
of the public advantage which is reaped from government; together with the
persuasion, that the particular government which is established, is equally
advantageous with any other, that could be easily settled

"Right is of two kinds, right to power, and right to property. What prevalence
opinion of the first kind has over mankind, may easily be understood, by
observing the attachment which all nations have to their ancient government,
and even to those names which have had the sanction of antiquity. Antiquity
always begets the opinion of right." -- "It is sufficiently understood, that
the opinion of right to property, is of the greatest moment in all matters of
government. -- "Hume's Essays.


opinion."

CUSTOM undoubtedly has a mighty force in producing opinion, and reigns in
nothing more arbitrarily than in public affairs. It gradually reconciles us to
objects even of dread and detestation; and I cannot but think these lines of
Mr. Pope as applicable to vice in politics, as to vice in ethics. -- "Vice is a
monster of so horrid mien,
"As to be hated, needs but to be seen;
"Yet seen too often, familiar with her face,
"We first endure, then pity, then embrace."
When an act injurious to freedom has been once done, and the people bear it,
the repetition of it is most likely to meet with submission. For as the
mischief of the one was found to be tolerable, they will hope that of the
second will prove so too; and they will not regard the infamy of the last,
because they are stained with that of the first.

INDEED nations, in general, are not apt to think until they feel; and
therefore nations in general have lost their liberty; For as violations of the
rights of the governed, are commonly not only Omnia mala exempla ex bonis
initiis orta sunt -- SALLUST, Bell, Cat. S. 50.
specious, but small at the beginning, they spread over the multitude in such a
manner, as to touch individuals but slightly. "The republic is always attacked
with greater vigor, than it is defended: For the audacious and profligate,
prompted by their natural enmity to it, are easily impelled to act by the least
nod of their leaders: Whereas the HONEST, I know not why, are generally slow
and unwilling to stir; and neglecting always the BEGINNINGS of things, are
never roused to exert themselves, but by the last necessity: So that through
^PRESOLUTION and DELAY, when they would be glad to compound at last for their
QUIET, at the expense even of their HONOR, they commonly lose them BOTH."

-- CICERO'S Orat. for SEXTIUS.

Such were the sentiments of this great and excellent man, whose vast
abilities, and the calamities of his country during his time, enabled him, by
mournful experience, to form a just judgment on the conduct of the friends and
enemies of liberty.


Thus they are disregarded. The power or profit that arises from these
violations, centering in few persons, is to them considerable. For this reason
the governors, having in view their particular purposes, successively preserve
an uniformity of conduct for attaining them. They regularly increase the first
injuries, till at length the inattentive people are compelled to perceive the
heaviness of their burdens. -- They begin to complain and enquire -- but too
late. They find their oppressors so strengthened by success, and themselves so
entangled in examples of express authority on the part of their rulers, and of
tacit recognition on their own part, that they are quite confounded: For
millions entertain no other idea of the legality of power, than that it is
founded on the exercise of power. They voluntarily fasten their chains, by
adopting a pusillanimous opinion, "that there will be too much danger in
attempting a remedy," -- or another opinion no less fatal, -- "that the
government has a right to treat them as it does." They then seek a wretched
relief for their minds, by persuading themselves, that to yield their
odedience, is to discharge their duty. The deplorable poverty of spirit, that
prostrates all the dignity bestowed by Divine Providence on our nature -- of
course succeeds.

FROM these reflections I conclude, that every free state should incessantly
watch, and instantly take alarm on any addition being made to the power
exercised over them. Innumerable instances might be produced to show, from what
slight beginnings the most extensive consequences have flowed: But I shall
select two only from the history of England.

HENRY the Seventh was the first monarch of that kingdom, who established a
standing body of armed men. This was a band of fifty archers, called Yeomen of
the Guard: And this institution, notwithstanding the smallness of the number,
was, to prevent discontent, Rapin's History of England.
"disguised under pretense of majesty and grandeur." In 1684 the standing
forces were so much augmented, that Rapin says -- "The King, in order to make
his people fully sensible of their new slavery, affected to muster his troops,
which amounted to 4000 well armed and disciplined men." I think our army, at
this time, consists of more than seventy regiments.

THE method of taxing by EXCISE was first introduced amidst the convulsions of
the civil wars. Extreme necessity was pretended for it, and its short
continuance promised. After the restoration an excise upon beer, ale and other
liquors, was granted to the 12 Char. II. Chap. 23 and 24.
King, one half in fee, the other for life, as an equivalent for the court of
wards. Upon James the Second's accession, the Parliament 1 James II. Chap. 1
and 4.
gave him the first excise, with an additional duty on wine, tobacco, and some
other things. Since the revolution it has been extended to salt, candles,
leather, hides, hops, soap, paper, pasteboards, mill-boards, scaleboards,
vellum, parchment, starch, silks, calicoes, linens, stuffs, printed, stained,
etc. wire, wrought plate, coffee, tea, chocolate, etc.

THUS a standing army and excise have, from their first slender origins, though
always hated, always feared, always opposed, at length swelled up to their vast
present bulk.

THESE facts are sufficient to support what I have said. It Is true, that all
the mischiefs apprehended by our ancestors from a standing army and excise,
have not yet happened: But it does not follow from thence, that they will not
happen. The inside of a house may catch fire, and the most valuable apartments
be ruined, before the flames burst out. The question in these cases is not,
what evil has actually attended particular measures -- but what evil, in the
nature of things, is likely to attend them. Certain circumstances may for some
time delay effects, that were reasonably expected, and that must ensue. There
was a long period, after the Romans had prorogued his command to In the year of
the city 428, "Duo singularia haec ei viro primum contigerc; prorogatio imp^rii
non ante in u^lo facta, et acto honor triumphus. "Live. B. 8. Chap. 23. 26.

"Had the rest of the Roman citizens imitated the example of L. Quintius, who
refused to have his consulship continued to him, they had never admitted that
custom of proroguing of Magistrates, and then the prolongation of their
commands in the army had never been introduced, which very thing was at length
the ruin of that commonwealth."

-- Machiavel's Discourses, B. 3. Chap. 24.


Q. Publilius Philo, before that example destroyed their liberty. All our Kings
from the revolution to the present reign, have been foreigners. Their Ministers
generally continued but a short time in authority I don't know but it may be
said, with a good deal of reason, that a quick rotation of Ministers is very
desirable in Great Britain. A Minister there has a vast store of materials to
work with. Long administrations are rather favorable to the reputation of a
people abroad, than to then liberty.
; and they themselves were mild and virtuous princes.

A BOLD, ambitious Prince, possessed of great abilities, firmly fixed in his
throne by descent, served by ministers like himself, and rendered either
venerable or terrible by the glory of his successes, may execute what his
predecessors did not dare to attempt. Henry the Fourth tottered in his seat
during his whole reign. Henry the Fifth drew the strength of that kingdom into
France, to carry on his wars there, and left the Commons at home, protesting,
"that the people were not bound to serve out of the realm."

IT is true, that a strong spirit of liberty subsists at present in
Great Britain; but what reliance is to be placed in the temper of a people,
when the Prince is possessed of an unconstitional power, our own history can
sufficiently inform us. When Charles the second had strengthened himself by the
return of the garrison of Tangier, England (says Rapin) saw on a sudden an
amazing revolution; saw herself stripped of all her rights and privileges
excepting such as the King should vouchsafe to grant her: And what is more
astonishing, the English themselves, delivered up these very rights and
privileges to Charles the Second, which they had so passionately, and, if I may
say it, furiously defended against the designs of Charles the First." This
happened only thirty-six years after this last Prince had been beheaded.

SOME persons are of opinion, that liberty is not violated, but by such open
acts of force; but they seem to be greatly mistaken. I could mention a period
within these forty years, when almost as great a change of disposition was
produced by the SECRE^ measures of a long administration, as by Charles's
violence. Liberty, perhaps, is never exposed to so much danger, as when the
people believe there is the least; for it may be subverted, and yet they not
think so.

PUBLIC disgusting acts are seldom practiced by the ambitious, at the beginning
of their designs. Such conduct silences and discourages the weak, and the
wicked, who would otherwise have been their advocates or accomplices. It is of
great consequence, to allow those who, upon any account, are inclined to favor
them, something specious to say in their defense. Their power may be fully
established, though it would not be safe for them to do whatever they please.
For there are things, which, at some times, even them to do whatever they
please. For there are things, which, at some times, even slaves will not bear.
Julius Caesar, and Oliver Cromwell, did not dare to assume the title of King.
The Grand Seignor dares not lay a new tax. The King of France dares not be a
protestant. Certain popular points may be left untouched, and yet freedom be
extinguished. The commonalty of Venice imagine themselves free, because they
are permitted to do what they ought not. But I quit a subject, that would lead
me too far from my purpose.

BY the late act of Parliament, taxes are to be levied upon us, for "defraying
the charge of the administration of justice -- the support of civil government
-- and the expenses of defending his Majesty's dominions in America."

IF any man doubts what ought to be the conduct of these colonies on this
occasion, I would ask him these questions.

Has not the Parliament expressly AVOWED their INTENTION of raising money from
us for certain purposes? Is not this scheme popular in Great Britain? Will the
taxes, imposed by the late act, answer those purposes? If it will, must it not
take an immense sum from us? If it will not, is it to be expected, that the
Parliament will not fully execute their INTENTION when it is pleasing at home,
and not opposed here? Must not this be done by imposing NEW taxes? Will not
every addition, thus made to our taxes, be an addition to the power of the
British legislature, by increasing the number of officers employed in the
collection? Will not every additional tax therefore render it more difficult to
abrogate any of them? When a branch of revenue is once established, does it not
appear to many people invidious and undutiful, to attempt to abolish it? If
taxes, sufficient to accomplish the INTENTION of the Parliament, are imposed by
the Parliament, what taxes will remain to be imposed by our Assemblies? If no
material taxes remain to be imposed by them, what must become of them, and the
people they represent?

Demosthenes's 2d Philippic.
"If any person considers these things, and yet thinks our liberties are in no
danger, I wonder at that person's security."

ONE other argument is to be added, which, by itself, I hope, will be
sufficient to convince the most incredulous man on this continent, that the
late act of Parliament is only designed to be a PRECEDENT, whereon the future
vassalage of these colonies may be established.

EVERY duty thereby laid on articles of British manufacture, is laid on some
commodity, upon the exportation of which from Great Britain, a drawback is
payable. Those drawbacks, in most of the articles, are exactly double to the
duties given by the late (...). The Parliament therefore might, in half a dozen
lines, have raised much more money, only by stopping the drawbacks in the hands
of the officers at home, on exportation to these colonies, than by this solemn
imposition of taxes upon us, to be collected here. Probably, the artful
contrivers of this act formed it in this manner; in order to reserve to
themselves, in case of any objections being made to it, this specious pretense
-- "that the drawbacks are gifts to the colonies, and that the late act only
lessens those gifts." But the truth is, that the drawbacks are intended for the
encouragement and promotion of British manufactures and commerce, and are
allowed on exportation to any foreign parts, as well as on exportation to these
provinces. Besides, care has been taken to slide into the act, some articles on
which there are no drawbacks. However, the whole duties laid by the late act on
all the articles therein specified are so small, that they will not amount to
as much as the drawbacks which are allowed on part of them only. If therefore,
the sum to be obtained by the late act, had been the sole object in forming it,
there would not have been any occasion for "the Commons of Great Britain, to
give and grant to his Majesty rates and duties for raising a revenue IN his
Majesty's dominions in America, for making a more certain and adequate
provision for defraying the charges of the administration of justice, the
support of civil government, and the expense of defending the said dominions;"
-- nor would there have been any occasion for an The expense of this Board, I
am informed, is between Four and Five Thousand Pounds sterling a year. The
establishment of officers, for collecting the revenue in America, amounted
before to Seven Thousand Six Hundred Pounds per annum; and yet, says the author
of "The regulation of the colonies," "the whole remittance from all the taxes
in the colonies, at an average of thirty years, has not amounted to One
Thousand Nine Hundred Pounds a year, and in that sum Seven or Eight Hundred
Pounds per annum only, have been remitted from North America.

The smallness of the revenue arising from the duties in America,
demonstrates;that they were intended only as regulations of trade: And can any
person be so blind to truth, so dull of apprehension in a matter of unspeakable
importance to his country, as to imagine, that the Board of Commissioners
lately established at such a charge, is instituted to assist in collecting One
Thousand Nine Hundred Pounds a year, or the trifling duties imposed by the the
late act? Surely every man on this continent must perceive, that they are
established for the care of a new system of revenue, which is but now begun.


expensive Board of Commissioners, and all the other new charges to which we
are made liable.

UPON the whole, for my part, I regard the late act as an experiment made of
our disposition. It is a bird sent out over the waters, to discover, whether
the waves, that lately agitated this part of the world with such violence, are
yet subsided. If this adventurer gets footing here, we shall quickly find it to
be of the "Dira caelaeno, "etc. Virgil, AEneid 3.
kind described by the poet. -- "Infelix vates."
A direful foreteller of future calamities.


A FARMER.

LETTER XII.
My dear COUNTRYMEN,
SOME states have lost their liberty, by particular accidents: But this
calamity is generally owing to the decay of virtue. A people is traveling fast
to destruction, when individuals consider their interests as distinct from
those of the public. Such notions are fatal to their country, and to
themselves. Yet how many are there, so weak and sordid as to think they perform
all the offices of life, if they earnestly endeavor to increase their own
wealth, power, and credit, without the least regard for the society, under the
protection of which they live; who, if they can make an immediate profit to
themselves, by lending their assistance to those, whose projects plainly tend
to the injury of their country, rejoice in their dexterity, and believe
themselves entitled to the character of able politicians. Miserable men! Of
whom it is hard to say, whether they ought to be most the objects of pity or
contempt. But whose opinions are certainly as detestable, as their practices
are destructive.

THOUGH I always reflect, with a high pleasure, on the integrity and
understanding of my countrymen, which, joined with a pure and humble devotion
to the great and gracious author of every blessing they enjoy, will, I hope,
ensure to them, and their posterity, all temporal and eternal happiness; yet
when I consider, that in every age and country there have been bad men, my
heart, at this threatening period, is so full of apprehensions, as not to
permit me to believe, but that there may be some on this continent, against
whom you ought to be upon your guard -- Men, who either It is not intended, by
these words, to throw any reflection upon Gentlemen, because they are possessed
of offices: For many of them are certainly men of virtue, and lovers of their
country. But supposed obligations of gratitude, and honor, may induce them to
be silent. Whether these obligations ought to be regarded or not, is not so
much to be considered by others, in the judgment they form of these Gentlemen,
as whether they think they ought to be regarded. Perhaps, therefore, we shall
act in the properest manner toward them, if we neither reproach nor imitate
them. The persons meant in this letter, are the base spirited wretches, who may
endeavor to distinguish themselves, by their fordid zeal in defending and
promoting measures, which they know, beyond all question, to be destructive to
the just rights and true interests of their country. It is scarcely possible to
s;peak of these men with any degree of patience -- It is scarcely possible to
speak of them with any degree of propriety -- For no words can truly describe
their guilt and meanness -- But every honest bosom, on their being mentioned,
will feel what cannot be expressed.

If their wickedness did not blind them, they might perceive along the coast of
these colonies, many men, remarkable instances of wrecked ambition, who, after
distinguishing themselves in the support of the Stamp Act, by a courageous
contempt of their country, and of justice, have been left to linger out their
miserable existence, without a government, collectorship, secretaryship, or any
other commission, to console them as well as it could, for loss of virtue and
reputation -- while numberless offices have been bestowed in these colonies on
people from Great Britain, and new ones are continually invented, to be thus
bestowed. As a few great prizes are put into a lottery to tempt multitudes to
lose, so here and there an American has been raised to a good post. --
"Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto."
Mr. Grenville, indeed, in order to recommend the Stamp Act, had the unequalled
generosity, to pour down a golden shower of offices upon Americans; and yet
these ungrateful colonies did not thank Mr. Grenville for showing his kindness
to their countrymen, nor them for accepting it. How must that great statesman
have been surprised, to find, that the unpolished colonies could not be
reconciled to infamy by treachery? Such a bountiful disposition toward us
never appeared in any Minister before him, and probably never will appear
again: For it is evident, that such a system of policy is to be established on
this continent, as, in a short time, is to render it utterly unnecessary to use
the least art in order to conciliate our approbation of any measures. Some of
our countrymen may be employed to fix chains upon us, but they will never be
permitted to hold them afterward. So that the utmost, that any of them can
expect, is only a temporary provision, that may expire in their own time; but
which, they may be assured, will preclude their children from having any
consideration paid to them. Natives of America must sink into total neglect and
contempt, the moment that their country loses the constitutional powers she now
possesses.


hold, or expect to hold certain advantages, by setting examples of servility
to their countrymen -- Men, who trained to the employment, or self taught by a
natural versatility of genius, serve as decoys for drawing the innocent and
unwary into snares. It is not to be doubted but that such men will diligently
bestir themselves on this and every like occasion, to spread the infection of
their meanness as far as they can. On the plans they have adopted, this is
their course. This is the method to recommend themselves to their patrons.

FROM them we shall learn, how pleasant and profitable a thing it is, to be for
our SUBMISSIVE behavior well spoken of at St. James's, or St. Stephen's; at
Guildhall, or the Royal Exchange. Specious fallacies will be dressed up with all
the arts of delusion, to persuade one colony to distinguish herself from
another, by unbecoming condescentions, which will serve the ambitious purposes
of great men at home, and therefore will be thought by them to entitle their
assistants in obtaining them to considerable rewards.

OUR fears will be excited. Our hopes will be awakened. It will be insinuated
to us, with a plausible affectation of wisdom and concern, how prudent it is to
please the powerful -- how dangerous to provoke them -- and then comes in the
perpetual incantation that freezes up every generous purpose of the soul in
cold, inactive expectation -- "that if there is any request to be made,
compliance will obtain a favorable attention."

OUR vigilance and our union are success and safety. Our negligence and our
division are distress and death. They are worse -- They are shame and slavery.
Let us equally shun the benumbing stillness of overweening sloth, and the
feverish activity of that ill informed zeal, which busies itself in maintaining
little, mean and narrow opinions. Let us, with a truly wise generosity and
charity, banish and discourage all illiberal distinctions, which may arise from
differences in situation, forms of government, or modes of religion. Let us
consider ourselves as men -- freemen -- christian freemen -- separated from the
rest of the world, and firmly bound together by the same rights, interests and
dangers. Let these keep our attention inflexibly fixed on the great objects,
which we must continually regard, in order to preserve those rights, to promote
those interests, and to avert those dangers.

LET these truths be indelibly impressed on our minds -- that we cannot be
HAPPY, without being FREE -- that we cannot be free, without being secure in
our property -- that we cannot be secure in our property, if, without our
consent, others may, as by right, take it away -- that taxes imposed on us by
Parliament, do thus take it away -- that duties laid for the sole purpose of
raising money, are taxes -- that attempts to lay such duties should be
instantly and firmly opposed -- that this opposition can never be effectual,
unless it is the united effort of these provinces -- that therefore BENEVOLENCE
of temper toward each other, and UNANIMITY of counsels, are essential to the
welfare of the whole -- and lastly, that for this reason, every man amongst us,
who in any manner would encourage either dissension, di^^idence, or
indifference, between these colonies, is an enemy to himself, and to his
country.

THE belief of these truths, I verily think, my countrymen, is indispensibly
necessary to your happiness. I beseech you, therefore, Deuteron. vi. 7.
"teach them diligently unto your children, and talk of them when you sit in
your houses, and when you walk by the way, and when you lie down, and when you
rise up."

WHAT have these colonies to ask, while they continue free? Or what have they
to dread, but insidious attempts to subvert their freedom? Their prosperity
does not depend on ministerial favors doled out to particular provinces. They
form one political body, of which each colony is a member. Their happiness is
founded on their constitution; and is to be promoted, by preserving that
constitution in unabated vigor, throughout every part. A spot, a speck of
decay, however small the limb on which it appears, and however remote it may
seem from the vitals, should be alarming. We have all the rights requisite for
our prosperity. The legal authority of Great Britain may indeed lay hard
restrictions upon us; but, like the spear of Telephus, it will cure as well as
wound. Her unkindness will instruct and compel us, after some time, to
discover, in our industry and frugality, surprising remedies -- if our rights
continue unviolated: For as long as the products of our labor, and the rewards
of our care, can properly be called our own, so long it will be worth our while
to be industrious and frugal. But if when we plow -- sow -- reap -- gather --
and thresh -- we find, that we plow -- sow -- reap -- gather -- and thresh for
others, whose PLEASURE is to be the SOLE LIMITATION how much they shall take,
and how much they shall leave, WHY should we repeat the unprofitable toil?
Horses and oxen are content with that portion of the fruits of their work,
which their owners assign them, in order to keep them strong enough to raise
successive crops; but even these beasts will not submit to draw for their
masters, until they are subdued by whips and goads

LET us take care of our rights, and we therein take care of our prosperity.
Montesquieu's Spirit of Laws, Book 14, Chap. 13.
"SLAVERY IS EVER PRECEDED BY SLEEP. "Individuals may be dependent on
Ministers, if they please. States should scorn it; -- and if you are not
wanting to yourselves, you will have a proper regard paid you by those, to whom
if you are not respectable, you will be contemptible. But -- if we have already
forgot the reasons that urged us, with unexampled unanimity, to exert ourselves
two years ago -- if our zeal for the public good is worn out before the
homespun clothes, which it caused us to have made -- if our resolutions are so
faint, as by our present conduct to condemn our own late successful example --
if we are not affected by any reverence for the memory of our ancestors, who
transmitted to us that freedom in which they had been blessed -- if we are not
animated by any regard for posterity, to whom, by the most sacred obligations,
we are bound to deliver down the invaluable inheritance -- THEN, indeed, any
Minister -- or any tool of a Minister -- or any creature of a tool of a
Minister -- or any lower "Instrumenta regni, "Tacitus's Ann. Book 12, 66.
instrument of If any person shall imagine that he discovers, in these letters,
the least dislike of the dependence of these colonies on Great Britain, I beg
that such person will not form any judgment on particular expressions, but will
consider the tenor of all the letters taken together. In that case, I flatter
myself, that every unprejudiced reader will be convinced, that the true
interests of Great Britain are as dear to me, as they ought to be to every good
subject.

If I am an Enthusiast in any thing, it is in my zeal for the perpetual
dependence of these colonies on their Mother country. -- A dependence founded
on mutual benefits, the continuance of which can be secured only by mutual
affections. Therefore it is, that with extreme apprehension I view the smallest
seeds of discontent, which are unwarily scattered abroad. Fifty or Sixty years
will make astonishing alterations in these colonies; and this consideration
should render it the business of Great Britain more and more to cultivate our
good dispositions toward her: But the misfortune is, that those great men, who
are wrestling for power at home, think themselves very slightly interested in
the prosperity of their country Fifty or Sixty years hence, but are deeply
concerned in blowing up a popular clamor for supposed immediate advantages.

For my part, I regard Great Britain as a bulwark, happily fixed between these
colonies and the powerful nations of Europe. That kingdom remaining safe, we,
under its protection, enjoying peace, may diffuse the blessings of religion,
science, and liberty, through remote wildernesses. It is therefore incontestibly
our duty, and our interest, to support the strength of Great Britain. When
considing in that strength, she begins to forget from whence it arose, it will
be an easy thing to show the source. She may readily be reminded of the loud
alarm spread among her merchants and tradesmen, by the universal association of
these colonies, at the time of the Stamp Act, not to import any of her
manufactures.

In the year 1718, the Russians and Swedes entered into an agreement, not to
suffer Great Britain to export any naval stores from their dominions but in
Russian or Swedish ships, and at their own prices. Great Britain was
distressed. Pitch and tar rose to Three Pounds a barrel. At length she thought
of getting these articles from the colonies; and the attempt succeeding, they
fell down to Fifteen Shillings. In the year 1756, Great Britain was threatened
with an invasion. An easterly wind blowing for six weeks, she could not man her
fleet, and the whole nation was thrown into the utmost consternation. The wind
changed. The American ships arrived. The fleet sailed in ten or fifteen days.
There are some other reflections on this subject, worthy of the most deliberate
attention of the British Parliament; but they are of such a nature, that I do
not choose to mention them publicly. I thought it my duty, in the year 1765,
while the Stamp Act was in suspense, to write my sentiments to a Gentleman of
great influence at home, who afterward distinguished himself, by espousing our
cause, in the debates concerning the repeal of that act.


administration, if lower there be, is a personage whom it may be dangerous to
offend.

I SHALL be extremely sorry, if any man mistakes my meaning in any thing I have
said. Officers employed by the Crown, are, while according to the laws they
condu^^ themselves, entitled to legal obedience and sincere respect. These it
is a duty to rende^ them; and these no good or prudent person will withhold.
But when these officers, through rashness or design, desire to enlarge their
authority beyond its due limits, and expect improper concessions to be made to
them, from regard for the employments they bear, their attempts should be
considered as equal injuries to the Crown and People, and should be
courageously and constantly opposed. To suffer our ideas to be confounded by
names on such occasions, would certainly be an inexcusable weakness, and
probably an irrem^diable error.

WE have reason to believe, that several of his Majesty's present Ministers are
good men, and friends to our country; and it seems not unlikely, that by a
particular concurrence of events, we have been treated a little more severely
than they wished we should be. They might not think it prudent to stem a
torrent. But what is the difference to us, whether arbitrary acts take their
rise from Ministers, or are permitted by them? Ought any point to be allowed to
a good Minister Ubi imperium ad ignaros aut minus bonos pervenit; novum illud
exemplum, ab dignis and idoneis, ad indignos and non idoneos transfertur. --
Sall. Bell. Cat. 50.
, that should be denied to a bad one? The mortality of Ministers, is a very
frail mortality. A -- may succeed a Shelburne -- A -- may succeed a Conway.

WE find a new kind of Minister lately spoken of at home -- "THE MINISTER OF
THE HOUSE OF COMMONS." The term seems to have peculiar propriety when referred
to these colonies, with a different meaning annexed to it, from that in which
it is taken there. By the word "Minister" we may understand not only a servant
of the Crown, but a man of influence among the Commons, who regard themselves
as having a share in the sovereignty over us. The "Minister OF the House" may,
in a point respecting the colonies, be so strong, that the Minister of the
Crown in the House, if he is a distinct person, may not choose, even where his
sentiments are favorable to us, to come to a pitched battle upon our account.
For though I have the highest opinion of the deference of the House for the
King's Minister, yet he may be so good-natured, as not to put it to the test,
except it be for the mere and immediate profit of his master or himself.

BUT whatever kind of Minister he is, that attempts to innovate a single iota
in the privileges of these colonies, him I hope you will undauntedly oppose;
and that you will never suffer yourselves to be either cheated or frightened
into any unworthy obsequiousness. On such emergencies you may surely, without
presumption, believe, that ALMIGHTY GOD himself will look down upon your
righteous contest with gracious approbation. You will be a "band of brothers,"
cemented by the dearest ties, -- and strengthened with inconceivable supplies
of force and constancy, by that sympathetic ardor, which animates good men,
confederated in a good cause. Your honor and welfare will be, as they now are,
most intimately concerned; and besides -- you are assigned by Divine
Providence, in the appointed order of things, the protectors of unborn ages,
whose fate depends upon your virtue. Whether they shall arise the generous and
indisputable heirs of the noblest patrimonies, or the dastardly and hereditary
drudges of imperious taskmasters, YOU MUST DETERMINE.

To discharge this double duty to yourselves, and to your posterity, you have
nothing to do, but to call forth into use the good sense and spirit of which
you are possessed. You have nothing to do, but to conduct your affairs
peaceably -- prudently -- firmly -- jointly. By these means you will support
the character of freemen, without losing that of faithful subjects -- a good
character in any government -- one of the best under a British government. --
You will prove, that Americans have that true magnanimity of soul, that can
resent injuries, without falling into rage; and that though your devotion to
Great Britain is the most affectionate, yet you can make proper distinctions,
and know what you owe to yourselves, as well as to her -- You will, at the same
time that you advance your interests, advance your reputation -- You will
convince the world of the justice of your demands, and the purity of your
intentions. -- While all mankind must, with unceasing applauses, confess, that
you indeed deserve liberty, who so well understand it, so passionately love it,
so temperately enjoy it, and so wisely, bravely, and virtuously assert,
maintain, and defend it.

"Certe ego libertatem, quoe mihi a parente meo tradita est, experiar: Verum id
frustra an ob rem faciam, in vestra manu situm est, quirites."

FOR my part, I am resolved to contend for the liberty delivered down to me by
my ancestors; but whether I shall do it effectually or not, depends on you, my
countrymen.

"How little soever one is able to write, yet when the liberties of one's
country are threatened, it is still more difficult to be silent."

A FARMER.
Is there not the strongest probability, that if the universal sense of these
colonies is immediately expressed by Resolves of the assemblies, in support of
their rights, by Instructions to their agents on the subject, and by Petitions
to the Crown and Parliament for redress, these measures will have the same
success now, that they had in the time of the Stamp Act.


D.

THE END OF THE FARMER's LETTERS.
THE MONITOR.

THE MONITOR.
NUMBER I.
DIVIDE and IMPERA. DIVIDE and TYRANNIZE.
WOULD to Heaven I could hang a comet on every letter of this motto, to warn my
countrymen of the danger that threatens their liberties from the adoption of
this maxim into the British counsels respecting America. When the Stamp Act had
raised so universal an opposition both in America and Great Britain, that the
execution of it was impracticable, it was repealed; and however joyous that
event might be, yet in its effects it may be fatal. It is but too evident that
the enemies to our liberties have drawn from it this dangerous lesson, to
change the mode of that act, not the measures which dictated it; that is to
sap, not to storm, our freedom. To accomplish this, two things were necessary;
to divide us among ourselves, and to divide us from those who declared
themselves our friends in Great Britain. In pursuance of this plan, implicit
obedience was required in one colony only at first to an act of Parliament
which touched their internal polity, and was effectually a tax. It was hoped
that the rest of the colonies would not interest themselves in the fate of one;
but look with silence and unconcern on this violation of American freedom, in
the British Parliament's disposing of the property of the people of New York,
and suspending their government.

THUS were we to be divided, and our liberties seized upon by such degrees, as
should not alarm us into opposition, till it was too late; and as they well
knew, that the majority of those who opposed the Stamp Act in Great Britain,
did it not from any friendship to our liberties and rights (a ground of
opposition confined to Mr. Pit, and a few others) but from a persuasion that
it would operate injuriously to their own interests; these were to be drawn off
by the never failing cord of self-interest; for which purpose a duty was laid
on those British manufactures, which we were supposed to be under a necessity
of using, for the purposes of a revenue; that is, to save the money of the
people of Great Britain, who must otherwise be taxed to furnish this revenue.
Well might Mr. Townshend say, when he presented this bill to the House, that
the Americans would raise no statues to him; for he knew the baleful tendency
of it to their dearest rights. His words, however, furnish us a very salutary
hint, which we should not neglect. They manifest his expectation, that we
should feel its injuries so as to make us execrate its author.

IN this manner was the great plan of division accomplished, in this manner our
enemies have purposed our final ruin. For to speak in the words of the great
Sir Thomas Wentworth, on a similar occasion, in the time of Charles, the First,
They have taken from us, what? What shall I say? Indeed what have they left us?
They have ravished from us all means of supplying the King, and ingratiating
ourselves with him, taking up the root of all property. If the Parliament of
Great Britain, over which we have no earthly restriction, may give and grant
our property for the purpose of a revenue, in whatever manner it be affected,
the root of all our property is effectually taken up, and we at best are but
tenants at will. But I desist from any farther exposi^tion of the
unconstitutional oppression and injustice of these proceedings; taking it for
granted, that no one can be unacquainted with what has been so often and so
fully set forth, particularly in the late excellent and unanswerable LETTERS of
the FARMER.

THE evil being known, what shall be the remedy? I shall offer my sentiments in
a few words. Let us, as a patriot said when the liberties of England were in
like danger from James the First, petition and petition the King again, as we
usually do to God, and without ceasing till be hear us. Petit's Jus. Pa^liam.
P. 281.
.

LET us study to pursue the plan of these great men who first formed the
petition, and then the bill of rights. A noble Duke, in a late debate on
American freedom, said, the Americans were not mentioned in the bill of rights.
Let us then frame a petition of rights, and never desist from the solicitation
till it be confirmed into a charter of liberty.

Hu^ parvi properemus et ampli
Si patr^^e volumus si nobis vivere ca^i.
(...) every colony contend which shall stand foremost in petitioning our most
gracious Sovereign against the billeting act, and the suspension of the
legislature of New York; showing that we consider these as wounds to American
liberties, through that of one colony. Let us petition against the giving away
our money by the British Parliament, as did the county of Durham, and the
palatinate of Chester. Let us, in the mean time, by our ^^^gality and industry
in manufacturing for ourselves convince our adversaries of their mistake in one
grand point, that we are under a necessity of using the manufactures of
Britain. To accomplish these noble and necessary purposes, let the people of
every county instruct their members to petition, and let associations ^e formed
to promote manufactures; that we may manifest to all the world, how unanimously
we are determined, both with hand and heart, to maintain our freedom, and
frustrate the designs of those, who, by dividing, would enslave us.

NUMBER II.
Servitus, malorum omnium postremum, non modo bello, sed morte etiam
repellendum.

A SENTIMENT which breathes so pure and exalted a sense of freedom, and
detestation of slavery, could hardly have arisen in a mind not enobled by the
influence of liberty, in a free state. Cicero, in this our motto, calls slavery
the worst of all evils; for in his short acquaintance with it, he had seen it
extinguish all those virtues, which had made Rome the habitation of heroes, and
the mistress of the world; nourishing in their place such vices as were most
detestable, and plainly ominous of that destruction to the Roman empire, which
they speedily produced.

It would be the greatest happiness to which I could attain, to impress upon
the minds of my countrymen, a love of liberty, and hatred of slavery, so
indelible as to render it impossible to six chains upon them, by whomsoever
forged. And though the poorness of my abilities, inadequate, very inadequate to
so glorious an end, should frustrate the completion of my wish, yet will the
intention, I hope, pass uncensured. Pulchrum est benifacere reipublicoe, etiam
benedicere haud absurdum. It is noble to serve the community, neither is it
amiss to wish it well. -- SALLUST.
Nor let it be deemed enthusiastic to imagine, that though we are a weak
people, yet the principles of liberty fully infused into us, will render it
impossible to enslave us. For, does not liberty give unwonted vigor to the
arm, and fill the heart with a spirit that is invincible? Does it not give
birth to every noble sentiment, and energy to every hardy exploit? Where then
is the power that shall subdue those who are truly animated with this
unconquerable virtue? "It appears, says Herodotus, not from one instance only,
but from all history, how noble is the virtue of liberty; so the Athenians when
under the tyranny of Pisistratus were of no excellency in war, but when they
had expelled the tyrants, they became the first in martial prowess On vit
manefestment pendant le peu de tems que dura la tyranny des Decemvirs a quel
point ^aggrandissement de Rome dependoit de sa liberte. L'etat sembla avoir
perda ^ame qui le ^^isoit mouvoir. -- MONTESQUIEU.

It was evident, during the short tyranny of the Decemvirs, how greatly the
aggrandizement of Rome depended on her liberty; the state seemed to have lost
the soul which should have animated it.


." Was it not this all-conquering spirit of liberty that sustained three
hundred Spartans against the might of Xerxes and his innumerable host? Was it
not this spirit that made the whole Athenian people quit their city, and trust
to their ships, rather than submit to a tyrant We find this anecdote related by
Cicero in his offices, that one Cyrsillus having advised the Athenians, on that
occasion, to remain in the city and submit to Xerxes, the people instantly
overwhelmed him with stones: An action worthy a free and spirited people; a
death worthy of such baseness: One might have foretold that Xerxes could never
conquer such a people.
? Was it not this that animated the single arm of ^^^les to maintain a bridge
against the whole Tuscan army, that lifting the daring hand of S^^^vola, to
stab the invader of their liberties in the midst of his troops, that dictated
this answer from the Roman people (already reduced to famine) to a powerful
invader, "That Porsenna might spare his interposition, and his efforts for the
Tarquins, since they were firmly resolved to undergo every species of misery
rather than receive the tyrant and his race." Was it not this spirit that, in
later times, vindicated the liberties of the unwarlike people of Flanders See
Cardinal Bentivoglio's historia de Fiandra.
, against the bravest troops and most powerful Monarch in Europe? Such are the
heroes, whom liberty inspires, devota morti pectora liberoe Horace. Souls
determined on liberty or death.
; such are the immortal deeds which she has effected; what then shall she not
accomplish?

The more I reflect on the nature of man, or read the histories of nations; the
more fully am I convinced of the truth of this observation of the illustrious
Sidney's, That liberty produces virtue, order and stability; while slavery is
of necessity accompanied with vice, weakness and misery.

L'aime des grands travaux, l'objet des nobles voeux.
La liberte Lettres de Voltaire.
!
LIBERTY, the life and soul of great pursuits, of noble actions, enlarges the
heart and stimulates the understanding. In times of liberty, a man depends upon
himself, his eloquence, integrity, spirit, ingenuity, and every virtue have
incentives to kindle and inflame them, a proper field to display themselves,
and to operate to his own emolument and his country's glory. Whether his
natural inclination be to the field or the cabinet, to philosophy, or arts, he
pursues it with an ardour, which conscious freedom always inspires, and which
cannot but crown him with distinguished success. But when slavery has spread
its baneful influence over a people, the minds of men are subdued and
enervated; they depend on their tyrants for what they are pleased to grant
them, property, or life or honors, to which they aspire, not by virtue, but by
cunning, servility and wickedness Les grandes vertus se cachent ou se perdent
ordinairement dans la servitude. -- MONTESQUIEU.
, from whence they soon become habitually vicious, weak and miserable.

It is with perfect propriety then, that Aristotle has said, a slave can have
no virtue; that Longinus has called slavery the prison of the soul, and a
public dungeon; that Sir Walter Raleigh, that illustrious ornament of human
nature, considered it as a conditi^^ (...) much below that of brutes, as to act
against reason is worse than to act without See his very excellent letter to
Prince Henry.
it, in fine, that Cicero, Cato, Cassius and Brutus, thought it an evil, non
modo bello, sed morte etiam repellendum To be shunned not only by war, but by
death itself. Timoleon had his brother, whom he had before saved in battle at
the risk of his own life, put to death for attempting to enslave his country.
Brutus used to say he would stab his own father, if a tyrant; and he, with Cato
and Cassius, killed themselves rather than survive the liberty of their
country. Cicero says Quid si tyrannidem occupare, si patriam prodere conabitur
pater, silibitne filius? imo vero obsecrabit patrem ne id faciat; si nihil
proficiat, accusabit, minabitur; ad extremum si ad perniciem patrioe res
spectabit, patrioe. Salutem anteponat saluti patris. Such grandeur and dignity
of sentiment animated these freeborn patriots. --

Inter quos utinam heroas natum me prima tulisset tellus!


.

While the sun of liberty shone on Thebes, it dispelled even the fogs of
Boeotia, and ripened into greatness of soul a Pelopidas, an Epaminondas, and a
Pindar; and if in 500 years of slavery a Stilico and a Belisarius did arise in
that Italy, fertile of heroes while free, they serve but to deepen the horrors
of tyranny, the one having been assassinated by his jealous Emperor, the other
compelled, by the ungrateful tyrant, to beg better bread through realms his
valor saved. During the three centuries from the death of Pisistratus to the
time of Alexander, at what a glorious height, in arts and arms, did the
Athenians, under the happy influence of liberty, arrive; but how few were the
years of slavery which reduced them to weakness, misery and contempt Les
Ateniens sans force par eux-memes et sans allies n'etonnoient plus le monde que
par leurs flatteries envers les Rois, et on ne montoit plus sur la tribune, ou
avoit parle Demostene, que pour proposer les decrets les plus laches et les
plus scandeleux. -- MONTESQUIEU.
! From the birth of Roman liberty, at the expulsion of the Tarquins, to its
total extinction by the death of Brutus, was little more than 500 years. In
this period, how glorious was the empire which freedom established, how firm,
how happy! What an illustrious train of heroes did this free spirit produce,
the Fabii, Fabricii, Decii, Metelli, Scipiones, AEmelii, and others, without
number! The immortal Cato has informed us what were the characteristics of this
potent republic. Domi industria foris justum imperium, animus in consulendo
liber neque delicto neque lubidini obnoxious Industry at home, justice abroad,
minds unconstrained in debate, unseduced by pleasure, and untainted by crimes.
. Such was the virtue, order, and stability, which liberty produced, such vital
energy did it infuse through the whole body of the state, that it baffled every
attempt to overthrow it; stood the impetuous assaults of such dreadful foes as
Hannibal and Pyrr^us, firm and unshaken; a battle lost, served but to arouse
still greater exertions of that vigor, which, animated by a sense of freedom,
was invincible. How shall we view the sad reverse which slavery produced,
without tears -- without detestation! Behold that senate, which appeared to the
Ambassador of King Pyrrhus like an Assembly of Gods, whose word set nations
free, and quelled the tyranny of Kings The Romans used to establish their own
form of government, as near as possible, among those they conquered. They
offered the Cappadocians their freedom; but they were base enough to refuse it.
, reduced to be the servile Ministers of arbitrary power over their fellow
citizens Quo^! ce Senate n'avoit fait evanouir tant des Rois, que pour tomber
lui-meme dans le plus bas esclavage de quelquesunes de ses plus indignes
citoyens; et s'exterminer par ses propres arrets? -- MONTESQUIEU.
, to be the wretched spectators and applauders of low obscene shows Quid si
scripsissem mimos obscoena jocantes,
Qui femper vetiti crimen amoris habet.
In quibus assidue cultus procedit adulter,
Verbaque dat stulto callida nupta viro.
Nuhilis, hos virgo, matronaque, virque, puerque,
Spectat, et e magna part senatus adest.
Nec satis incestis temerari vocibus aures,
Adsuescunt oculi multa pudenda pati
Cumque fefellit amans aliqua novitate maritum
Plauditur et magno palma, favore datur.

, without power, virtue, dignity or worth. Even so early as the reign of
Augustus, had slavery operated with this baneful influence on the senate, nor
was the whole Roman people less infected. For now, as an author of insinite
erudition observes, "idleness, trifling amusements, tumblers, dancers, races,
and wild beasts, occupied the minds of those who had been wont to think of
honors, triumphs and laborious virtues Memoirs of the Court of Augustus.
."

The Roman name was now no more Victor gentium populus, et donare regna
consuetus, says FLORUS.
, no more that hardy and incorruptible virtue, that called a Cincinnatus from
the plough, to be dictator of Rome Si quidem aranti lucio quint io Cincinnato
nuntiatum est eum dictatorum esse factum. -- CICERO.
. The Fabricii and Catones were no more; the epicurean Apicii and Nasideini had
occupied their places, feasts and debauchery were substituted for arts and
arms. Foecunda culpoe secula, nuptias
Primium inquinavere et genus et domos
Hac font derivata clades
In patriam, populumque fluxit.
HORACE.
. The Roman people were already wicked Nor is it wonderful, since Seneca
himself confesses that on Coesar's approach, all that were virtuous and worthy
quitted Rome; and all these perished afterward in defense of liberty.
, they were soon to be weak and miserable; they were soon to groan under the
most execrable monsters that ever blackened human nature; Tiberius, Nero,
Caligula, Commodus, Caracalla and Domitian. They were to be harrassed with
perpetual contentions, under what tyrant they should bleed L'histoire de
l'empire Grec, c'est ainsi que nous nommerons doors navant l'empire Romain,
n'est plus qu'un tissu de revoltes, de seditions, et de perfidies. --
MONTESQUIEU.
; their empire, like a reed, was to be shaken by every assault Dans les guerres
civiles de Vitellius et (...) Vespasian, Rome en proye a tous les ambitieux, et
pleine de burgeois timides, trembloit deva^t le premiere band des (...) qui
pouvoit ^e'n approcher. Ibid.
, till, after a few miserable centuries, it was to be overturned by Barbarians
-- falling, like Lucifer, never to rise again; serving only as a dreadful and
everlasting monument of the atrocious ills that slavery begets, Shall we not
then, my countrymen, combine to oppose this fiend, whenever he shall invade us?
Shall we not use every caution, work every nerve, to repel his open, or elude
his concealed, attacks? Shall we not hold our liberty as the immediate jewel of
our souls? Hardily did our forefathers venture into this once savage wild; what
animated their attempts and soothed their toils? Liberty: What did they
bequeath us? Liberty; Let us then never -- never resign it.

That we may secure this valuable blessing, and learn the greatness of its
worth, let me, with all respect, earnestly beg leave to recommend to my
countrymen, especially the younger part, a thorough acquaintance with those
records of illustrious liberty, the histories of Greece and Rome; from whence
they will imbibe a just hatred of tyranny and zeal for freedom. Let them study
well the godlike actions of those heroes and patriots, whose lives are
delivered down to us by Plutarch, that they may be inspired with a glorious
emulation of those virtues, which have immortalized their names. Let them
examine thoroughly and particularly into our own history and constitution
Hume's history, guarded by Mr. Hurd s dialogues, Lord Coke's institutes, and
the Jus Parliament: seem best adapted to this purpose.
, that they may well understand its full force, form and excellence; the
methods which bad Princes and wicked Ministers have taken to destroy it, and by
what means it has been preserved H^^ illud est proecipioe, in cognitione rerum,
salubre ac frugiferum, omnis te exempli documenta in illustri posita monumento,
intueri; inde tibi, tu^eque reipublicoe, quod imitere capias; inde foedum
inceptu, foedum (...) quod vites -- LIVY.
. These things should be thoroughly considered, we should entertain one another
frequently in conversation on these subjects; that we may implant in ourselves
a lively sense of liberty and law; and infuse into all around us a generous
love for their country and the British constitution Pro qua, quis bonus dubitet
mortem opp^t^^e, si ei sit profuturus? -- CICERO.
. Such a love as dictated this speech, which ought to enroll its author in that
sacred list of patriots, where Timoleon, Cato, Brutus, Cassius, and the first
Nassa^, shine immortal. It is the speech of Sir William Wallace to Bruce, who
was soliciting him to gain King Edward's favor by giving up the defense of his
country. Vos, said the indignant hero, quibus potior est turpis cum securitate
servitus, quam honesta, cum periculo, libertas; istam, quam magni estimatis,
fortunam amplectameni: Ego, in patria soepe defensa, liber et libens morear;
nec me prius ejus caritas quam vita relinquet Ye who prefer shameful servitude,
with safety, to becoming freedom, with danger; embrace the lot which you so
greatly prize: I am determined to die free and freely for my country, which I
have often defended; nor will I give up my love for her till I resign my
breath. -- See Buchanan's history of Scotland.
. Godlike resolve, patriot approved! Thy grateful country shall unceasing
ceasing pour blessings and praises on thy name. Such too was the divine spirit
which animated our deliverer, the Prince of Orange, when exhorted to make his
terms with Lewis XIV. since he could not avoid seeing his country enslaved, he
replied firmly, yes, I can, thy dying in the laft ditch. See Bishop Burnet's
history of his own times.
.

READER, whoever thou art, revere these names, and emulate their virtues --
Remember Thy lise is not thy own when Rome demands it.

NUMBER III.
Salus populi suprema lex esto, is a fundamental law; and sure I am, the safety
of the commonwealth is ill provided for, if the liberty be given up.
PATRIOT KING.
TO the many and great authorities which I adduced in my last, to prove the
unavoidable connection between liberty and happiness in a state, I have now
subjoined this sentiment of my Lord Bolingbroke. I therefore presume no one
will question that position: Indeed I even hope there are few of my countrymen
who want much proof to evince a truth, which is, as it were, graved on the
heart of every freeman. The end of government is the good of the majority; and
when it is diverted to the emolument of one or a few, it then becomes bad, it
then becomes, detested be the name, it then becomes a tyranny. When this is
vested in one, as in an unlimited monarchy, it is bad, but much more is it to
be dreaded when in the hands of many. Thus the Decemviri at Rome, the Thirty at
Athens, the Doge and Senate at Venice, were more woeful tyrannies than even
that of the Grand Signior; and the most tremendous tyranny that ever existed
would be the House of Commons in England, if it were independent of the people;
that is, if the seats were for life; filled up when vacant by the members
themselves, and they not affected by the laws they made. If they made a law to
take away the property of the people, their own would be untouched; if to
endanger the lives of the people, they themselves would not feel its severity.
From the dreadful calamities of such a form of government, if persisted in,
there could be no hope of relief but from that which Mr. Lock calls an appeal
to Heaven. The people, says he, have by a law, antecedent and paramount to all
positive laws of man, reserved that ultimate determination to themselves, which
belongs to all mankind, when there lies no appeal on earth, namely, to make
their appeal to Heaven, that is, to the sword; and this judgment they cannot
part with. The reader will observe, I am supposing what is called the House of
Commons, to be no longer elected by the people, and therefore no longer their
representatives; or suppose the House of Lords should say to the people of
England, we are your virtual representatives, and therefore have a right to tax
you; suppose they were, upon this declaration, to tax them accordingly; what
would the people say? They would tell their Lordships that they possessed, and,
have ever possessed, a right by the constitution, an unalienable right to choose
representatives, who are their trustees, and are bound in duty and interest to
preserve their liberty See debates in Parliament, Ann. 1704. p. 221. The rights
of the people are safer in the hands of their representatives than any other;
if they do not like them, they can turn them out, and choose new ones; but they
cannot do so in the case of the Lords. Mr. Lowndes's speech, Ibid. p. 66.
and property; with these therefore, and these only, they would trust their
property, and not with their Lordships, over whom they had no such restriction;
should the Lords persist, the people would without doubt make their last appeal
to Heaven. There would not be wanting some, who would style this rebellion; but
(I speak the words of Mr. Sidney) they who seek after truth will find, that
there can be no such thing in the world as the rebellion of a whole nation
against its magistrates.

BUT I have dwelt too long, perhaps, in supposing miseries, to which I hope the
people of England will never be reduced; that is, I hope they never will taste
of the bitter cup of slavery, which they are forcing upon us. When I began this
paper, it was with an intention of admonishing my countrymen, or rather
lamenting with them on the woeful prospect before us. Our privileges are all
virtual, our sufferings are real. We have freeholds, and I read, in the address
of the Lords to Queen Anne, that "the right of election, is a legal interest,
incident to the freehold, or founded upon custom, or the letters patent of your
Majesty's Royal ancestors, or upon particular acts of Parliament Now nobody can
think, but that the right to elect a Parliament man, which is a distinguishing
character from the vulgar, and has its weight in the legislature, is a
privilege; and therefore to be deprived of it, is to be deprived not only of a
burden or service, but of a very valuable privilege: And I believe any
Englishman would think we dealt very hardly by him, to deprive him of it,
though we should tell him at the same time we deprived him only of a service or
burden, not of a valuable privilege.

-- Cowper's (afterward Lord Chancellor) speech.


;" but our freeholds are all virtually included in the manor of Greenwich; is
then the authority exercised over the same virtual freehold in Greenwich? Alas!
No. When we are to be taxed, we are in America; when duties are laid upon the
commodities we purchase from Great Britain; when our governments are to be
suspended, unless we will be humble, complying, unmurmuring, very, very slaves,
we are then in America; but when we are to choose our representatives, our
trustees, who are bound thereby in duty and interest to treat us with the same
justice and tenderness, with which they would treat themselves, then, my
countrymen, we are unhappily in the manor of Greenwich. Thus, I John Thomas, of
the county of Richmond, in Virginia, freeholder, do vote without knowing it,
for a burgess in the manor of Greenwich, in England; which manor I never saw,
nor indeed ever heard of before, to lay a duty upon the glass I want to mend my
windows in my tenement, on my freehold, in Richmond county, Virginia. This, my
countrymen, would, in the days of superstition, have been called witchcraft;
but, the gen^^est of all shepherds, the wisest, virtuousest, discreetest, best
of all Ministers, Mr. Grenville, calls it a virtual representation. We might
have flattered ourselves, that a virtual obedience, would have exactly
corresponded with a virtual representation; but it is the ineffable wisdom of
Mr. Grenville, to reconcile, what, to our feeble comprehensions, appeared to be
contradictions; and therefore a real obedience is required to this virtual
power. How does this great man soar above those weaknesses that govern mankind
on this earth; truth, justice, wisdom, law, and right? It was not until his
complete triumph over these human weaknesses, that he declared America
represented in the manor of Greenwich; but who is the representative? Does he
know us? Or we him? No. Have we any restriction over his conduct? No. Is he
bound in duty and interest to preserve our liberty and property? No. Is he
acquainted with our circumstances, situation, wants, etc.? No. What then are we
to expect from him? Nothing but taxes without end. Unhappy people! We are
fallen into that deplorable state in which I supposed the English would be,
were they taxed by those whom they did not elect. So vitally injurious would
such a power be to the liberties of that people, that such of their Kings as
were tyrannically disposed, have, through the whole course of their history,
been endeavoring to accomplish it; but so sensible were the people of its
importance, that they as constantly reclaimed that right by their
representatives; till the bill of rights suppressed entirely all such attempts.
Thus, Mr. Petit, in his Jus Parliamentarum, asserts that never any imposition
was set on by the King out of Parliament, but what was complained of in
Parliament; and not one that ever stood after such complaint, but remedy was
afforded for it. Even when the British Parliament attempted to tax a part of
Britain, which it did not actually represent; the violation of liberty was
perceived, reclaimed against, and redressed. And that the injustice of such
proceedings might stand recorded to all futurity, it is set forth in the
statutes 34 and 5, H. VIII, in these words, "that the inhabitants of Durham and
Chester, having neither Knight ne Burgess in the Parliament of Westminster, for
the lack thereof have been oftimes touched and grieved with acts and statutes,
made within the said court, as well derogatory unto the most ancient
jurisdictions, liberties and privileges of your said county palatine (and of
Durham) as prejudicial unto the commonwealth, quietness, rest and peace of your
Grace's most bounded subjects inhabiting in the same." Such was the sacred
reverence paid to the rights and liberties of the subject! But if the people of
the counties of Durham and Chester, so nearly connected with those who voted
for the representative, whose circumstances might so easily be known, were yet
touched and grieved by the acts of that representative; how much more shall we
be injured, who are remote, unknown, unfriended, unsopported? Shall we not be
touched to the quick? Shall we not be grieved to the heart? Will not our
jurisdictions, liberties, and privileges, be totally violated? Shall we not
sink into slaves? O liberty! O virtue! O my country!

My Lord CAMDEN has justly and emphatically observed, that there is not a blade
of grass in Great Britain but what is represented; for what unheard of crime is
it, that not a blade of grass in America is represented? What can prevent us
from being treated with all the severity which the cruel rapacity of a wicked
Minister may dictate, If we be once subjected to an authority unlimited and
unrestrained? Every needy dependent on the Minister will be immediately
provided for in America, new places will be framed, new, endless, and
insupportable taxes will be laid upon us, for their support, rendering us the
slaves of slaves. When Sir Robert Walpole was endeavoring to extend the excise
in England, Mr. Pulteney, after having showed ^ow fatal it would be to the
liberties of the people, to what misery and contempt it would reduce them, to
what dangerous excess it would extend the influence of the Minister, adds,
"Nay, Sir, I do not know but some of us may live to see some vain overgrown
Minister of State, driving along the streets, with six Members of Parliament
behind his coach See the Parliamentary debates, ann. 1733, p.92.
." In like manner I think it not at all improbable, that, under this new
system, a Minister will be waited upon at table by half a dozen American
Governor^; while their deputies are exercising us with the iron rod of
extortion. I can conceive that it would give the malignant heart of Grenville
infinite pleasure, to be thus avenged by sending his footmen to tread upon the
necks, and grind the faces of those people, whose spirit once disappointed his
oppressive purposes; and held him up to infamy and cotempt. Some perhaps may
flatter themselves, this will never be the case; but I would ask them, on what
ground they cherish this hope, or where is the security in this new model of
our constitution, against all the ignominy and evils of tyranny? For it is most
certain that wicked Ministers do frequently exist, and that a government (as
Mr. Fletcher has before observed) is not only a tyranny when tyrannically
exercised; but also when there is no sufficient caution in the constitution
that it may not be used tyrannically Political Works, p. 108.
. Where is this caution in ours?

LET me then again exhort my countrymen, over the whole continent, that they
instruct their representatives to draw up a petition of rights, and never
desist from the solicitation till it be confirmed into a bill of rights. Then,
and then only, will there be truly such a thing as American freedom; then oly
shall we be safe from those ills which tyranny pours down upon its wretched
vassals. From which, may GOD of his infinite mercy, preserve us.

P. S. As the right of election is the very pillar of our constitution; I hope
the following explanation of it, by Sir Joseph Jekyll, a very learned and able
lawyer, will not be unacceptable. I take the right, says he, of every elector
in England to accrue to him by the common law, for he is under one or other
these qualifications: Either ^e is a freeholder, and then he has a right to
vote for knights of the shi^e; or he has a right by charter, or a right by
prescription; which two last rights take in the right of noting in all cities
and boroughs. Now I would be glad to know whether the right of a freeholder is
not by the common law? Whether a right by charter is not by common law? Is it
not that law that enables the Crown to grant charters and qualifies that power?
Whether a right by prescription is not by the common law? Is not prescription
common usage? And is the common law any thing but common usage? The
freeholder's right of voting is of the essence of his freehold, and you may as
well take away his freehold, as take away the right of voting, which he has by
virtue of that freehold, etc. Now I proceed to observe, that were the House of
Commons in England our real representative, they could not, of right, either
take away, or did in taking away from us this right; for this right of
election, being the very pillar of our constitution, it cannot be removed
without destruction to the constitution itself, and surely the representative
is chosen not to subvert or aid in subverting, but to support the constitution;
and it manifestly is the highest inconsistency to suppose the people would
choose trustees to take from them that very right by which they chose them. It
is a right which the people cannot give away, it is truly a divine right, prior
and paramount to all laws, and which may be modelled, but cannot be resigned.
How truly contemptible then, how thoroughly wicked is that Grenvillean idea,
that a virtual representative can rightfully take the privilege of electing
from the people of America?

NUMBER IV.
Potior visa est periculosa libertas, quieto servitio.
SALLUST.
Liberty procured with danger, seemed preferable to slavery with case.

IN my preceding papers, I have endeavored to warn my countrymen of the danger
that threatens their liberties. I have proved, from the sentiments of the
greatest men of all ages, and from the histories of nations, how necessarily
virtue, happiness and strength, attend a free government; and that weakness,
vice, ignominy and wretchedness, are the unavoidable concomitants of slavery. I
have farther taken the liberty of suggesting to my countrymen, the necessity of
instructing their representatives to petition to our most Gracious Sovereign
against the late acts of the British Parliament; which are destructive of the
rights and liberties of the British colonies in America. And I shall now
proceed to offer the outlines of the instructions, which it is incumbent on the
people, as they value the liberty their forefathers bequeathed them, to give
their representatives.

1. That we the freeholders or electors of the -- country or -- borough, are
fully sensible, that the privilege, which we have always possessed, of electing
our own representatives, to raise taxes, or levy money upon us, as the
exigencies of government shall require, and we are able to supply, is
essentially necessary to our freedom: So that without this privilege, we must
inevitably be slaves.

2. That we regard every attempt to take this privilege from us, or to injure
us for not resigning it, as in the highest manner oppressive and unjust.

3. That we consider such attempts made upon any one colony, equally
interesting to every British colony in America.

4. We therefore recommend it to you, in the most earnest manner, by the regard
you have for our liberties and rights, with which we have now entrusted you, to
do your utmost in the next Assembly, toward having petitions drawn up to our
most Gracious King against the late acts of the British Parliament, for
billeting soldiers in America, for suspending the government of New York and
for laying certain duties, for the purpose of raising money on glass, paper,
paint, etc. imported into America from GreatBritain.

5. We think, and shall always think, that any impositions whatever laid upon
us by the British Parliament, which does not and cannot represent us, are
absolutely destructive of our liberty.

6. We therefore recommend it to you, that you endeavor to have these our
sentiments formed into a petition of rights; or in any other manner that shall
seem, to your wisdom, most proper to procure their being established into a
bill of rights; to the end that we may no more be alarmed with invasions of our
liberties, but rest in peace, each man under his own vine, and each man under
his own ^ig-tree.

7. We again heartily recommend the utmost attention to these our most
important concerns; and we promise to support you, in the prosecution of these
measures, to the utmost of our abilities.

These I think are the necessary heads of the instructions, which ought to be
given to all the representatives of the people in America. They specify what we
feel to be our rights, and what have been the invasions of them; they recommend
to our representatives, to petition against these violations, and to endeavor
the preventing them for the future; lastly, they promise them a just support in
this business.

It has been objected to this method of petitioning, that it will probably be
ineffectual; and this supposition is founded upon the fate of our petitions and
remonstrances against the Stamp Act. The disregard they met with, it is
thought, will fall upon these, But I must beg leave to think there is no
validity in this objection; because the circumstances of things is entirely
altered. The affairs of America were then neither at all understood; nor in the
least regarded. I remember to have heard some considerable members say in the
lobby, during the debates on the repeal of the Stamp Act, that, though they
were in the House when it first passed, yet they did not pay so much attention
to the reading as to hear what the bill contained. It is not so now; the
affairs of America have become the object of national attention; and I am
confident, the American petitions will not be again treated so cavalierly, nay,
I would venture to assert, that no Minister will dare to imitate the violence
of Mr. Grenville, in suppressing or withholding these petitions. I must observe
further on this head, that two things more contributed to the rendering those
petitions abortive; one was, that the colonies were not by any means unanimous
in sending them; the other was, that either through want of proper
Instructions, or though neglect of them, the affair was not properly managed at
home, VIRGI^^A was, I think, the only colony that remonstrated and petitioned
at first; few only did so at all; and therefore the general sense of the
colonies, expressed by their Assemblies, will hardly meet with the same fate.
Either no instructions were sent, directing our remonstrances and petitions to
be made public, or they were not complied with in time; and this omission had
the fatal effect of prejudicing the people of England against our proceedings.
They thought us violent and disrespectful in making such spirited resolves, and
opposing the execution of the Stamp Act, without previously petitioning against
it. Innumerable times did I hear this urged against the Americans; which would
not have happened, had our remonstrances and petitions been made public. The
people of England are candid, just, and generous; under the influence of
passion, they may act repugnant to this character, but otherwise I am confident
they never will; I am confident they will applaud our conduct, when they
perceive we are vindicating our liberties, in a respectful, though firm and
spirited manner, in the manner that they themselves began to reclaim their own,
in the time of James I. The voice of the people of England has that weight with
the administration, which the voice of every free people ought to have; it has
great weight; and therefore care should be taken to render it favorable, which
a fair appeal to them, will, in consequence of that nobleness of nature which
distinguishes them, generally obtain. I do not wish to injure those Gentlemen
who serve the colonies as agents; but it is notorious, that many of them were
our enemies in the affair of the Stamp Act: some of them, I know, were
outrageously such. I think it my Duty to admonish my countrymen of this, that
they may not trust these very important concerns to those, who, from the nature
of things, cannot be sufficiently interested in them, and of whose abilities we
cannot be proper judges. I submit it to their consideration, whether we might
not reasonably expect more success from men chosen from among ourselves; on
whose known wisdom, integrity and spirit, we might safely roly.

I WILL beg the reader to indulge me a little longer, while I touch upon the
right of constituents to instruct their representatives. It has been lately
denied that they have such a right. I say, lately, that is, since the system of
corruption, which is now arrived at so dangerous a height, began first to
predominate in our constitution. Then it was, that arbitrary Ministers, and
their prostituted dependents, began to maintain this doctrine, dangerous to our
liberty, that the representatives were independent of the people. This was
necessary to serve their own tyrannical and selfish purposes; it was therefore
called by Sir John Barnard and others, a new and wicked Doctrine: "It is, Sir,"
said Sir William Wyndh^em, "not only a new doctrine, but it is the most
monstrous, the most flavish doctrine, that was ever heard, and such a doctrine
as I hope no man will ever dare to support within these walls. See the debates
on the septennial bill, 1734.
."

MY Lord Coke, in his institutes, says, "it is also a law and custom of
Parliament, that when any new device is moved in the King's behalf in
Parliament, for his aid, or the like, the Commons may answer, that they
tendered the King's estate, and are ready to aid the same, only in this new
device they dare not agree without conference with their countries; whereby it
appears that such conference is warrantable by the law and custom of
Parliament." He has cited an instance of this in the Parliament held the 9th of
Edward III. and Mr. Petit, in his Jus Parliamentarium, has given another
precedent of it in the 13th year of the same reign. It appears then, that by
the constitution, the representatives ought not to agree to any new device,
before they have taken the sentiments of their constituents; and why agree to
any old device? Because they are supposed to have received already the
instructions of the people. The constitution therefore supposes the Knight or
Burgess always to receive the instructions of his constituents, before he acts;
and surely, when these are received, it would be the highest absurdity to
suppose the member was not bound by them, for this would be to set the opinion
and interests of one man against those of thousands; which would be absurd,
ruinous, and unjust. It is, without question, but common justice, that they who
are to feel the effects of any measure, should direct in the conduct of it,
otherwise they would be slaves and wretched tools; the representatives are
trustees for their constituents, to transact for them the business of
government; and therefore I presume it is, that the writ runs, to serve in
Parliament; and for this service, they, like all other agents, were paid by
their constituents; 'til they found it more advantageous to fell their voices
in Parliament, and then it was they broached this monstrous doctrine, and
wished to become independent of the people. I hope the origin of this opinion
will suffice to condemn it; the right of the people to instruct, must have
began with the constitution, because it is necessary to that freedom which is
the essence of it, and is founded in the laws of justice, which are eternal and
immutable; and when this right is taken from us, we may justly complain, as
Demesthenes did for the Athenians, "that the representative has now usurped the
right of the people, and exercises an arbitrary authority over his ancient and
natural lord See his third Olynthian.
." Nor is there any one instance in which the people have abused this right, or
reason to apprehend they will ever do it; they act from what they feel; and
when that feeling is general, it must be real:

"The Nobility and Gentry," says Mr. Addison, "have so many private
expectations, and particular interests, that hang like a false b^ass upon their
judgments, and may possibly dispose them to sacrifice the good of their country
to the advancement of their own fortunes; whereas the gross of the people can
have no other prospect in changes and revolutions, than of public blessings,
that are to diffuse themselves through the whole state in general Addison's
travels.
."

FOR these reasons, I hold it to be an ancient and unalienable right in the
people, to instruct their representatives; nor has it any weight with me, that
Mr. Blackstone, in his commentary on the law of England, has asserted the
contrary; since he founds his opinion on that fiction, of a person's being,
after he is elected, the representative of the whole kingdom, and not of a
particular part. The sophistry of this argument is sufficiently manifest, and
has been fully exploded. The British constitution is not to be new-modelled by
every Court Lawyer Mr. Blackstone is Solicitor to the Queen.
; any more than the liberties of America are to be reasoned down, or wafted
away from us, by the silver tongue, or venal breath of a Court judge Lord M-ns
-- ld who supported the right of Parliament over America, against Lord Camden.
.

NUMBER V.
Ad reipublic^^ firmandas and stabiliendas vires, sanandos populos, omnis
nostra p^rgit oration.
CICERO de Legibus.
The aim of these papers is to establish the rights of the colonies, to provide
for their strength and welfare, upon a sure and solid foundation.

WHEN I earnestly recommend to my countrymen in America, the instructing their
real representatives to petition to our most Gracious Sovereign against those
late acts of the British Parliament, which infringe our liberties, and for a
confirmation of those rights, which we have hitherto uninterruptedly possessed,
I comply perfectly, in my judgment, with the profession made in this motto. For
these acts tending to make all property among us precarious, to expose us to
vice, violence and contempt, are but too manifestly inconsistent with our
strength or welfare; and a confirmation of our rights, would establish them on
a sure and solid foundation, so as to merit the title of the Magna Charta
Americana. What were the means, by which our forefathers in England obtained
their Magna Charta, I do not stop here to enquire; it is privileges which they
had long enjoyed; and what was therefore in justice their due. The rights we
claim, have been our uninterrupted possession for upwards of an hundred years.
I say uninterrupted; for otherwise our rights are as old as the British
constitution, since we are the direct and lineal descendants of Britons. Our
American forefathers had therefore no absolute occasion for charters to confirm
their liberties to us their descendants, as it must have been concluded that we
were in course entitled to them; but they justly considered, that a possession
so dear as liberty could not be guarded with too much security. This
consideration is a sufficient answer to those, who conclude our privileges to
be null and void, because they were held from the Royal charter; which, say
they, it is not in the power of prerogative to grant See the Lords protest
against the repeal of the Stamp Act.
these charters are not grants of new rights, but in confirmation of old ones;
nor is it worth disputing whether prerogative could grant them; it would be
enough for us, that prerogative did grant them, that the Parliament acquiesced
in the grant, and that the free people of Britain acted under the security of
that grant. Surely the^ (...) could not be deemed consistent with the laws of
honor or justice, that the Parliament (...) ^ould suffer the people to be
deluded by a nugatory grant; that they should (...), at least, these charters,
under the security of which, the first settlers might be tempted to divest
themselves of the real liberties they possessed in Great Britain. The very
supposition is in the highest manner derogatory of the credit, and injurious to
the honor of Parliament; and therefore cannot be admitted. But this
supposition, wretched as it is, will become still more contemptible, when we
reflect, that the last of these charters was granted in the reign of George the
Second, when there remained little doubt concerning the nature of the British
constitution, the liberties of the people, or the power of prerogative, since
the bill of rigths had, long before that period, fixed them upon the same
determined principles by which they have ever since been governed. And this
last charter, has reserved to the Americans the same privileges, and in the
same words, as has the first in the reign of James the First. What? Were all
the Parliaments, from that period to this, asleep, that they suffered
prerogative thus to usurp their rights; till Grenville and his patriotic party
awakened this Parliament to reclaim them?

OF the same leaven is that supposition, that these liberties were never
intended or thought of in those charters See the protest.
. Have words then no meaning, or are they to give up their meaning, like we our
liberties, to please the accomplished Mr. Grenville? The words are reserving to
the Americans, the privileges, immunities, franchises and liberties of British
subjects, as if born within the realm of Britain. Could words so express, so
positive as these, be without meaning? Could they fail being perfectly
understood, by those who granted and those who received the charters? To
imagine then that the first settlers did not understand these words, in the
sense of giving their property by their own consent, expressed by themselves,
or their representatives, which was the well known ground of British liberty,
when, agreeably to this acceptance, they immediately chose representatives to
tax them, and who have continued solely to lay impositions upon them, is a
supposition that deserves only to be mentioned, that it may be despised. It is
like all the rest of Grenville's sophistry, most contemptible; indeed I have
often lamented, that Mr. Grenville's speech, in support of the Stamp Act, was
not printed, as well as Mr. Pitt's against it. The wretched sophistry, with
which he endeavored to prove the legitimacy of his hideous offspring, seemed
to me the strongast mark of its being spurious. How strange, how very strange
it is, that a wise, a free, a generous people, should ever have been influenced
by a man, who never, in any one act of his administration, showed either wisdom
or virtue; and whose chief characteristic, is the being obstinately wedded to
his own weak, confined and wicked politics! Strange that they do not see their
own liberties embarked in the some bottom with ours; and that the violence
which sinks the one, must overwhelm the other. When our rights are thus plain
and indubitable, our case becomes general, and Britain herself is interested in
the support of it: Whenever our liberties are laid low, their rights and
privileges will not be be of long duration; whenever any impious man shall dare
to impose shackles upon us, their hands will not long remain unsettered.

The liberties then of our forefathers, were coeval with the British
constitution, they were confirmed by various Kings, and recognized by various
Parliaments; we then my countrymen are free: And let us tell our brethren in
Britain, that we are free; let us tell it with a spirit becoming those who
claim so noble a brotherhood; with a British spirit, than which a nobler never
yet animated a free people!

IN looking forward, to the very probable consequences of a peaceable
acquiescence under the late assumed authority of the British Parliament, I
shudder with apprehension. Our money only is seized upon now, to relieve the
debt of Great Britain; and will not our youth be ravaged from us next to fight
her battles, in the fields of Germany, or in the Indian ocean? Will not a
press-gang be our next scourge? I see already men torn from their weeping and
distressed families, without hope, without redress, never to return, by an
unrelenting, lawless crew, unbridled by our own civil and legislative
authority, and wantonly cruel in the execution of despotic power. I see every
endearing tie of father, husband, son and brother, torn asunder, unrespited,
unpitied, unreprieved. I see my weeping country, worn down with reiterated
sorrows and alarms, imploring aid, peace, respite, or revenge: Alas! In vain,
her youthful sons are now no more, fallen in foreign wars and on unhospitable
shores; nothing but feeble age remains to mix his unavailing tears with hers.
Gods! Are we men, and shall we suffer the foundation to be laid for miseries
like these; shall we look tamely on while the yoke is fixed upon us, under
which we must for ever groan? We and our posterity forever. Shall we thus
devote ourselves and them to the malice of private lurking informers, and the
hateful insults of petty authority; to be hunted like beasts of prey, like
murderers and felons; our property, our liberty, our happiness given up to
Ministers, who having grown savage in the exercise of despotism, shall contrive
for us new hardships, new oppressions, and tyrannize without measure, without
fear, without mercy. Even in England, a Minister has been found daring and
wicked enough to propose in Parliament, that authority should be given to the
officers of press-gangs of break into any house, and at any time, and carry off
any one who was said to be a sailor, to make it punishable for any one to
conceal such men, and to put them to their own oath, to prove the facts for
which they were to suffer. And this bill, fraught as it was with cruelty and
oppression, could hardly be rejected by the universal indignation expressed
against it, by all the efforts of patriotism and powers of eloquence, such as
even Cicero and Demosthenes never excelled. What shall we then, who are
unrepresented, unfriended and unheard expect? Shall we hope a Minister so
wicked and so daring will never live? Vain hope, even now he lives. Mr. Pitt's
speech informs us that Sir Robert Walpole, daring and wicked as he was, did not
dare to tax America. But he who has dared, has wickedly dared to tax her, lives
still, he lives to see his measures adopted, asserted and executed; and he may
live to propose successfully an impress bill for America. When such a bill,
tyrannical in itself, and parental of tyranny in others, giving considence to
the arrogant, and security to the cruel, shall have passed; then must we
prepare to see our property ravished from us, our houses broke open, our wives,
our daughters, violated, ourselves torn from the tenderness and caresses of our
families, and dragged, with every circumstance of violence and barbarity, ot
hardships, labor, insults, and oppression. So will the tyrant or his minions
doom; such are the ills which tyranny invents, and slavery must bear; ills,
which cannot be heard without indignation, nor thought of without horror. If
the reader would see to what dangerous and daring lengths a tyrannizing
Minister will go, and how fat the modesty of a real representative will suffer
him, he will do well peruse the debates on the impress and excise bills.
If there be yet any among my countrymen, who doubt whether Grenville himself
would be capable of such atrocious cruelties, let such bethink them how
necessary a part of his plan a press-bill is, to continue us in that weakness,
which having once admitted, will always confirm his tyranny. The taking from us
our youth, and strength, will rivet the chains, which the giving and granting
our property must impose upon us. Even those who Counsel, ignoble ease, and
peaceful sloth,
flatter themselves, that when we grow stronger, we shall shake off the yoke.
Delusive hope! Will the tyrannous minister suffer us to grow stronger? Does
slavery give strength? Have I not shown that the fabric which liberty rears to
beauty, strength and grandeur, by slavery is soon defaced and ruined See
Monitor II.
? We have indeed grown strong, and flourished to amazement, for our years; but
why? Because the unquestioned enjoyment of liberty and property, drew emigrants
to us in troops: but when these attractions are no more, when, in their stead,
grim tyranny shall rear his hideous form, who is it that will approach him?
Then, when an American and a slave are one, who is it that will voluntarily
seek bondage in America? If any man be yet inclined to leave his liberty at
mercy, and trust in the justice and humanity of great men, let them read the
list of bribes, for which the Chancellor Bacon set justice to sale; let him
examine the impeachments of the Chief Justice Tressilian, and the rest of the
judges, the campaign of Jess;rey's and the administration of Sir Robert Walpole
All those invaders of the liberties of the people were afterward called to an
account for it by the real representatives of the people; had they been
virtual, they would have aided the tyranny instead of impeaching it.
Tressilian, and the judges, were hanged at the instance of the Commons, alarmed
at the cries, and incensed at the injuries of their oppressed constituents; but
our virtual representative would neither hear our cries, see our oppressions,
nor redress our grievances.
; then blush at his credulity, and retract his error.

SOME there are, who acknowledging, for who can deny it, the violation of our
liberties, yet think there is a necessity of submitting to it. Necessity,
absolute necessity, is a formidable sound; well calculated to awe the weak into
silence, and terrify the timid into submission. But, for my part, I cannot
conceive the necessity of becoming a slave, while there remains a ditch in
which one may die free; nor can I well imagine a greater necessity ever to
exist, than that which impended over the Athenians, from Xerxes, and his
million, over the starving Romans, from a powerful besieger, over the unwarlike
people of Flanders, from veteran troops, and a very potent Monarch, or than
that which now operates upon the Corsicans, from the French and Gen^ese, upon
the Georgians, from the mighty force of the Turkish empire. They who know that
the battle is not always to the strong, nor the race to the swift, will not pay
a very ready acquiescence to formidable words, and consident assertions. But,
where is the necessity that withholds us from carrying the sufferings of the
innocent, and the injuries of the oppressed, to the foot of the throne? That
throne, whose supports are justice and mercy, that throne, from whence our most
gracious Sovereign has already promised us, that he will maintain the liberties
and rights of all his subjects. I counsel not seditions and tumultuous
opposition, but a clear and respectful representation of our rights and
grievances, with an humble petition for relief. And I rely on the known grace
and justice of his Majesty, for redress, on the virtue of the free people of
England, for encouragement and approbation. But in no event must our liberties
be given up; our liberties, which like the hairs of the strong man, are the
seat of our strength; if these therefore be shorn away, it will be then in vain
to cry out The Philistines be upon you.

NUMBER VI.
Oppression, tyranny, and power usurped,
Draw all the vengeance of his arm upon them.
CATO.
WHY, my friend, said a Gentleman the other day, do you employ your time in
writing on Liberty, which may possibly bring you into some difficulties or
danger; when you might use it so much more to your own emolument? -- Because
Liberty is the very idol of my soul, the parent of virtue, the nurse, of
heroes, the dispenser of general happiness; because slavery is the monstrous
mother of every abominable vice, and every atrocious ill; because the liberties
of my country are invaded, and in danger of entire destruction, by the late
acts of the British Parliament; because I would with joy be the sacrifice to
the re-establishment of them, upon a sure and solid foundation. Very many there
are, infinitely more able than myself, to support the rights of their country,
and why they comply not with this most cogent of all duties, I cannot divine.
Perhaps they think not with me, that it is the duty of every man to pay the
tribute of speaking out, to his country; to rouse the spirit of Liberty, to
protest against what he cannot prevent, and claim, without ceasing, what he
cannot by his own strength recover. And, surely no mortal can aspire to a
higher station, or to greater glory, than that of being, on every occasion, the
support of good, the control of bad government, and the guardian of public
liberty.

WHEN I consider the willingness and alacrity with which the people resign the
greatest part of the fruits of their labor, for the ease and luxury, of their
Governors; for which they expect, in neturn, protection to their persons, and
security in the free use of the remaining pittance; I am fired with indignation
at the ingratitude and wickedenss of those who, envying them the free enjoyment
even of that pittance, would urge them still further, endeavor arbitrarily to
extort from them the last farthing, and have their persons at devotion, who
would put saddles upon the backs, and bridles in the mouths of the rest of the
community, that they themselves might securely spur and goad them, as the
wantonness of vice, the insatiability of avarice, or the atrociousness of
cruelty may suggest. These are the views of ^yrants and their minions, these
were the views of him who devised the Stamp Act for America, and the rest of
those acts, of which we are now complaining. We have ever contributed both in
men and money, with the utmost of our abilities, to the support of government;
but we have done it constitutionally, by our own consent, given in our several
assmblies to the requisitions of our Sovereign; what then do these new acts aim
at, but the extorting from us, as slaves, the remainder of that which we gave,
as freemen? The abolishing, or what is the same, the rendering our Assemblies
nugatory and useless, by vesting the disposal of our property, and the
arbitration of our liberty, and the dispensation of justice, in a British
Minister, and British Parliament. That we may be reined and spurred at will,
that our properties, our lives, and every thing that is dear and sacred among
men, may be at the absolute disposal of those, who, instead of being under any
control from us, under any necessity to treat us with tenderness and prudence,
will have all the incitements that can urge men, inflamed by power, mis^ed by
folly, and stimulated by ambition, to exhaust us with absurd or continual
exactions, and sink us down with merciless and unremitting oppressions.

Is any imagination capable of conceiving a people more absolute, more abject
slaves, than when they are taxed, not only without their consent, but directly
contrary to their express will? Yet this must be the state of the Americans, if
taxed by the British Parliament, when they choose representatives for that
purpose. The very idea of it is absurd, is monstrous, big with iniquity,
stupidity, and evil; nor is it wonderful, that more than an hundred years
should have passed away, before the man was born who could devise so vile a
complication of tyranny and folly.

THE attempt of any Minister, to take from us the right of giving our money by
our own consent, (of which, from long experience we know the value, and how
essential it is to our freedom) to annihilate our own representative, and
constitute an unlimited authority over us, deserves surely no better treatment,
than that of being branded as tyrannous and foolish. Taxing us against our
express will, is adding insult to oppression; doing it without our consent, is
taking from us at once all (...) property. For what property can I have in
that, which another may take from me, rightfully, without my consent? "To tax
me, without consent, is little better, if at all, than downright robbing me. I
am sure the great patriots of liberty and property, the free people of England
cannot think of such a thing but with abhorrence These are the words of an able
politician and generous patriot, Mr. Molyneux, in his defense of Ireland,
against its being bound by acts of the British Parliament; and it is worth
remarking, that an answer written to it, and dedicated to the Lord Chancellor
Summers, disclaims the right of taxing Ireland, but maintains the justice of a
supreme jurisdiction; it is therefore probable that this was the opinion of my
Lord Summers; indeed the idea of taxing without consent is too monstrous ever to
have entered the head of any one but an abandoned tyrant. With respect to
America, this remained to be the chef d'oeuvre of Mr. Grenville.
."

THERE are some who think, they fully justify this oppression on the Americans,
by saying, there are great numbers of people in Great Britain, who never vote
for a representative, yet are taxed by the British Parliament. This, as
sophistry often does, seems to carry weight with it; but it is a mere petitio
principio, a begging the question. We are not contending that our rabble, or
all unqualified persons, shall have the right of voting, or not be taxed; but
that the freeholders, and electors, whose right accrues to them from the common
law, or from charter, shall not be deprived of that right; and, let any man
show me one instance in Great Britain, where a man, so qualified, does not vote
for a representative? Is it not then most pitiful, most detestable sophistry,
to tell us, that because there are a number of people in Great Britain, who
are, by the constitution, unqualified to vote for a representative, and yet are
taxed, therefore all the people in America, who are qualified, shall be treated
in the same manner? This is truly Grenvillian reasoning, a confusion of
absurdity and injustice, too flagrant to be extenuated, too gross to admit of
exaggeration. When such arguments are used, to justify the usurpation of our
liberties, it is surely time for the people of England to be alarmed, lest,
when tyranny, which, from its nature, knows no bounds, becomes unsatiated with
despotic rule in America, the same argument should be turned upon them, and an
arbitrary Minister should say, that, as one third of the people of Britain have
been long taxed, without their consent, it can be no injury or injustice to
reduce the rest to the same condition. And, certainly, the having enslaved
America, under the shadow of such reasoning, will be no feeble precedents for
trying its efficacy in Great Britain. It is true, nothing but force will ever
accommodate it to our comprehensions here; and a standing army, artfully
increased, or maintained in America, may one day give it the same weight there.
Certain it is, that the British grandeur and constitution, stands or falls with
us; we are her natural and necessary support, and when we fall, it must be like
the strong man, embracing the pillars of her constitution, and its ruins will
follow us.

SOME of my countrymen seem to think, that as we are weak, we should be silent;
and endeavor, by manufacturing for ourselves, to convince Great Britain of our
importance to her prosperity; and therefore induce her to treat us with more
tenderness, justice and respect.

BUT they must pardon me, for differing with them; for, though I am well
satisfied that we might supply ourselves with manufactures, and thereby give a
very sensible wound to the trade of Britain, yet this is but an inadequate
method of vindicating our rights. Our view should be to re-establish our
constitution; not to injure or quarrel with the people of Britain: And when I
have advised the forming associations for the encouragement of manufactures, it
was chiefly with this intention, that if the inexorable severity of Britain
should refuse us redress, we might not be absolutely dependent upon her for the
necessaries of life. The bond of union between Great Britain and America, is
support from us, protection from her; should we no longer continue to supply
her with raw materials, and consume her manufactures, that union would be
dissolved. I therefore cannot think this method altogether eligible, neither do
I conceive it adequate. For, to what purpose shall we save money, which others
may take away at pleasure?

THE Farmer has already, in his very useful letters, developed, with great
sagacity, the designs and tendency of the late act concerning America; and he
has, with equal perspicuity, and political learning, warned us of their
consequences, and exhorted us against permitting encroachments; which, however
small at first, will soon be drawn into precedents for the most dangerous and
oppressive invasions of Liberty. Suffer me to add my feeble voice to his, and
exhort you to suppress the disease in its infancy; lest it arrive to a degree
of violence, dangerous in its effects, and uncertain in its remedy.

IT is easy to show, that the right assumed by any one of the three acts of
Parliament, already specified, if given up, would be sufficient to enslave us.
As the influence of money and places, generally procures to the Minister a
majority in Parliament, in the conduct even of British affairs, it will
certainly be secure in those of America: This right may therefore be
considered, as in the Crown and its Minister.

LET us suppose, then, that the Minister possessed the right alone of forming a
revenue by duties, upon goods imported from Great Britain; what would be the
consequence? Either that we must cease to take any goods whatever from Britain,
and therefore dissolve the union between us; or, the Minister would have it in
his power to raise money upon us at pleasure. Our Assemblies would then be of
no use, we should have no restraint upon the Crown, no method of ingratiating
ourselves with our Sovereign, by granting him aids; the Crown would have
obtained a perpetual revenue from us, which the Commons of Britain know would
be so injurious to their liberties, that they have ever guarded against it with
unremitting vigilance. Under the influence of such a right, we should
experience the fate of the Roman people, in the deplorable times of their
slavery, and be sleeced by every exaction which the ingenuity of tax-gatherers
could devise Tacitus, after giving a long list of taxes, under which they
groaned, adds, et qu^^ alia exactionibus illicitis nomina publicani invenerent.
; and we should, like that miserable people, pay tributes, not by law and
reason, but at the will of the Minister Sub imperatoribus vectigalia, non lege
ac ratione, sed arbitratu imperatorum processerunt. Buling de trib: et vectig:
P. R.
. We should be slaves.

BUT if we possessed, as we ought, the right of granting money for a revenue,
by our own Assemblies only; and the Minister had either that of supporting and
quartering troops upon us at will, or of suspending our legislature at his
pleasure, we should, in the same manner, be reduced to slavery; for, unless our
elections are free, they are useless; and, how easy it would be for a Minister
to force and form them to his own purposes, with troops at his devotion, is
self evident. The Parliament of Britain has therefore taken care to enact that
no troops shall ever be near the places of their election. In a similar manner,
would the suspending power operate to force the voice of the representative
body, though freely chosen, so that the Crown and its Minister, would, by this
single right, be arbitrary in America. It is such a power as this, that renders
the Parliament of France useless to the people, and enables their Monarch to
rule without control. In short, freedom in electing our members, who shall,
with a free voice, give our consent to the taxes laid upon us, is an
indispensable requisite to the preservation of our liberty; it is the essence
of our constitution, and every attempt to violate it, is dangerous and alarming.

WE, therefore, my countrymen, must never cease to remonstrate against every
such attempt; and to claim our rights without fear or intermission; we must
imitate the illustrious example of the British Barons, in their Nolumus leges
Anglioe mutari.
We will not have the constitution changed.


NUMBER VII.
"The legislative power must not raise taxes on the property of the people,
without the consent of the people, given by themselves, or their deputies."
LOCK on Government, chap. xi.
MR. LOCK, one of the clearest reasoners the world has yet seen, and who seems
first to have taught men precision in thinking, has, in the words above, laid
down, clearly and explicitly, the principle of freedom in the British
constitution; taxation by representation only. This essential right, inherent,
unalienably inherent, in the people, or their representative, is wrested from
us by the late acts, and, to show how absolute the slavery is, to which we must
submit, the tax is perpetual, and the produce of it is to be remitted home,
there to be disposed of by the Crown, without any control from the people, by
whom it is paid, or by their representative.

OUR property, thus taken from us, without our consent, nay, contrary to our
express will, for ever too, and submitted to the uncountrouled disposal of the
Crown, or its Minister; what further aggravation can be added? What injury,
what indignity, more? The measure of slavery (as far as money is concerned) is
now full; and there wants the humble acquiescence only of these colonies, to
pour its bitterness upon us, without mercy, and without end.

THE right of the representative of the people, to enquire into the manner in
which the taxes raised by them on their constituents have been disposed of by
the executive part of government, that is, by the Crown, or its Minister, is
also essential to liberty and good government. Without this right, taxes would
more frequently serve to make Ministers wicked, and enable them to vitiate and
corrupt the government, than they would answer the purposes for which they were
^aised. The representative of the people of Great Britain, do possess this
important privilege; and, why the colonies are not to possess it, can only be,
because they are not to be free.

I SHALL now lay before my countrymen, those parts of the act, for laying
duties on the goods we consume, which demonstrate the plenitude of that power
asserted over us.

WE, your Majesty's most dutiful subjects, the Commons of Great Britain, have
resolved to give and grant unto your Majesty, the several rates and duties
herein after mentioned; and do most humbly beseech your Majesty, that it may be
enacted, and be it enacted, etc. that from and after the twentieth day of
November, 1767, there shall be raised, levied, collected, and paid, unto his
Majesty, his heirs and successors, for, and upon the respective goods herein
after mentioned, which shall be imported from Great Britain, into any colony or
plantation in America, which now is, or hereafter may be, under the dominion of
his Majesty, his heirs, or successors, the several rates and duties following,
etc. etc. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that his
Majesty, and his successors, shall be, and are hereby empowered, from time to
time, by any warrant, or warrants, under his, or their royal sign manual, or
sign manuals, countersigned by the high treasurer, or any three or more of the
commissioners of the treasury, for the time being, to cause such moneys to be
applied, out of the produce of the duties granted by this act, as his Majesty,
or his successors, shall think proper or necessary, for the defraying the
charges of the administration of justice, and the support of the civil
government, within all, or any of the said colonies or plantations.

THE injuries and oppressions with which this act alone is fraught, are
manifest from a bare recital of these parts. Has not the administration of
government been always sufficiently provided for by the colonies themselves, in
a constitutional manner: Where then was the propriety of invading our rights,
and innovating upon the constitution for this purpose? Have we given any late
instances of such folly or stupidity, that it might be justly concluded, we
could not discern the exigencies of government; or, discerning, would not have
capacity or inclination to answer them? I think, I may safely defy the framers
and abettors of these acts, to prove this upon us. Why then are we deprived of
that check, which we had upon government, arising from that right? Surely, for
no other reason, but because we are no longer to be free.

THE advocates for this act, (who happily are indeed but very few) support it
upon this principle, that the Parliament has a right to lay duties upon her own
manufactures. The subterfuges of sophistry and injustice, are as endless as
they are futile. Let these Gentlemen show me where an import duty on British
commodities was ever laid by the British Parliament on any other people, but
the Americans. Yet unless they can do this, the instance is inapplicable. But
what would the Spaniards think, were the Parliament of Britain to lay certain
import duties on the British cloth imported into Spain; and for the purpose of
a revenue to support the civil government of Spain? Gentlemen choose to forget
the purposes of this act, when they undertake to justify it; but they will
presently hear of further purposes in it. still more abhorrent from our rights.
In the mean time, I think, a wise friend to Great Britain, would not be forward
in establishing this practice of a native's laying what duties she pleased even
on her own exports; since, under the shadow of this right, the Swede and the
Dane might raise intolerable exactions on Great Britain, for their hemp and
iron; to which she must either submit, or the British fleet would be rendered
useless They have already attempted to render the articles we must have from
them, more expensive to us, by less adequate means, than that of laying what
duties they please on their exports.
.

THIS act is also defended upon precedent; a duty, it is said, has been laid on
Madeira wine, and we have submitted to it. What then? -- Can precedent reverse
the nature of right? Can it change the eternal laws of justice? Can precedent
support that, which justice abandons? It is true, precedent, or long usage,
give a ^ind of veneration to what is right, and makes it more forcible, not
because it is more just, but because its utility also may be justly inferred
from its antiquity: But never can it make that right, which is in its nature
wrong, or vindicate injustice from impeachment. Look back into the English
history, and you will find that every right of freedom that people possesses,
has been occasionally violated; and shall it be therefore pleaded, on
precedent, that they have no rights? This would indeed be the plea of M -- s --
d and G -- v -- le, to sanctify the despotism they are executing over America;
and meditating over Britain. It has already been embraced by the artful Mr.
Hume, in vindicating the tyranny of the Stuarts, from the opprobrium it
deserved. He, because the reigns of the Tudors furnished many precedents fer
arbitrary power, cautions us, in the most friendly manner, against the useless
curiosity of looking any further back into our history, since it is covered
with darkness, and involved in perplexity; so our precedent friends, will
dissuade us from looking farther back than the short period, since a duty was
laid on Madeira wine, or the right of taxing the colonies declared. But the
learning and patriotism of Dr. Hurd have amply vindicated the liberties of
Britain, against the finesse of Mr. Hume; and, I hope, the FARMER's LETTERS
will for ever guard us against the baleful arts of these sinister friends. I
cannot quit this subject of precedent, without presenting my reader with the
sentiments of that most upright judge, and illustrious defender of British and
American liberties, my Lord Camden, in his letter on general warrants, etc.
"But even, if the usage had been both immemorial and uniform, and ten thousand
similar warrants could have been produced, it would not have been sufficient,
because, the practice must likewise be agreeable to the principles of law, in
order to be good; whereas, this is a practice inconsistent with, and in direct
opposition to the first and clearest principles of law. Immemorial uniform
usage will not even support the bye-law of a corporation, if it be flatly
repugnant to the fundamentals of the common law; much less will it authorize
the secret practice of a political office."

THE preamble of this act, for laying duties, etc. declares it expedient also,
that a revenue should be thus raised on us, "toward defraying the expenses of
defending, protecting, and securing these dominions."

NOW, I should be glad to know, in what we are to be defended, protected and
secured; not in our liberty and property, without question, for this act takes
them both away from us, and when we are deprived of the possessions we thought
our own, of the freedom we imagined was our right, what will then remain a
worthy object of invasion from others, or protection to us? But, to be more
particular on this subject of protection. These colonies have two enemies, the
French and Indians. The French are their political enemies, in consequence of
their connection with Great Britain, and the support they furnish to Britain,
enabling her to rival France, and baffle the ambitious views of that monarchy.
What are we justly to expect from Britain for this support? PROTECTION from the
French; and thus it is, as I have before observed, that the bonds of union
between Great Britain, and her colonies, are, support from us, protection from
her. There are some people who cannot see how we support Great Britain; yet
nothing is more obvious, nothing more easily comprehended. It is but to reflect
a moment on the number of ships and seamen the trade to the colonies supports,
the manufacturers they maintain, and the taxes they pay in the consumption of
British manufactures. The Tobacco trade, alone, may be computed to maintain
upwards of 4000 seamen If I mistake not, it is computed in a very sensible
pamphlet, written in America, during the agitation of the Stamp Act, that the
tobacco trade employed of British seamen, 4500, the sugar trade, 3600, the
Newfoundland fishery, 4000. In this view alone, America would be a very
important nursery for British seamen, and we well know her prosperity depends
on them.
, and 250 sail of ships annually; and the very great value of the whole
plantation trade, may be easily judged from the veneration which is paid in
Britain to the act of navigation which secures that trade to her. It is
speaking greatly within bounds, to say, there are 100, 000 manufacturers in
Great Britain, who draw their daily subsistence from America; and, I am much
mistaken, if the colonies do not actually pay, half a million, at least, of the
taxes in Great Britain, The manner in which they pay it, is plain; the shoes I
now have on, were made in England; the grazier, or butcher, who sold the raw
hide, paid the land tax, and was reimbursed by the tanner, with interest; in
like manner, the tanner was repaid by the shoemaker, for that, and every other
tax, which he might pay, window-lights, etc. local or general; and this I
refund to the shoemaker, with interest upon it, and all his taxes, besides the
taxes of the merchant, and all others, who are necessary to my obtaining the
manufacture I want; all these charges must be, and are always accumulated on
the price, the consumer must at length pay for the commodity Mr. Gee, therefore
with great propriety, says, "If we examine into the circumstances of the
inhabitants of the plantations, and our own, it will appear that not one fourth
of the produce redounds to their own profit. -- On Trade.
.

PROTECTION from the attacks of our European enemies, is justly due to us on
the part of Britain; and, from the Indians, I humbly apprehend, we can defend
ourselves. It is not probable, the whole force which the Indians could possibly
bring against us, would amount (were all the nations we know, combined, which
is hardly possible) to 30, 000 sighting men; our Militia, on the continent,
amounts to more than 100, 000. We effectually maintained 25, 000 troops, during
the last war: Is it then to be presumed we are not able to defend ourselves
against the Indians? Is it presumeable we shall not always be able to defend
ourselves against them, when it is certain they decrease, and, on the contrary,
we increase, so as to double our number in 25 years, This act would indeed
render such protection necessary, because it would make us slaves; and the
state of slavery, is that of weakness. To suppose we want protection from the
Indians, is to imagine we have greatly indeed degenerated from the spirit of
our forefathers; who, when not a tenth of our number, not only defended
themselves from them, but drove them as far back as they pleased. Have we not,
with ease, defended ourselves against them for upwards of 100 years, and what
instance has this period furnished of such national degeneracy, that we may be
supposed incapable of continuing this defense? The supposition of such
incapacity, is an insult that hardly has an equal, except i^ be that of
importing a few Hessian and Hanoverian mercenaries, to defend Great Britain
from the invasions of the French.

I HAVE marked a single word in the preamble of this act, which points out a
very alarming purpose of this tax, in its being raised for the use of all, or
any of the colonies. It is but too plain, that we are taxed in this
unconstitutional manner, of support the unfertile dominion of Florida, and the
conquered province of Canada. By the custom-house accounts in the year 1766,
Canada produced 22, 000 pounds yearly: Florida nothing. They are maintained at
half a million annual expense to Britain: They were conquered and secured by
our united endeavors, with those of the British troops, in which we furnished
a large quota of troops, and suffered heavy taxes. They never can be of any
advantage to us, but may be eventually injurious, by rendering our produce less
valuable. Yet, we are to pay for their support and protection: We are to
maintain a small army of British troops in them, not only for their security,
but to enforce, occasionally, upon ourselves, any oppressive measures, which an
arbitrary or ignorant Minister, shall wickedly devise, and obstinately pursue.
In this miserable state, we may have the poor comfort, perhaps, of murmuring
out, like the wretched Romans, in the times of their slavery, when grievously
taxed by their Emperors, to bribe the Barbarians from invading the remote
provinces.

Facta est servitus nostra, pretium securitatis alienae!
Our slavery is to provide for the security of others.
P. S. I did intend to say something particular about our petition to his
Majesty; but, as that is in a fair way of being considered in its proper place,
the H -- of B -- g -- s, it would be unnecessary: I will, however, beg leave to
mention one thing, that should be prayed for, namely, that his Majesty would be
graciously pleased, always to withhold his assent to any bill, in which we are
concerned, till we are apprized of it, and can lay our sense of it at his feet.
This, the remoteness of our situation, renders just and necessary.

NUMBER VIII.
-- Nill sine magno
Vita labor dedit mortalibus. --
Every pursuit in life requires industry.

GO to the ant, thou sluggard, and learn her ways, faith the wisdom of Solomon:
and never was there any people, or any time, in which such a lesson was more
necessary, more beneficial. This is the period, in which our happiness, our
liberties, depend in a great measure, on our industry in manufacturing for
ourselves the necessaries of life. So far, the first of all charities In ipsa
autem communitate, sunt gradus officiorum, ex quibus quid cuique proestat,
intelligi possit; ut prima dis immortalibus, secunda patrioe, tertia
parentibus, deinceps gradatim reliquis debeantur. -- CICERO.
, the preservation of our country demands; that we may not be under a dangerous
and slavish dependence on any other people. To urge manufactures further at
present, with a view of distressing Great Britain, more than is absolutely
requisite to our own welfare, is what I do not wish to see; it is abhorrent
totally from my heart, and I hope from those of all my countrymen. I love, I
revere, Great Britain, her history is the illustrious record of heroes and
patriots; her clifts are the venerable ramparts of freedom. Never did any
people so long preserve such an uniform character for bravery, wisdom, and
virtue; and above all for an invincible spirit of liberty. Never did any people
better deserve the blessings she bestows. Who then could behold without
concern, without the deepest concern, this glorious bulwark of civil and
religious liberties, crumbled into dust, by the unrelenting aversion of her
colonies. For sure I am, that it is in the power of these colonies, to work the
fall of Britain, by un^^mitting industry in manufactures; I am sure, upon the
maturest reflection, she is so dependent on America for support, that without
it, she must speedily sink, with all her blushing honors into ruin. The
balance o^ trade is against her in Europe; America and India, reimburse and
sustain her; but without the former, the latter would be very unequal to her
support. With the political, as well as the natural body, the seeds of
inevitable dissolution, are incorporated; bravery, ^^quest, riches, luxury,
anarchy, ruin; behold the sated course, which the best constituted governments
must run Les conquetes avoient engendre le luxe, and ce luex est ^oujours
l'avant coureur de la chute des empires. Valeur, conquetes, luxe, anarchie,
voila le cercle fatal, and les differens periodes de la vie politic de
presque tous les etats.

-- Voyage de Cyrus, p. 3.


. To this fate, Britain herself, great, glorious, mighty as she is, must come
As all human things have an end, the state we are speaking of (England) will
lose its liberty, will perish; have not Rome, Sparta, and Carthage perished? It
will perish, when the legislative power shall become more corrupt than the
executive. -- MONTESQUIEU.
: Perish the kindred hand that would wantonly precipitate her fall! The part of
British liberty, which we have hitherto enjoyed, has been sufficient to make
us, though subordinate, a flourishing and happy people; let us wait with pious
patience, till this course of nature shall gently relieve us from this
subordination, and bestow upon America, that full inheritance of liberty, which
is her birthright indeed, but which, as the younger branch, she cannot yet
claim without impious violence. Be it our care to vindicate our just rights, to
pay that due reverence to the British constitution of preserving it here in its
fundamental rights, at least (taxation by representation, trial by jury, and
habeas corpus) inviolate, that Britain may rise like a phoenix from her ashes,
to liberty and glory in America, Listen not, my dear countrymen, to those who
would incite you (if there be any such) to relinquish your connection with
Great Britain, No wound can be inflicted on her, at which our own blood will
not issue, a thousand tenderest strings of our hearts will be on the rack, when
we are dissevered from her, and the violence will make us bleed at every pore.
Just, amiable, generous and brave, as the people of Britain are, nothing would
move me to any contest with them, but that great cause, to which every other
interest must yield subordinate, the cause of liberty.

LET me now take leave to propose the following form of association for the
encouragement of American manufactures.

We the underwritten to agree, and solemnly promise to prefer on every
occasion, the manufactures of America, to those of every other country; and to
promote with the utmost of our abilities, American manufactures, so far as to
furnish ourselves with the necessaries of life.

THE beneficial influence of associations, and institutions of the same kind,
on the progress of manufactures, has been too often experienced to be now
questioned. The linen hall at Dublin, and wise regulations attentively pursued,
have brought the linen manufacture in Ireland, to state as flourishing as it is
beneficial. The board for the improvement of fisheries and manufactures in
Scotland, constituted in the year 1727, aided by a national spirit, in which we
are rather too deficient, have brought the manufacture of linen there, in a few
years, to great perfection. "They" says an approved writer FRANCIS HOME, M. D.
on bleaching, "have with unwearied and disinterested zeal, contributed in a
very great measure to raise and direct a spirit of industry among us, by their
own example, by their experience, by adopting the experience of our neighbors,
and by distributing with great prudence, those small funds, entrusted by the
government, for their management."

HAVE not we, in this colony, a committee for the same purpose? What prevents
their imitating this laudable example? The supplying ourselves with linen,
would be highly advantageous to us, without interfering with the manufactures
of Great Britain; nay, we might make it a part of our export, in return for
those commodities we may receive from her. This would save her a large balance,
paid to foreigners, for their linen. If my memory does not fail me, a
computation I received from one of the commissioners of the linen company in
Scotland, made Britain debtor for much more than half of what she consumed, and
Mr. Gee, makes the balance of trade with Germany, Flanders, and Russia, for
this article, to amount to near one million annually against Britain. We have
therefore an ample field before us, to animate and reward our industry, in
pursuing this single branch of manufactures.

THERE are many people, who seem to think the attempt of manufacturing, even
necessaries for ourselves, too arduous to be successful. But certainly, they
whose incitements are great, will overcome difficulties, which to the
unanimated, appear insurmountable. And can there be greater incitements, than
the vindicating our liberties, and maintaining a just independence of grinding
extortion, and arbitrary impositions? Were we once determined upon the attempt,
all difficulties would vanish; for what is there too laborious to be
accomplished by the fostering care and wisdom of the legislature, by a
judicious distribution of public and private bounties, by giving attention and
encouragement to every useful project, by wisdom in planning, by industry,
unanimity, and spirit in execution? The example of the Gentlemen will instruct
and encourage the poor; and associations for the use of American manufactures,
will hold up to them a sure reward for their industry and labor. These
colonies, like all young countries, abound in children; every individual of
which may, from the time they are able to move their hands or feet, be employed
in manufactures of various kinds. One may see in the manufactories of England,
the young, the decrepid, and the old people performing tasks proportioned to
their abilities, with great utility. In the Foundling Hospital, every female
child is seen knitting, sewing, or spinning; every male at the loom, or some
other useful occupation. In this colony, we have numbers of Negro children, and
superannuated field Negroes, who are rather an expense than profit; though they
are perfectly fit for manufactures, and might be engaged in them much to the
advantage of their masters. There are some worthily industrious Gentlemen among
us, who, the last year, clothed entirely upwards of an hundred of their people
with the labor chiefly of these, otherwise useless hands. It is (...)
industry, great industry, is necessary to make manufactures prosper among us;
they will never be accomplished by the slothful man, who, to speak in the
emphatical language of Solomon, sits with his hand in his bosom, and will
not so much as lift it up to his forehead; or lies in his bed, crying there is
a lion in the way, he will devour me. Slothfulness, is at all times injurious
to a state; but at this period, it may be quickly and vitally pernicious.

WHEREFORE let every man bear in his mind this admonition of a judicious poet,
Vitanda est improba siren --
Desidia --
Sloth, that baneful siren, must be shunned.


NUMBER IX.
-- Hinc spargere voces
In vulgum ambiguas et quoerere conscius arma.
Conscious of the badness of his cause, he thenceforward began to spread false
reports, and inflame the people to violence.

THE great art of Mr. Grenville and his partisans, has been, to spread such
^^mours among the people of Great Britain, as, by inflaming their passions,
should hurry them, contrary to what reason would have dictated, into an
approbation and support of his arbitrary measures. With this view every
expression of discontent under his ruinous and oppressive administration was
imputed to a desire in those colonies to dissolve all connection with Britain;
every tumult here, was inflamed into rebellion.

LET it be our study, my countrymen, to invalidate these pernicious endeavors,
as far as is consistent with the maintenance of our just rights. Let our
opposition, while it is animated by a full sense of our privileges as freemen,
be moderated by that respect and tenderness which are due to friends and
brothers. Soft words turn away wrath, and if the people in Britain have been
deceived and incensed, by the guileful practices and inflammatory arts of those
who are equally enemies to both, let us frustrate their mischievous intentions,
by gently recalling the people to their reason, by treating them as if they had
hastily shot their arrows over the house, and hurt their brothers.

IT must not be judged from what I have said, that we should resign one atom of
our rights, or ever desist, from asserting and supporting them; but the direful
necessity of doing this, by other instruments than reason, is not yet come;
when it do^^, heaven only must decide the controversy. We are engaged in a
contest the most dignified and important of any that can claim the attention or
the lives of men; a contest for liberty: Let us preserve its dignity unfullied
by ourselves, unimpaired by others. The more we reflect on the cause we are
vindicating, the more fully shall we be convinced of its justness, the more
immutably shall we be determined in its support. For my own part, every hour I
consider the late attempts upon our liberties, makes them appear more
monstrous, more replete with oppression, more absolutely productive of a
tremendous despotism.

IT may well be supposed, that Mr. Grenville, and his abettors, are conscious
of the badness of their cause, how little it will bear the test of reason, when
they endeavor to support it by inflammatory exaggerations, by infusing
suspicions, jealousies and prejudices into men's minds; and executing that by
passion, which they despair of accomplishing by reason. A measure, so
supported, wears a very suspicious aspect; nor is its gloom much dispelled, by
the act declarative of a right to tax these colonies, in whatever manner they
please. When a measure was adopted, of taxing us without out consent, and we
deeming it invasive of our privileges, as freemen, and violative of the
constitution, denied the right by which it was done; the passing an act
declarative of that right, was confessing, either that it did not exist before,
or was very dubious, Resolutions are both the proper and sufficient means of
declaring a right, that is real and original. The bringing in a bill, and
passing an act, looked like establishing some new and assumed power; not
declaring an original right. "Besides, an act of parliament, says my Lord
Camden, newly made, is not so venerable in the eyes of the world. or so secure
against future alterations, as the old common law of the land, which has been,
from time immemorial, the inheritance of every Englishman, and is, on account
of its antiquity, held, as it were, sacred in every man's mind. On general
warrants, etc.
."

NOW this, my countrymen, is our claim; the old common law of the land, the
constitution, the immemorial inheritance of every Englishman, the sacred right
of participating by our representatives, in the legislature, and maintaining
that privilege, which so naturally belongs to us, of giving our money by our
own consent or that of our real representative. Any tax or imposition,
whatever, (...) upon us, without our own consent, is a violation of this
constitution, so sacred for its wisdom, so venerable for its antiquity. Its
antiquity, which we may trace with the sagacious Montesquieu, into the woods of
Germany Si l'on ve^r lire l'admirable ouvrage de Tacit fur les moeurs des
^^ermains, on ver^a que ^'est d'^ux que les Anglois out tire l'idee de lour
gouvernement. politiqu^ (...) beau systeme a (...) trouvc dans les bois Tom
(...) p. 22^.
. And, shall a novel act of parliament, subvert this sacred and venerable
monument of antiquity and freedom? It seemed to me not improper to take notice
of this declarative act of parliament; that those of my countrymen, who have
not leisure to enquire far into such things, may not be deceived into an
opinion, that it has more authority than is consistent with the liberty we
claim. Our freedom is what we can neither give up, nor they take from us; and
therefore, even an act of Parliament, is limited, in this respect, like the
imperious waves of the ocean, hither it may come, but no further. It cannot
touch, or subvert that consitution, in which its own existence is founded. GOD
has made us, says my Lord Bolingbroke, to desire happiness, he has made that
happiness dependent on society, and the happiness of society, on good or bad
government; his intention therefore was, that government should be good." I
would say farther, that the happiness of society depends upon free government,
for this is the only form which consults and provides for the good, security,
and happiness of many; in opposition to the will and pleasure of one, or of a
few It is under the government of laws only, not of men, that happiness and
virtue are to be found; that is, where the laws, which regulate our conduct in
society, are divulged, and they, who are to execute them, cannot pervert or
transgress them with impunity. "Arbitrary power," says the ingenious Hume, "in
all cases, is somewhat oppressive and devouring; but it is altogether ruinous
and intolerable, when contracted into a small compass; and becomes still worse,
when the person who possesses it, knows that the time of his authority is
limited and uncertain. Habet subjectos, tanquam suos; viles ut alienos. He
governs the subjects with full authority, as if they were his own; and with
negligence or tyranny, as belonging to another. A people, governed after such a
manner, are slaves in the full and proper sense of the word; and it is
impossible they can ever aspire to any refinements in taste or reason. They
dare not so much as pretend to enjoy the necessaries of life in plenty, or
security." Now, whoever will reflect a moment, must perceive the fate of these
colonies delineated above, should the right lately assumed over us, by the
British Parliament, be once established. The Minister, for the time being,
would have an absolute power, with respect to us, it would be contracted into a
small compass, exerted, comparatively over a few, and would be therefore
ruinous and intolerable.
. It is most certain, that men cannot be happy or virtuous in that society,
where the will of one is the law; where liberty, life, and property, are in the
arbitration of one, or a few persons; in so precarious, so perilous a
situation, happiness and virtue can rarely, if at all, be found. Insensibility
of the ills, to which they are exposed, the wretched boon of long and painful
suffering, sometimes assumes, even in slavery, the specious form of happiness;
but, how poor is this, when compared with that inexpressibly happy feeling,
which conscious dignity and worth inspire.

Where freedom in the streets is known,
And tells a Monarch on his throne,
He lives, he reigns, by her alone Dr. AKENSIDE.
.
IMPIOUS then, and detestable is the attempt, to take from men, by force or
guile, that liberty in which their happiness and virtue consist: Impious the
government which pampers and inflames the vices of a few, by the groans, the
tears, the miseries of many, Let every abettor of despotism, every subverter of
freedom, take care, that conscience do not bes^t his pillow with thorns, that
he keap not upon his own head coals of fire; the vengeance of an injured and
Incensed people, may at length seize him, or the cries of oppression lift the
red hand of heaven against his execrated head.

IT is a happiness resulting from the cause we maintain, that recollection,
while it fills the hearts of our adversaries with bitterness and anguish, will
be forever pleasing to us. The just gratulations of our own hearts, the
applause of mankind, the blessings which our posterity, whose rights we are
defending, must bestow upon us, will be like balm to every wound. a cordial in
every hardship we may sustain. The question now is, whether we shall be slaves,
or freemen, whether we shall bequeath bondage or liberty to our children;
wherefore I beseech you, my countrymen, that on this great occasion, ye be
determined in your conduct; and attentive to its issue.

NUMBER X.
Quis autem amicior quam frater fratri; aut quem alienum fidum invenies, si
tuis hostis fueris?
SALLUST.
What tie can be stronger than the mutual interest of these colonies; or, how
can we expect sidelity from others, if we are not faithful to one another?

IN the great and important question now before us, my countrymen, a question
on which the liberty or bondage, the weal or woe, of millions now, and tens of
millions hereafter, will depend, it is incumbent on us, to study the most
perfect unanimity in sentiment and action. Like a band of brothers, these
colonies should be indissoluby firm, in defending the sacred fire of freedom
from being extinguished. Our united efforts will be weighty, and, in all
probability, successful; if divided, we shall counteract one another, and all
our endeavors, to vindicate the constitution from ruin, and ourselves from
bondage, will be feeble and ineffectual. It is one common interest, that claims
our union; the rights of every colony rest upon the same foundation, and cannot
be subverted in one, without being overthrown in all.

OUR friends too, in Great Britain, would be increased and encouraged by our
unanimity in opposition; divisions among ourselves, would silence and
dishearten them. It is not to be hoped, that we shall find men in Britain
faithful to our interests, if we ourselves abandon them, or determined in their
opposition to measures, injurious to us, while we appear dubious or divided. It
is unquestionably the wish and aim of our enemies in, Britain, to enfeeble the
interest of America there, to create in us a distrust of our friends on the
other side of the Atlantic, to excite an universal jealousy of us in them, and
to spread dissension and dismay among ourselves, by partial exertions of
imperious and arbitrary rule. These are the means, by which they hope the more
effectually to disturb, subdue, and enslave us; these are the views, with which
they have changed the oppressive Stamp Act, into a not less oppressive, though
more speciously just, duty, on certain British manufactures imported into
America, have pursued the same arbitrary plan, under what we called and deemed
an American administration, and have endeavored to enforce absolute obedience
to the billetting-act, by the suspension of the Legislature in one province.

THE colonies of Virginia and Massachusetts Bay, have, by their respective
representatives, given their sense of the ruinous tendency and arbitrary nature
of these measures. In Virginia, they have sent petitions, memorials and
remonstrances, to the different branches of the British Parliament, against all
these acts, not excepting that for suspending the legislative power of
New York, which they justly deem equally destructive to their own liberties, as
to those of that particular province. While I rejoice in this transaction, I
promise myself, that the influence of so noble and useful an example will be
universal, that every colony will, in like manner, bear its testimony against
these acts, and the principle upon which they are founded.

NEXT to the importance of unanimity among the colonies, in expressing their
abhorrence of the arbitrary measures lately adopted against American freedom,
stands that of the concurrence of the two branches of the Legislature, in each
colony, the Assembly and Council, in remonstrating against them, and
petitioning for redress. Such a concurrence must give the greatest weight and
efficacy to our public proceedings, must place, in the strongest light, the
dignity and value of our rights, when no consideration of place or profit can
influence men to ^it in silence, and see them violated. This colony, I mention
it with the highest satisfaction, has pursued such a plan, the Upper House of
Assembly having concurred with the Lower, in all the proceedings against the
late acts of Parliament. Such unanimity in conduct, it is to be hoped, will be
as universally imitated, as it must be generally approved; since it cannot but
redound to the immortal honor of those gentlemen, who thus sacrifice every
private consideration to the public good, and the maintenance of our
invaluable rights.

As the sanction of the Legislature gives dignity and weight to the sentiments
of the people; so it must receive from them support and strength. It is
therefore the duty of every individual to second, with his utmost abilities,
the endeavors of the legislative powers in vindication of American liberty. It
is now that we are called upon by every sacred and valuable tie, by our own
rights, by the rights of our children, and their posterity, by the veneration
due to our free constution, by the virtue, happiness and glory, that spring
from its admirable frame; to frustrate and repel every attempt of those, who
would violate and corrupt it. It is at this juncture that frugality and
industry will have double the beneficial influence which usually flows from
them, that harmony and spirit in thinking, speaking and acting, against
usurpation or oppression, will restore and reanimate our liberties, so as to
preserve the^^ long safe, and uninjured, by simllar invasions. It is now, that
every man ought to grave upon his free heart, this noble Roman determination:
-- Manus hoec inimica tyrannis
Ense p^tit placidam, sub liberate quietem.
To tyrants, and to tyranny, a foe, I will maintain my liberty at the hazard of
my life.


I HAVE thus adventured to lay before the public, in a series of papers, my
sentiments on the present state of affairs; to show the nature and excellence
of liberty, the vices, the miseries and abasement which slavery produces, to
develope the artful designs of our enemies; the arbitrary tendency of their
late conduct in Britain, the fatal consequences' that must inevitably follow
our acquiescence under the rights lately assumed and exercised over us, by the
British Parliament; and the necessity of an unanimous and determined opposition
to the meditated subve^sion of our constructional freedom and happiness.

IT will be for ever pleasing to me, if I have thrown any light on this very
important subject, if I have aided the understanding of any one man, or infused
into his mind the true and noble spirit of liberty, determining him to support
it with his latest breath.

I HAVE now to take leave of my countrymen, which I shall do in these words of
the great, good, and patriotic CICERO: Duo modo (...) opto; unam, ^t (...)
populum Romanum liberum relinquam, ^os mihi majus a diis immortalibus dari
(...) potest; alterum, ut ita cuique, eveniat, ut de republica quisque mereatur
Philippica ii.
.

Two things I earnestly wish, that every man may be esteemed in proportion to
his real patriotism, and that I may hail my country free with my last (...).

SUCH, in that hour, as in all past,
O save my country, Heaven! shall be my last.
ESTO PERPETUA. THE LIBERTY SONG.
COME join hand in hand, brave AMERICANS all,
And rouse your bold hearts at fair LIBERTY'S call;
No tyrannous acts shall suppress your free claim,
Or stamp the word SLAVE, on AMERICA'S name.
In freedom we are born, and in freedom we'll live,
Our money is ready,
Steady, boys, steady,
Let Us give it as Freemen, but never as Slaves.
II.
Our worthy Forefathers, let us give them a cheer,
To climates they knew not, full bravely did steer,
Through oceans, to deserts, in freedom they came,
And, dying, bequeathed us their freedom and fame.
In freedom, etc.
III.
The Tree their own hands had to liberty reared,
Deep rooted in earth, grew strong and revered:
Then, from all assaults, we this tree will maintain,
And leave to our children the fruit of our pain,
In freedom, etc.
IV.
Here Is a health to our King, and the Nation at home,
AMERICA and BRITAIN should ever be one:
In liberty's cause, we united shall stand
The envy and dread of each neighboring land.
In freedom, etc.
V.
Then join hand in hand, brave AMERICANS all,
By uniting, we stand, by dividing, we fall;
In so righteous a cause, we must surely succeed,
For Heaven approves of each generous deed.
In freedom, etc.

