AN APPEAL TO THE WORLD; OR A VINDICATION OF THE Town of Boston, FROM Many
false and malicious Aspersions

CONTAINED In certain Letters and Memorials, written by Governor Bernard,
General Gage, Commodore Hood, the Commissioners of the American Board of
Customs, and others, and by them respectively transmitted to the British
Ministry.

PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE TOWN.

PRINTED AND SOLD BY EDES AND GILL IN QUEEN STREET, BOSTON, 1769.

AT a Meeting of the Town of BOSTON, legally assembled, on Wednesday October
the 4th, and thence continued by Adjournment to Wednesday October 18, 1769.
THE following Remarks, upon the Letters written by Governor Bernard, and
others, were ordered to be published; and the Committee were directed
respectfully to transmit a printed Copy of the same to the following Gentlemen,
viz. The Honorable Col. Isaac Bar, Esquire a Member of Parliament; His Excellency
Thomas Pownal, Esquire late Governor of this Province, and a Member of Parliament;
Benjamin Franklin, Esquire Doctor of Laws; William Bollan, Esquire Agent for his
Majesty's Council of this Province; Dennys DeBerdt, Esquire Agent for the House of
Representatives, and Barlow Trecothick, Esquire Alderman of the City of LONDON, and
a Member of Parliament.

Attest. William Cooper, Town Clerk.

AN APPEAL, etc.
THE Town of Boston having by the generous Care of WILLIAM BOLLAN, Esquire formerly
a very worthy Inhabitant in it, but now a Resident in London, received
authentic Copies of Letters, Memorials, etc. written by Governor Bernard,
General Gage, Commodore Hood, the Commissioners of the American Board of
Customs and others, and laid before the Parliament; which contain many base
Insinuations and virulent Charges of an high Nature against the Town: The
Freeholders and Inhabitants in a legal Town Meeting assembled for the Purpose,
have considered the same. As they have not yet been favored with the particular
Vouchers, if indeed these Gentlemen have produced any to the Ministry before
whom they laid their Accusations, it cannot be expected they should be enabled
to make so full a Vindication of the Town as otherwise they might: They have
however endeavored to extract from these Writings, so far as the Town is
concerned in them, and to lay before the Public their true Spirit: From whence
it will appear how restless Governor Bernard and his Associates have been in
their malicious Intrigues to traduce not this Town and Province, alone, but the
whole British American Continent.

In this Letter to the Earl of Shelburne, dated March 19th 1768, he tells his
Lordship, that "he sees such an Opposition to the Commissioners and their
Officers, and such a Defiance to the Authority by which they are appointed,
continually growing, that he can no longer excuse his informing his Lordship of
the Detail of Facts, from whence the most dangerous Consequences are to be
expected." -- It is observeable here, how artfully he connects an Opposition to
the Commissioners with a Defiance of the Authority by which they are appointed;
and this with an apparent Design to represent this Town as disaffected to his
Majesty's Government in general, than which nothing can be more false and
malicious. That the People should entertain the highest Disgust of a Board,
instituted to superintend a Revenue to be raised from them without their
Consent, which and still is exacted with the utmost Rigor, is natural; after
they had so loudly as well as justly complained of the Revenue itself, as
depriving them of they very Idea of Liberty: But it cannot be said with the
least Appearance of Truth that they set at Defiance the King's Authority, at
the very Time when they were actually yielding Obedience to those Revenue Laws,
under all the Hardships of them, and were patiently waiting for the happy Issue
of their just Complaints, and their humble Petitions to their Sovereign for the
Redress of their Grievances. -- The Commissioners had however at that Time
surely no reasonable Grounds to expect any Injury to their Persons or
Interruption in their office; for they had been more than four Months in the
Town, without the least Danger of this Kind, although they had from their first
Arrival discovered such an Arrogance and Insolence of Office, as led many
Persons to apprehend, that they aimed at nothing less than provoking the People
to such a Degree of Intemperance as to make an Appearance of it. But being
disappointed in this, mere Shifts and Pretensions are to be sought after; and
accordingly we find Mr. Bernard beginning his "Detail" to his Lordship with
telling him there had been "frequent Reports of Insurrections intended, in
which it had been said, the Houses of one or more of the Commissioners were to
be pulled down." The Governor, it is to be observed, relies much upon Reports
in his Letters even to Ministers of State, while few if any among us ever heard
of such Reports: He does not so much as attempt to make it appear to his
Lordship that these frequent Reports were brought to him by Persons of Credit,
or that they were well grounded; and it is very much to be questioned, whether
he received his Intelligence from any other Persons, but the Commissioners
themselves, their Dependents and Expectants, the Number of whom are increased
to an enormous Degree, more than sufficient to devour the whole Revenue, and
many of them are of the most abandoned Characters.

But to give a Coloring to these Ideas of an Insurrection, there must be
something more alleged than barely that there had been frequent Reports of its
being intended; and therefore his Lordship is told of an Event which in Fact
took place as some few remember, but the Story is wrought up by the Governor
with all the Strokes of masterly Invention to serve the Purpose. "A Number of
Lads, says he, paraded to Town with a Drum and Horn." And what possible Harm
could there be in that? Why among other Houses "they passed by the
Council Chamger when he was sitting in Council:" And did they stop to insult
the Governor and Council? Such a Circumstance would doubtless have embellished
his Excellency's Narrative. Their passing by however carried the Air of an
Insult, though in all Likelihood the unlucky Boys might not know that his
Excellency was there. -- But they had "assembled before Mr. Paxton's House,"
and lest it should be forgot, his Lordship is reminded that Mr. Paxton is "a
Commissioner." And did they do Mr. Paxton the Commissioner any Injury? Yes
truly; "they huzza'd," and went off. -- Then they "invested Mr. Burch's House,"
and his Lordship is also told, that Mr. Burch is "another Commissioner." and
"his Lady and Children were obliged to go out of the Back Door to avoid the
Danger that was threatened;" so that they were not threatened with Mischief,
but with Danger only. It has been usual for the Commissioners to affect an
Apprehension of Danger to themselves and their Families, to serve the Purposes
they had in View. There is indeed no accounting for the real Fears of Women and
Children: The Ladies however can sometimes vie with their Husbands in Intrigue,
and are thoroughly versed in the Art even of political Appearance. And it is
said that all are Politicians in this Country: Whether this Lady, whom Gov.
Bernard has politely ushered into the View of the Public, really thought
herself in Danger or not, it is incumbent on him to show that there were just
Grounds for her Apprehensions, that Mr. Burch's House was in Fact "invested,"
and that "the most dangerous Consequences were to be expected." The World may
be assured, there was not the least Appearance of this Kind; and yet, these are
Mr. Bernard's own Declarations to his Majesty's Ministers, grounded upon vague
and idle Reports, beneath one of his Rank and Station to take any notice of,
and especially with a Design to misrepresent. He expresses a Surprise, and
surely he must counterfeit it, that this Matter of "the Parade with the Drum
and Horn," was after all treated as the Diversion of a few Boys, as it is still
thought to have been by all who can remember so trifling an Occurrence, except
the Governor and his Adherents -- the Diversion of a few innocent, though perhaps
vulgar Boys, who neither did nor intended to do the least Harm to them or any
other Persons, nor were they able to effect it, if they had such a Design. But
after this says Mr. Bernard, "it was reported, that the Insurrection was
postponed 'till the 18th of March" -- The Idea is still kept up of a designed
Insurrection, how else could it be Postponed? and "two Persons, says he, one of
them Mr. Paxton, a commissioner, were mentioned as devoted to the Resentment of
the Mob." It is strange that no Persons should have heard of all this but the
Governor and his Informers; for he tells his Lordship that he "took all the
Pains he could to discover the Truth of this Report;" and "on the very Day
before, he spoke with the most knowing Men he could procure", who had heard
nothing about the Matter. At length, however, "late in the Evening, he had
certain Advice that Effigies were prepared, but it was late too late to do any
Thing, and -- his Information was of that Nature, he could not make Use of it
in Public." To induce his Lordship however to believe that the Reports of the
Insurrection, which was postponed to the 18th of March, will every Circumstance
as just now related, were well grounded, he tells him, as if it was designed to
be the Prelude to the whole, that "early in the Morning the Sheriff informed
him that the Effigies of Mr. Paxton and Mr. Williams were in Truth hanging upon
Liberty Tree"! -- -- There was in the Time of it, a strong Suspicion in the
Minds of many, that these Effigies were hung up by some particular Persons on
that Day (which was to be observed as a Day of Festivity), with a Design to
give a Coloring to just such a Representation as Gov. Bernard now makes. --
There are Persons here capable of playing such a Game; and there are some
Circumstances which make it appear that such a Suspicion was not groundless.
Particularly it is difficult to account for Governor Bernard's neglecting to
give Orders to prevent their being hung up after he certainly knew it was
intended; and that he should pretend it was too late the Evening before; but
especially, his not choosing to make Use of his Information, or it may rather be
supposed his Informants Name is public, unless it was through Fear of
discovering the Plot, is dark and unaccountable -- If there was a Design of
this Nature, it must have been truly mortifying to those who were in the
Secret, that the Design was so soon frustrated: For before the Governor could
meet his Council, which he had prudently "the Day before summoned to meet," and
while he was "sending round to get them together as soon as possible it might
be; amidst all these careful Preparations, the Effigies, says the Governor,
"were taken down by some of the Neighbors without Opposition"! Their being
thus, perhaps unexpectedly, taken down, is sufficient to evince the good
Disposition of the Inhabitants in general: That They were not in the Plan of an
Insurrection, whoever else might be, and that the Governor therefore might with
Safety, if he had been so inclined, make use of his Information in Public -- --
It might possibly indeed have totally overthrown his Design in writing this
very Letter to his Lordship.

But the best Improvement is to be made of every Appearance: Accordingly the
Governor hastens to his Council, who were then met, agreeable to his
Appointment the Day before, and there he tells his Lordship, he "set forth in
strong Terms the Attrociousness of this Insult; the Danger of its being
followed by actual Violence, and the Necessity there was of providing for the
Peace of the Town." However attrocious the Insult might be, where could be the
Danger of its being followed by actual Violence, when some of the Inhabitants
themselves, had taken down the Effigies, with, at least the tacit Consent of
the whole Community; for it was done without the Opposition expected, perhaps
hoped for: And what Necessity of providing for the Peace of the Town, when the
People already discovered so peaceable a Disposition. It would doubtless have
pleased the Governor well, if his Council had advised to some severe Measures;
such as might have afforded a firmer Foundation for him to have represented the
Town as upon the Eve of an Insurrection, than groundless Reports or
Informations, from his own Pimps, which it was not prudent for him to make use
of in public. But "all he could say" to that Purpose, though he strove hard fox
it, "made no Impression on the Council," They, says he, "persever'd in treating
the Affair as of no Consequence," as well they might; for it is questionable
after all, whether there was the least Apprehension then of any Commotion even
in the Mind of the Governor himself, whatever were his Pretensions. The
Commissioners however took this Opportunity "of setting forth the Danger they
apprehended"; and the Governor, very readily no doubt, took the Occasion to
acquaint the King's Minister, that he had received a Letter from the
Commissioners, " desiring the Protection of the Government."

Mr. Bernard proceeds in his Narrative, and entertains his Lordship with a very
minute Account of the Celebration of the Anniversary of the Repeal of the
Stamp Act; and "the terrible Night it produced" -- to Mr. Burch, one of the
Commissioners, and his Lady and Children who had moved to his House for Safety;
-- "to the LieutenantGovernor and the Sheriff of the Country who were also with
him"; and in fine to all "those who thought themselves Objects of the popular
Fury." It may be here observed as in general true, that no Man has Reason to
fear the popular Fury, but he who is conscious to himself of having done that
which has exposed him to their just Resentment -- -- The Governor himself owns
that "the Selectmen of the Town" and "some others", and even the Gentlemen who
dined at two Taverns near the TownHouse, upon the Occasion of the Day "took
great Paius that the Festivity should not produce a Riot." There is no Reason
to suppose this was mentioned for the Sake of giving a Credit to any of those
Gentlemen, but rather to insinuate that the People were so outrageously
disposed as that they could not be restrained even by their own Leaders; for
most of those whom the Governor has honored with that Character were present.
The Truth is, none of them were apprehensive that their Festivity would produce
a Riot; but they were careful to prevent the lighting a Bonfire, because the
Governor had constantly represented that as "the usual Signal for a Mob;" and
the Joys of the Evening among the lower Sort, which however innocent are
sometimes noisy, would of Course be represented as riotous. And thus he did in
Fact represent it to his Lordship; for he tells him that "many Hundreds of
People of all Kinds, Sexes and Ages, paraded the Streets with Yells and
Outcries" -- -- That they "invested Mr. Williams's House" -- That "at two
different Times about Midnight they made Outcries about Mr. Paxton's House".
And though after all, he owns it was "out of mere Wantonness", yet he says the
whole made it a terrible Night". This is Painting indeed, much beyond the Life:
But Mr. Bernard has the Art in Perfection. He could not however persuade even
General Gage, to give it such a Coloring; for the General in his Letter to
Lord Hillsborough dated Boston the 31st of October 1768, tells his Lordship
quite otherwise; and that "according to the best Information he had been able
to procure, the Disturbance in March (which was this very Instance) far from
being "terrible as the Governor represents it, was in Truth "trifling". This
being the Account given by one of the principal Servants of the Crown in
America, and who has discovered himself far from being partial in favor of the
Town, it is needless to add any Thing further on this Head -- Trifling as
indeed this "Disturbance" was, such Improvements were made of it by Governor
Bernard and others, that it occasioned the ordering two Regiments from Halifax
to this Town for a Purpose for which the military Power was certainly never
designed; a very dangerous Purpose, an abhorrent to the British Constitution
and the Spirit of a free Government, namely to Support the Civil Authority -- A
Measure which has caused continual Terror to his Majesty's peaceable Subjects
here, and has been productive of more Disturbance and Confusion than has been
known in the Memory of any now living, or than is recorded by any Historian,
even the most partial against this Country.

We shall now take Notice of Governor Bernard's Letter to the Earl of
Hillsborough, dated Boston, June 11, 1768, wherein he gives his Lordship an
Account "of a great Riot that happened in this Town the preceding Evening." And
it must be confessed there was a Riot on that Evening, which is by no means to
be justified. It was however far from being so great an one as the Governor
represents it to be. -- The Collector and Comptroller of the Customs indeed
represent it as a "numerousMob," but they being particularly interested, their
Fears might deceive them. -- -- It was not a numerous Mob; nor was it of long
Continuance, neither was there much Mischief done. It was occasioned by the
unprecedented and unlawful Manner of seizing a Vessel by the Collector and
Comptroler: And considering their illegal Proceedings in making the Seizure,
attended with the most irritating Circumstances which occasioned this Mob --
the intolerably haughty Behavior which the Commissioners who ordered this
Seizure, had constantly before discovered toward the People -- the frequent
Threats which had been given out, that the Town should be put under a Military
Government, and the armed Force actually employed as a Prelude to it, it cannot
be wondered at, that in a populous Town, such high Provocations, and the sudden
Exertion of Lawless Power, should excite the Resentment of some Persons beyond
the Bounds of Reason, and carry them into Excess. -- We cannot state the
Circumstances of this Affair with greater Impartiality, than by reciting the
Sentiments of his Majesty's Council after two Days Enquiry and Consideration,
in their own Expressions, viz.

"HIS Excellency having laid before the Board a Representation of some
Transactions relating to, and in Consequence of the Disorders in the Town of
Boston on the Evening of the 10th of June last, the Board think it necessary in
Justice to the Town and Province, and in Vindication of themselves, to make
some Observations thereon, and to give a fuller Representation than is
contained in the Paper laid before the Board.

"With Regard to the said Disorders, it is to be observed that they were
occasioned by the making a Seizure (in a Manner unprecedented) in the Town of
Boston on the said 10th of June, a little before Sunset, when a Vessel was
seized by several of the Officers of the Customs; and immediately after, on a
Signal given by one of said Officers, in Consequence of a preconcerted Plan,
several armed Boats from the Romney Man of War took Possession of her, cut her
Fasts, and carried her from the Wharff where she lay, into the Harbor, along
side the Romney; which occasioned a Number of People to be collected, some of
whom, from the Violence and Unprecedentedness of the Procedure with Regard to
the taking away of the said Vessel, and the Reflection thereby implied upon the
Inhabitants of the Town as disposed to rescue any Seizure that might be made,
took Occasion to insult and abuse the said Officers, and afterward to break
some of the Windows of their Dwelling-Houses, and to commit other Disorders.
Now, though the Board have the utmost Abhorrence of all such disorderly
Proceedings, and would by no Means attempt to justify them, they are obliged to
mention the Occasion of them, in order to show, that however culpable the said
disorderly Persons were, the Officers who seized, or those by whose Orders such
unusual and violent Measures as were pursued in seizing and taking away the
said Vessel, were not faultless: It being highly probable that no such
Disorders would have been committed, if the Vessel had not been with an armed
Force, and with many Circumstances of Insult and Threats, carried away from the
Wharff."

The Council further say, "With Regard to what happened on the 10th of June, it
seems to have sprung wholly from the Persons who complain of it, by the Plan
said and the Orders given for making the Seizure aforesaid, and carrying it
away by an armed Force. Which Circumstances, together with the Time of Day of
seizing the Vessel, makes it seem probable that an Uproar was hoped for and
intended to be occasioned by the Manner of Proceeding in making the Seizure."

From this impartial State of the Matter, it must evidently appear to every
candid Mind, that the Opposition was made, not at all to the seizing of the
Vessel by the Officers of the Customs, but wholly to the Manner in which it was
secured; and that if it had been done in the usual Manner, as the Council
afterward say, "it would have remained secure in the Hands of the Officers" --
This corresponds with the Commissioners own Account; for they say in their
Letter to Governor Bernard, June 12, that they received a verbal Message from
the People to the following Purpose, "that if the Sloop seized was bro't back
to Mr. Hancock's Wharff, upon Security given to answer the Prosecution, the
Town might be kept quiet". But this pacific Proposal, though brought to them as
they acknowledge "by a Person of Credit", they expressly declare "appeared to
them as a Menace", and it was in Fact one of their very Reasons for requesting
the Governor to give Directions that they might be received into the Castle for
Protection -- So totally regardless were they of the Peace of the Town, and so
excessively fond of being thought by others as important as they fancied
themselves to be, that when this reasonable and timely Proposal was brought to
them even by a Person of Credit in their own Esteem, they haughtily replied,
that "they gave no Answers to verbal Messages", which plainly indicated either
a Wantonness of Power in them beyond all Bounds, or the Hopes if not the
Intentions of a further Uproar. --

Governor Bernard tells his Lordship that this Riot "had very bad
Consequences", which is undoubtedly true: The exaggerated Accounts which he and
the Commissioners gave of it to the Ministry, and their taking Occasion to
represent the Town itself as in a State of Disobedience to all Law and
Authority, and indeed the whole Continent as ripe for a Revolt, were attended
with the worst of Consequences to the Town. The Commissioners says in plain
Terms that "there had been a long and extensive Plan of Resistance to the
Authority of Great Britain", and that "the Seizure refered to "had hastened the
People of Boston to the Commission of actual Violence sooner than was
intended". Such Inflamatory Representations as these had the Effects which they
had long wished for; and induced the Ministry to order two other Regiments to
this Town; the Consequence of which, if they or any of them are continued, it
is to be feared, far from reconciling the People to the present Measures of
Administration, will only increase their Discontent, and even alienate their
Affections.

The Governor in the Postscript to his Letter June 13, mentions his having
Intelligence from the Commissioners of some Particulars from whence they
concluded, that they were immediately exposed to further Violences, and desired
Protection at the Castle. -- This Intelligence is contained in their Letter of
June 12, just now mentioned, wherein they take upon themselves to charge the
Government with having used no Measures for securing the Peace of the Town,
alleging in general Terms that "there was the strongest Reason to expect
further Violences". And they further say, that "His Excellency himself had
acquainted them that Boston was no Place of Safety for them". Here we see that
the Intelligence which the Governor represents to his Lordship as having been
received by him from the Commissioners, he first communicated to them; and
thereupon they grounded their pretended Fears in their Letter to him, and
desire the Protection of the Government. This is all of Piece, and may serve to
explain the frequent Rumors of an Insurrection, mentioned in a former Letter,
and from what Quarter these frequent Rumors came. It shows the Combination,
and the settled Design, of the Governor and the Commissioners, to blacken the
Character of the Town; and how dexterously they can play into each others Hands
-- The Governor the next Day, June 13, wrote to the Commissioners, and
acquainted them, that "having communicated their Letter of the 12th to the
Council, they desired him to inform them that during the Sitting of the Council
on Saturday Morning, there was no Reason at all given to expect further
Violences, and that there was no Apprehension either in the Governor or the
Council of an immediate Danger." It is incumbent on the Governor, or
his-Friend, if he has any, reconcile this with what he had before told the
Commissioners, "that Boston was no Place of Safety for them". It seems Gov.
Bernard was perpetually teizing the Council with the Commissioners vague
Reports of an Insurrection, and of the Danger they were in; and indeed it
appears to be the main Point in View to persuade the Council if possible into a
Belief of it, or if not, to form a Complaint to the Ministry that they were
negligent of their Duty in not advising to proper Measures for the Protection
of the Commissioners; and from thence to enforce a Necessity of military Force
to restore and support Government in Boston -- Why did he not lay before the
Council the Particulars, which he tells his Lordship he had received from the
Commissioners, from whence they concluded that they were exposed to further
Violences? This we hear nothing of; perhaps the Intelligence, like that which
he mentions in a former Letter, "was of such a Nature that he could not make
use of it in Public." He indeed tells the Commissioners that "he had informed
the Council of their present Apprehensions of further Violences, and that they
were then taking the same into Consideration." -- But he should have fairly
represented this Master to the Commissioners, and told them that the Council
had already taken the same into Consideration, and come to a Conclusion, as in
Fact they had; for by their own Minutes we find, that "the Matter being fully
debated, is appeared to the Board that there was no immediate Danger of fresh
Disturbances." They at the same Time advised that the Matter Should be laid
before the General Court then Sitting, and postponed the Consideration of it by
them, as of Council to the Governor, till the Effect of such a Proposal should
be known. All this the Governor knew; how then could he consistently say that
they were then taking it into Consideration. He tells Lord Hillsborough that
"He was against the Business being laid before the General Court, but was
obli'd to give it up"; and that "he had many Objections to the Measure." He
knew very well that the drawing this Matter into open Day light, would
effectually defeat his Design; and that the Intention of bringing the Council,
if possible, to join with the Governor in requiring the military Force, or
accusing them of Negligence in Case they did not, would thereby be entirely
frustrated. -- The removing the Business to the General Court, he tells his
Lordship, was however, upon one Consideration, not "entirely to his
Dissatisfaction;" for he says, it was then in a great Measure "taken out of his
Hands"; and he concludes, that "as he cannot conduct this Business as it ought
to be, or rather as he chose it should be, it may be best for him to have but
little Hand in it." -- It may not be amiss here to recite the Declaration of
his Majesty's Council at a full Board on the 29th of July, six Weeks after the
commissioners voluntary Exile to the Castle in Consequence of these pretended
Apprehensions of further Violences. The Council say, "the Commissioners were
not obliged to quit the Town; there never had been any Insult offered to them;
their quitting the Town was a voluntary Act of their own; we do not apprehend
there was any sufficient Ground for their quitting it; and, when they had
quitted it, and were at the Castle, there was no Occasion for Men of War to
protect them." Such an Authority, will, no doubt, be deemed sufficient to
vindicate the Town from this Aspersion; especially, As the Council had then had
Time cooly to recollect the Matter: As they had born their full Testimony
against the Disorders, and taken every Step which belonged to their Department,
to bring the Offenders of condign Punishment: But more especially, as that very
Board had always before supported the Governor's Measures to the utmost Extent
that their Consciences would allow, and many Times against the general
Sentiments of the People, for which they had gained the Governor's Applause,
and his particular Recommendations to his Majesty's Minister; and he himself
could at this Time have no other Exception to any Part of their Conduct, but
their Opposition to his favorite Plan, to introduce a military Government, into
the Town, without the leaft Color of Necessity, and thereby to break through the
Mounds, and tear up the very Foundation of the civil Constitution.

The Governor in his Letter to Lord Hillsborough of the 14th of June, being
resolved to give his Lordship and exact Detail of every Occurrence "from whence
the most dangerous Consequences are to be expected," takes Occasion to mention
"a Paper stuck up on Liberty Tree." This Paper, he had said in his Letter of
the 13th, contained "an Invitation of the Sons of Liberty to meet at Six
o'Clock to clear the Land of the Vermin which were come to devour them." A very
innocent, if not a laudable Proposal, for which the Country should think itself
obliged to them, to besure if they could have effected their Design. But in
this Letter it is called "a violent and virulent Invitation to rise that Night
to clear the Country of the Commissioners and their Officers, to avenge
themselves of the Custom-house Officers, and put one of them to Death:" And,
still more alarming, "there were also some indecent Threats against the
Governor!" Could the Governor think that by the Vermin that were come to devour
the Land they meant his Excellency and the Commissioners! But perhaps the Mind
of the Sheriff who brought this Information to the Governor was somewhat
agitated with the Fears of an Insurrection; and moreover we may presume that he
had not seen the Paper himself, but took it from Report, in Conformity to the
Example of the Governor, who believed or pretended to believe every Word of it,
till he had the mortifying Sight of the true Contents of this very important
Paper; of which the following as he himself at length tells his Lordship is "an
exact Copy" viz. Boston, June 13, 1768. The Sons of Liberty request all those
who in this Time of Oppression and Distraction wish well to and would promote
the Peace, Good-Order and Security of the Town and Province, to assemble at
LibertyHall under Liberty Tree and Tuesday the 14th Instant, at Ten o'Clock
precisely. -- It might have been supposed that so harmless a Thing would have
given Offense to none. In the first Place the Matters alleged in it were
confessedly true: That this was a Time of Oppression, the People all felt: That
it was a Time of Distraction, the Governor and the Commissioners loudly
proclaimed: A Design then at such a Time to promote the Peace, Good-Order, and
Security of the Town, was at least unexceptionable. But the Governor complains
that "it was not considered as an Implication of Danger": Strange would it have
been indeed, if so salutary a Proposal as the promoting the Peace, Good-Order
and Security of the Town had been thus considered. "Neither, says he, was the
Impropriety of the Sons of Liberty appointing a Meeting to secure the Peace of
the Town, when the Governor and Council were sitting upon that Business, and
seemly to little Purpose, taken much Notice of." But surely if the Governor and
Council could be supposed to be fitting upon such Business, at such a Time, and
seemingly to little Purpose, there could be no great Impropriety in other
Peoples undertaking it. But without adopting by any Means the Measure, Is not
here a striking Instance of the Disposition of Governor Bernard, and some
others, to receive with the greatest Avidity the most aggravated Accounts of
every trifling Occurrence that has happened, and without any Enquiry, to paint
them to the Ministry in the deepest Colors! Behold a Meeting, the prosess'd
Design of which was to promote the Peace, Good Order and Security of the Town,
and that in open Daylight, represented to the King's Minister as a Meeting
designed to be held at six o'Clock, near Sunset, in one Letter; and in another
the next Day, "a most violent and virulent Invitation to rise that Night! and
clear the Country of the Commissioners, -- threaten the Governor, and commit
Murder"! In Consequence of which he tells the Council, there is "no Time to
enquire into the Particulars of the former Riot". They are to be hurried to
Measures to provide for the Peace of the Town;" and to prevent "new
Disturbances premeditated" and "immediately threatened"; and his Lordship is to
be forthwith informed of it. -- Certainly, every candid Person will from hence
be inclined to believe all that Governor Bernard relates to the Prejudice of
this Town, or any particular Persons, with great Diseretion.

His Letter of the 16th of June, for he seemed to be almost every Day employed
in writing his "Detail" of common Reports, gives the Earl of Hillsborough an
Account of "the Meeting at Liberty-Tree in pursuance of the printed Notice".
And after entertaining his Lordship with a particular though awkard and
inconsistent Description of the Tree, the vast Height of the Flag Staff, and
the Design of hoisting the Flag, namely "for a Signal," which to besure must be
a Discovery quite new to his Lordship, he proceeds to say; that "at least 4000
Men assembled"; that "the principal Gentlemen attended to engage the lower
People to concur in Measures for Peace and Quiet", which was the prosess'd End
of their Meeting -- that "one of the Selectmen was chosen Moderator or
Chairman" -- that they adjourned to the Town Hall" for the Accommodation of so
large a Number. And there it being "objected that they were not a legal
Meeting" they adjourned to the Afternoon", he should have said, broke up; and
the Selectmen instead of "legalizing the Assembly" as it is oddly expressed,
called a Town-Meeting agreeable to the Directions of the Law, to meet in the
Afternoon. All this was certainly an innocent Proceeding, and the Governor
himself, it is presumed did not think otherwise, for it happens for once, that
he makes no particular Remarks upon it; and if it should be said of them, that
they me seemingly to little Purpose, it might be said truly enough; but it is
to be remembered, that another Assembly, with their Chairman at their Head, if
the Governor's ludicrous Account of the Meeting of that very respectable Body
could be credited, might in that Respect keep them in Countenance. -- -- But
innocent as it was, the Governor did not choose it should be though it that he
viewed it in that Light, and therefore told the, Council, and his Lordship
afterward, that "had it been the first Business of the Kind, he should have
asked their Advice, whether he should not send to the General for Troops: And
to show his own excessive Fondness for so arbitrary and violent a Measure, he
adds, that "he was ready to do it, if any one Gentleman would propose it"!

The Governor then proceeds to give a Detail of the Meeting of the Town in the
Afternoon; in which he tells his Lordship, that "many wild and violent
Proposals were made". It ought here to be observed, that Governor Bernard
constantly represents Bodies of Men, even the most respectable, by Proposals
made by Individuals, which have been misrepresented by Pimps and Parasites, and
perhaps aggravated by himself, instead of allowing them to stand or fall by
their own Conclusions -- Can any Thing be more base, more contrary to Equity
than this? -- What should we think of the most respectable Corporations at Home
-- what even of both Houses of Parliament, if they were to be judged of by
every Motion that has been made, or every Expression that has dropped from
Individuals in the Warmth of Debates. If it had been true that such Proposals
were made, nay, if measures that could not have been altogether justified, had
been even adopted by the Town, at a Time when every Art had been practiced to
irritate the People, and inflame their Minds, the candid Part of Mankind would
have been ready to overlook it. -- The Governor has often been observed to
discover an Aversion to free Assemblies: No Wonder then that he should be so
particularly disgusted at a legal Meeting of the Town of Boston, where a noble
Freedom of Speech is ever expected and maintained: An Assembly of which it may
be justly said to borrow the Language of the ancient Roman, with a little
Variation, Sentire quae volunt at quae sentiunt dicere licet, They think as
they please, and speak as they think. -- -- -- -- Such an Assembly has ever
been the Dread -- often the Scourge of Tyrants -- -- But these "wild and
violent Proposals", which no one can recollect but the Governor, and perhaps
his Informers, it seems were "warded off" as the Governor is pleased to express
it, from whence it may be supposed that Prudence directed at this Meeting,
"originated and composed as (he says) it was" -- By these Expressions it is
conceived, he would intimate to his Lordship that it was both illegal and
tumultuous; and if that was his real Intention, the Insinuation was both false
and injurious. -- The Meeting was "originated" as the Law directs, and nothing
was there concluded upon according to the Governor's own Account, but the
Appointment of a Committee, which he himself says "in general was very
respectable", to wait on him "with a Petition"; the receiving his Answer, as he
is pleased to say, with "universal Approbation"! writing a Letter to a Friend,
and voting such Instructions as they though it proper to their Representatives.
After which he tells his Lordship they "broke up quietly" and the Meeting
ended." But notwithstanding this quiet and as may be concluded by the
Governor's Account of it, coalziing Town Meeting, which consisted of so large a
Number, and among whom he himself was so "popular" that even "the Moderator
declared that he really believed he was a Well-wisher to the Province". (Thus
says Governor Bernard, but no one remembers or believes it) yet all this will
not avail to soften his Mind or alter his Intentions. And although he tells his
Lordship "the Romney and a Sloop of 16 Guns just come in will complete the
Command of all the Approaches to the Castle, and other Ships of War are
expected, so that the Security of the Commissioners is effectually provided
for"; yet the favorite Point will not be carried, till the long-wish'd-for
Troops arrive, to enforce his arbitrary Designs, and suppress the Spirit of
Liberty. And now is the Time, if ever, to press the Matter: Every Hand
therefore must be set to work, and nothing will serve the Cause like
continually holding up the Idea of an Insurrection. Accordingly we find one of
the Auxiliaries, whose Letter, though anonimous, has Credit enough to appear in
the List laid before Parliament, says "It is my Opinion that the Promoters of
the present Evils are ready to unmask, and openly to discover their long and
latent Design to REBEL" -- and -- "involve this Country in Blood and Horror"!
Another anonimous Writer, who is said to be "well acquainted with the State of
the Town of Boston", says, that "He observes a Sourness in the Minds of the
People in general", and adds, "He that runs may read, that without speedy
Interposition, a great Storm will arise." -- The Collector and Comptroller of
the Customs mention with deep Concern, as they affect to express themselves,
"that a general Spirit of INSURRECTION prevails, not only in the Town, but
throughout the whole Provinces." -- The Commissioners themselves, in their
Letter to General Gage, tell him, "that it is utterly impossible to carry on
the Business of the Revenue in the Town of Boston, from the outrageous Behavior
of the People:" They acquaint the General "of the alarming State of Things in
the Town, and desire him to give them Protection". And though Gov. Bernard, when
not so much on his Guard, or perhaps under some little Compunction of Mind, in
his Letter to the Commissioners, June 13, gently chides them for their
ill-grounded Fears, and tells them "he is very sorry that they think themselves
so much in Danger in Boston (which he had before said was no Place of Safety
for them) as to think it unsafe for them to reside there"; notwithstanding all
this, yet in the Letter we are now considering, which was written nearly at the
same Time, he positively assures his Lordship, that "if there is not a REVOLT,
the Leaders must falsify their Words and change their Purposes" Perhaps he
would have been more consistent if he had imagined these Letters would ever
have seen the Light. He concludes his Letter with mentioning a few more "Papers
stuck up on the Town House". -- No Evidence however appears to have accompanied
all these heavy Charges upon a whole Community: But Gov. Bernard and others
seem to have conducted their Proscriptions as if they could have even for seen,
that the bold Assertions of Persons apparently in inimical to a Country,
anonimous Letters, Street Conversation picked up by Pimps and Spies, and Papers
stuck by no one knows whom on a public Building, would be of so much Weight as
to influence the Measures of Administration! Can any Person believe this a just
Representation, when Governor Bernard with all his Industry and And has not
been able to furnish Proof that any Body or Combination of Men, or even a
single Person, had incurred a legal Penalty, if we except the Disturbances that
happened on March and June already considered.

The Governor in his Letter of the 9th of July informs his Lordship of a
Measure, as he calls it, of the Sons of Liberty; a Number of them going out of
Boston at the close of a certain Day in Parties, and meeting on each Side of a
House in Roxbury, which Mr. Robinson (and his Lordship must be informed that he
also was one of the Commissioners) had lately hired, with a Intention to
surprise him and prevent his Escape; but he being at the Castle, where the
Commissioners had been driven for Safety, they did nothing but plunder his
Fruit Trees. This is a very solemn Account indeed; but he never laid this
"Manoevre of the Sons of Liberty", extraordinary as it was, before the Council,
which he never failed to do on like Occasions; thinking possibly, that
respectable Body might be of Opinion, that a Gentleman of any political Party
may be supposed to have had his Orchard or Fruit Gardens robbed by liquorish
Boys, without making a formal Representation before his Majesty's first
Ministers of State. As the Governor will still have it that the Commissioners
were " driven to the Castle for Safety", we take Occasion to observe here, that
it was notorious, that they frequently landed on the Main, and made Excursions
into the Country; visiting the Lieutenant Governor and other Gentlemen at their
Seats, where it would have been easy to have seized them if any Injury had been
intended them; which as his Majesty's Council very justiy have observed,
"demonstrated the Insincerity of their Declarations", as it did those of the
Governor "that they immured themselves at the Castle for Safety".

Another Part of the Detail in this Letter is the Rescue of a Vessel which had
been seized by the Custom-House Officers It seems by Governor Bernard's
Account, it had been "thought proper to try an Experiment"; for says he, "When
the Sloop was seized which occasioned the Riot, and in Consequence of which the
Commissioners were obliged to leave the Town, the greatest Part of the
Resentment was expressed against the putting her under the Care of the Man of
War"; which was very true, and he might have also said, the making the Seizure
with an armed Force, and therefore, he adds, "when this Schooner was seized it
was left at the Wharff, under no other Care but two Custom-Houses Officers", in
hopeful, no Doubt, if not certain Expectation that the Rescue would be made,
from whence it might possibly be made to appear that the Resentment against the
Proceedings of the Custom-House Officers in the former Instance, as being
violent and illegal, was mere Protence. The Rescue was made, and it was
universally displeasing to the Town. The Governor says, "this very Molasses was
the next Day returned," and tells his Lordship, that "the Selectmen of the Town
sent for the Master of the Schoona," and "ordered him to return it, under Pain
of the Displeasure of the Town"; which is a gross Misrepresentation of the
Matter, and artfully designed to prepare for the subsequent ungenerous Remark,
that "all Government in now in the Hands of the People." A good Magistrates
would have rejoiced at this Instance of the People's voluntarily affording
their Aid in the Recovery of the King's Due, which had been rescued from him,
without torturing his Invention to find an ilnatured Construction for it: But
Gov. Bernard is disturbed that "the Humor of the People," which he says this
was done "to please," should ever comcide with their Duty to their Sovereign --
The voluntary Association of the People to promote Peace and good Order, he had
before said "carried an Implication of Danger" to the Government; and now, when
they seem to unite in taking Measures for the Execution of a Law, although in its
Nature disagreeable to the People, why truly "the Government is in the Hands of
the People, and not of those deputed by the King, or under his Authority." But
if the People had a View to save their own Reputation in this Piece of Service
to the Crown, as the Governor intimates, surely he will not say it was
"ill-judged" or "ill-timed." The Truth is, they had a particular View at this
Time to prevent Governor Bernard's improving this Rescue, which they were in no
Sort Concerned in, to the Prejudice of the Town, as had been his constant
Practice in other Cases, and as it now evidently appears he intended: And it
was certainly a wise Precantion; though a candid Mind will by no Means exclude
any other good Intentions. -- -- We cannot for bear taking Notice hero with
Freedom, of a very extraordinary Assertion of Governor Bernard, in this Letter
to his Lordship. That "every Seizure made, or attempted to be made on Land at
Boston for these three Years past, before these two Instances, had been
violently rescued or prevented." -- An Assertion so notoriously false, that few
Men could have (...) it without Brushing; and we may suppose even Governor
Bernard himself would not have made it, had he apprehended it would ever have
become Public. It is remarkable that Governor Bernard, not long before these
Letters were made public, expressed to a certain Gentleman, his earnest Wish,
that the People of this Province could have a Sight of all his Letters to the
Ministry, being assured that they would thereby be fully convinced that he was
a Friend to the Province -- Indeed be made a Declaration to the same Purpose,
in one of his public Speeches to the House of Representatives. Upon the Arrival
of the Letters however, be discovered, as some say, a certain Paleness, and
complained of as an Hardship that his Letters, wrote in Confidence, should be
exposed to the View of the Public. -- A striking Proof of the Baseness, as well
as the Persidy of his Heart!
-- The Officers of the Customs themselves will not venture to affirm it. If
the Assertion is true, his Majesty's Council must have been egregiously
mistaken when they declare that "no Instances can be alleged of any Vessel
seized or any Seizure whatever in the Town of Boston being rescued out of the
Hands of the Officers, except what took Place here on the 8th of July Instant,
when a Quantity of Molasses (this very Molasses) having been seized, was taken
away from the Officers who had Charge of it; which unwarrantable Proceeding
being universally condemned, the Molasses was very soon returned". At this
(...) Story was invented and told by Gov.Bernard, with the sole Intention of
casting an Odium upon the Town, we have Reason to expect his Retractation of
it; or he must bear the Reproaches of an highly injured Community, and the just
injurious Assertions, he thinks it a proper Time to acquaint his Lordship, that
the one Regiment which he had (...) flattering Expectation of, from a Letter he
had received from General Gage, "though it might secure the Castle, would not be
sufficient to awe the Town"; which was in Effect acting for more. Thus we see
the Means which Governor Bernard and his Confederates have been incessantly
using to accomplish their Designs; and strange as it may in some better Times
hereafter appear, these Means and these very Instruments at Length prevailed to
introduce a military Power into this Town -- A Power which is daily trampling
on our Laws, contemning our Religion, and invading the Rights both of Persons
and Property -- A Power by which a truly loyal but long abused and highly
provoked Community, is, not indeed (...), but distressed -- And were it not for
the certain Advice that our humble and dutiful Supplications have at Length
reached the Royal Hand, we should be reduced even to a State of Desperation!

Governor Bernard in his Letter to Lord Hillsborough of the 16th of September,
begins with acquainting his Lordship with the prudent Methods he took, to
communicate the Expectation of the Troops gradually, for Fear of certain ill
Effects that might arise from their sudden Arrival. And no wonder that the Man
who had long been representing a whole Country as Rebels; and had been one of
the principal Instruments in bringing such a Curse upon it, should at that
Juncture be under some Apprehensions of Danger. In his last Letter he talks of
his personal Courage, and tells Lord Hillsborough that "he did not feel his own
Firmness of Mind to fail"; He also mentions "the spirited Conduct of the
Lieutenant Governor; and with Pleasure assures his Lordship that "he could
depend upon his Resolution and Steadiness as much as he could upon his own";
from whence he concludes that "there would be ho want of a due Enforcement of
the Laws to the Correction of the present Abuses": -- But now he seems to be
conscious of Fear! -- Happy was it for him, that he was in the Hands of a
People; who attended to the Dictates of sound Policy, Religion and Loyalty --
He first opens this Matter to one of the Council, and tells him that "he had
private Advice that Troops were ordered hither, but that he had no public
Orders about it himself"; and he observes that "it quickly was very thoro'ly
circulated all over the Town", and the Faction immediately took the Alarm". By
this he would insinuate that the better Sort of the People, and even the
Generality of the Town, were well enough pleased with it. If the Faction only
took the Alarm, the Generality of the Town must have been included in the
Faction: For in Truth, he had the Mortification of seeing the whole Body of the
People, saving his own very few Adherents who were properly an implacable
Faction, thoro'ly awakened and alarmed at the sudden Expectation of a military
Force, which had indeed been often threatened by this Faction, but few realiz'd
it before -- And now the Pimps were all immediately sent out, who no Doubt were
rewarded in Proportion to their Success in the Business; and the Governor soon
had Intelligence brought to him of the Conversation of "private Companies": And
that in one "it was the general Opinion to raise the Country and oppose the
Troops"; in another "it was resolved to surprise and take the Castle". How
ridiculously impertinent must he appear in the Eyes of Men of Sense, after all
to acquaint his Lordship, that "he does not relate these Accounts as certain
Facts." To what Purpose then did he relate them at all! It seems that he was
full as designing, in communicating to Lord Hillsborough, as he was in
communicating to the People, though his Designs were different: For the People
were not to be told the whole that the Governor knew to be true; but his
Lordship was to be induced to believe more: -- In either Case if the Purpose
could be served, Sincerity was out of the Question. Uncertain however as these
Facts were, his Lordship is informed, that they were yet "believed"! Strange,
as they were said to be Facts of Yesterday, that no one, after all the Pains
that had been taken, could make them certain; and if they were not to be made
certain, stranger still that any in their Senses should believe them. -- Some
Men are very apt to believe that which they wish were true: This no doubt is
the present Case. -- And besides, we are to remember, that more than two
Regiments were wanted to awe the Town; and if the Governor could boldly say,
that these Reports, vague as they were, had obtained any Credit here, no Matter
by whom believed, they would have some Weight. But he must be presumed to think
very injudiciously of the Head or the Heart of a Minister of State, to suppose
that such an undigested and ridiculous Account of Things would influence his
Measures. Nothing, we should think, but the great Candor which has ever
appeared in Lord Hillsborough toward Governor Bernard, could have prevented
his severest Censure. -- But admitting they were true, which was by no Means
the Case, certainly the Town is not accountable for what one of his
Excellencies Spies might have overheard in a "private Company." -- Let us then
consider the Account the Governor gives of the public Conduct of the Town, at a
Meeting legally called on Monday September 12. And first he says, "at the Hall
the Faction appeared surrounded with all its Forces"; and an Appearance very
decent at least, it seems, they were capable of making according tot he
Governor's Account. For he tells his Lordship, "a Set of Speeches by the Chiefs
of the Faction, and no one else, followed in such Order and Method, that every
Thing both as to Matter and Order, seemed to have been preconcerted;" while
alas! the "very few principal Gentlemen there," the better Sort in the
Governor's Estimation, appeared "as curious, perhaps anxious Spectators"! Where
is now the little Remains of an expiring Factions, which he had so offten told
the World of? The Tone is wonderfully altered; the Body of the People are now
truly represented as united firm and regular in their Opposition to his
Measures, while his own few Partisans, who yet must be styled "the principal
Gentlemen," though expecting every Moment to be surrounded with all their
Forces," appeared inquisitive and anxious for the Event! But noting was
resolved upon says the Governor, but to put two Questions to me, and appoint a
general committee to consider and report." The main Question to the Governor
was, Whether he had certain Expectation of the Troops? To which he answered
with an artful Ambiguity, that he had private Advice, but no public Orders
about it. His private Advice might have been certain; or he might have had
authentic public Advice without public Orders about it, for General Gage was
Commander in Chief of the King's Forces. Being however somewhat pressed by the
Committee who waited on him, he discovered a Duplicity for which he has a
peculiar Talent, and said, that he would not have the Town certainly expect the
Troops; although he then expected them himself, and fully believed they were on
their Passage from Halifax; and in this Letter to Lord Hillsborough he tells
him, that it was at that very Time his Intention to communicate these
Expectations of the gradually -- His Account of diverse Speeches made in the
Town Meeting is as uncertain, and with Regard to some of them, as untrue, as
the Intelligence he had received of the private Conversation: Perhaps it was
carried to him by the same Hands, at some of his principal Gentlemen were
there. The Resolves and Determinations of this Meeting, as the Governor says,
were published to the World; and they remain on the Records of the Town that
Posterity may judge of them. The Town has seen no Reason since to revoke these
Resolves, notwithstanding they have been sentenced as "very dangerous Resolves,
procured by mad People", by so exquisite a Judge, in Matters which regard civil
Government, as well as so polite a Gentleman as General Gage. The Governor
himself has been since respectfully requested by the Selectmen, in Behalf of
the Town, to show in what Respect the Resolves and Proceedings of this very
Meeting had militated with Law; but he declined it: And we believe he declined
it, because he was not able to do it. Spirited indeed they were, but not too
spirited for the Times. -- When the Constitution is threatened, the Principles
of the Constitution must, if ever, be asserted and supported -- The Governor
indeed takes Notice of our Claim to a certain Clause in the Bill of Rights as
"a large Stride": But as we are free British Subjects, we claim all that
Security against arbitrary Power, to which we are entitled by the Law of God
and Nature, as well as the British Constitution. And if a Standing Army may not
be posted upon the Subjects in one Part of the Empire, in a Time of Peace,
without their Consent, there can be no Reason why it should in any other; for
all British Subjects are or ought to be alike free. --

The Governor in a former Letter to Lord Hillsborough mentioned the Selectmens
ordering the Arms belonging to the Town to be brought out and cleaned; and to
make something of the Story, he told him that "they were exposed some Hours at
the Town House": In this Letter he says "these Arms were deposited in Chests,
and laid upon the Floor of the Town Hall to remind the People of the Use of
them". Could any one besides Governor Bernard, descend to so pitiful an
Artifice as to insinuate that these Arms were cleaned, exposed to the People,
and finally laid on the Floor of the Hall at this Juncture, to induce his
Lordship to believe, that these were the Forces with which the Faction appeared
"surrounded", and that the Selectmen who are the principal City Magistrates,
and the leading Part of the Town itself, were actually in the Plan which he had
just before mentioned, as concerted in one of the private Meetings, "to raise
the Country and oppose the Troops": And that these Arms deposited in Chests
were laid on the Floor of the Hall, to "remind the People of the Use of them,"
and inspirit them for the Purpose of opposing the Troops. Whereas the simple
Truth of the Matter is, these Arms had for many Years been deposited in Chests
and laid on the Floor of the Town Hall; but the Hall itself being burnt a few
Years ago, the Arms were saved from the Ruins and carried to the Town House:
After the Hall was Rebuilt the Town ordered their Removal there; and though it
happened to be done at a Juncture when the Governor and his Confederates talked
much of the Town's revolting, there was no other Thought in the Minds of any,
except the Governor and a few more, and it is a Question whether even he, or
they, really thought otherwise, but to lodge them in their proper and usual
Place.

We cannot help taking Notice how very exact the Governor sometimes is even in
the choice of Words, in his "Detail of Facts" to a Minister of State: An
Instance of which we have now before us, wherein he mentions to his Lordship
his enclosing "a blank Copy of the Precept (as he is pleased to call it) which
the Selectmen have used", it is a Wonder it was not issued, for that would have
made it appear more formal, "in calling together the Convention"; from whence
he takes Occasion to say, it was "a daring Assumption of the Royal Authority".
Here then is the Treason and Misprision of Treason, or a Part of it least,
about which there has been such an Eclat of late; for which the Governor tells
his Lordship in his Detail of the Convention, every Well-wisher of the
Province, of whom he is doubtless one, "most devoutly desires the Charter may
be forfeited" -- And some of the Leaders were to be sent to England to be tried
there -- Nay, his Lordship, or some one of his Majesty's Servants is informed
that they expected it themselves; for Commodore Hood in one of his short and
pithy Epistles, says, "they were alarmed, and expected nothing less than a
Voyage to England against their Inclinations". -- But his Lordship's deep
Penetration might have discovered that this "Precept to call a Convention" was
nothing more than a friendly circular Letter to the Selectmen of the several
Towns in the Province, desiring them to propose to their respective Towns the
sending Committees, to join with those of the Town of Boston, in consulting
Measures to promote Peace and good Order: which was so far from an Assumption
of the Royal Authority, that it assumed not the least Shadow of any Authority
whatever -- This very innocent Measure of the Town in "calling together a
Convention" as the Governor expresses it, which he so highly censures, and upon
the Promoters of which he loudly calls for the national Vengeance, was most
certainly attended with all the happy Effects for which it was proposed: For
the general Sentiments of the Province were thereby collected, which could not
otherwise have been done; the Governor having arbitrarily dissolved the General
Assembly, and positively refused to call another, against the dutiful Petition
of the Convention itself, as well as of the Town, even before they proposed or
thought of it -- The several Towns having the Opportunity of conferring
together by their Committees, had the same Effects which followed a certain
circular Letter, which formerly so perplexed his Excellency; for the People
became the more united in the Measures proper to be taken for the Preservation
of their common Rights at so critical and alarming a Juncture. And though the
Governor says "at the Fountain Head it was intended to provoke Resentment", yet
to this very Measure has been imputed, in some small Degree at least, whether
justly or not, it becomes not this Town to say, that Prudence as well as
Firmness and Perserverance in the Cause of Liberty, of which it is hoped this
Country will forever avail itself. Even Governor Bernard cannot but own that
the Convention discovered "Moderation" and "a temperate Conduct", which is far
from being inconsistent with true Fortitude: But he is not willing that the
Town of Boston should " assume the Merit of it". They are content to have that
Share of Merit which their beloved Countrymen are willing they should have. And
though he would insinuate to his Lordship with his usual Cunning, that there was
at the Convention an essential Difference of Sentiments between the Town and
the Country; and that "many of the Deputies came down with a Disposition and
Instructions to prevent the Bostoners (as he elegantly expresses himself)
involving the Province in the Consequences of their own mad Devices"; and that
many of them "were from the beginning sensible of the Impropriety and Danger of
this Proceeding"; His Lordship, as "they printed what they did", has no Doubt
been since convinced, that they were united in their Sentiments of the common
Cause.

But this very peaceable Proposal, the Governor thinks, exceeded the "Great
Rebellion when it was at the highest, and the Confusion arising there from most
urgent for some extraordinary Measures". Here is the Burden of the Song --
extraordinary Measures! And surely his Lordship must propose some very
extraordinary Measures to chastise a greater than the Great Rebellion, even
when it was at the highest. -- Not content with pouring forth this Torrent of
Zeal, the Governor still presses upon his Lordship; and assures him that
"unless it is prevented by some Power from without, not only the Crown Officers
will be excluded", but "every Ingredient of Royalty" in the Government of the
Province will be totally destroyed -- -- What Rhetoric! to arrest his
Lordship's Attention, and hurry him on to conclude with the Governor, that "the
Force already ordered by General Gage, viz. two Regiments, will not be
sufficient". -- -- In Order still to heighten the Ideas of an intended
Rebellion, the Governor adds, "It is now a great Question whether the King's
Troops will be suffered to enter the Town or not". And "the Design against the
Castle in now so well known that it is probable that the very Names of the
People who were enrolled for that Service to the Number of Five Hundred, or of
the Chiefs of them will be discovered". It is pretty remarkable the Governor in
the former Part of this Letter informed his Lordship, that he did not relate
this very Account as a certain Fact; his Spies must then make very quick
Rotations, and the Intelligence flow in very fast, to be so well assured of it
before he concluded; or the Governor must be so unfortunate, perhaps not having
Time in the Multiplicity of his Affairs, to keep a regular Diary, as to forget
what he had wrote, and as we every now and then find it happens, in the
"overflowings" of his Zeal, to be inconsistent with himself.

It would be an endless Task to take particular Notice of every false and
injurious Representation contained in these voluminous Letters. Indeed it might
be said, the whole World would not certain all the Remarks that might be justly
made upon them. One instance however seems to have been overlooked by the Town;
and as it is an instance of importance, it is hoped, its being notic'd in the
Margin will not be thought amiss. The Governor, after having prevailed upon the
Council, at a very thin Board, and by a Majority of One out of only Eleven
Gentlemen present, to advise to the clearing the Manufactory-House in Boston,
for the Reception of a Part of the two Irish Regiments then expected; in his
Letter to Lord Hilisborough of Nov. (...), he gives him an Account of the Steps
he had ordered for the Removal of the Families out of the House. And it seems,
that the Governor, by a Power which he had assumed, appointed the Sheriff and
two of his Deputies, Bailiffs for the Governor and Council, for the Purpose:
These Families however, refused to submit to such Authority, even though the
Chief Justice himself (...) to go with the Sheriff, and advised them to give up
the House. The Sheriff upon the third Attempt says the Governor, (...) finding
the Window open entered; upon which the People gathered about him and shut him
up; he then made a Signal, to an Officer who was without, who brought a Party
of Soldiers, who took Possession of the Yard of the Building, and relieved the
Sheriff from his Consinement" -- This is the Governor's Account of the Matter;
but others give a very different Account of it, and say that the Sheriff
attempted of forceable Entry, and was resisted by the People within the House;
and by them only: Certain (...) that one of them commenced an Action of
Trespass against the Sheriff; but what became of the Action the Records of the
Court of Common Pleas will best show: It is also certain that an Officer, a
Military Officer, was without and at Hand; and upon a Signal from the Sheriff,
bro't a Party of Soldiers, the whole Regiment being then (...) in Sight on the
Common; and the Soldiers (not the Inhabitants as the Governor asserts) "kept
the House blockaded all that Day and best Part of the next". It is further
certain, and it may be attested by the Oaths of diverse Persons of Credit, that
Offers were made to the Sheriff, of sufficient Aid in the legal Execution of
his Office, if he would dismiss the Troops; illegal Steps being at the same
Time excepted against -- Great Numbers of People during the Seige as it may be
properly called, were collected in the Street, which is as spacious as in any
Part of the Town, but the Governor owns they did no Mischief: He indeed
represents it in his usual Manner, as a GREAT MO^ assembled with some of the
Chiefs of the Faction, intimating thereby as in his former Letters "an intended
Insurrection": The General on the other Hand says the Matter "occasioned a
little Disturbance of no Consequence"; but takes Care to add, that "it served
to show a most obstinate Spirit of Opposition to every Measure of Government"
The Governor further says, the Inhabitants "were very abusive to the Soldiers";
-- The Contrary is most certainly and (...) true. He says also, That "the
Soldiers were withdrawn on Evening of the second Day;"; So far is this from
Truth, that the Guard of Soldiers to whose Custody the (...) committed the
Cellar of the House, which he had got the Possession of, kept their post a much
longer Time; and Application was made to diverse of his Majesty's Justices of
the Peace for their Removal by the Force of Law near three Weeks after. And
again the Governor says, that "this Building was kept filled with the Outcast
of the Workhouse, to prevent its being used for the Accommodation of the King's
Troops"; Which is contradicted by the Oaths of all the Oversears of the Poor,
who must have known it if it had been true, for the Care and Government of the
Workhouse is by Law vested in them. The Truth it, the People gathered upon this
extraordinary Occasion, but were very peaceable; some few it may be to carry
Intelligence to the Governor, but by far the greater Part, from a just
Abhorrence of this Measure of Government, to borrow the General Expression, and
an Anxiety for the Event of this first open and (...) Effort of Military
TYRANNY! The Governor declares, that the Council who were alarmed at the
Violence of this Proceeding, must have known that the Entry "could not have
been made without Force;" and he sufficiently explains what sort of Force he
meant, in the Reason he gives, why the Soldiers were withdrawn for that Time,
which was, because "the Building was not immediately wanted," the Irish
Regiments, for whom it was designed, as was pretended, not being yet arrived.
-- -- Perhaps the Governor gives this circumstantial Account to his Lordship to
confirm what he had before said, that "Two Regiments were not sufficient to AWE
THE TOWN! -- This Attack upon the Security of People's Dwelling-Houses, was as
violent as has ever been known even under line most despotick Governments, though
happily it proved unsuccessful. This is one of the bright Glories of BERNARD'S
Administration: He who with so much Readiness and exact Propriety afforded the
Aid of his Advice, and PREJUDGED the Matter, (...) however his Share in the
Annals of Fame. -- --
No one can read them without being astonished at seeing a Person in so
important a Department as Governor Bernard sustained, descending in his Letters
to a Minister of State, to such trifling Circumstances, and such slanderous
Chit-chat: Boasting, as he does in one of his Letters, of his overreaching
those with whom he was transacting public Business; and in Order to prejudice
the most respectable Bodies, meanly filching from Individuals belonging to
those Bodies, what had been dropped in the Course of Business or Debate:
Journalizing every idle Report brought to him, and in short acting the Part of
a Pimp rather than a Governor. -- -- As these Letters, being now made public,
will be a Monument of Disgrace to him, it cannot be supposed, that any Honor
can be derived from them, to those great Men to whom they were addressed.

Notwithstanding the Town have been obliged in Justice to themselves, to say
thus much in their own Vindication, we should yet be glad, that the ancient and
happy Union between Great Britain and this Country, which Governor Bernard has
so industriously labored to interrupt, might be restored. Some have indeed
flattered themselves with the Prospect of it; as Intelligence is said to have
been received from Administration, that all the Revenue Acts would be repealed:
But as it since appears by Lord Hillsborough's own Account, that nothing more
is intended, than the taking off the Duties on Paper, Glass, and Painter's
Colors, upon commercial Principles only; if that is all, it will not give
Satisfaction: It will not even relieve the Trade from the Burdens it labors
under; much less will it remove the Grounds of Discontent, which runs through the
Continent, upon much higher Principles. Their Rights are invaded by these Acts;
therefore until they are are all repealed the Cause of their just Complaints
cannot be removed: In short, the Grievances which lie heavily upon us, we shall
never think redressed, till every Act, passed by the British Parliament for the
express Purpose of raising a Revenue upon us without our Consent, is Repealed;
till the American Board of Commissioners of the Customs is dissolved; the
Troops recalled, and Things are restored to the State they were in before the
late extraordinary Measures of Administration took Place.

Besides these Letters of Governor Bernard, we find others written by General
Gage, and Commodore Hood. And we cannot but observe, that although both these
Gentlemen were perfect Strangers in the Town they have yet taken such
extraordinary Freedoms, and the General in particular has wrote in such a
positive Strain, as must unavoidably give high Disgust to every Reader of
Candor and Impartiality. -- -- If these Gentlemen received the Character of the
Town, or of any of its Individuals, from Governor Bernard, as we are ready to
think they did, they must have been long before convinced, if they knew any
Thing at all of the State of the Town, that the Governor was too deeply
interested in misrepresenting, to be credited in a Point of that Importance:
and therefore common Justice would have dictated a Suspension of their public
Testimony to the Prejudice of a Community, till they could have had the
Opportunity of doing it upon impartial Enquiry, or their own Observation -- The
General seems to have early imbibed some Sort of Prejudice against a Town, that
had been before prejudiced in his Favor: For the Governor in one of his Letters
to Lord Hillsborough acquaints him, that the General "had sent Capt. Montresor
from New York, to assist the Forces as Engineer, and enable them to RECOVER and
maintain the Castle, and such other Posts as they could secure", upon
Intelligence that the People in and about Boston had revolted. Now even the
Gov. himself declares this to be a mistake, and says that Things were not quite
"so bad as that came to." -- As there are two constant and regular Posts
between this Town and New York, each of which carries Intelligence from the one
to the other in the Course of a Week; and more especially as he might
reasonably expect authentic Accounts of a Matter of such Importance, by
Express in a shorter Time; it is strange, if the General's Mind was unbias'd,
that he should so strongly rely upon private Advice, as to form his Measures
from them, which the Governor asserts. -- It was a Measure of Importance, as it
issued, to the Town: for Col. Dalrymple who had the Command of the Regiments,
from the Authority of these new Orders, as the Governor declares, though it proper
to alter the Plan, which was to land only one, and landed both the Regiments in
Boston without Loss of Time. Perhaps it was under the Impression of these
private Advices, and "the Narrative of the Proceedings of the Town Meeting",
which the Governor also mentions as influential on the General's Measures, and
which possibly was a Narrative of the Governor's own writing, that so wrought
upon the General's Imagination, as to induce him to give his Opinion to his
Lordship that the "Intentions of the Town were suspicious, and that he was
happy the Troops from Halifax arrived at the Time they did"! These and many
such like unprovoked Expressions are to be found in the Letters of both these
Gentlemen, and especially the General's; but as they partake of a full Portion
of the Spirit of Governor Bernard's, and as the Sense of this Province fully
appears in the late spirited Resolves of the House of Representatives, we shall
avoid troubling the Public with particular Remarks upon them, and to borrow an
Expression of great Authority, "treat them with the Contempt they deserve".

The Town of BOSTON, at their Meeting beforementioned, came into the following
Resolutions, viz.
RESOLVED, That the Letters and Memorials of Governor Bernard and the
Commissioners of the Customs in America, transmitted by them respectively to
his Majesty's Ministers, and laid before the Parliament of Great Britain,
authentic Copies of which are now before this Town; had a Tendency to deceive
the Ministry and lead them unavoidably to misinform his Majestly, with Regard
to the Affections and Loyalty of his American Subjects in general: And that the
said Governor Bernard and the Commissioners have particularly, in their Letters
and Memorials beforementioned, discovered an implacable Enmity to this Town,
(...) most virulent Endeavors to traduce (...) to his Majesty himself; by
Means thereof the Inhabitants very sensibly feel (...) Displeasure of their
Gracious Sovereign. --

RESOLVED, That this Town have Reason to rejoice in the Measure taken by the
Honorable House of Representatives, in the last Session of the General
Assembly; by so seasonably preferring their Dutiful and Loyal Petition to his
Majesty, for the Removal of Governor Bernard for ever from the Government of
this Province: And the Town take this Opportunity to express their most ardent
Wish, that the Prayer of said Petition to his Majesty may be graciously heard
and granted.

RESOLVED, That General Gage and Commodore Hood in their several Letters to his
Majesty's Ministers and Servants, authentic Copies of which are now before
this Town, have discovered an unreasonable Prejudice against the Town. And the
General in particular, in declaring in his Letter to the Right Hon, the Earl of
Hillsborough, one of his Majesty's Secretaries of State that " in Truth there
was very little Government in Boston; and in making Use of other Expressions
alike severe, has done great Injustice to the Town, and an irreparable Injury.
And moreover the Opinion of the Town, that Readiness he has discovered to
receive un vourable Impressions of it, and the public Testimony he was
prevailed upon to be against it, before he could have Time to make an impartial
Enquiry, betrayed a want of Candor unbecoming his Station and Character.

RESOLVED, That many of the Letters and Memorials aforesaid are false,
scandalous, and infamous Libels upon the Inhabitants of this Town, Province and
Continent, of the most virulent and malicious, as well as dangerous and
pernicious Tendency: And that the Selectmen be and hereby are directed to apply
and complain to proper Authority, that the wicked Authors of those incendiary
Libels, may be proceeded with according to Law, and brought to condign
Punishment.

The Reader is desired to correct the following, and any other Mistakes of the
Press.

Page 7. line 4. for is, read in.

Page 18. line 8 from bottom, for senticat, in some of the Copies, -- read
sentiunt.


