A MEDICAL DISCOURSE, OR AN HISTORICAL INQUIRY INTO THE ANCIENT AND PRESENT
STATE OF MEDICINE: THE SUBSTANCE OF WHICH WAS DELIVERED AT OPENING THE MEDICAL
SCHOOL, IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK.

BY PETER MIDDLETON, M. D. AND PROFESSOR OF THE THEORY OF PHYSIC IN KING'S
COLLEGE,

Est quoddam prodire tenus -- HOR. Curentur du^ii MEDICIS MAJORIBUS Aegri, JUV.
PRINTED BY DESIRE.

NEW YORK: Printed by HUGH GAIN, in HANOVER-SQUARE. M,DCC,LXIX.

TO THE WORTHY AND VERY RESPECTABLE THE GOVERNORS OF KING'S COLLEGE, AND, TO
THE MUCH ESTEEMED PRESIDENT MILES COOPER, L. L. D.
GENTLEMEN,
THE favorable Sentiments you were pleased to express of my Introductory
Lecture, at opening the MEDICAL SCHOOL in this COLLEGE, have induced me to make
some considerable Additions, in hopes of rendering it more generally
entertaining: This, with my other necessary Avocations, has prevented its
Publication, till now. The successful Efforts which have lately been made,
under your AUSPICES, toward establishing the PRACTICE of PHYSIC in this CITY
upon a reputable Footing, and undeceiving the Inhabitants with Respect to
Impostors, are confessedly the Fruits of that cheerful and steady Warmth, with
which you have at all Times espoused the Cause of Learning, and the Interests
of this COLLEGE; and more particularly of this present INSTITUTION. How far the
following Discourse can serve to promote these benevolent and laudable
Purposes, is submitted to your Judgments: If it merits your Approbation, the
Author will be happy in the Success of his Endeavors; and your friendly
Indulgence to him, for what Faults may be found in it, will be gratefully
acknowledged by,

GENTLEMEN, Your most obedient, And very humble Servant, P. M.
KING'S COLLEGE, Nov. 3, 1769.
MEDICAL DISCOURSE.
THE many and great Advantages arising to Society, from the Institution of
public SEMINARIES of LEARNING, were so early apparent to the illustrious Sages
and venerable Legislators of Antiquity; that we find such SCHOOLS nearly coeval
with the Dawnings of Science itself. The Histories of the most remote Ages
inform us, that particular Classes of Men, under various Denominations in
different Countries, were employed and set apart as the Depositaries or
Preservers of all the Learning then known; whose Duty it was by further
Observations of their own, to rectify or improve whatever had been communicated
to them; and afterward to transmit the whole, without reserve, to their
Successors. These Men from their retired Life, reputed Sanctity, and Knowledge
of the Powers of natural Bodies, and when Patriarchal Authority had now for
some Time been sunk in that of rising States and Empires, would naturally be
considered in Days of Ignorance and Simplicity, as a superior Order of Beings,
and as holding immediate Converse with Heaven; and therefore they were usually
entrusted at the same Time, with the Direction of all the religious Rites and
Ceremonies practiced among them, in the Worship of their several local
Divinities: But that their Attention might not be taken off from these
different Tasks or Studies, by the Necessity of providing themselves with Food
and Raiment, they were for the most Part maintained at the public Expense. So
profusely liberal had the Kings of EGYPT been to their Seminaries or Colleges
of learned Men, that as Diodorus Siculus tells us, one third Part of the whole
Country was anciently allotted for the Support of the Priests; who, he adds,
were also all Physicians, or skilled in the Art of Healing. These Priests, by
some called Hierophantes, or Expounders of sacred Things, derived the Origin of
their Institution from the earliest Ages; and were reputedly the most learned
Body of Men then known in the World, wherever Policy and good Government had
been established. For it may be affirmed from natural Reason, as well as from
all the credible Histories of ancient Nations, that none of the liberal Arts or
Sciences ever made any considerable Progress, but where good Order and
Government had been first introduced and properly maintained. LAWS are
necessary both for the Security of the Persons and Properties of Men, and from
that Ease and Happiness which are the necessary Consequences of such Security,
proceeds Curiosity, and an emulous Desire of distinguishing themselves either
by successful Researches into the Nature and Uses of the Objects around them;
or by such other Inventions and Discoveries as are advantageous to themselves,
or Neighbors: The happy Result of all which is SCIENCE or Knowledge.

Besides the EGYPTIAN COLLEGES already mentioned, we find similar Institutions
among several other Nations of Antiquity; some of which I shall give a summary
Account of.

Among the most ancient of these are the CHALDAEANS: They are noticed by that
Name in Scripture, so early as in the Days of Abraham, who is there said to
have been born in their Country. Though the CHALDAEANS are frequently spoken of
as a Nation of ASSYRIA, the Name is now most generally understood of a certain
Body of learned Men distinct from the Rest of the Citizens; whose sole Business
was Study; who lived in and about Babylon; and were famous for their Knowledge
of Astronomy. The Philosopher Callisthen^s, who attended Alexander on his
Expedition against Darius, sent Aristotle an Account of Astronomical
Observations made by the Chaldaeans, from nearly the Time of the Mosaical
Deluge. They first invented Judicial Astrology, or pretended to foretell Events
from the Influence and relative Aspects of the Stars and Constellations. They
were much consulted in Diseases, which they pretended to cure by Charms, and
the Agency of invisible Powers, more than by the Medicinal Herbs they used on
these Occasions.

The CABEIRI was an Appellation sometimes used by the Ancients for their Great
Gods, so called; but most generally for the Priests, who performed their sacred
Rites, and taught their Manner of Worship. They first came from Phoenicia, and
settled in Samothrace: They affected great Secrecy in their Ceremonies; and
used certain Forms of Initiation into their Mysteries, by placing their Pupils
upon a Throne, and dancing round them; after which they put a Girdle about
them, which was thought to possess great Virtues.

The CURETES, so called from keeping their Hair short, and the CORYBANTES, were
different Names for the Priests of Cybele or Rhea, the fabled Mother of the
Gods. They were sometimes called Idaei Dactyli, from their Number; and from
Mount Ida near Troy, where Cybele was held in particular Veneration. These
Priests went from Phrygia, and took up their Residence in the Island of Crete;
where they were said to have been entrusted with the Education of JUPITER; when
to prevent the Cries of the young God from being heard by his Father Saturn,
they invented the noisy and warlike Dances in Armor, to the Sound of Drums and
Flutes, which afterward became Part of their established Worship. They were
expert in the Science of Augury and Divination. They applied themselves much to
Astronomy, to Physiology or the Study of Nature, and to Poetry. They are said
to have first instructed the Cretans to build Cities, and to live in Societies;
to manage Flocks and Bees; and to make and use Armor. STRABO mentions this
Order of Priests by the Name of the COLLEGE of the CURETES; and as performing
yearly Sacrifices in Honor of the Birth of Apollo and Diana.

The TELCHINES came first to Greece from the Island of Rhodes, whither they had
removed from Egypt: They were undoubtedly of the Tribe of the Priests in Egypt,
the Inventors or Preservers of the sacred Hieroglyphick Characters, and of the
other Methods by which they concealed their Learning from the Vulgar; for they
were very scrupulous and reserved in communicating their Knowledge. The Greeks
speak of them as the Inventors of Arts; who first taught them to rear Temples,
to carve Images, and to practice regular Ceremonies in the Worship of their
Deities. They were also great Magicians, and pretended to work Wonders by
Charms, Incantations, and certain Drugs, whose Qualities they were acquainted
with. They were probably the same as Pharoah's Sorcerers or wise Men; who are
said in Scripture to have done such supernatural Feats, in Imitation of the
Miracles performed by Moses in Egypt. They were also much given to Processions
and Shows; and to all the other Arts by which they could excite Admiration in
Mankind, and Reverence for themselves, and their Profession.

In the Book of JOSHUA we read of a City of Palestine or Canaan called
Ciriath-Sepher, which literally signifies the City of Books or of Letters; as
the Canaanites and especially the Sidonians are known to have even then made
great Progress in Arts and Learning, it is generally believed that they had in
those Times, public Schools or Colleges in Ciriath-Sepher, in which were
taught the Sciences or Philosophy of those Ages; and that this City had its
Name from these Circumstances, and the Number of learned Men who used to
assemble in it, for Study, or mutual Improvement.

It is certain that there were COLLEGES among the JEWS, in the Time of SAMUEL,
even for the Instruction of their Prophets in the Rites and Ceremonies of their
Religion; and other Mysteries of that important Profession. Here is such an
Encomium upon Learning, as exceeds all the Powers of Man to equal: By this we
are given to understand that Learning was conducive to Inspiration, and a more
familiar Intercourse with the Deity; and was the eligible Vehicle of his
revealed Will to that favorite People. Accordingly in the prophetic Writings
we find many beautiful Descriptions, ingenious Allegories, and instructive
moral Truths, delivered in a Style truly Poetical and Sublime. We are also told
in the Jewish History, that HULDAH, the Prophetess, dwelt in the COLLEGE at
Jerusalem.

The SALII or Priests of MARS, were instituted at ROME by Numa, for keeping the
Aneilia or sacred Bucklers: They had a PRAESU^ or chief Director; and they were
called the COLLEGE of the SALII. This Name was given them, because they danced
in Armor through the Streets in their Processions, in a certain Cadence,
continually beating upon their Bucklers; on which Occasion they were
accompanied with a Number of young Virgins in particular Habits, singing the
Saliare Carmen, or Song of their Order.

Besides these, we read that there were anciently COLLEGES of the Persian Magi,
and of the Indian Gymnosophists or Bramins; which Institutions exist in the
East at this Day: And the COLLEGES of the Druids, or Semnotheans both in Gaul
and Britain, are frequently mentioned in the Roman and other Histories. These
Colleges were inferior to none of the others, either in Antiquity, Regularity,
or popular Influence. Their Learning and Opinions shall be more particularly
considered hereafter.

It may be observed in general of all these INSTITUTIONS or public SEMINARIES;
that they were usually composed of Men distinguished by their Birth, Learning,
and Abilities, set apart for the Care of their religious Tenets and Ceremonies;
and that they were the established SCHOOLS for the Instruction of Youth.

These Outlines or imperfect Models of PUBLIC ACADEMIES or SCHOOLS, whether
derived from the Institutions abovementioned, or from some other Denomination
of learned Men, among Nations, whose Histories have not reached our Times, were
warmly adopted and greatly improved by the Greeks: Among them we find the fine
Arts more generally diffused and cultivated, than among the other Nations of
Antiquity. This indeed might naturally be expected from the inquisitive Genius
and liberal Sentiments of the free born. Sons of Greece; whose unwearied
Diligence in the Pursuit of, and inextinguishable Avidity for Knowledge, often
prompted them to explore distant Lands, to visit many and Strange Nations, and
to brave all opposing Difficulties and Dangers, in Order to participate of
every Treasure of Learning, wherever it could be found. Of this there are many
Instances in History; and it has been observed, that one of the greatest
Encomiums bestowed upon the sagacious ULYSSES is, that he

" Wandering from Clime to Clime, observant strayed,
" Their Manners noted, and their States surveyed."
POPE. Nor was this Custom of Traveling confined to the Greeks. The famed
ZOROASTER traveled over Indostan, as far as the Ganges, to be instructed in
the ancient Philosophy of the Bramins, who, even in his Time, were celebrated
for the Innocence of their Lives, and Purity of their Doctrines; and the Gentoo
Annals, still preserved in India, mention both him and PYTHAGORAS, as
Travelers into that Country, in Search of Knowledge. The Hyperborean
Philosopher and British Druid ABARIS, is mentioned by several Greek Writers, as
traveling over the Continent of Europe to Athens and Delos, and from thence
into Italy. ANACHARSIS was a noble Scythian who came to Greece for Improvement;
from thence he visited CROESUS in Lydia; and afterward was killed in his own
Country, for endeavoring to introduce the Grecian Customs. ERILLUS, and
CLITOMACHUS, otherwise called ASDRUBAL, were Carthaginians who came to Greece,
for Instruction; as did MENIPPUS from Phoenicia.

We read of many more inquisitive Sages of Old, who quitted their native
Countries to visit distant Regions, in Quest of Learning. From these renowned
Travelers of Antiquity, is derived the modern fashionable Practice, of
visiting foreign Countries for Improvement; which was adopted soon after the
Revival of Learning in Europe; and is still considered, by Men of generous
Minds and enlarged Understandings, not only as a genteel and useful
Accomplishment, but as the finishing Part of Polite Education.

Since those more remote Times, Learning has been so extensively branched out
into various Arts, Sciences, or Professions; by the many curious and amazing
Discoveries communicated to the World, within these few last Centuries; and by
the innumerable useful and interesting Improvements made in all its several
Departments; that the munificent Founders, and generous Benefactors of modern
UNIVERSITIES have been thereby induced to assign competent Allowances, for the
Support of particular Professors or Teachers in each necessary Branch* Who with
Abilities not inferior, though with Assistances and Advantages infinitely
superior to the Ancients, are nevertheless considered as both usefully and
necessarily employed for themselves, and the Public, in attending to, and
improving the single Part alloted them.

By the Example of these European Nations, who have distinguished themselves as
Encouragers of Learning and Patrons of Science; and more particularly by the
Example, and with the Countenance and Assistance of those Countries, which,
with that affectionate Respect due to the Birth Place of our Fathers, and those
Sentiments of Gratitude we so justly owe for their generous Protection and Aid
in that Undertaking, we more emphatically call the MOTHER COUNTRIES; a Seminary
of Learning, has for some Time past been established and endowed in this City,
with a public Spiritedness and Liberality worthy of its Founders; and which
will, we hope, reflect Honor upon their Memories, and those of its kind
Benefactors, while lives the Love of Letters, -- while Merit meets Reward.

To render the Influence of this COLLEGE more extensive and beneficial to
Mankind, the respectable Governors have, with their usual Benevolence, been
pleased to countenance and cherish the infant and well-meant Endeavors of a
few Gentlemen of the Medical Profession here, to erect a SCHOOL of PHYSIC; by
bestowing upon each of them the Titles, Privileges, and Immunities of
PROFESSORS in it, of such separate Branches of Medicine as they have severally
engaged to teach. For these distinguished Marks of Favor, it is with the
greatest Alacrity and Pleasure, that I embrace this first Opportunity, in my
own Name, and in the Names of my Brother Professors, of making our sincere
Acknowledgements to the worthy and patriotic GOVERNORS, for that Protection and
Encouragement they have so cheerfully afforded to our Undertaking, and the
Honors they have been pleased to confer upon us: And in a particular Manner we
return our unfeigned and most cordial Thanks to the THREE GENTLEMEN of the
COMMITTEE DR. S. AUCHMUTY, Rector of Trinity Church DR. M. COOPER, President of
King's College, and J. T. KEMPE, Esquire his Majesty's Attorney Ge*
appointed to confer with us; whose great Good-Sense and Politeness were not
only useful, but necessary in removing many Obstacles which occured to the
Execution of our intended Plan; and whose steady and unwearied Attention to the
Reputation and Interest of this COLLEGE, are only surpassed by their Humanity
and general Good Will to Mankind, so conspicuous in their Endeavors to promote
and improve the great ART of HEALING.

When we consider that the most civilized and polite Nations on Earth, have
formerly at some Period lived as the most Savage and Ignorant do at this Day;
we have great Reason to extol the Sagacity and Address of our Ancestors, for
inventing, cultivating, and improving the Arts and Sciences. To enumerate the
Benefits we derive from their Industry; the many Conveniences and Pleasures of
Life which their Discernment and Good Sense have put us in Possession of; or
the Labors and Inquietudes we have been delivered from, by their profitable
and successful Endeavors; would be a Task not more difficult than unnecessary;
as it would be doubting the Judgment of this learned AUDIENCE; as well as their
Knowledge of Men and Books: I shall therefore confine my subsequent Discourse
to the present Occasion of bringing together this respectable and polite
Company; and to what is properly the Subject of this present Institution.

The ART of HEALING, as is observed by the learned Dr. PITCAIRN, must certainly
be of greater Antiquity than the Study of PHILOSOPHY; because in the Beginning
of the World, every one would be determined to those Studies of PHYSIC or
PHILOSOPHY, according as the Feelings of Man's Body, or the Amusements of his
Mind first excited his Attention. Now it is most probable, that the Reasons for
PHILOSOPHY were only accidental or casual; for Men then only addicted
themselves to philosophising, when, after experiencing the Efficacy of
Remedies, they could in some Security and at Leizure consider the Qualities of
Natural Bodies, and think of excelling the Rest of Mankind in the Powers of the
Understanding: Whereas the Reasons for PHYSIC, or the Preservation of Health,
were perpetual; and, from the earliest Use of Man's Faculties, naturally
connected with his Well-being and Existence. The SCIENCE of MEDICINE is also
more useful, more honorable than that of PHILOSOPHY; by how much the more
reasonable it is, that our Care for the Life of Man, should exceed that of
gratifying his Curiosity.

By the Word MEDICINE, the Ancients understood every Thing which related to the
Art of Healing; as by the Appellation of PHYSICIAN (...), Medicus, -- a Healer.
, they meant every one who practiced that Art, whether the prescriptive, or
manual Parts of it.

MAN, from the Beginning, seems to have been formed by his CREATOR, subject to
Changes, and even to Death itself; equally with all the other living
Productions of Nature. The Structure of his Body, the Functions necessary to
the Preservation of Life, Motion and Rest, Watching and Sleep, and even Health
itself, are ultimately productive of Infirmities and Sickness: The daily
Necessity of fresh Supplies of Meat and Drink, to recruit the continual Waste
of the Body, by the Actions of Life; the Air he breathes, filled with
Exhalations of very different Properties, according as they ascend from the
Earth in the Day, or descend from the surrounding Atmosphere in the Night; the
various and sudden Changes of the Weather, from hot, cold, moist, dry, to their
several Opposites; or the long and uninterrupted Cold and Heat of successive
Days and Nights; the Influence of the Sun and Moon upon our Bodies, through the
Medium of the Atmosphere; and the varying Seasons of the Year; all must
occasion such Alterations in his Constitution, and State of Health, as are the
necessary Conditions of his Existence; and finally must become the Source of
his total Dissolution. From all this may we not conclude, that before that
mysterious Fall of ADAM, the Structure of the human Body must have been very
different from what it now is; or that it was not liable to the same
Inconveniences, Necessities, and Accidents, as at present; or otherwise, that
even in EDEN'S Garden, and while possessed of that so celebrated and golden
State of Innocence, nothing less than a Tree of Life, or some such singular and
perpetual Exertion of Omnipotence, could preserve to him, the full and
undiminished Enjoyment of all those various Powers and Faculties, depending
upon the Health and Well-being of a Machine, so mutable, so weak, and
complicated?

The first Race of Mankind, exposed in the Forests or open Fields, to the
sudden Changes and Inclemencies of the Weather, must have maintained their Life
in no very comfortable Condition. Unacquainted with those Luxuries and Abuses
of natural Benefits, which have since their Time been so much followed and
refined upon, it is agreed among all the ancient Writers of every Country and
Denomination, who have treated that Subject, and Reason itself confirms it to
us, that their whole Sustenance consisted in the Seeds, Herbs, and Roots of
their own and Nature's Tillage, just as they grew and presented themselves to
their Hand; joined with the succulent Fruits of Shrubs and Trees; and diluted
with the cool and refreshing Draughts from the pure Stream or Fountain. This
Diet of the primitive Ages would vary, according to the different Productions
of their respective Countries; whence many Nations were anciently distinguished
by Names expressive of that particular Food most generally used among them, or
with which their Country chicsty abounded: Thus we are told that the Arcadians
lived in former Times upon Acorns; the Argives on Pears; the Athenians on
Figgs; other Nations are said to have fed chie^^y on Beech Mast; and to keep up
the Remembrance of these Days of Innocence and Frugality, it was customary at
Athens, to present the new married Pair on the Day of their Nuptials, with a
Basket of Acorns mixed with Bread. However, let us observe by the by, that
probably the Acorns in these southern Latitudes differed in Quality, from those
known to us; and that other Kinds of Shell Fruits might be comprehended under
that Name. But when we consider the Nature of this Diet, we must allow that,
though it is very proper for Cattle and the feathered Tribes, whose Organs are
adapted to such Aliment, it could not be so fit for or agreeable to MAN, who is
of a more delicate Texture: For the most delicious Fruits are cold, and afford
but little Nourishment; Seeds, without previous Dressing, are flatulent, and
hard to digest; and Herbs and Roots are still more harsh and crude. This is the
uncontroverted Opinion of Physicians in all Ages and Climates. HIPPOCRATES
says, that in the Beginning Men used the same Food as the Beasts; and that the
many Distempers, brought upon them by such indigestible Aliment, taught them in
Length of Time to find out a different Diet, better suited to their
Constitutions: And the same Reasons no doubt, suggested the first Essays of
improving the Taste, and meliorating the Nature of such ungrateful Food, by
Means of Fire.

The Use of MILK was probably an early Acquisition to the Diet of the primitive
Ages. This being a ready Article of Food, more palatable, and better suited to
their Powers of Digestion, than any other then known, will easily account for
that Attention and Care with which the Men of those Times preserved and
multiplied their Herds and Flocks, in which consisted all their Riches; and for
that perpetual Desire they had to roam and change their Places of Abode, in
their Function of Shepherds, for the Convenience of finding fresh Pasture and
Water. Thus the SCYTHIANS were sometimes called GALACTOPHAGI, or MILK-EATERS,
by the Greeks, from their feeding much upon that nutritious Fluid.

The Simplicity of their Diet could only be equaled by that of their Clothing
and Habitations. The Skin of some Animal, accidentally found dead, or of some
devouring Beast of Prey, killed perhaps in Self-defence, was probably the first
Covering that was wore, either for Use or Ornament: As their Canopy was the
Sky; a natural Grotto; or some temporary Shelter of Branches and Leaves;
agreeable to their Necessities, and suited to their Circumstances.

At what Time the Use of ANIMAL FOOD was first introduced, is not easily
ascertained. PLUTARCH wonders what Soul or Sentiments the Man had, who first
with his Mouth touched Blood, or the Flesh of slaughtered Animals; and thinks
that nothing but extreme Necessity could have introduced such a Practice. When
we consider the helpless Condition of Man, in his State of Nature; how he is
comparatively unprovided with Weapons of Offense or Defense; and if we reflect
that there is in every Man, unpractised in the Ways of Blood, an innate
Abhorrence to deprive of Life, or dispassionately to butcher an inoffensive
Brute, from a preconceived Desire of eating its Body; we cannot believe that he
was originally formed by his CREATOR for an Animal of Prey. This is further
confirmed from comparative Anatomy; by which it is evident, that his
Instruments of Manducation and Digestion more nearly resemble those of
Graminivorous, than of Carnivorous Animals. Thus ADAM, among other Injunctions
given him, is told; That every Herb bearing Seed, and every Tree in which is
the Fruit of a Tree yielding Seed, shall be to him for Meat: But, though Dominion
is expressly given him over all living Creatures, in every Element, he is no
where told that he might kill, or eat of them: And it is as true as remarkable,
that excepting those human Figures which inhabit near the frozen Seas to the
North of Europe, and who from Necessity live almost entirely upon Fish and Sea
Fowls; the principal Part of Man's Food in all other known Regions of the
World, from the fierce Savages of AMERICA, to the wandering Hordes of TARTARY,
and the sooty Tribes of AFRICA, has ever been, and still continues to be
Vegetable. But by whatever Means Man was first tempted to act so contrary to
the Feelings of Humanity, as to destroy Animals for Food; whether from the
Example of Savage Beasts, the grateful Odor of Burnt-Offerings, Curiosity,
dire Necessity, a Spirit of Revenge, or by whatever Motive he was induced to
make the bold Essay; the first Account we have of Animals being the destined
Prey of Man, is in that formal Permission addressed to NOAH, immediately after
the Flood, in these Words; Every moving Thing that lives, shall be Meat for
you; even as the green Herb have I given you all Things: And it is the general
Opinion of Ecclesiastical Writers, that no such Food was used, till after the
Deluge. This Permission to eat Meat, when considered simply and in itself, will
appear to have been only a partial Favor: For crude Flesh quickly putrifies,
more especially when assisted by the natural Heat of the Body; while
notwithstanding, the human Stomach and Bowels, from the Delicacy of their
Structure and Length of their Tube, are unable to discharge the putrid Faeces
so expeditiously as is done by Beasts by Nature formed for Prey, and whose
Intestines are not only shorter, but also more firm and muscular: Wherefore it
is obvious that the Eating of raw Meat must have been attended with very
pernicious Consequences, before the various Methods of dressing it by Fire, and
other Contrivances for preserving it, were found out; in order to retard its
Tendency to Putrefaction, and accommodate this Disposition to the Powers of
Digestion in Man, and to the Length of Time it must necessarily remain in his
Body. Thus the ART of COOKERY, however it may have administered to the Folly or
Luxury of later Times, was undoubtedly, in its Origin, not more simple than
proper and necessary; and like other prophylactick Remedies or Preservatives,
was at first practiced for the sole Purposes of Health and Convenience.
Physicians often form very just Opinions respecting the Nature of the humane
Juices, and the general State of Health, from that particular Kind of Food
chiefly used, whether it be Animal or Vegetable; and some have even pretended
to judge of Men's Tempers and Disposition, from eating their animal Food much
dressed, crude, or nearly so. There are however many Examples of a voluntary
Abstinence from all Flesh. both in ancient and modern Times; partly from
Motives of Humanity to Brutes, and partly from those of Self-Mortification: For
not to mention the Austerities and frugal Life of ANCHORETS in different Parts
of the World, it is well known that, of the present religious Orders amongst
the Roman Catholics, the CARTHUSIANS and MINIMS never eat Meat: and the rigid
Order of LA TRAPPE, never eat any Thing which has ever had Life in it; They
live entirely on Vegetables, cultivated by their own Hands. The COLLOYERS, a
Sect of Greek Monks, never eat Meat; and on Fast Days they use Vegetables only.
There is another Sect of Greek Devotees called ASCETAI, who live recluse in the
Mountains upon Vegetables alone: Many Religious among the Armenians never eat
Meat; and among the Japanese we are told, that many of their Priests and other
Devotees are no less abstemious in that Article of Food. That small Society of
industrious inoffensive People, who have lately settled in a neighboring
Province, and are commonly known by the Name of DUNKARDS, live for the most
Part upon Vegetable Productions; and though they do not refrain altogether from
Meat, they professedly use it very sparingly, from a Principle of Self-Denial.
They are moreover very frugal in their Dress, Sleep upon Boards, and are
extremely hospitable: They have a Mo^e of Worship, and some Tenets peculiar to
themselves; and with Respect to their public Economy, they live under
Regulations somewhat resembling the ancient Spartans, or their modern Imitators
the Moravians.

This natural Aversion in Man to kill Animals for Food, if it did not give Rise
to, was certainly much hightened by, the Belief of the METEMPSYCHOSIS, or
TRANSMIGRATION of Souls; which PYTHAGORAS having been instructed in by the
Egyptian HIEROPHANTES, and BRAMINS of the East, is falsely supposed to have
been the Author of, because he first publicly taught it in Greece. For it is
certain that all of this Persuasion, abstain more or less from Animal Food;
either from Motives of Religion, or Humanity.

As this Doctrine of the METEMPSYCHOSIS is very ancient, and constitutes the
very Essence of the Gentoo Religion at this Day; and as the Account of their
original Tenets, lately published by MR. HOLWELL, who resided several Years
amongst them, is in very few Hands here; I shall subjoin an Abstract of their
Opinions, chiefly from him, for the Amusement of the Curious, though somewhat
foreign to the present Subject.

The BRAMINS, or GENTOO PRIESTS, by the Ancients called GYMNOSOPHISTS, have
ever invariably professed, as fundamental Articles of their Creed, the three
grand Principles usually taught to those initiated into the celebrated
ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES; to wit, The Unity of the Godhead; his Providence over
all Creation; and a future State of Rewards and Punishments. They believe that
the Host of Angels was called into Existence long before the Creation of this
World; and that long before this latter Event, there was an Apostasy or
Rebellion of the Angels in Heaven, who, with their Chief, MOISASOOR, were
banished thence by the ETERNAL ONE, into utter Darkness: That after some Time,
at the Intercession of the good Angels, several Worlds were created as Places
of Punishment and Probation for such of the DEBTAH, or fallen Angels, as were
penitent and desirous of regaining their lost Estate, where they were doomed to
animate the Bodies of different Animals, even to the smallest Reptile and
Infect, according to the Nature and Degree of their Crimes; till by Obedience,
Perseverance, and a Series of Transmigrations through different Species of
Animals in all these several Worlds, they should have totally expiate^ their
Guilt, and be again admitted into the DIVINE PRESENCE. They believe that every
Animal Form is endowed with COGITATION, MEMORY, and REFLECTION; that each
Species has a comprehensive Mode of communicating their Ideas, peculiar to
themselves; and that the delinquent Spirits are conscious of their own
Situation, through all these different Transmigrations and Animal Forms. They
believe that MOISASOOR, or the Arch Rebel, and his impenitent Followers, are
continually endeavoring to bring back the Penitent Angels to their Apostasy,
and to render ineffectual their Atonements, in the different Forms they
animate: That the good Angels have also, from Time to Time, by the Permission
of GOD, voluntarily subjected themselves to the Feelings of Natural and Moral
Evil, and undergone the whole Series of Transmigrations; for the Sake of
instructing and encouraging their Penitent Brethren: That these benevolent
Spirits have appeared at different Periods, in the various Characters of KINGS,
LAWGIVERS, PHILOSOPHERS, or TEACHERS; as shining Examples to them of Courage,
Piety, Benevolence, and of every other social Virtue; and that these
Visitations were more frequent formerly than now: That in all the inferior
Orders of Beings, these Spirits are in a State of Punishment; but that in MAN,
commences their State of Probation; because in this Form only, they become
absolute and free Agents: Whereas in other Forms, they believe that the
intellectual Powers of the Criminal Spirits are circumscribed, by the varied
Structure of the Bodies they inhabit; and in this principally consists, say
they, the Difference between MAN and other ANIMALS. That the most Malignant of
the Apostate Spirits are doomed to inhabit the voracious Classes of Animals,
whither of the EARTH, AIR, or WATERS, and Men whose Lives and Actions are
atrociously or publicly wicked: Whereas the least Guilty transmigrate only
through those Forms, which by Nature are destined to feed on Vegetables; among
which they particularly venerate the Cow, as holding, according to their
Belief, the next Rank to MAN in the Chain of Beings, as being by its Milk the
most useful of all Animals to Men forbid the Use of Meat, and as assisting them
in the Cultivation of their Lands, upon which depends their vegetable
Subsistence. They believe that the FEMALES of all animated Forms, and in a more
eminent Degree, that WOMEN are highly favored of GOD, and are inhabited by the
least culpable of the apostate Angels: That, when a Spirit is dispossessed of
its Dwelling before the Time allotted, however far advanced it might be in
Number of Transmigrations toward its State of Probation, it was obliged to
begin them all anew from the lowest Class: Wherefore the rigid BRAMINS
execrate with Bitterness all those who kill, or eat such beloved Animals of
GOD, as feed entirely upon Vegetables, especially the Cow; SHEEP, and GOAT;
contrary, say they, not only to the express Prohibition of GOD, but to the
natural and obvious Construction of the Mouth, and digestive Faculties of MAN;
which mark him as destined, with the other most favored Forms, to subsist upon
the Produce of the Earth, with the additional Blessing of Milk. They dread to
destroy, even by Accident, any Thing which has Life in it; lest they should
thereby dispossess a Kindred Spirit; or any of those other Celestial Beings,
who are working for their Redemption. For the same Reason^ they are anxious to
purchase the life of any of the favored Animals destined for Slaughter; and
they have Hospitals for the maimed and infirm of such Classes, where they are
fed and attended with great Assiduity and Care, by their Devotees. They most
religiously abstain from every Kind of Animal Food, or from feeding upon any
Thing which has ever breathed the Breath of Life. There is not in all their
Books, the smallest Allusion to that Mode of Worship among other ancient
Nations, by Sacrifices and Bur^^ Offerings; such a cruel Institution, so
repugnant to the true Spirit of Devotion, and so abhorrent from the Benevolence
and paternal Love of the Deity, could only, say they, be contrived by the evil
Spirit. With Respect to the Antiquity of the SHASTAH, or Gentoo Scriptures, MR.
HOLWELL observes, that the first Conquerors, who invaded their Country, found
them a potent, learned, and civilized People, united under one Head, and
professing one uniform Worship: That their Annals, though silent as to the fabled
Conquests of BACCHUS, and SESOSTRIS, yet make particular mention of the
Expedition of ALEXANDER the GREAT into India, by the Epithets of a mighty
Robber and Murderer: That the Sancrit Language and Character, in which their
Doctrines were originally written, are not now any where used or understood,
exce^^^ by a few learned of the BRAMINS: That as their Records make mention of
the famous Persian Philosopher ZOROASTER, and of PYTHAGORAS from Greece, as
Travelers into India in Quest of Knowledge; it is highly probable, that the
Fame of their Learning and Purity of Manners, may have induced many other
inquisitive Sages of Antiquity to visit their Country: That as the GENTOOS are
by the fundamental Principles of their Religion forbid all Intercourse with
other Nations; and as they cannot even admit of Converts to their Faith, or
receive them into the Pale of their Communion, without the loss of their Cast
or Tribe, which is a Disgrace every GENTOO would rather suffer Death than
incur; therefore that their Nation has not only remained unmixed with any other
Race of People to this Day, but their Theological Dogmas have also subsisted
unchanged and unmixed, ever since they were first taught to them by BRAMAH;
which according to their Accounts, was near 4900 Years ago; excepting some
Mythological Interpolations of a later Date: And that the Chaldaeans, Persians,
and Egyptians, so celebrated for their Wisdom, and who were not under the like
religious Restraints from leaving their Country, or from having Communication
with the Rest of Mankind, most probably borrowed great Part of their Knowledge
and Opinions from the BRAMINS; and not they from the Egyptians, Persians, or
Chaldaeans. From all which MR. HOLWELL concludes, that though many Theological
Systems have in all Appearance been built upon the religious Tenets of the
GENTOO'S, yet they have copied from none: And that therefore their Doctrines
are most ancient, and truly Original; as much so at least, as any written Body
of Divinity whatever.

It is worthy of a Remark, that if Firmness of Mind, a steady Adherence to
avowed Opinions, a philosophic Indifference to every Object of Pride and
Sensuality, and a cool and determined Contempt of Death, are the natural Result
of Integrity of Heart, and conscious Rectitude; none have given greater or more
voluntary Proofs of these, than the BRAMINS and their Disciples, for successive
Ages. The Bramin DANDAMIS, though sent for by ALEXANDER the GREAT to visit him,
was equally unmoved by his Solicitations and Threats; declaring that he had
nothing to ask of ALEXANDER, and that if the King had any Thing to ask of him,
he might come to him: This magnanimous Prince however condescended to visit him
first; after which the Philosopher was prevailed upon to come to Court. There
is still extant a Letter from this DANDAMIS to ALEXANDER, giving him some
Account of the Sentiments of his Sect; and in which he draws a Comparison
between his own Principles and Morals, and those of ALEXANDER, not much to the
Advantage of the latter. The deliberate and easy Manner in which the Bramin
CALANUS, when sick of a Dysentery, burnt himself at Pasargadae, before
ALEXANDER and his whole Court, upon a Pile of Wood erected for the Purpose, is
a Story equally well known and attested; and notwithstanding all Arguments, and
even Entreaties were used by ALEXANDER, to dissuade him from his Purpose, he
persisted in his Resolution to die, for this sole Reason, because he was tired
of Life. But ZARMANOCHAGAS, another Bramin, who came in the Train of
Ambassadors sent from the Indies to AUGUSTUS, when on his return from Rome,
burnt himself in like Manner publicly at ATHENS; professing on the contrary,
that he did this in the Height of his Prosperity and Happiness, lest he should
afterward meet with Chagrin and Misfortunes; and he ordered it to be engraved
upon his Tomb, that he did thus, in Conformity to the Custom of his Country.
When Teachers Seal their Doctrines with such palpable Proofs of Conviction and
Sincerity, it is not to be wondered at, if we meet with similar Instances of
Fortitude and Enthusiasm even among their modern female Disciples; who glory in
ascending the funeral Pile, and in setting Fire to it, like CALANUS, with their
own Hands; in order to mix their Ashes with those of their deceased Husbands.
We have a very particular Account of such a free Will Offering, told us by MR.
HOLWELL, in his Historical Events.

STRABO tell us, that Physic was in his Time the favorite Study of the
INDIANS; that they did not however deal so much in Pharmacy, as in the
Diaetetick Part of Medicine; that they made great Use of external Applications
in all Diseases; that they were well acquainted with natural Philosophy, and
knew the salutary and noxious Qualities (...) Herbs. We are further told that
this Profession is chiefly followed by the BRAMINS; that it is very ancient
among them; and that their Rules and Method of Practice, particularly in
Malabar, are recorded in Books, in like Manner as among the Egyptians. The
Indians derive the Origin of PHYSIC from the Supreme Being, to their Prophets;
by whom, they say, it was first communicated to Mankind.

When we consider the Primitive State of Man, according to the View already
exhibited, we can not doubt that, being unaided by supernatural Powers,
unprompted by Instinct, and without Experience, he first felt the
Inconveniences of his Situation, before he thought of the Means for Relief.
His slow REASON must often have been indebted to the more unerring INSTINCT of
the Brute Creation, for the Election of his daily Food; and often, no Doubt,
his late but woeful Experience taught him to distinguish the noxious, from the
wholesome Vegetable, the nutritious and salutary Fruit, from such as he had
found to be deleterious or hurtful. Thus it is customary with Sailors, or such
as are forced upon an uninhabited Coast, where they meet with unknown Fruits or
Plants, to observe with great Attention, such as are eat or tasted by Birds or
other Animals, before they themselves venture to feed upon them.

But it may be presumed that their Acquaintance with, and Observations upon the
various Productions of the Earth, were not confined to such only as they used
for Food: They undoubtedly made Trials of those also that attracted their
Notice by their Color, Smell, or other sensible Qualities: From repeated
Experiments of this Kind, they could not help observing the powerful Effects of
some of these Productions, in exciting and promoting the more obvious and grand
Evacuations of the Body; and having perceived that whatever was hurtful or
nauseous to the Stomach, was ejected by Vomit; and that every Thing offensive
to the Bowels, was carried off by the foeculent Discharges; it is reasonable to
conclude, that the most efficacious Simples or Remedies for promoting these
capital Evacuations, were carefully considered and distinguished Sic Medicinam
ortam, subinde aliorum Salute, aliorum Interitu, pernicios a discernentem a
Salutaribus. CELLS.
. Such were probably the first MEDICAL FACTS adverted to; their Knowledge of
which might arise, either from their own Experience, or that of others, or from
their Observations upon Brutes: For though many Remedies have been found out by
Accident, many by Instinct, or particular Longings, and many by rational
Enquiry and Analogy; it is well known that many have been discovered by
attending to the Effects of Substances upon Brutes: Thus HERODOTUS tells us,
that the purgative Qualities of Hellebore were first discovered by the ancient
Physician MELAMPUS; from observing that his Goats always purged, after browsing
upon that Plant. According to PLINY, the HIPPOPOTAMOS first suggested
Blood-letting; and the first (...) of giving Enemata or Injections, was taken
from the Egyptian Bird IBIS The famous Tyrian Purple Dye, was first discovered
by a Shepherd's DOG, which being pressed by Hunger, had broke that Shellfish
on the Shore, when the Shepherd wiping the Blood, as he thought, from the Dog's
Mouth with some Wool, perceived it soon ^inged with a beautiful purple Color.
. Cretan Dittany became the celebrated Vulnerary of the Ancients, from
observing that DEER and GOATS, whenever they were wounded, had Recourse to it.
The Cathartic and Alterative Qualities of some Preparations of Antimony were
first observed by that ingenious Chemist Basil Valentine; he having thrown away
some Antimony, which had been used in the Fusion of Metals, perceived that some
Swine, which had accidentally eaten of it, purged considerably, and afterward
that they soon became sleek and fat: From this, he first used Antimony and its
Preparations internally; whereas it had formerly been ranked among the Poisons.
In these later Times it has been said, that the febrifuge Virtues of the Qunra
Quina, or Peruvian Bark, were first noticed from some wild APES having Recourse
to it in the Ague, which these Animals are subject to: But GEOFFROI, with more
Probability, says it was first discovered by an Indian under that Disorder,
accidentally drinking of a Pond, into which some of the Trees had fallen, and
had imparted their Properties and bitter Taste to the Water; by which he was
cured. We may further suppose that the sensible Savage, from repeated Trials,
observing that the Success of this Remedy, was always proportioned to the
Degree of Bitterness in the Water, would naturally be led to make Use of the
Bark itself. But the useful Discoveries which have been made in PHYSIOLOGY, and
in the Nature and Effects of various and active Drugs, since the Begginning of
the last Century, by Experiments upon different living Animals, from the
stately HORSE, to that MEDICAL MARTYR the FROG, are so numerous, that the
Catalogue of them alone would fill a Volume: Let it suffice to observe, that by
such Experiments, the grand Discovery of the CIRCULATION of the BLOOD was
perfected by the immortal HARVEY, and the Progress of CONCEPTION explained; by
such Experiments, the Uses and Influence of the NERVES have been traced; the
PERISTALTIC, o^^undulatory Motion of the INTESTINES exposed to View; and the
Course of the CHYLE, or digested ALIMENT from the Bowels, to its mixing with
the Venous Blood under the left Collar Bone, were first demonstrated: Not to
mention many other valuable Acquisitions to Natural History, as well as to
Medicine, from this inexhaustible Source of Knowledge.

The SCIENCE of MEDICINE, in this its Dawning or Infancy, was usually with the
other Learning of the Times, preserved by the Fathers or Heads of Families: But
the Number of Observations and Remedies, becoming too great to be retained in
the Memory of Men, otherwise occupied with the Concerns of their own little
States or Tribes; and the Sacerdotal Function, for the like Reasons of
Convenience, being now separated from the temporal Authority, it was long
engrossed by the Priests; because internal Diseases were then considered as
Punishments immediately inflicted by the Gods, for Crimes; and were therefore
to be cured solely by priestly Arts and Invocations: And such is the State of
Physic among some Superstitious and Pagan Nations, at this Day. Afterward, as
Mankind advanced in the Knowledge of Nature, MEDICINE became the Study and
Occupation of those inquisitive Geniuses of Antiquity, distinguished by the
Name of PHILOSOPHERS; who having more Leisure and Curiosity to prosecute
Experiments, and to collect or mark down the Cures performed by themselves, or
communicated by others, became useful to Society, not more by their learned
Disquisitions, than by visiting the Sick, and imparting their Advice to such as
asked it: So that the same SAGES, who so usefully applied themselves to the
Study of Nature, were in their Day no less famous for the Cure of (...). It^ ut
Morborum Curatio, and Rerum Naturae Contemplatio sub (...) Autoribus nata fit.
CELSUS.
In Proof of this, AELIAN relates that PYTHAGORAS was said to have gone from
Place to Place, not so much to teach his Doctrines, as to practice Physic.
Many similar Instances might be given, till HYPOCRATES, emphatically called the
Divine old Man, Divinus Senex.
first separated this Profession from the Philosophy and speculative Learning
of his Time, and gave it the Form and Stability of a liberal and distinct
SCIENCE. Thus Remedies, handed down from Father to Son, were continually
improved and multiplied, by succeeding Generations.

The primitive Physicians most probably began their Inquiries into the Nature
of Diseases, with those which were most generally observed to attend upon the
Changes of the Seasons: And as ASTRONOMY was the first Science cultivated by
the ancient Philosophers, they would naturally impute these Distempers to the
angry Influence of the Stars and Constellations, which were supposed to rule at
such Seasons; hence arose a different Mode of treating Diseases, by Charms and
Incantations, in order to appease these presiding Powers: These medical Charms
continued long in Use among the Ancients, and are still devoutly con^ided in,
by many superstitious and ignorant Nations at this Day.

All the Progress made in the Art of Healing at, or before the Flood, may well
be imagined to have been very inconsiderable. The infant State of the World
makes it probable, that as ANIMAL FOOD and FERMENTED LIQUORS were then little
used, or altogether unknown, there were but few Diseases existing; and that the
Extent of Medical Skill then consisted, in the successful Exhibition of some
Simples internally or externally used; in Frictions, Bathing, and Sweating in
the Sun or Sand. Immediately after that Period, the making of WINE was found
out, and communicated to Mankind. This was probably the Effect of Accident; for
NOAH had certainly tasted of the Grape, before he expressed or fermented the
Juice; and he could not possibly know, that the Effects of Fermentation were to
give an inebriating Quality, to a Liquor he had so frequently experienced to be
pleasing and harmless, and to produce a Spirit in the expressed Juice, which it
did not contain before; till he discovered it, by that memorable Incident
recorded in Sacred Writ. Not long afterward was probably discovered the Method
of making of BEER; for HERODOTUS tell us, that in those Provinces of Egypt
where no Vines were cultivated, the People drank a Sort of Wine made of BARLEY:
This seems to have been the STRONG DRINK mentioned in several Places of the Old
Testament, as distinct from Wine: Thus it is said, " Give STRONG DRINK to him
that is ready to perish, and WINE to those that be of heavy Hearts: -- Thou
shall bestow that Money for Oxen, or for Sheep, or for WINE, or for STRONG
DRINK: AARON and his Sons were forbid to drink WINES, or STRONG DRINK, when
they went into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, under the Penalty of Death:
And MOSES tells the Israelites, that in all their 40 Years Journey through the
Wilderness, they neither drank WINE, nor STRONG DRINK: Which proves, that they
were both at that Time known and used, in the Country whence they had so lately
emigrated. The Use of BEER among the Germans, and some other northern Nations,
is as ancient as any Accounts we have of those People, or their Customs.
DIOSCORIDES informs us, that the ancient Britons used an intoxicating Drink
made of Barley, or sometimes of Wheat, called in their Language CURMI; and this
Liquor is still highly celebrated in the old festival Songs of the ancient
Scots, by the same Name; though the Method of making it is now lost. This CURMI
seems to have been different in its Qualities, and in the Manner of preparing
it, from any BEERS now known; if we may credit their Traditions concerning this
famed BEVERAGE. We are told that the Mexicans also used a BEER, or intoxicating
Liquor made of MAIZ, or INDIAN CORN, when the Spaniards first came amongst
them: This must have been an Invention entirely their own. The same Fact is
also told us of the Peruvians, in the History of their Incas.

As Vice and Debauchery, by such Means prevailed in the World, Infirmities and
Diseases must have become more frequent; Remedies must consequently have been
more sought after, and valued; and the Art itself more cultivated and esteemed,
as it became more useful or necessary to Mankind.

We shall now more particularly consider the STATE of PHYSIC, among the most
celebrated Nations of Antiquity; and the Reputation it was held in by them,
from the Times it began to be followed as a Profession.

ASIA, without Doubt, was civilized before any other Part of the World.
Accordingly we find that most of the ARTS and SCIENCES, the sure Concomitants
and Consequences of the Establishment of SOCIETIES, PROPERTY, and LAWS, had
their first Rise in the East. Here too were made the first Observations upon
Diseases and Remedies, which were soon communicated to Egypt; but it was in
Egypt itself, that MEDICINE was first followed as a SCIENCE. In Egypt it is to
be observed, that however the History of their first Kings has been concealed
under Allegories and Fables, it is greatly for the Honor of this Profession,
that of those who have been deified by their superstitious Countrymen, for
inventing or communicating useful Knowledge to Manking; some as HERMES, OSYRIS,
ISIS, and HORUS have been deified, more particularly for inventing and
improving of PHYSIC. It is in Egypt we have the first authentic Account upon
Record, of PHYSICIANS by Profession: For in the Book of Genesis we are told,
that JOSEPH ordered the Physicians to embalm the Body of his Father JACOB.
MEDICINE is said to have been first reduced to a System there, by THONIS; but
after him, several Kings are reported, not only to have studied, but also to
have practiced it. The Egyptian Writer MANETHO, according to Eusebius, relates
that ATHOTIS wrote a Treatise upon Anatomy; and HERMES, a King of Thebes, wrote
upon the same Subject, for, adds our Author, he was a Physician. -- Whatever
Credit may be given (...) those Accounts, they at least prove the great
Anti^^ity of the SCIENCE, as well as the great Veneration it was held in, at
the Time when those Authors wrote. Their Practice was much subdivided; for some
undertook to cure one Distemper only, and others to cure others: So^^ practiced
only upon Diseases of the HEAD; others only upon Diseases of the EYES; of which
last Class, CYRUS sent for one from Egypt. Others again practiced upon Diseases
of the BOWELS; some Studied those Distempers incident to WOMEN only; others
applied themselves to cure OCCULT MALADIES incident to both Sexes: And none
were allowed to practice out of their own Branch. The Profession among them was
hereditary, and the Science transmitted from Father to Son. They had Salaries
and Mantainance allowed from the Public; and they practiced Gratis. The
Egyptian Physicians were particularly studious of Cleanliness. The Books
containing their Rules and Method of Practice were deposited in their Temples,
along with those of their Religion and Learning. If by following the Directions
of this their sacred Code, they could not cure or relieve the Patient, they
were held blameless; but if they attempted any Thing not warranted by this Rule
of Practice, and without Success, it was deemed a capital Crime. None, under a
severe Penalty, was permitted to administer Medicine, without being first
received a Member of their COLLEGE, and being licensed by their Authority. In
all that Country, we are told, that MEDICINE was a favorite study, and that
they particularly revered the Profession and Character of a PHYSICIAN:
Wherefore, as Egypt abounds with all Sorts of Plants, both Medicinal and
Poisonous, HOMER, after enumerating the pleasing Effects of HELEN'S Anodyne
Draught of NEPENTHE, communicated to her by POLYDAMNE, the Wife of THON Prince
of CANOPUS, subjoins, "From PAEON sprung, the Patron GOD imparts,
"To all the Pharian Race, his HEALING ARTS."
POPE's ODYS.

It should be remarked here for the Honor of Egypt, that we have the first
Account of a PUBLIC LIBRARY, in that Country; over the Doors of which was
written, in golden Letters, (...), or MEDICINE FOR THE SOUL. The Egyptians were
wont to hang up the Histories of extraordinary Cures in the Temple of VULCAN at
Memphis. The Art of Embalming, for which they were so famed, is a Proof of
their being early acquainted with the general Properties of Spiceries, Rosin,
Balm, Myrrh, and other Gums, usually imported by the Ishmaelites, and employed
in that Process.

The PHAENICIANS are among the first Nations that make any Figure in History,
for Learning and Arts; and who are said to have studied and cultivated physic
very early. But as we have only general Assertions to conduct us in our
Inquiries here; and as all Observations upon Medicinal Facts, were in these
Times necessarily interwoven with their other philosophic Studies; we are
obliged to form our Opinions respecting their Skill in the HEALING ART, from
the Advances we find they had made in the other Branches of USEFUL KNOWLEDGE.
It is uncertain whence they derived their Origin. Some think that they were the
Posterity of the Inhabitants of Canaan, who escaped the devouring Sword of the
Jews; and this Opinion seems countenanced by the Etymology of the Word Canaan,
which, in the Language of the East, means a Merchant. The AUTHOR of the Inquiry
into the Life and Writings of HOMER observes, That they retained much of the
Manners of the Eastern Nations; that their Language was a Branch of the old
Aramaean; that their Policy, both civil and religious, their Temples, their
Records preserved in Temples, and the Order of their Priests exempted from
Taxes, are very like the Institutions that prevailed over the East: To which
may be added, that the Tyrians worshipped the Fire. They were the Authors of
the nobler Kinds of ARCHITECTURE, of NAVIGATION, and GEOGRAPHY; the Improvers
of ASTRONOMY; the Inventors of the HELIOTROPE or Sun-Dial, and of GLASS; and
the Rivals of the Egyptians for the Invention of LETTERS and ARITHMETIC. They
were also the Parent of MECHANICS, and the first Workers in Metals, Wood, and
Stone: So that what is said of HIRAM, the Widow's Son from Tire, and the Master
Workman to King SOLOMON, was truly characteristic of the Nation, -- he was
skilful to work in GOLD and in SILVER, in BRASS, in IRON, in STONE, and in
TIMBER; in PURPLE, in BLUE, in fine LINEN, and in CRIMSON: Also to grave every
Manner of Graving, and to find out every DEVICE which should be put to him. In
short they excelled in all Works of Taste. By their frequent Voyages over the
Euxine, and Red Seas to all the different Parts of the Mediterranean, and into
the Atlantic Ocean, as far as the Gum Coast on one Hand, and to Britain on the
other; we may reasonably suppose that they greatly improved the HEALING ART,
and enriched the MATERIA MEDICA: For it is well known that the Communication of
Diseases from one Country to another, as well as of Remedies and Operations
used in different Countries for the same Diseases, is the Effect of Commerce.
From the Phaenicians, HOMER first learned the noted Story of the SIRENS; and of
that dangerous Dame Circe, who with the intoxicating Juice of Herbs, could
transform Men into Brutes. From the same People he probably first heard of the
Enchantments of MEDEA in Colchis, and of her wonderful Skill in the Virtues of
Herbs. If moreover we consider their daily Intercourse with, and Vicinity to
Egypt, where Medicine was always particularly cultivated and respected, and
that even then, this Profession was a profitable Branch of Business; we can not
doubt that they, whose Merchants were Princes, and whose Trassickers the
Honorable of the Earth, were also well acquainted with the Nature and Cure of
Diseases. The Knowledge of Medicine constituted in those Days Part of their
Philosophic Studies; and Phaenicia has given Birth to many celebrated Names of
Antiquity. ANCEUS, the only Argonaut upon that Expedition who understood
Astronomy, was a Phoenician: MOSCHUS, who lived some Time before the Trojan
War, and first taught the famous Atomical Philosophy, was a Sido^ian;
DEMOCRITUS afterward brought this Philosophy from the East, and communicated
it to EPICURUS, by whose Name it has been usually distinguished ever since; and
the Principles of which became, as ST. EVEREMOND says, the fashionable Opinions
of all the fine Gentlemen of Antiquity* THALES, commonly called the Milesian,
and one of the Seven Wise Men, according to DIOGENES LAERTIUS, was a noble
Phaenician; And ^^NO, the Founder of the S^oic Philosophy, was originally a
Tyrian Merchant shipwrecked upon the Coast of Attica, near Athens. It ought not
to be omitted that PHERECYDES, who is considered as the Father of the Grecian
Philosophy, and as the first who spoke of the Metempsychosis, and who was also
Master to PYTHAGORAS; without any one to lead him in the Way to Science,
obtained all his Knowledge from some Volumes of the sublime Philosophy of the
Phaenicians, which he had fortunately purchased from their Merchants; whereby
he acquired a great Name for Learning among the Greeks: Now PHERECYDES is
expressly said to have been skilful in Physic.

It was customary with the BABYLONIANS to bring out their Sick into the
Streets, and most frequented Places; and to inquire of Spectators or Passengers
how they might obtain Relief: And it was considered as wicked or criminal to
pass the^^ without inquiring into the Nature of their Distemper, and giving
some Advice, either from their own Experience, or from what they had learned of
others. From this Custom HERODOTUS imagines; that there were no professed
PHYSICIANS among the Babylonians: But we know that the same Practice prevailed
in Egypt, long after PHYSIC had been reduced to some Rules in that Country;
and also in Greece they exposed their Sick in like Manner, after MEDICINE is
well known to have made Part of their national Learning.

The ancient SCYTHIANS, according to PLINY, were very expert in poisoning their
Arrows; and were well acquainted with the Medicinal Qualities o^ many Herbs.

In the Countries bordering upon India, they had the Art of preparing Poisons
in early Times; for STRABO mentions a Law, to deter them from the Practice of
poisoning one another, even in the same Family. When we have such Authority for
believing them experienced in the Powers of noxious Plants, we cannot doubt of
their being also well acquainted with those of many salutary ones; and with the
most successful Methods of using them.

In the sacred History of the JEWS, there is frequent Mention made of
PHYSICIANS, and of MEDICINES. The high Price which RACHEL offered to LEAH for
her Sons Mandrakes, proves their early Acquaintance with the real or suppose^
Virtues of Plants. Their great Lawgiver MOSES, it is said, was learned in all
the Wisdom of the Egyptians; among whom we have observed that the Study of
Physic was particularly followed* The Symptoms or distinguishing Marks he has
left us, of the different Degrees of Malignancy in the Leprosy, and of other
cutaneous Distempers incident to that People; his Observations upon various
other Maladies, classed under the Denomination of Unclean; his Prohibitions
with Respect to some particular Kinds of Meats; all testify his judicious
Attention as a PHYSICIAN, to the prevailing Temperament and Diseases of his
Countrymen; and to the DIAETETICK Part of MEDICINE comprehending Food and
Cleanliness. We are told that by GOD's Direction, he cured the Bitterness of
the Waters at MARAH, and rendered them sweet and potable, by casting a Tree
into them; upon which it is elsewhere observed "Was not the Water made sweet
with Wood, that the VIRTUE thereof might be known?" He is the first who speaks
of the particular MYSTERY or ART of the APOTHECARIES, and mentions their
compound Ointments and Confections. His grinding the golden Calf to Powder, and
giving it to the People to drink, is an Instance of his great Skill in
CHEMISTRY, which has puzzled all the Adepts in that ART ever since, to imitate.
By the Mosaical Law, whoever hurt or maimed another, was obliged "to cause him
to be thoroughly healed, and to be at the Expense of his Cure. Mercedem Medici
solvet.
Of all SOLOMON's divinely inspired Wisdom, his Knowledge in BOTANY must have
been none of the least conspicuous; for he is said to have wrote upon Trees,
from the CEDAR that is in Lebanon, even to the HYSSOP that springs out of the
Wall: And himself assures us, that he knew the Operation of the Elements, the
Position of the Stars, the Nature of living Creatures, the Diversities of
Plants, and the Virtues of Roots: It is a Saying of the same WISE KING, that a
merry Heart does good like a MEDICINE. It is remarkable that King AS A being
diseased in his Feet, is reproached for seeking to the PHYSICIANS (I(...))
rather than to GOD; and that the sweet Odours and Spices in which his Body was
deposited after Death, were prepared by the Apothecaries Art (M(...)): T^^s
seems to prove that in his Time, if not before, these two professions were
distinct. Asa lived about 450 Years before Hippocrates.
-- Is there no Balm in GILIAD, says JEREMIAH, is there no PHYSICIAN there? Why
then is not the HEALTH of the Daughter of my People recovered? ST. LUKE the
Evangelist, is called the beloved PHYSICIAN; and from many Medical Expressions
used by him in his Greek Original, is with good Reason b^lieved to have been of
this Profession. For further Proof of the high Estimation in which the MEDICAL
CHARACTER was held by the JEWS, take their own Words, -- Honor a PHYSICIAN
with the Honor due unto him, for the Uses which you may have of him; for the
Lord has created him. -- The Skill of the PHYSICIAN shall list up his Head;
and in the Sight of Great Men, he shall be in Admiration. The LORD has created
MEDICINES out of the Earth; and he that is wise will not abhor them: -- With
such does ^e HEAL Men, and takes away their Pains; of such does the APOTHECARY
make a CONFECTION, and of his Works there is no End. And again, Give Place to
the PHYSICIAN -- he shall receive Honor of the King -- and from him is Peace
over all the Earth. What deserves Notice here, and shows us from sacred Writ,
both the moral and religious Obligations we are under, to use the necessary
Means for the Recovery of Health, is, that besides the abovementioned Cure of
the Waters at MARAH; the Prophet ELISHA cured the unwholesome Waters of Jericho,
by throwing SALT into them; and ISAIAH, though he had Divine Authority to assure
HEZEKIAH, of his Recovery from a perilous Disease in three Days, yet visibly
contributed thereto, by the judicious Application of a Poultice of Figs to his
Boil: And that even our SAVIOR himself deigned to use external Means in the
Cure of a blind Man, by anointing his Eyes with Clay, made of Earth and
Spittle; when in all these Cases, the FIAT or COMMAND alone had sufficed.

In PERSIA we find that PHYSIC was early cultivated, and held in high Esteem.
XE^OPHON tells us, that the GREAT CYRUS never failed to take a Number of
PHYSICIANS along with him in his Army; rewarding them very liberally, and
showing for them a particular Regard. He farther remarks, that CYRUS in this
only followed a Custo^, anciently established among the Persian Generals: And
we are assured that the YOUNGER CYRUS kept up the same Custom in his Army.

Perhaps it may not be displeasing to the Curious, to have some Account here of
the ancient Persian MAGI; and of their modern Descendants the PARSSES, or
Guebres, so called from their worshipping the Fire.

The Doctrines of the Persian MAGI, are very ancient. Their Name, in that
Language, means the same as PHILOSOPHERS among the Greeks, or SAPIENTES
(Wisemen) among the Latins; and from their extraordinary Learning, and
Knowledge of the Operations of natural Bodies, they were believed to have
secret Communication with, or Power over, invisible Spirits. We are told that
they believed the Transmigration of Souls; and DIOGENES LAERTIUS assures us,
that they lived entirely upon Milk and Vegetables. They were the sole Guardians
and Superintendants of RELIGION, and of the LAWS: No public Worship could be
performed but by them; and no Law could be enacted or abrogated without their
Concurrence. They allowed of no Images, nor used bloody Sacrifices in their
Worship; which was always in ancient Times, performed by them in the open Air,
or in Groves, but never in covered Temples: For as the SUN was the great Object
of their Adoration, they said that the whole World was the Temple of the SUN.
However, Temples were afterward permitted, for the Preservation of their Holy
Fire, which was always kept burning; though even then their Temples were open at
the Top. Their Doctrines are believed to be older than ZOROASTER, and he lived
about the Time of ROMULUS. They were equally revered by Princes and People; and
seemed to have had the same Power and Influence, as the PROPHETS among the
Jews. They were famed for their Knowledge in the Arts of Divination and Augury;
and made great Use of Charms. The Scripture bears Testimony of their Skill in
Astronomy, by the Observations they made upon that STAR which appeared at the
Birth of CHRIST. The Posterity of these MAGI are still extant in the
East Indies; and are distinguished by the Name of PARSSES. They call themselves
FOLLOWERS of ZOROASTER; and have preserved the Religion and Belief of the
ancient MAGI, with little Alteration, to this Day. We are indebted to the
Industry and laudable Curiosity of MR. DU PERRON, for the best and most genuine
Account we have, of the Rites and Opinions of these PARSSES. This Gentleman, a
few Years ago, voluntarily undertook a Voyage to the East Indies, in order to
learn the Language and Religion of the PARSSES, from the PARSSES themselves;
and to discover and translate at the Fountain Head, the ZENDOVESTA, or Writings
generally attributed to ZOROASTER. After traveling some Time over Indostan,
for Information, and in Order to collect Materials, he fixed his Residence at
Surat, where he continued three Years, studying those Languages in which their
Sacred Books are written, and which are now no more spoken or understood,
except by a few of their LEARNED. At Surat he purchased a great many of their
Original Manuscripts, which he partly copied, and partly translated. Here too
he had an Opportunity of conversing with their Doctors, or Teachers; as there
is a large Body of these PARSSES, who have been established in Guz^^atte, ever
since the Year 767, to which Place they fled from Kirman, a Province of Persia,
on Account of the Persecutions of the Mohammedan Follow^^ of OMAR. These*
original Manuscripts, with Copies and Translations of several others,
respecting both the Religion of the PARSSES and BRAMINS, and which were
collected from different Parts of India, have been brought to France, and
deposited by DU PERRON in the King's Library there: The Genuiness of which is
supported, by the universal Belief of the People themselves, and of the Country
they reside in; by an uninterrupted Tradition down from ZOROASTER himself; by
the evident Antiquity of the Character and Languages in which they are written,
and which are now no longer used, and almost entirely forgot; and by the Assent
of the Mahometans themselves, their declared Enemies. Though their Laws and
Opinions are allowed to be much older than ZOROASTER, yet as he new modelled
and reduced them to a regular System, he is considered by them, not only as
having been their PRINCE and LAWGIVER, but also as an i^spired PROPHET and
PHILOSOPHER: His Body of Laws is divided into 21 Books, some of which are now
lost; 7 of them treated of the Creation, and History of the World; 7 of
Morality, and of all Duties civil and religious; and 7, of PHYSIC and
Astronomy. In one of his Chapters, he treats particularly of the DIGNITY and
USEFULNESS of the MEDICAL PROFESSION; and of the great Merit of him who has
cured many Sick* promising that he shall be rewarded with a long and happy
Life. He forbids them using Remedies to his beloved PARSSES, without having
first experienced their Efficacy on others: And he then fixes the Fees, which
the different Classes among the PARSSES are to give to the PHYSICIAN. He also
treats, in different Places, of several Disorders incident to Women, under
various Circumstance^ of Life. Whence we may reasonably conclude, that before
ZOROASTER composed his ZENDOVESTA, the SCIENCE of PHYSIC, must have been for
some Time followed as a learned and respectable Profession, either in his own
Country, or in Indostan, the Place of his Travels and Studies; or in both. Our
Author was often in the Temples of the PARSSES, and observed their Mode of
worshipping the Holy Fire* according to the Usages of the Ancient MAGI. They
consider the Fire as a sensible Emanation of that Fountain of uncreated Light,
which in the Beginning contained the Prototype of all Beings; or as an
Emanation of the Principle of Life and Action, which resides in the SUPREME
BEING, and which ZOROASTER calls the Son of GOD, or the created of GOD. Their
Devotion to the SUN, is rather that of Praise, than Adoration; it is he, say
they That diffuses Light through all Nature; he purifies the Earth and the
Waters; he is the Fountain of Abundance to the World: From Methrim, the Name of
the Angel who, they believe, presides over Farms and Villages, and is the
Companion of the Angel who presides over the SUN, comes the Met^^a of the
Ancients, supposed by them ^o be the SUN itself, because Methrim is often
mentioned in Praises addressed to that Planet; though he only seconds the SUN in
his Functions. The PARSSES are forbidden to swear, even in Favor of the Truth.
They believe that there are two primary and powerful Angels; the one the Author
of all Good, called MYTHRAS; and the other the Author of all Evil, called
ARIMANIUS; who are for ever at Variance: But that both are subject to one
uncreated Supreme RULER of the Universe, by them called OROMAZES.

The GREEKS derived almost all their Theology, and the greatest Part of their
other Learning from the Egyptians, and Asiaticks: And as the Travelers of
both Nations frequently took Phaenicia in their Way, the Egyptian Doctrines,
and Phaenician Arts, passed into Greece about the same Time: Thus DANAUS the
Egyptian, the Phrygian PELOPS, and CADMUS the Phaenician, though by Descent an
Egyptian, are acknowledged to have been the first Planters and Improvers o^
Greece. By CADMUS particularly, the Greeks were first taught the Use of
Letters, and the Mysteries of the CABEIRI, or Great Gods. In Crete, a Colony
from Egypt, they learned the Institution of ORACLES; with the other necessary
subservient Arts. The STUDY of MEDICINE was as early cultivated in Greece, as
any other Branch of Science whatever.

Before the Trojan War, MELAMPUS, already mentioned, cured the Daughters of
PRAETUS King of Argos, of a particular Species of Madness or Hysteric Phrensy;
for which he was rewarded with one of them in Marriage, and a third Part of the
Kingdom as her Portion: He is also ^^e first who prescribed the Cold Bath as a
MEDICINE; by Means of which, and other Prescriptions* he cured IPHICLUS of
Impotency. MEDFA, so celebrated in the Expedition of the ARGONAUTS to Colchis,
first invented the Medicated Warm BATH; which was attended with such salutary
Effects, that she was feigned, not only to have thereby restored her Husband
JASON's Father, the aged AESON, to Youth; but also to have preserved by the
same Means, an unfaded Youth in herself. In the Trojan War, HOMER celebrates
the Medical Abilities of many of his Chiefs; and even gives them a Preference
to the Military Prowess of his bravest Warriors. In the Battle where MACHAON is
wounded by PARIS, he tell us, In his right Shoulder the broad Shaft appeared,
And trembling Greece for her PHYSICIAN ^eared."
POPE's Iliad.

And IDOMENEUS, h^^^ing requested the aged NESTOR, to convey the wounded Her^
off with Speed to the Ships, adds, as an ^^^ument for his Tenderness and Care,
that, A Wise PHYSICIAN skilled our Wounds to heal,
Is more than Armies to the Public Weal."
POPE.

Though the Greek Poet, here in the Original, OF(...)
passes a very signal Commendation upon PHYSICIANS, and insinuates that the
Grecian Army was not so much dispirited at the Wounds of their bravest Heroes,
as at the single Danger of MACHAON, whom in another Place he calls the
Preserver of the Greeks, yet it must be owned that POPE, probably in Gratitude
to his learned Friend and Physician DOCTOR ARBUTHNOT, has very much heightened
the Compliment in his Translation. However, it will be allowed to HOMER, that
he at least speaks the Sentiments of the Times he wrote in. HOMER further
informs us, that even the inexorable ACHILLES, while His feasted Eyes beheld
around the Plain,
The GRECIAN Rout; the Slaying, and the Slain;
His Friend MACHAON, singled from the ^est,
A transient Pity touched his vengeful Breast."


And the Distress of the bleeding EURYPYLUS is greatly aggravated with this
Reflection, that The great MACHAON, wounded in his Tent,
Now wants that Succor, which so often he lent.


BOTANY, or the Knowledge of Plants, must even then have been in the highest
Repute amongst them; and they believed that the most wonderful and supernatural
^ffects, could be produced by Means of Herbs: The Stories of MEDEA and CIRCE
are well known; and HOMER in the Iliad distinguishes AGAMEDE by this Character;
She that all Simples healing Virtues knew,
And every Herb that drinks the Morning Dew.


It should be observed too, in justice to HOMER himself, that in many Parts of
his Poems, he shows no inconsiderable knowledge of Anatomy, Surgery, and
Botany, considering the Age he lived in.

Of PODALIRIUS, we are told, that on his Return from the Destruction of Troy,
being fortunately driven upon the Coast of Caria, he cured the Daughter of
DAMAETHUS, King of th^^ Country, who had fallen from the Top of a House; by
bleeding her in both Arms: And that she was afterward given by her Father to
PODALIRIUS in Marriage, with Half of the Kingdom, as a Reward for his Skill and
Services. This is the first Instance on Record of Venoesection, or Bleeding
with a medicinal Intention.

The Greeks in early Times imitated the Babylonians and Egyptians, in bringing
their Sick into the most public Places, for Advice. They carried them sometimes
too into their Temples, to be there directed to a Cure, by the supposed
Influence of their Deities in Dreams, or by the Management and Attendance of
their Priests or Devotees who came to worship: And when a Cure was effected,
the History of the Case, and the particular Method of Treatment by which the
Sick recovered, were engraved o^ written upon Tables, and hung up against the
Walls and Pillars of the Temple; both as a Memorial of the Patients Gratitude;
and to instruct others, who might thereafter labor under the same Complaints.
From these Tables it is said that HIPPOCRATES afterward acquired great
Knowledge, by collecting them from different Places, and with the Assistance of
his own Observations and Practice, digesting them into that Regularity and
Order so justly admired in his Writings.

Many Medical Schools were erected at different Times in Greece, and also by
her Colonies, in various Parts of the World. From that of Crotone, the
celebrated DAMOCEDES, had the good Fortune to cure DARIUS King of Persia, of an
obstinate Disorder* which had baffled the Endeavors of his own Physicians; for
which he was loaded by that Prince with great Wealth and Honors, and was
possessed ever afterward of his Confidence and Friendship. But that of Coos
excelled all others in Fame, by giving to the World the immortal HIPPOCRATES;
whose Reputation was so great, that not only his own Countrymen, the Coans,
impressed* his Image upon their public Coins; but all Greece, by common
Suffrage decreed him the same Honors as were paid to Hercules. The Athenians,
the politest and most learned of all the Grecian States, made him free of
their City, voted him a Crown of Gold, and Maintenance to him and his
Posterity, at the public Expense. And in such Repute was the Profession in his
Time, that, when taught to a Pupil, a more than filial Gratitude and ^^rpetual
Obedience were required from him to his Master or Teacher; inasmuch as his
Birth or Initiation into those learned and useful Mysteries, was thought of
superior Import to that of Nature: The Oath exacted by HIPPOCRATES from his
Pupils, is a Proof of this; and has served as a Model for those solemn
Obligations usually administered to GRADUATES in Medicine, in all regular
Universities, ever since. The Athenians held the HEALING ART of such
Consequence to the Public, that they passed a Law forbidding all Women, and
such (...) were not free, to learn any Part of Medicine; and not only they, but
several other Grecian States also decreed public Honors and distinguished
Privileges to PHYSICIANS.

Thus we find the greatest PHILOSOPHERS of Antiquity, were proud of the Name
and Reputation of being skilled in Medicine. PYTHAGORAS, who has been already
mentioned, erected a Medical School in Italy, 550 Years before CHRIST; and both
he, and DEMOCRITUS wrote upon the Virtues of Herbs. The divine PLATO wrote upon
the Theory of Medicine, and particularly Physiology, or the Economy of the
human Body. ARISTOTLE being descended from AESCULAPIUS, considered the SCIENCE
as his Birthright; he therefore not only studied, but practiced it with such
Success, that having recovered his Pupil the great ALEXANDER from a Pit of
Sickness, this Monarch, ever ambitious of excelling, prevailed with his Matter
to instruct him too in that useful SCIENCE; and which PLUTARCH tells us, the
King afterward thought not unbecoming his Dignity to communicate to others:
When this Prince was sick at Tarsus, in Consequence of unseasonably bathing in
the River Cydnus, the noble and generous Confidence with which he treated his
Physician PHILIP, notwithstanding he had received Notice from PARMENIO to
beware of him as a Traitor, is not more a Proof of his own Magnanimity, than of
the high Opinion he entertained of his Physicians Skill and Integrity.
ALEXANDER's Situation here was critical, himself unable to act; DARIUS
advancing fast upon him; being therefore equally impatient of Doubts as of
Delay, he presented PARMENIO's Letter with one Hand to PHILIP, while with the
other he took down the medicated Potion prepared for him: Nor was he deceived
in the Event. THEOPHRASTUS also, and many other Philosophers of Antiquity, both
practiced and wrote upon Physic. At Smyrna, another Grecian Colony in the
lesser Asia, PHYSICIANS were held in such Repute and public Estimation, that,
as we are informed by the learned DOCTOR MEAD, their Names were impressed upon
their public Coins, with those of their Praetors or chief Magistrates; they
were even frequently joined in their Medals, with their tutelar Deities: Nor
did they confine (...) Honors to their own Physicians; for we know, from the
same Authority, that they bestowed them also upon others eminent in this
Profession; though belonging to another celebrated School in a remote Country,
and at that Time their Rival in medical Fame.

In short, the medical Abilities of the Greeks continued unequalled, during the
whole Course of the Roman Sovereignty; and even after its Declension: And the
learned FRIEND observes, that if we compare any of the Greek medical Writers,
from HIPPOCRATES to PAULUS AEGINETA of the 7th Century, with the very best of
their Cotemporaries in any Art or Profession whatever, we shall find them not
at all inferior, either in the Disposition of their Matter, the Clearness of
their Reasoning, or the Propriety of their Language. Some have written above
the Standard of the Age they lived in; and many have done great Honor to this
Profession, by their extensive Knowledge in other Arts and Sciences, as well as
their own. The Integrity of the Ancients was such, that although their Credulity
was sometimes an Impeachment to their Understandings, yet, being above the
little Views of private Interest, and acting up to the Character of their
Profession; whatever they could (...) out by their own Experience, or from the
Observations of others, which might relieve their Fellow Creatures, they
heartily and generously made it public. This was the Practice of the Ancients,
and ought to be a perpetual Model for such of their Successors, as would
imitate them, either in their Knowledge, or their Virtues. Their medical
Writings were evidently the Result of long Practice, accurate Observation, and
solid judgment. Hence an universal and deserved Deference is paid to their
A^thority, by every Practitioner, who desires to comprehend the whole Circle of
this Science, or to distinguish himself by Abilities in his Profession.

The CARTHAGINIANS were a Colony of the Phaenicians; and as there was an
uninterrupted Amity and Correspondence kept up between these Republics, while
either could be of Use to the other, we cannot doubt that they were well
acquainted with all the Learning and Arts of the Country they came from. They
had also frequent Intercourse with the Greeks, while at the Summit of their
Glory for Arts and Arms; and while MEDICINE was both a fashionable Part of
Philosophy, and followed as a Profession: For we find that their Lacedemon^an
Allies under XANTIPPUS, defeated the Roman Consul REGULUS in Africa, and took
him Prisoner, 499 Years after the Building of Rome, and 255 Years before
CHRIST; whereas HIPPOCRATES lived about 500 Years before this last Event. What
Progress the Carthaginians themselves had made in the HEALING ART, cannot now
be ascertained; by Reason of the barbarous Policy of the Romans, in destroying
their historical Monuments and Records. We know, however, that there was a
Temple in th^^ Part of Carthage called Byrsa, dedicated to ESCULAPIUS; and
DIODORUS SICULUS, in his Account of the Plague which raged amongst the Troops
under HAMILCO, at the Siege of Syracuse, gives us to understand, that they had
at that Time professed PHYSICIANS in their Army.

The ROMANS are the only Nation of Antiquity who enjoyed a Form of Government,
for several Centuries, without any Knowledge of MEDICINE. This is the more
surprising, as they appear from their Origin to have been a restless,
quarrelsome People, perpetually embroiled in bloody Dissensions at Home, or in
cruel Wars abroad; when the Healing Art, particularly CHIRURGEY, must have been
extremely necessary. In the 350th Year of their City, there was certainly no
Practitioner, at least of Merit, amongst them; for being them grievously
afflicted with the Plague, they, by the Advice of the Oracle at Delphi, sent
ten Deputies to the Temple of AESCULAPIUS at Epidaurus, to bring the God to
Rome. His Godship, as we are told, was pleased to go along with them, in the
Shape of a Serpent; and having quitted the Vessel and gone ashore on an Island
in the Tyber, near the City, a Temple was there erected to (...) upon which the
Plague ceased. Hither the Sick from all Parts of Italy resorted, or sent for
Relief. The Method of recording Cures, according to the Custom of the Greeks,
was long practiced here too, as PLINY testifies: And HIERONYMUS MERCURIALIS has
preserved to us some Inscriptions written in the Reign of ANTONINUS, and found
in this Temple of ESCULAPIUS; where not only the Cures effected, but also the
Remedies prescribed by the Oracle are recorded. In the Ruins of this Temple,
not long ago, was discovered one of the Marble Tables which had been
consecrated to this Deity; upon which are ingraved in Greek Characters, several
Cures performed by his Advice; and which is still preserved as a great
Curiosity, in the Palace of MAPHEO at Rome. It Is indeed allowed that, for
nearly the first five hundred Years of their City, few or no Vestiges of any
Kind of polite Literature, are to be found amongst them. Before this Period,
they seem to have resembled rather a turbulent, licentious, and ill associated
Community, with respect to themselves; and a vindictive, haughty, and
unrelenting Band of Destroyers, with respect to the neighboring Nations; than
the Progenitors of those, who were one Day to give Law to, and diffuse the
Polite Arts with new Luster over the World. The Accounts of their Transactions,
as related by their own Historians, sufficiently countenance this Opinion;
which might probably have been the general Belief at this Day concerning them,
if their rival States had been equally fortunate, in transmitting to us their
own Histories, together with their Sentiments and Portrait, of the Policy, and
leading Characters of that imperious and proud Republic; so as that Posterity,
unbiassed by partial Evidence, might have judged for themselves* However, we
are assured that this SCIENCE was encouraged, as early as any Kind of Learning
was taught amongst them: For about, or a few Years after the Era
abovementioned, we have an Account of one ARCHAGATHUS, a Physician of great
Reputation, who came from Greece to Rome; where he was honored with the
Freedom of the City, and a House given him to dwell in. Some Time after him,
lived ASCLEPIADES the Bithynian, Physician to CRASSUS; no less respected by the
Great for his Eloquence, than for his Skill in PHYSIC. It is very remarkable,
that from the first Introduction of public Schools at Rome, to the Subversion
of this unweildly and corrupted Republic, by the superior Fortunes of the great
CAESAR, almost every Profession or Art then studied or practiced amongst them,
except that of War, was chiefly taught by such Greeks, as had emigrated thither
for the Sake of Curiosity or Gain; or by such as the Fate of Arms had reduced
to Servitude: For the fierce and warlike Temper of her own Citizens, unlike the
more extensive and elevated Genius of the Greeks, deigned not as yet to profess
any Science, except such as tended to gratify their Ambition for Conquest, or
to lead and rule the People. While the Romans thus had little other Knowledge
of PHYSIC, than what was practiced by Captives and Foreigners, or served only
to enhance the Price of a Slave, we cannot wonder that it should sometimes be
spoke of by their Learned, in very inadequate Terms: VIRGIL at one Time seems
to consider it as a mere manual Occupation Mutas agitare, inglorius, Arts.
; yet this great POET tells us, that his Hero's Physician JAPIS, preferred the
Knowledge of Medicine, to that of Divination, Archery, or Music; all which
APOLLO had put equally in his Election -- Scire Potestates Herbarum, usumque
medendi Maluit. VIRG.
But the wise and politic CAESAR, who was also the most accomplished Scholar of
the Age, made all who practiced Physic, Freemen of the City. AUGUSTUS confirmed
to them these Honors; and particularly indulged his own Physician, ANTONIUS
MUSA, the Privilege of wearing a golden Ring, which among them was the usual
Badge of Knighthood. To this MUSA the Romans also erected a brazen Statue, as
a grateful Acknowledgment of his Services and Skill, in curing AUGUSTUS of an
obstinate Disorder. These encouraging Marks of public Favor, could not but
recommend so useful an Art, to the Study of the Romans themselves. Accordingly
the elegant and learned CELSUS Latini^^imus CELSUS.
soon after this Period, exhibited to the World a lasting Specimen of his
Proficiency in that comprehensive Science: Yet PLINY, who lived about 120 Years
after CELSUS, says, that even in his Time the Romans had not much applied
themselves to MEDICINE, though then a profitable Employment; but that it was
chiefly in the Hands of the Greeks.

VALENTINIAN ordained that there should be a PHYSICIAN for each of the 14 Wards
into which Rome was divided, to take Care of the Poor; and who should be paid
at the Public Expense. This seems to have been the first Essay toward a Public
HOSPITAL. We shall here in general observe, that many of the Faculty lived in
the strictest Intimacy and Friendship with the ROMAN Emperors; that many had
ample Salaries allowed them by those Princes; that many, by the liberal
Gratuities given them for their Services, acquired great Riches, and were the
Authors of many public Benefactions in the Places where they lived; and lastly,
that many, from the Reputation of their universal Learning and great Abilities,
were employed as Ambassadors to foreign Potentates, and in the other highest
Offices of State. But besides the many and distinguished Honors and Privileges
from Time to Time conferred upon Individuals, the whole Profession was held in
such Esteem, that great Immunities were also granted to their Schools or
COLLEGES, as well as to themselves. They were by the public Edicts of
ANTONINUS, CONSTANTINE the GREAT, and JULIAN, exempted from all the usual
Duties of Citizens, or Soldiers, from attending Courts, or entertaining public
Officers and Strangers; and every one was forbid to molest them, under the
Penalty of being punished at the Will of the Judge: And a Participation of
these public Indulgences was extended, even to the Wives and Children of such
useful Members to the Commonweal. Nor was the Fame of their PPYSICIANS always
confined to the Limits even of this vast Empire; for when a Peace was
negotiating between the Emperor JUSTINIAN, and CHOSROES King of Persia; this
last would not even agree to a Truce, but upon this express Condition, that the
Physician TRIBUNUS, whose Assistance he wanted, and whose Skill he was
acquainted with, should be sent to him; which JUSTINIAN having complied with, a
Truce was granted for 5 Years. CHOSROES, being restored to Health by the Care
of TRIBUNUS, offered to give him whatever he demanded: But the generous
Physician only desired that some Roman Captives, his Countrymen, should be set
at Liberty: That gallant PRINCE not only released the Persons required, and
3000 Prisoners besides, but also rewarded him with great Presents; and sent him
back in Safety to his own Country.

About this Time the MEDICAL SCHOOL of Alexandria, was so celebrated through the
learned World, that to have been educated there, was alone sufficient to give
the Reputation of great Skill in PHYSIC. The Fame of this Place for MEDICINE,
had been long before this AE^a established in the East; and it continued
undiminished for many Years, even after the City had been, in the 7th Century,
sacked by the Saracens. HEROPHILUS, Physician to PTOLOMY LATHYRUS, is said to
have been the Founder, as well as the great Ornament of this School: He is said
also to have been the first who dissected Human Bodies, for the Purposes of
Medical Instruction; by the Countenance and Encouragement of that Prince.

Before I dismiss this Enquiry into the State of PHYSIC among the Ancient
Nations; I must request the Reader's Attention to one more Seminary of learned
Men, not less remarkable for their Antiquity, the Regularity of their COLLEGES,
the Singularity of their Doctrines, their Learning, and popular Influence, than
any yet spoken of: I mean the BRITISH DRUIDS. As these Men, besides their other
Functions, were also in their Day, the sole Practitioners of PHYSIC; and from
Circumstances of Place, seem to hold some distant Connection with ourselves; I
hope I shall be indulged in being somewhat particular in the following Account
of them: As indeed the Advances made by them in the other Branches of
Literature, are the only Rule we have, whereby to judge of their Progress in
MEDICINE.

The DRUIDS, by some called SEMNOTHEANS, i. e. such as reverence the GODS, were
possessed of the same Influence and Authority among the Celtes, and other
Gallic Tribes, as the Persian Magi; or as the Prophets among the JEWS; who are
well known to have been often too powerful, for Royalty itself. The first
Account we have of them by that Name, is from CAESAR, who in his Commentaries
describes them as a COLLEGE, or select Class of religious Philosophers, and
Priests, having fixed Places of Worship; as governed by particular and
established Regulations, and subjected to one certain Head or ARCHDRUID, who
resided in Britain: To which Place, he says, all the Noble Youth of the
Continental Gauls, were usually sent for their Education. As they knew not the
Use of Letters, before their Intercourse with the Romans, they committed all
their Learning to Memory, and delivered it to their Pupils in Verse. They were
so called from DERU, which in the old British Language signifies an OAK;
because the OAK was always held sacred by them; because they always worshipped
in Groves of OAK, upon gently elevated Places; and because they never performed
any of their religious Functions without it. The MISLETOE of the OAK was in a
particular Manner revered by them, and gathered at certain Seasons, with great
Parade and Ceremony: They believed this to be an infallible Cure for
Barrenness; an Antidote to Poisons; a Preservative against Witchcraft; and a
powerful Remedy in all Diseases whatever. In some old British Books still
extant, are to be found many of the Medical Secrets, usually practiced by the
DRUIDS, in their Treatment of various Maladies; and it need not be doubted,
that many of the strange Cures and Charms recommended at this Day, for
different Complaints, by the common People of the HEBRIDES or Western Islands,
and elsewhere in Britain, and Ireland, are from the same Origin. They were
experienced in the Powers of natural Bodies, and particularly in the Properties
of Plants, and gave great Application to such Studies; whence they were
constantly consulted in all bodily Infirmities and Sickness, by all Ranks of
People: The SILAGO, a Species of Moss which grows upon Trees, was also a
sovereign Remedy with them, especially for Diseases of the Eyes; as was also
the Samolus, a Species of the Water-Brook-Lime. They were much addicted to
Magic, Incantations, and Charms; and were highly esteemed, even by the Romans,
for their Skill in Divination and Augury. They were great Astronomers, and it is
said, could calculate Eclipses. They were indeed well versed in all those Arts,
by which the Terror and Amazement of the Vulgar are usually excited; and by
which the beneficial Belief, of their being possessed of Supernatural Powers,
could be kept up. The Learned have found much Resemblance between the British
DRUIDS, and the Persian MAGI, in their religious Te^^ets, Modes of Worship,
Learning, and Dress. The DRUIDS acknowledged the Existence of one Supreme God,
uncreated, and unconfined; whom they therefore adored in the open Air, in
consecrated Groves, but never in covered Temples. They admitted however of
inferior Deities: Thus, TARANUS was their Jupiter, having Power over the
Heavens: HAESUS was their Mars, or God of War: TEUTATES was their Mercury, who
presided over Arts and Commerc^e, and was the Guide of Travelers. But their
principal Adoration was directed to APOLLO, or the SUN; as the God of Light,
Heat, and PHYSIC. To the SUN they offered grand yearly Sacrifices on the first
Day of May; at which Time all domestic Fires were every where extinguished, and
the People went to receive holy Fire from the DRUIDS, at their Temples, or
Places of Worship; to rekindle their household Fires. This Deity or God-like
Luminary, was by the DRUIDS of S. Britain, called BELIN; and the principal Seat
of his Worship, was in the Isle of Anglesey: But the Caledonian DRUIDS gave him
the Name of GRIAN, signifying the Essence, or Source of Fire and Heat; and
worshipped him at particular Seasons, by making large Fires upon the Tops of
Hills. There are many Remains of the Druidical Temples, still to be seen in
Anglesey, in the Western Isles of Scotland, and in several other Places;
consisting of long, large, and rude single Stones placed on End in the Ground,
at regular Distances, and in a circular Form; with an Avenue of the same
Contrivance, leading up to it. They also paid great Veneration to the MOON;
whose Temples were constructed in like Manner, but of a semicircular Form; as
appears by the Vestiges of some of them, still observable in the North of
Scotland. Music, both Vocal and Instrumental, was a constant Attendant upon all
their religious Rites; and their Instruments were Pipes, Flutes, and Harps. It
does not appear that they ever used any Images in their Worship: From which and
other Circumstances, it seems evident, that they borrowed nothing from the
Greeks; though it may be reasonably suspected, that the Greeks have been indebted
for some things to the DRUIDS. Their Authority was so great, and so devoutly
supported, that their Excommunications were terrible, even to their Princes; so
that the Nobles, generally from Prudence as well as Inclination, procured
themselves to be initiated into their Mysteries, and frequently, to be enrolled
among them. As they had the sole Direction in all religious Matters, no
Sacrifice, whether Public or Private, could be performed but by a DRUID. They
were also the sole Judges in all Controversies respecting Property: No Law
could be enacted without their Approbation: They had the greatest Influence in
all public Councils: And, like the Spartan Ephori, they could control the
chief Rulers of the Nation. They offered up human Sacrifices in Times of
imminent Danger, or great Distress; for which Reason it is said, that SUETONIUS
PAULINUS under NERO, utterly destroyed their Groves and Temples in
South-Britain: But the true Reason seems to have been, their great Influence
with the People, in spiriting them up to defend their Liberties, against the
unmerited Encroachments and arbitrary Sway of the Romans: For such Sacrifices
could be no more reproachful in the DRUIDS, than in the Romans themselves; who,
in no very distant Period, had countenanced the like Cruelties: It was only in
the 657th Year of the City, and in the Consulate of LENTULUS and CRASSUS, that
human Sacrifices were forbidden at Rome: Till then they had been occasionally
authorized there; and we meet with several Instances of the like Practices
among the Romans, long after that Period, in different Parts of the Empire.
Indeed we find frequent Examples of this barbarous Custom, among most Nations,
in their Infant State; from the chosen People of God, to the professed Objects
of his Vengeance in Canaan; and from the more enlightened Greeks, to the more
ignorant and ill fated Mexicans. The Destruction of the DRUIDS in
North-Britain, was more gradual, owing to civil Broils, and the Resentment of
Parties contending for Power; they having espoused the weaker Side. Tradition
informs us, that there were some Remains of them in Scotland, at that Time when
the first Christians fled thither, from the Roman Persecutions: Where these
pious Fugitives, from their sequestered Life in Caves, and other hidden Places,
were called CULDEES; and from the Similiarity of their Circumstances, being not
easily distinguished by the Natives from the proscribed DRUIDS, they have been
frequently confounded by Posterity. They believed the Immortalily of the Soul;
and the Metempsychosis from one human Body to another, under certain
Circumstances: And they allowed of a future State of Rewards and Punishments.
They usually burnt the dead Bodies of their Friends, and preserved their Ashes
in earthen Pots, buried under great CAIRNS, or Heaps of Stones: Some of these
Pots or Urns have lately been dug up, from under these CAIRNS, in the West
Highlands of Scotland. The Druidical Functions were often hereditary; and their
Females, called DRUIDESSES, were no less famous for Divination, than the DRUIDS
themselves.

The pious and peaceful HYPERBORAEANS, so often mentioned by the old Greek
Writers, were undoubtedly the Celtic or British DRUIDS; for as what they tell
us of these HYPERBORAEANS, cannot be applied with any Justice, either to the
Scythians, or Scandinavians, there is no other Class of Men yet known, who
agree with their Description and Situation, but the DRUIDS. They tell us, that
the HYPERBORAEANS inhabited a large I^land, with many lesser Islands about it,
lying to the N. W. of Europe, beyond Gaul, and in the great Atlantic Ocean; and
that LATONA, the Mother of APOLLO, was born there: That APOLLO was the great
Object of their Worship; so that after having finished the Building of the
Walls of Troy, he is said by PINDAR, to have hastened to the HYPERBORAEANS:
That these Islands were frequented by the Ghosts of departed Heroes, and by
friendly GENII, who revealed future Events in Dreams; and that one of these
smaller Islands, was the peaceful Retreat of old CRONUS or SATURN, after he had
been deprived of his Sovereignty by JUPITER: Perhaps the present Notion, that
some People in those remote Parts, are possessed of what is called the SECOND
SIGHT, or a Power of predicting certain disastrous Events, is a Remnant of the
old Druidical Doctrines and Superstitions, and of this Belief in friendly
GENII, or guardian Spirits. The Fertility of the Soil, Temperature of the
Climate, and happy Situation of the Inhabitants of these Hyperboraean Islands,
were highly celebrated by many ancient Writers. They say that they were a
religious, temperate, long lived, hospitable, hardy, and vigorous Race of
People; that they were subject to few Diseases; that they lived chiefly on
Vegetabl^^; and were infested with no Wars: That frequent Embassies of Young
Men and Virgins, crowned with Laurel, and clothed in White, had from Time to
Time been sent from these ISLANDS, with Offerings of FIRST FRUITS, wrapped in
Wheat Straw, and having their Instruments of Music, to the Temple of APOLLO,
in the Island of Delos; where LATONA is fabled to have been delivered of him,
and his Sister DIANA. Now ANACHARSIS says, that his Countrymen the Scythians
detested the Use of Instruments of Music in their Religion; and Laurel was not
then known to exist in Russia, or Scandinavia: Besides, when Rome was sacked by
the Gauls under BRENNUS, it was the general Report in Greece, that this City
had been taken by an Army of Foreigners, from the Country of the HYPERBORAEANS.

This Intercourse between Greece, and the Country of the HYPERBORAEANS, has
been traced up to about the Time of the Trojan War: So that ABARIS, the
celebrated HYPERBORAEAN PHILOSOPHER, and PRIEST of APOLLO, who came to Athens
about 550 Years before CHRIST, to renew this Correspondence, and to visit
Delos, could be none other than a DRUID, and probably too from the Western
Isles of Britain. DIOCENES LAERTIUS observes, that it was the Opinion of many
learned Men, that the Greeks acquired their Philosophy from the BARBARIANS;
among whom he names the DRUIDS: And it is allowed, that the HYPERBORAEANS first
taught the Greeks, that the Earth was Spherical, and situated in the Center of
the World; whence it is conjectured, that what they called the SPHAERE of the
Barbarians, was a Form or Machine contrived by the HYPERBORAEANS, for the
easier Instruction of their Pupils in Astronomy. Besides, as the Images used by
most Nations, to represent the happy State of Souls departed, are usually drawn
from Subjects which were the principal Part of their Delights in this World; so
the HYPERBORAEANS, according to PLATO, among other Things, promised in their
PARADISE or ELYSIUM, the finest Fruits of every Season, Choirs of Dancers,
Theaters of Poets, vocal and instrumental Music, public Festivals, Banquets,
and SCHOOLS of PHILOSOPHERS: All which are in every Respect conformable to the
known Rites, Usages, and Belief of the DRUIDS. Thus, the DRUIDS being generally
descended of the best Families, the Honors of their Birth, joined with those
of their Functions, and the Opinion of their great Learning, procured them the
highest Veneration and Authority, among all the Gallic Nations: And it is
natural to believe, that such a Set of Men, under such a regular Institution,
continually employed in the Search of Knowledge, and communicating their
Discoveries from Age to Age, must have made great Improvements in PHYSIC,
ASTRONOMY, MATHEMATICS, PHILOSOPHY, and the other SCIENCES; according as their
Studies or Researches were directed.

There was also another Order of Priest among them, but supposed to be inferior
to the DRUIDS; called EUBATES, or FAIDS; whence the VATES of the Latins. These
likewise studied the sublime Mysteries of Nature, and pretended to be inspired:
There are some Vestiges of their Name, among the Highland Scot^, and native
Irish at this Day.

The BARDS were a Set of Men, inferior to both DRUIDS, and FAIDS: They were the
Disciples of the DRUIDS; but they were no Priests, nor interfered with
religious Matters: Their Persons however were every where sacred, among the old
German and Gallic Nations, and they were the usual HERALDS of State, between
contending Chiefs. They were by Profession POETS, employed on Subjects merely
mortal; and who celebrated in Songs, the Genealogies of the Great, and the
Gallant Deeds of departed Warriors: Nor were the softer Passions forgot in
their Compositions, as is evident from these genuine and invaluable Remains of
ancient Poetry, ascribed to OSSIAN: They were exempt from Taxes, and all public
Duties, both Civil and Military: They frequently went from Place to Place,
repeating their Songs for Hire, like the Scandinavian SCALDS; or rather like
the AOIDOI (...) of the Greeks, among whom some have classed the immortal HOMER
himself. The BARDS at last came to be retained in the Families of the Great, as
Implements of State: Their Function became hereditary; Lands were assigned to
their Office in Perpetuity; and they continued in the highest Estimation with
the ancient Natives, for many Ages after the Extirpation of the DRUIDS; as
appears from OSSIAN'S Poems, and the Traces of that Profession still extant, in
some remote Parts of Britain.

It is worthy of Remark, that all the ancient Nations, who first cultivated or
made any considerable Improvements in MEDICINE, have either attributed the
first Discovery of it to their GODS; or have deified the Inventors. Such
Sentiments at least show the high Veneration they had for this useful
Profession; and how beneficial and necessary they believed it to be, for the
Preservation and Happiness of Mankind. HIPPOCRATES observes, that this Belief
of the divine Origin of PHYSIC, was not only consonant to the general Opinions
of the World in his Time; but also, he thinks, agreeable to Reason. In short,
all Nations, as they emerged from Barbarism and Ignorance, and improved in
civil Polity and Knowledge, have encouraged and respected the Learned in the
HEALING ART; as the Friends and Benefactors of Society, and of Mankind. They
rewarded their Services while living, with a Liberality almost beyond Belief;
and revered their Memories after Death, not more honorably by monumental
Inscriptions, Medals, and Statues; than gratefully, by continuing their public
Benefactio^^, even to their Posterity.

Let us next view the State of the MEDICINAL PROFESSION, among certain foreign
Nations, who, though Ancient as to their Origin and Government, may yet be
considered as Modern, with Respect to our Acquaintance with them.

The CHINESE have applied themselves to the Study of MEDICINE, from the very
Infancy of their Empire; and they have a great Number of ancient Authors, upon
that Subject. The Profession is not only much respected among them; but their
own Physicians also are justly esteemed, for their Sagacity and singular
Acuteness in distinguishing Diseases, and forming Prognostics by the Pulse;
though they pay great Attention to the Tongue, Eyes, Voice, and Complexion of the
Patient, at the same Time, in forming their Opinions: From the Manners of the
Country, they are sometimes obliged to find out Distempers by the Pulse alone;
for many of the great Men will not permit their Wives to be seen or spoke to,
but only to put their Arms through a Curtain, in Order for the Physician to feel
the Pulse. DU HALDE has given us a particular Account of their Method of
judging by the Pulse, with their various Observations and Distinctions
concerning it. Their Herbal is very copious, and contains many Simples not
known in Europe; from which they form a Variety of Compositions. The same
Author gives us several Specimens of their Prescriptions, both simple and
compound; and assures us, that they are as expert in curing Diseases with their
Medicine^, as the Europaeans are with-theirs. The Profession of the PHYSICIAN
among them, is distinct from that of the DRUGGIST, or APOTHECARY; and he is
paid for his Visits. They have also their Quacks; some of whom pretend to be
possessed of a Medicine, which will render those who take it, immortal. They
are circumstantial in their Manner of collecting and curing their Drugs; minute
in distinguishing Diseases; and attentive to every Consideration suggested by
Difference of Age, Sex, Temperament, Climate, Diet, or Occupation, or by the
various Conditions of Women. Every Part of the Elephant is used by them in
Medicine, in some Form or other; and the Gins^ng Root is a sovereign Remedy,
for numberless D^sorders. They are however very superficial Anatomists; and
have therefore made little Progress in Medicine as a SCIENCE: And they are very
whimsical in their Theories. Before their Acquaintance with the Europeans, they
knew little of CHEMISTRY, and nothing of the CIRCURLATION of the BLOOD;
whatever they may pretend to the contrary: Yet they knew the Method of opening
a Vein, though they seldom practiced it. The Use of Enemata or Injections, they
learned from the Europaeans; and therefore call them, the Remedy of the
Barbarians; for such they account all Nations, besides themselves. Several of
their Monarchs are believed to have both practiced, and improved MEDICINE; and
if we believe their Accounts, there were Imperial ACADEMIES anciently
established, for that Purpose: Nankin is p^rticularly famous at this Day, for
the Cultivation of the Arts and Sciences; and has the greatest Number of
Libraries, of any City in China.

There is an Anecdote mentioned in the Chinese Histories, which, while it
proves their high Estimation of the HEALING ART, yet greatly invalidates the
boasted Antiquity of their Chronology: They tell us that CHI-HOAM-TI,
acknowledged to be one of their greatest Monarchs, being interested in the
Destruction of all the ancient historical Records, and of those who preserved
the Memory of them, caused all Books to be burnt, except such as treated of
AGRICULTURE, and MEDICINE; in Hopes that his own Actions might eclipse all
those of his Predecessors in the Empire. This happened about 213 Years before
CHRIST. As the Use of Paper was not known, the Chinese then wrote their
Characters upon wooden Tablets, or little Plates of Bamboo, which could not
easily be secreted or concealed; and therefore it is imagined, that this
Destruction of their historical Monuments, must have been pretty complete: And
that they can have few if any authentic Records, anterior to that Period. This
Emperor built the famous WALL, so much admired by Travelers; to defend his
Dominions from the Incursions of the Tartars.

We have also in DU HALDE, an Account of a Chinese Treatise, on the Subject of
Preserving HEALTH, divided into these 4 Heads; 1st, of the Heart and its
Actions; 2dly, of Diet; 3dly, of the Actions of the Day; and 4thly, of Rest at
Night: Wherein seem to be contained, most of the Modern Rules respecting Air,
Aliments, Motion an^ Rest, Passions of the Mind, things retained or discharged,
and Sleep and Watching; which in the Medical Style are called the SIX NON
NATURALS. In violent Pains, particularly of the Gout, the Chinese burn MOXA
upon the Parts affected. This Remedy, upon the Recommendation of SIR WILLIAM
TEMPLE, was for some Time the fashionable Application for the Gout, in England;
but is now laid aside.

Among the People of JAPAN, the Antiquity and Estimation of this Art, are
carried as high as with the Chinese. They ascribe the Inven^ion and first
Practice of it, to their KINGS; who, by their Computation, lived long before
the Mosaic Deluge. Their PHYSICIANS have the Reputation of great Skill and
Abilities; and it is remarked that they most commonly prescribe their Medicines
in a solid Form; and make very frequent Use of Rhubarb and Cassia; But the ART
of SURGERY is very little practiced among them, and less understood. The
Japanese are gross Pagans, or rather have little real Religion of any kind; for
they treat their Idols with great Contempt and Freedom, whenever they are
displeased with them. As to their National Character, they are just in their
Dealings; faithful to their Promises; civil to Strangers admitted among them;
and of strict Veracity: They have but one Language, and one Measure over all
the Empire: Their Laws are every where uniform, and duly executed: Property is
well secured, and generally hereditary; Perjury, Theft, and Gaming for Money,
are punished with Death: They are remarkably fond of Music, and admit it to all
their Entertainments. They are not permitted to leave their Country, on any
Pretense; and if they do, they can never return. In State Offenses, the Emperor
generally orders the Nobleman in Disgrace, to be his own Executioner, on an
appointed Day: This is accounted an Indulgence, and always complied with: But
the Kindred and Friends of the Criminal, are frequently involved in his Fate.
It is fashionable with the Japanese Noblem^n, among other Branches of their
polite Learning, to apply themselves to the STUDY of PHYSIC; in Order to
recommend themselves more effectually to the Emperor's Favor. None however are
allowed to write or publish Books, but their DAIRO, or Chief Priest, with his
Family, and Descendants, who for this Reason, are particularly induced to apply
themselves to Learning. The Japanese PHYSICIANS make very little Use of
Bleeding: And in violent Pains, or Spasmodic Affections, they use Acupuncture;
or burn MOXA upon the Parts affected: This Practice is also followed by the
Chinese in the like Complaints, as well as in the Gout.

The State of Physic among the BRAMINS, and Inhabitants of Indostan, has been
already taken Notice of. We shall only add here, that they usually divide
Diseases into certain Classes; and that their PHYSICIANS confine themselves to
one or two of such Classes, that they may excel in those they particularly
profess. They are very exact and punctilious with Regard to Regimen; and have a
particular Regimen for most Diseases. They have some Knowledge of CHEMISTRY;
and make frequent Use of Medicines prepared by Fire. They have a Book of
Institutes, in which is contained all their Medicinal Knowledge. Their
PROGNOSTICS are much influenced, by superstitious Observations. They are very
nice in their Choice of Medicines, and Method of preserving them. They
carefully consider both the Pulse and Excretions, in order to form just Notions
of Diseases; but they were ignorant of ANATOMY, or the CIRCULATION of the
BLOOD, when first visited by the Europeans.

In the Island of CEYLON, the Practice of PHYSIC, as well as their Modes of
Worship, and religious Tenets, are very similar to those of the MOGUL Nations,
and Bramins. They make frequent Use of strongly purgative Simples; and apply
steeped Pepper outwardly, in all Complaints of the Bowels. The Elephant is also
much used here in Medicine; and the Island abounds with various Drugs, and
valuable Spiceries.

In the Island of AMBOYNA, they are remarkably expert in the Knowledge of
poisonous Plants; and not less so, in the Application of their Antidotes. The
Natives of the East Indies in general, particularly of the Islands, are chiefly
studious of the noxious Properties of Vegetables; though it must be owned, that
they are also well acquainted with many salutary and Medicinal Productions.

In SIAM, the Practice of MEDICINE consists in administering a certain Number
of Receipts, which have been handed down from their Ancestors; and which, like
our modern Quacks, they apply at Random, without Regard to the different
Causes, or distinguishing Symptoms of Diseases.

Among the TARTARS of THIBET, the LAMAS or Priests are their only PHYSICIANS.
They prescribe the most common Simples, and chiefly such as are used in China.
We are assured, that some of them are well acquainted with the Methods of
curing most Diseases, incident to these Countries. The Tartars believe their
chief LAMA, to be a living Deity ever present with them; and accordingly
worship him seated upon an Altar in their Temple, whenever he pleases to show
himself for that Purpose: They believe that he never dies, but only changes his
Person, or the Body the chooses to inhabit, as suits his Inclination: The
Vulgar have the same Notions, with Respect to their subordinate Lamas. The LAMA
of Thibet, like the Roman Pontif, is Supreme both in Spiritual and Temporal
Affairs; and is often visited by distant Princes, to receive his Blessing, and
Remission of their Sins.

The ARABIANS were long acquainted with the Practical Part of MEDICINE, before
the Foundation of the Saracen Empire: It Is believed, that their Prophet MAHOMET
had some Knowledge of MEDICINE himself; and that therefore it was ever
afterward highly esteemed, by his Successors in the Caliphat. The Saracens, in
the beginning of Mahometanism, scarce applied themselves to any Study, besides
that of cultivating their own Language, and understanding their own Laws,
except PHYSIC; but this Profession was generally esteemed among them, as being
of universal Advantage to Mankind. It was the barbarous Policy of this People,
to destroy all Books, and other Vestiges of Literature wherever they carried
their Conquests: Accordingly, AMROU, having made himself Master of Alexandria,
and being loath to destroy so famous and valuable a LIBRARY as he found in that
City, sent to the CALIPH OMAR, to know his Pleasure; he received for Answer,
that if these Books contained the same as the CORAN, they could be of no Use;
and if they advanced any thing contrary to it, they should therefore be burnt.
This was accordingly executed, excepting such as treated of MEDICINE; these
were carefully preserved from the Conflagration. The Quantity of Volumes which
had been collected there, at an immense Expense, for a Series of ^ges, was so
great, that it supplied Fuel to the Bagnios, for the Space of six Months; though
there were no less than 4000 at that Time in Alexandria. Thus the Remains of
the PTOLOMEAN LIBRARY, which had survived the calamitous Accidents of CAESAR's
Wars, were now intentionally and almost entirely consumed by the^e Votaries to
Superstition and Enthusiasm. It has been remarked that Arts and Sciences have
undergone Revolutions, somewhat similar to those of States and Empires. The
Irruptions of the Goths, and other Northern Nations into the Roman Empire, in
the 5th Century, was attended with the Destruction of almost every Monument of
Learning, in the Western World: And about two Centuries afterward, the
Saracens and Followers of Mahomet in the East laid the Foundation of an Empire,
which in the Space of abo^^ 80 Years, extended its Dominion with amazing
Rapidity, more Kingdoms and Territories, than the Romans had ever been able to
do in 800; and labored but too successfully, to substitute ARABIC and the
KORAN, in the Place of every other Language and Book, through great Part of Asia,
and Africa. This Difference however is observable in these literary Events,
that what was done by the Northern Swarms, through brutal Ferocity and Ignorance,
was perpetrated by these Apostles of MAHOMET, under the specious Pretense of
serving GOD and his PROPHET* We read, it is true, of some few Instances, both
in Sacred and Profane History, where a Difference in Religious Doctrines, has
occasioned the Demolition of States, or Extirpation of Nations: even the
Followers of the meek and peaceful JESUS, though shameful to relate, -- had
already set that execrable Example of killing, or otherwise persecuting one
another for the Sake of GOD; which has been so piously and industriously
followed, by overheated and factious Enthusiasts, through successive Ages, to
these present Times: But on such Pretenses to destroy Books, and the useful
Labors of the Learned, is such a Prostitution of Reason and Religion, as no
Age, no Nation, before the Sarace^s, had ever avowed. Such Feats of Bigotry and
Ignorance, were reserved for the Sons of ISHMAEL; and for some Christian
ZEALOTS of more modern Days, who with more than Turkish Barbarity, indulged
their religious Phrenzy, in destroying both Books; and many stately Edi^ices,
the very Ruins of which are at this Day the Admiration of Strangers.
Notwithstanding this Havoc among the Records of Antiquity, the FATHERS of
PHYSIC, as has been said above, found an Asylum with these religious
Conquerors. Afterward, when Spain, in the 9th Century, was reduced to the
Moorish Yoke, they began to attend to the Arts of Peace, and founded COLLEGES
there; to which there was a great Resort of Students, from all Parts of Europe,
particularly to learn the HEALING ART. The many voluminous Publications of the
Arabian PHYSICIANS, which for many Years were almost the only Books consulted
upon the Subject of Medicine; the liberal Rewards and Salaries bestowed upon
them, by their CALIPHS and Princes; the many valuable Additions they have made
to the MATERIA MEDICA; and the accurate Descriptions they have left us, of
several new Diseases, unknown to former Authors; are not only Testimonies of
the great Esteem the Science was held in, by that People, but also of the
extensive Knowledge and Abilities of their Practitioners. We are assured, that
the HAKIMM, or DOCTOR, is always treated with uncommon Respect among the
Arabians, and other Nations (...) the East: That he may uninvited enter any
House, where he never fails of a cordial Welcome: That even in their hostile
Incursions and Depredations, his Person and Effects are unmolested, and held
sacred; for, say they, it would be barbarous and unjust, to involve those in
the Calamities of War, who by their Profession and Employment are FRIENDS to
MANKIND; And by this distinguished Apellation, we are told by Travelers, they
are characterized in these Countries, at this Day.

The TURKS are now, with Respect to Learning, nearly what the Romans were,
during their Regal, and a great Part of their Consular State; a warlike, proud,
and illiterate People: But where the other liberal Sciences are not permitted
to take Root, the ART of HEALING has never bee^ ^^served to flourish. The TURKS
have some Family Receipts, which they make Use of when sick; and when these
fail, they then have Recourse to some professed PHYSICIAN. The Practice among
them, is generally carried on by Armenians, Greek^ or Jews; or by Christian
Renagado's: But they must all be licensed by the ECHIM-PASCHI, or chief
PHYSICIAN to the GRAND SEIGNIOR, before they dare open Shop. This License,
which is obtained at no great Expense, is considered as their DIPLOMA. They
have the same Chief of the Faculty, with the same Powers of licensing
Practitioners, at Cairo in Egypt. The TURKS, being forbid the Use of Wine, very
temperate in their Diet, and making frequent Use of Bathing, are in general
very healthy. But what principally discourages the ART here, and prevents Me^
of Skill from settling among them, is, that the TURKS are extremely covetous
and fond of Money; that they make great Promises, but after the Service is
done, are bad Pay-Masters; and that they are apt to impute the Death of a
Patient, to the Ignorance of the DOCTOR, whoever he is, from mere Caprice and a
gratuitous Inclination for Abuse or Plunder. They have a particular INFIRMARY
belonging to the SERAGLIO. The Sultan's PHYSICIAN is greatly respected, and
always eats in the Palace, with the CA^EE AGA, or Chamberlain in greatest
Authority; and for whom there is allowed a separate Table and Attendance. They
make great Use of Scarifications and Burning for Headaches, or local Pains,
and are very patient under such Operations. The Commonalty consult, for the
most Part, some Jew or Renagado Christian, or whoever will serve them cheapest;
but if these Medical Adventurers are convicted of Mal-Practice, they are
severely punished in their Persons or Effects, and most frequently in both.
When their Great-Men are Sick, they generally apply to some Ambassador, for the
Advice of his PHYSICIAN, who nevertheless is seldom well paid for his
Assistance. When a Physician is applied to, they will not follow his
Directions, till he first has told them, what the Patient's Disorder is: This
is not only an Argument of their extreme Caution and Diffidence, but also of
the Experience and Ability that they require in the Practitioner, to whom they
entrust the Care of their Health. They have some few Books of Physic among
them, as well as of History, Poetry, and other Subjects. Their Institutes, and
Practice of PHYSIC, are chi^s^y taken from GALEN. The Arabian Writer AVICENNA,
whom they call E^^^-ZINA, is also greatly admired, and much consulted wherever
the Mohammedan Religion has prevailed. MATHIOLUS is another Medical Writer known
to them: But as their sole Aim and Study is to get Money, there is no Emulation
any where among them, in any Branch of true or useful Knowledge.

DI SOLIS informs us, that MONTEZUMA, EMPEROR of Mexico, had transplanted into
his Gardens, for the Purposes of MEDICINE, all the choice Simples that benign
Climate produced; where his Physicians had an Opportunity of studying their
Properties. By long Experience, they had found out various Herbs and Plants,
proper for all kinds of Pains and Diseases; and with which they often effected
surprising Cures. The Emperor himself not only distributed such Plants from his
Collection, as had been prescribed by the Physicians, or desired by the Sick;
but would also inquire after the Success of the Medicines given; thus, either
gratifying his Vanity, or believing that he thereby fulfilled the Obligations
of a Sovereign, in taking such Care of the Health of his Subjects. The same
Author tells us, that CORTES having been seized with a violent Fever, and
Disorder in his Brain, at Tlascala, in Consequence of a Wound of the Head,
which he had received a few Days before, in an Engagement with the Mexicans;
the Senate of that Republic, sent for the best PHYSICIANS in the Country to his
Assistance: Who, by a wonderful Discernment in the Virtues of their Medicinal
Herbs, and by varying their Applications, according to the different Turns and
Appearances of the Distemper, at last restored him to Health.

Mr. WAFFER, who was himself bred to Physic, ^^lls us in his Travels, that
being accidentally wounded in crossing the Isthmus of Darien, he was
necessarily left behind among the Indians of that Country; that being unable to
assist himself, these Savages, though not remarkably kind to him in other
Respects, took Compassion upon his Wounds, and by applying certain salutiferous
Herbs chewed to a Consistence, and spread upon Plantane Leaves, they effected a
complete Cure, in a short Time. These Indians he tells us, had a very singular
Method of Bleeding; the Patient was seated on a Stone, in the River which
flowed near their Habitation, and a Person skilled in that Exercise, shot
several little Arrows at the Body, which pierced no deeper than the Skin: And
that when they brought Blood, the Spectators were greatly rejoiced. The Wife of
the Indian Chief LACENTA, being sick, MR. WAFFER, to relieve her, opened a Vein
of the Arm, with a Lancet; when the Spouting of the Blood so alarmed the
Indian, that he was with Difficulty withheld from killing him: But the Woman
soon recovering, LACENTA, with all his Followers, kissed Mr. Waffer's Hands, in
Reverence to his Skill; and they ever afterward treated him with singular
Respect. He was carried about in a Hammock, from Plantation to Plantation,
administering Advice, Phlebotomy, and Physic, for he had preserved some
Instruments and Medicines; and he became the Object of almost general Adoration
with those grateful Savages. It was with Difficulty that at last, when an
Opportunity offered of getting back to Europe, they consented to part with him,
upon his Promise of a speedy Return.

The PERUVIANS, as we are told in the History of their INCAS, had several
Medical Secrets and Operations, for various Diseases, which had been
transmitted from Father to Son; and which they had learned from long
Experience: Though they had a pretty extensive Knowledge of Remedies, they had not
advanced so far in that Branch of Learning, as to have any regular Theory
respecing Diseases, or to have reduced their Practice to a SYSTEM. That they
had professed Practitioners among them seems evident, from reading in the
History of the Conquest of PERU, that ATAUCHI, Brother to the murdered INCA
ATABALIBA, having taken some Spanish Prisoners, would have sacrificed them all
to his Revenge; but he was afterward prevailed upon, not only to give them
their Lives, in Consideration of two among them, who had warmly protested
against the INCA'S Murder: But also he took Care, says our Author, that such as
were wounded, should be cured: And then he dismissed them with Presents. By
Means of the Peruvians, we are become acquainted with several powerful Drugs,
particularly Jesuits Bark, and Ipecacoan; which are strong Proofs of their
Knowledge in the Virtues and Properties of various Plants.

The warlike Savages of NORTH AMERICA, particularly the Iroquois, or five
confederate Nations, where they are untainted with the Vices and cozening Arts
of the more civilized Europaeans, exhibit the most striking and genuine Picture
of the primitive World, or supposed State of Nature, to be met with upon the
known Face of the Globe. They have no established Authority among them,
hereditary or elective, but such only as is acquired by approved Bravery and
Success in War, or by Eloquence in Council: And even this Obedience or
Submission to superior Merit, is altogether voluntary; for their SACHEMS o^
Chiefs, when acknowledged such, are mere Advisers or Counselors, they never
have any coercive Powers. They have no national Tenets of Religion; no
established Modes, or public Places of Worship; no Order of Priests, or
Distinction of Days: Every Man frames his own CREED, according to his Fancy;
and many of them have none at all. The only Article of Belief in which they
seem generally to agree, is i^ some vague and obscure Notions of a future
Existence; But with the ancient Mexicans, and the more humanized Natives of
Peru, this Opinion was still more prevalent.

The following Lines of MR. POPE, may be, with some Indulgence, applied to all,
or most of the known Tribes in this Western World: Lo, the Poor INDIAN! whose
untutored Mind
Sees GOD in Clouds, or hears him in the Wind;
His Soul, proud SCIENCE never taught to stray
Far as the SOLAR WALK, or MILKY WAY;
Yet simple Nature to his Hope has given,
Behind the cloud-topt Hill, an humbler HEAVEN;
Some safer World in Depth of Woods embraced,
Some happier Island in the watery Waste;
Where Slaves once more their native La^d behold,
N^^ Fiends torment, no CHRISTIANS thirst for Gold.
TO 'BE, Contents his natural Desire,
He asks no Angels Wing, no Seraphs Fire;
But thinks, admitted to that equal SKY,
His FAITHFUL DOG shall bear him Company.


Some distant Nations about the upper Lakes, pay Reverence to the SUN: And some
also to the MOON. Some have MANITOOS, or small tutelar Divinities of their own
Composition, which they carry to War with them in Boxes, and consult upon
particular Emergencies, with strange Ceremonies, and always in the Dark; upon
which Occasions, the War Captain generally acts the Conjurer. War and Hunting
are the sole Occupations of the Men; and almost every menial Office at Home, or
in the Field, is performed by the Women. Whoever first Plants a Spot of Land
with Maize or Indian Corn, possesses it undisturbed, as long as he pleases; and
when he leaves it, which is frequently the Case, the next Comer occupies it by
the same indisputed Right, Possession. Whence the Migration of Families is both
easy and frequent among them; and even whole Tribes or Nations, from various
Motives, will sometimes change their Habitations. Their Wants are few: Their
Household Furniture and Riches are easily transported: They know not the Use of
Locks or Bars to their Houses; yet Theft is scarcely ever heard of among
themselves, though they will all take or steal from Europaeans: Every Wood
affords them a Shelter; and there too they can generally supply themselves with
both Food and Clothing. Their Medicinal Remedies are few, and generally
administered by their Squaas or Women: They consist in various Methods of
Sweating; in certain Drinks made with Simples, which operate by Stool or Vomit;
and in cold Bathing. They have some Notions of Bleeding, by Scarifications for
local Pains: They treat with particular Respect, upon all Occasions, such
Europaeans as possess any Knowledge of MEDICINE: And they obey their
Directions, when ailing, with the greatest Deference and Punctuality.

Among the Negro Tribes of AFRICA, we are told, that the Practice of MEDICINE
consists in the outward Application of certain Herbs or Roots, or Infusions and
Decoctions of them given inwardly: But the REMEDIES they chiefly depend upon,
are the Charms, and other Tricks of their Conjurers. They are all believed to
be so very mischievous, and with all so expert in the Use of vegetable Poisons,
that every obstinate and uncommon Ailment among them, is usually supposed to be
the Effect of Poison administered by some envious or revengeful Negro: It Is
true, such Accidents too frequently happen; but this Belief is so prevalent
among the African Slaves, that when once a sick Negro is fully impressed with
such a Notion, he seldom recovers. Though the extensive Countries of the Negroes
are generally, for obvious Reasons very unhealthy, yet we do not find any where
a fixed or uniform Practice in their Cure of Diseases; nor do we know any
remarkable Remedies or Drugs which are peculiar to their Climates. It is
however worthy of Remark, that, from undoubted Accounts both of Traders and
intelligent Natives, some of the inland Nations of Africa have long had the
Practice of INOCULATION for the SMALL POX; but whether this is a Discovery of
their own, or derived from the more intelligent Nations of ASIA, we know not.

The Revival of Learning in EUROPE, is in nothing more distinguishable, than by
that ardent Attention, and early Encouragement given for improving all the
various Branches of the HEALING ART. Many Medical COLLEGES were soon after this
Period endowed, and Lecturers appointed, by different Princes in their
respective Dominions; to which there was a great Resort of Students, from many
distant Countries; according as the Reputation of the Professors attracted
them. From these first Establishments in Spain and Italy, already mentioned, as
we approach our own Times, we find the PROFESSION rising more and more into
Fame and Estimation, through France, Germany, and other Parts of Europe; in
Proportion as Discoveries and Improvements were made, in ANATOMY, CHEMISTRY,
BOTANY, and PHYSIOLOGY: Till the immortal HARVEY, Physician to that great
Patron of Learning CHARLES THE FIRST, by his Discovery of the CIRCULATION OF
THE BLOOD, cast such an inextinguishable Light upon this Science, as fixes
HERE, the most memorable Era in the History of PHYSIC, since it first existed
as a Profession. From that Time, MEDICINE has continued to flourish, among the
British Nations, with unequalled Luster. In no Country is this Profession more
honorable, more respected, or more bounteously cherished; and no Profession
has more amply repaid this benign Influence, and public Favor, or reflected
more Honor upon their Country, by such a Number of eminent Writers, than this
has; Whether we consider them with Respect to their Merit and Abilities; in
Subjects merely medical; or their great Reputation in foreign Kingdoms, for
Compositions of Genius and Taste; or their acknowledged Proficiency; in all
other Parts of useful and polite Literature: It is u^necessary to give
Instances here, or to enumerate a long Train of MEDICAL WORTHIES so well known
to every GENTLEMAN of Reading. To justify my Assertion, permit me to appeal to
the Sentiments of that Ornament of human Nature, Mr. POPE; who, in one of his
familiar Epistles, speaking of his Obligations to Dr. MEAD, and others of the
Faculty, adds, they are in general the most amiable Companions, and the best
Friends, as well as the most learned Men I know: And the ingenious Dr.
BLACKSTONE, in his Lecture upon the Study of the LAW, recommends some
Acquaintance with this necessary Science to the FACULTY of PHYSIC, in common
with other Gentlemen, to complete the Character of general and extensive
Knowledge; a CHARACTER, says he, which their Profession, beyond others, has
remarkably deserved. Nor is it our least Happiness and Boast, that there are
now living, many Gentlemen deservedly celebrated both at Home and Abroad; not
more for their medical ^alents in particular, than for their extensive
Knowledge of LETTERS in general. But when we turn our Researches from these
glorious Fields of SCIENCE, to the present obscure and illiterate Scenes before
us; when we lift our Eyes to these towering and enlightened Geniuses of ancient
and modern Days, and afterward look down to the favorite Wonder-working
Doctors of this Place, how wide is the Distance between such contrasted
Objects? How numerous the Links which connect the Extremes of such a lengthened
Chain? The Comparison, with all Respect to those who think differently be it
said, is too unequal, absurd, and ridiculous to be supported.

I cannot conclude this Inquiry into the ancient and present State of PHYSIC,
without acknowledging, in Justice to the MEDICAL FACULTY of Philadelphia, that
THEY first set us the laudable Example of this Institution in America; though the
practicability of instructing Youth in this useful and learned Profession,
among ourselves, has for many Years been an Object of Speculation here: Whereby
we may in a great Measure prevent the future Necessity of long and perilous
Voyages to EUROPE; as well as large Remittances of Money, which never more
returns: Nor indeed is this the only Instance of the wise Police and public
Spirit of that flourishing and well regulated CITY, which deserves our
Imitation.

The ART of PHYSIC instructs us in the Method of preserving Health when
present; and in the Means of restoring it when lost; or how to alleviate the
Inconveniences consequent upon Health impaired, when a total Cure cannot be
effected. This Art is by HIPPOCRATES called the NOBLEST of all ARTS; which
heals, by adding that which was wanting, and taking away what is supper^luous.
And PLUTARCH says, that MEDICINE contains as large and fruitful a Field for
Pleasure, as any other of all the LIBERAL ARTS.

The whole System of PHYSIC is comprehended under these two Denominations, the
THEORY, and the PRACTICE. The Nature and Meaning of the latter is pretty
generally understood: But the THEORY of PHYSIC, though the Foundation of all
rational PRACTICE, being very little understood or attended to here, and
consequently its Advantages not so obvious, a particular Explication of the
Nature and Usefulness of it, will now the more readily be indulged me, as it
will serve at the same Time to convey a more adequate Idea of the Importance of
this present INSTITUTION.

There is but too frequent Occasion to remark, that we are apt to undervalue in
others, what we ourselves do not possess, or despair of ever attaining;
especially when the Subject of our Envy gives any Pre-eminence to the
Possessor! This is in no Case more applicable, than with Respect to the
Usefulness of THEORY in PHYSIC; and will fully account for that Obloquy and
Ridicule with which the Self-taught Doctors of this City, affect to treat a
Plan of MEDICAL Education, which they either have not Sense to comprehend, or
Honesty and Candor enough to regret the Want of. Such little Foes are
pardonable; they indeed claim our Pity; because they know no better. But when
an intelligent Head, is totally guided by an unfeeling and malevolent Heart:
When the Want of academical Instruction in his Profession, is artfully
concealed under many real and more studied Oddities of Behavior; by shunning
every Occasion of Medical Converse with such as can judge of his Skill, or
censure his Practice; by amusing his credulous Hearers with vulgar Jests, or
the too generally delectable Arts of Defamation, and illiberal Abuse of those,
who have been more fortunate in Opportunities of Improvement than himself: When
a Spirit of Rapacity is glossed over by boasted Nostrums, and fictitious Cures;
or otherwise, by himself, or his Emissaries, practicing upon the distempered
Imaginations of the sick; and by every other mean and reproachful Artifice; it
might well excite the Amaze and Regret of every Friend to Learning, and of
every good Member of Society, should he find that the insidious Opinions of
such a Medical Phenomenon, who reflects so little Honor upon the City he
lives in, and much less upon the Profession he follows, were still, as
heretofore, not only listened to, but applauded. However I would willingly
hope, that this respectable Community will, for the future, form their Opinions
of this Profession, and of this present Undertaking, from their own
Understanding and Observation; and that Strangers, who shall henceforth visit
these hospitable Regio^^, for the Sake of Health, will not too hastily judge of
the whole FACULTY here, from the ungracious Practices of a HETEROCLITE DOCTOR,
or the relentless Cravings of an insatiable LEECH.

Before we proceed, let us here consider such common Objections made to the
Usefulness of THEORY, as carry with them any Appearance of Reason or
Plausibility.

It seems to be universally allowed, that Experience alone can never form a
rational PHYSICIAN: Yet some decry THEORY, as of no Use in explaining Diseases,
because, say they, it cannot be accommodated to all of them. But such
Disputants may as well contend, that because THEORY cannot obtain in all
Diseases, it therefore does in none; which would be to contradict all Sense and
Observation. Others, because they are not accustomed, or not willing, or
perhaps not able to investigate the Causes of Diseases, reckon Theory not only
as useless, but would insinuate also, that it may sometimes be dangerous in
Practice. Now, what can be more absurd, than to imagine that a PHYSICIAN will
be the more unsuccessful, the better he understands the Distemper? Or that he
who sees clearly into the Origin and Cause of an Indisposition, should
therefore be the more incapable of rightly applying a Remedy? Or on the
contrary, that he should be the most happy in his Cures, who is altogether
ignorant why one Method should be pursued rather than another? The Futility of
such Objections is obvious to every Capacity. Others again say, that Diseases
have been cured by Persons ignorant of all THEORY; who neither understood
ANATOMY, the ANIMAL ECONOMY, nor the Manner in which Remedies operate! This
has sometimes undoubtedly been the Case; and happy are they who have escaped,
to tell the Tidings! But were we to examine the Practice of such Persons, and
observe how unseasonably most Medicines are applied; how many and how contrary
Things are given; we must acknowledge that their Apothecaries are much obliged
to them, but their Patients not at all: For being unacquainted with the Nature
of the Distemper, or any certain Method of Cure, they range through the whole
MATERIA MEDICA, in Hopes that they may fortunately hit upon a Remedy at last.
There are some too who object to the Usefulness of THEORY; That there are
Persons who, though entirely ignorant of any rational Scheme of Practice, yet by
being much employed, have acquired such a Degree of Knowledge, as to succeed in
the Cure of some particular Diseases! This Observation will hold equally good
of every sagacious and attentive old Woman, or Nurse; nor, if true, is it so
very surprising, when it is considered, that some Diseases recur as it were in
a Circle. But should any new Distemper arise, and such as this Practitioner
never saw before, our Champion of Experience would then be much at a L^ss, and
turn over his musty Receipts and Commentaries long in vain, 'ere he could
discover any Light to guide him to a proper Treatment. Whereas the judicious
and rational PHYSICIAN, who is intimately acquainted with the Powers of the
human Body, and the Nature of the Fluids; without being alarmed at any unusual
Case; applies the Ideas he had already formed in his Mind, about the Nature of
Diseases in general, to this particular Case; by which he easily discerns the
Genius of the Disease; whence it arises; the true Indications of Cure; and what
Method ought chiefly to be pursued: Amidst the Variety of Drugs, he has no
Difficulty in choosing immediately such as are most proper for his Purpose, and
in fixing upon that Order he ought to follow in prescribing them. EMPYRICS do
not so much distinguish between Diseases themselves, as the Names of Diseases:
For Instance in Fevers, the same symptoms frequently occur, where the Cause of
the Disease and State of the Humors, are very different. Thus some Fevers
arise from a Redundancy, some from a Rarefaction, others from a Lentor, and
others again from a putrid Dissolution of the Blood; all which require a
different Treatment, according to their several Causes. Suppose now this
Nominal Physician to be sent for; he would immediately form his Distinctions,
or Diagnosis, as it is called, from the most obvious Symptoms attending Fevers
in general; and without further Inquiry, pronouncing the Distemper to be a
Fever, would boldly pursue the same Method of Cure in all! On the contrary, the
rational PHYSICIAN explores not so much the Name, as the Nature of the Disease:
He endeavors to find out its immediate and remote Cause^, with the State of
the circulating Fluids; and from these is directed in his Application of
Remedies: And often too, by a judicious ANALOGY, extends those Medicines to
many Diseases, which Use had perhaps too arbitrarily determined as SPECIFICS in
one. How can he apply a proper Remedy to a Disease, says CELSUS, who knows not
whence it arises, what Parts are affected, how they are connected, where they
are seated, or what are their Functions? And though it is undeniable that
Experience is absolutely necessary to a Physician; yet even this Experience can
neither be pursued, nor safely applied, without Reasoning upon it; or without
forming some Theory from his own Observations. Whence it may be fairly
concluded, that THEORY and PRACTICE so much require each others Assistance,
that no one can ever deserve greatly of PHYSIC, who does not unite them: And
let us add, that the best Collection of Medical Receipts or Prescriptions which
ever was, or will be made, can no more make a complete PHYSICIAN, than good
Colors and Pencils alone, can make a fine PAINTER. -- Thus then the Knowledge
of the THEORY of PHYSIC, regularly acquired as a SCIENCE, according to the best
and most approved Methods of Study, is the surest Guide to a safe and judicious
Practice; and distinguishes the rational PHYSICIAN, from the daring EMPYRICK,
and other trammel'd Laborers in this Profession.

We shall now consider the Nature of THEORY, and what it particularly teaches
us. It is well known, that all other SCIENCES have their PRAECOGNITA, or
Introductory Parts; and that no one can arrive at their Summit, without
ascending by such regular Steps, as Reason and Experience inform us are
necessary to conduct him. The PRAECOGNITA, or THEORY of PHYSIC, comprehends
several curious, and intricate Subjects of Study; each of which alone is
sufficient to employ the Attention of a Student, for a long Time, before he can
acquire such a competent Knowledge therein, as will entitle him to practice
with Safety to his Patient, or Honor to himself.

The Foundation of all true and rational Medical Knowledge, is ANATOMY; or that
dextro^s, nice, and methodical Dissection of the human Body, which discovers to
us its various component Parts, together with their Figure, Arrangement,
Situation, and Connections. ANATOMY gives us the Mechanism and Uses of the
Bones, and of the Muscles; it describes the Contents of the different Cavities
of the Trunk of the Body: It teaches also, the particular Course of the Nerves,
and Blood Vessels; and how we may often discover the Origin or Seat of an
Injury, when perhaps the Part affected or complained of, is very distant from
it. The Demonstrations in this Polar Branch of MEDICINE, are so palpably
necessary and instructive, that they can never be too often repeated by every
Denomination of the FACULTY, whether Pupils or Practitioners; for it is self
evident, that they ought to know intimately and minutely the Composition and
Frame of the Body, in the natural and sound State, before they attempt to
remedy its Infirmities or Ailments. -- To use a familiar Comparison -- would
not a Man deserve to be laughed at, who should undertake to regulate or repair
any valuable or curious Piece of Machinery, (suppose a Watch,) without
understanding its Principles and Mechanism? Yet how many are guilty of a
greater Absurdity, by trusting their own most curious ANIMAL MACHINE, which
itself alone is a WORLD of WONDERS, in the Hands of those, who are ignorant of
the Structure and Uses even of such Parts, as admit of equal demonstrative
Certainty, with any Contrivance of Man's Invention?

Besides what we are instructed in by ANATOMY, which is principally concerned
in describing the human Body after Death; there are other Parts of Knowledge,
respecting our present Wellbeing and Existence, which are properly the Subjects
of PHYSIOLOGY. -- This Branch of THEORY considers Man progressively, from his
earliest Existence, before he has yet breathed the Breath of Life; before he is
even fashioned in his Mother's Womb; and while all the boasted Pre-eminence of
this future Image of Divinity, of this Deputy Ruler of the World, is that of a
locomotive Vegetable, a mere automatous Machine, an almost imperceptible Worm;
to his Decay, or natural Death. PHYSIOLOGY treats of the Animalization of our
Food; of the Properties and Uses of our various Fluids; of the Nature and
Circulation of the Blood; of Respiration; of the Senses; and, in short, of
every Function, whither Vital, Animal, or Natural, which is, or ought to be
performed by the Body, while in Health: All which are comprehended under the
Appellation of, -- the ANIMAL ECONOMY. By PHYSIOLOGY, we are enabled to form a
just Idea of Health, and wherein it consists: As from the total, or partial
Depravation of any of the various Functions, which are or ought to be performed
in HEALTH, we form the Idea of SICKNESS, in all its different Stages and
Degrees. ANATOMY may be considered as the Topography of the Body; and
PHYSIOLOGY as its natural History. ANATOMY is the guiding Star to the SURGEON;
but both are alike essential to the PHYSICIAN. We have already observed, what
great Improvements have from Time to Time been made, in PHYSIOLOGY, by opening
and inspecting the Bodies of different Animals alive; and otherwise making
Experiments upon them. How far such Practices, though influenced by such good
Motives, are reconcilable to Humanity, I will not pretend to determine: But
when it is considered what important, what useful Discoveries have been made in
that Way; the Inquisitive both in PHYSIC and PHILOSOPHY, will always
congratulate themselves upon every Acquisition of KNOWLEDGE, however abhorrent
they may be from such Means of obtaining it. We find too, that such practical
Curiosity prevailed in a very early Period of this Profession; and was even
carried to great Lengths, if what some affirm of ERASISTRATUS, the sagacious
PHYSICIAN to the first SELEUCUS, and of HEROPHILUS above mentioned, be true.
From what is already said, it must be evident to every Man of Sense or
Reflection, how preposterous it is, to attempt to remedy the Alterations and
Changes produced in the Body by SICKNESS, without a previous particular
Knowledge of its State in HEALTH.

But these Studies of ANATOMY, and PHYSIOLOGY, besides being considered as
necessary Qualifications for the Practice of PHYSIC, may moreover be looked
upon as Branches of NATURAL PHILOSOPHY, both pleasing and instructive to Men of
Speculation and Letters; and no less amusing to such as carry their Researches,
no farther than the immediate Objects of their Senses. If our Curiosity
receives such exquisite Gratification, in contemplating the immense VARIETY,
which Nature has displayed in her inferior Productions; why should we not in
like Manner take Pleasure in pursuing her, in her more complete and noble Work,
the HUMAN FRAME? When we examine the various component Parts of the Body, with
their different Combinations and Uses, how are we amazed, to find all the
Motions of this most complicated Machine performed, according to the well known
and immutable Powers of MECHANICS? How are our most warm and Heartfelt
Emotions of Gratitude called up, when we perceive, that every minute
discernible Atom is formed, and placed, according to the most just Weight, and
strictest Mensuration? That the Distribution of our Vessels, and Course of the
Fluids through them, are all conformable to the ever permanent Laws of
HYDRAULICS; and that all these are disposed of, with such Symmetry and
benevolent Care, as are most conducive to the Preservation, and present
Happiness of BEINGS, whose Duration is so short and limited? -- The
Articulations of the SPINE, or Backbone, moving over their liquid Axle, and
resting upon the Incompressibility of Water, at least incompressible by any
natural Force of the Body: The astonishing Mechanism of the EYE, and EAR, so
beautifully contrived, and carefully adapted to the Nature and Properties of
LIGHT, and SOUND; ALL must excite the most profound Respect, and awful
Veneration in every attentive Observer of NATURE, for HIM who has thus
fashioned us. In short, what more rational Entertainment can be found; what
Subject of Admiration, more grand or noble; what more convincing Proofs can be
given, of the superlative and paternal GOODNESS of the DEITY, than such an
Historical Survey of this little WORLD of MAN? Who, agreeable to that just, and
emphatical Exclamation of the Hebrew POET, is so "fearfully and wonderfully
made!"

PATHOLOGY necessarily depends upon the previous Knowledge of PHYSIOLOGY, and
is naturally connected with it; it is usual therefore to teach both, in the
same Course of LECTURES: These two Branches together are more particularly, and
in a limited Sense, called the THEORY of PHYSIC. The Subject of PATHOLOGY
consists, in the general Investigation of the various Causes of Diseases,
whether adventitious or natural; with their consequent Symptoms, and Effects.
PHYSIOLOGY considers the Human Body, in its sound and healthy State: But
PATHOLOGY considers it, in its preternatural and morbid State.

A familiar Acquaintance with the MATERIA MEDICA, and PHARMACY, or at least
with the Nature and Effects of all such Simple and Compound Medicines, as are
generally used in Prescriptions, together with the most proper Methods of
compounding them, is another Acquisition in this Science, extremely necessary
to a Student, before he engages in Practice. MEDICINES are the Instruments in
the Hands of the PHYSICIAN, with which he is to subdue Diseases: it would
therefore be not only dangerous for the Patient, but absurd and wicked in a
Practitioner, should he be ignorant of the Strength and Qualities of those
Weapons, he employs for accomplishing his Purpose: It is indeed his Duty to
know, not only the several Virtues of Drugs; what Diseases they are proper for;
in what Quantities they ought to be given (...) and in what Forms they can be
most commodiously exhibited: But he should also be able to distinguish what are
genuine, from what are sophisticated; and what are fresh and ^ound, from what
are old and useless.

CHEMISTRY, and BOTANY, with Respect to Medicine, may in some Sense be
considered, as Subdivisions of the MATERIA MEDICA; with which they both serve
to make us more intimately acquainted. By CHEMISTRY, the Nature and Properties
of all such Substances as are used in Medicine, are explored; and various
powerful Remedies are thereby prepared from the VEGETABLE, FOSSILE, and ANIMAL
Kingdoms, by Means of Fire, and Solv^nts* By CHEMISTRY, many curious
Discoveries, and useful Improvements are made in NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. It is a
Study, no less pleasing than advantageous to the PHYSICIAN; and an Amusement
equally curious and entertaining to the GENTLEMAN and SCHOLAR.

By BOTANY we are instructed in the Natural History, and distinguishing
Characters of PLANTS. This pursued as a Science, or Branch of Medical Study,
presents to us a Fund of Knowledge, both valuable and ornamental. As this
CONTINENT yields most of the Medical PLANTS now in Use, and abounds also with a
Variety of others, whose Virtues we are as yet but little acquainted with, or
entire Strangers to; may we not hope, that among the future literary
Institutions in this Place, a TEACHER of BOTANY will soon be appointed; and a
Botanical Garden laid out, and properly furnished? This would open an extensive
Field for further Discoveries in, and for large Acquisitions to the MATERIA
MEDICA: And this City might yet have the Honor, of the first Appointment of
that Kind in America.

The principal and most interesting Part of MEDICINE, and to which all those
other foregoing Studies, or Branches of THEORY are subservient* is PRACTICE; or
the Knowledge and Cure of Diseases. The PRACTICE of PHYSIC is founded on
repeated Experiments, and Observations of Facts, made by our Predecessors in
the HEALING* ART, upon Diseases and Remedies; and compared with those made by
ourselves: And thence, from what usually has happened, we collect what may
again happen, and what we ought to do in similar Cases. As all the Proficiency
made in the other preparatory CLASSES, with every Assistance which can be
derived from Memory, or the Powers of Understanding, is necessarily exerted
here; it has always been customary for Students, to embrace the earliest
Opportunities of being conversant in it; by attending, from their first
Entrance upon their Studies, the Practice of some Gentleman, eminent for
Business and Abilities; or by visiting the Sick in HOSPITALS, where the same
Opportunities of Instruction usually occur. -- Permit me to observe here, that,
in this wealthy and populous CITY, which from its extensive Trade and
commodious Situation, is so much the Resort of Strangers, and to which, as the
METROPOLIS and Seat of Government, there is such a Concourse of People from the
inland Settlem^^ts; the want of a proper ^^d well regulated INFIRMARY, is
greatly to be lamented. When we look round, and see how many Objects of
Distress, are every where suffering under the accumulated Woes of Poverty
Sickness, and bodily Infirmities; only because they cannot have the
Conveniences necessary for their being benefited by that Assistance, which
many Gentlemen of this Profession daily do, and would still most cheerfully
give them; it is a Matter of sincere Regret, that neither the Motives of
Humanity, nor the laudable Example of a neighboring COLONY, have yet been able
to give Being, to so desirable a Place of Refuge, from such complicated Misery.
An Establishment, so beneficial to the whole PROVINCE, and to this CITY in
particular, well deserves the Attention of a PUBLIC SPIRITED LEGISLATURE; as
well as the united Influence of every FRIEND to the Country, and of every
compassionate and good MAN: But the Manifold Advantages, which would hence
arise to the Young Student, and Practitioner, in the Profession both of PHYSIC
and SURGERY, are so very palpable and obvious, that it in a particular Manner
claims the Countenance of every FRIEND to the ART of HEALING. I am not
ignorant, that there has been for many Years in this CITY, a public Receptacle
for poor INVALIDS; but the intentional Plan and Economy of that House, render
it undeserving of the Name of an HOSPITAL. From the known Humanity of the
Magistrates and Managers, it cannot be doubted that the Sick are there at all
Times supplied with decent, and suitable Entertainment: But their Medical
Treatment has hitherto been so studiously concealed, that as yet it is
inscrutable; and therefore it remains a Doubt, whether it be a Reproach to the
Community, or a Benefit to the Patient Since this Lecture was read in the
College Hall, the Necessity and Usefulness of a PUBLIC INFIRMARY has been so
warmly and pathetically set forth, in a Discourse delivered by DR. SAMUEL BARD,
at the Commencement, in May last; that his Excellency SIR HENRY MOORE*
immediately set on Foot a Subscription for that Purpose; to which himself, and
most of the Gentlemen then present liberally contributed. His Excellency also
recommended it in the most pressing Manner to the ASSEMBLY of the Province, as
an Object worthy of the^r Attention; and the CORPORATION of the CITY have given
us Assurances of granting a very valuable and commodious Lot of Ground, for
erecting the Building upon So that there is now almost a certain Prospect of
this benevolent and ^umane FOUNDATION soon taking Place. And as it is to be
upon the most catholic and unexceptionable PLAN, it is hoped that it will meet
with the Countenance and Encouragement of every compassionate and good Member
of Society; whatever Party or Denomination he may choose to be distinguished
by, on other Occasions. -- DR. BARD'S Discourse, by particular Desire, has
since been published.


Every Thing which can possibly affect the Body, or influence its State of
HEALTH, whether it be done by us, or suffered by us, comes under the
Consideration of PRACTICE. Thus, as the Body is greatly influenced by the
general^ Climate of the Country, as well as by the particular Air, Soil,
S^tuation, etc. of the Places we live in; and by the Diet, Clothing,
Occupation, and Exercise peculiar to each Individual; they are all Objects of
PRACTICE. Hence it is not to be wondered at, if the Alterations made in our
State of HEALTH, should be as different, as are the Causes they may arise from;
or that the same Diseases should be more or less frequent in some Places, than
they are in others; and even that they should be sometimes widely different in
the same Places, according to their various Causes, and the Constitutions they
affect. This Diversity in the Symptoms, and Degrees of Violence, by which
Diseases are distinguished, must necessarily require the utmost Attention of
the PHYSICIAN, in his Management of them; and it must be very evident, from
these Considerations, that no one Method of CURE can possibly be framed, so
general or comprehensive, as to suit every Climate; nor even the same Disease
in every CASE, in the same Climate. We shall in general observe upon this Head,
that a thorough Knowledge of ANATOMY; and of the ANIMAL ECONOMY, according to
the latest Discoveries, and most approved THEORIES; a competent Acquaintance
with the Powers and Effects of DRUGS; and a diligent Study of the best ancient
and modern MEDICAL WRITERS, improved by his own Experience and Observations,
should be the Business of every PHYSICIAN; and are the essential Requisites, to
a safe and happy Practice.

A PHYSICIAN ought also to be well acquainted with the Operations of SURGERY:
And to understand both the THEORY and MANUAL PART of MIDWIFRY; though he may not
incline to practice either the one, or the other. How necessary such
Accomplishments are every where, especially in this infant Country; how
conducive they are to the Increase and Welfare of our fellow Citizens; and how
imprudent it is, to permit any one to practice these Arts of SURGERY and
MIDWIFRY, without previous Examinations, or having public Testimonials of their
Abilities, must be obvious to every one. A Practitioner ought to know how to
act, as well as to advise: And in Case of Necessity, to assist in, or even
perform every Operation needful for the Relief, or Preservation of those who
have placed their whole Confidence in him; or are otherwise committed to his
Care.

From this general View of the Profession of MEDICINE; how amazing and
unaccountable is it, that Men of Sense and Reflection, should trust that
greatest of all Blessings, HEALTH, in the Hands of Presumptuous and daring
Empyrics; who not only are ignorant, of the above mentioned most essential
Principles to a conscientious Practitioner; but even of the particular
Qualities of those very Nostrums, they vaunt of? The Learned ROLLIN observes,
that judicious and experienced PHYSICIANS deserve to be highly recompensed and
distinguished; since all their Labors, Lucubrations, and Watchings, are
devoted to Peoples HEALTH; which of all human Blessings, is the dearest and
most valuable; And yet, says he, so careless are Mankind of this Blessing, that
through a blind Credulity, they foolishly entrust it with Persons of no Skill, or
Experience, who im^ose upon them by their Impudence and Presumption, or seduce
them by their flattering Assurances of an infallible Recovery. Palam est, ut
quisque inter istos loquendo polleat, Imperator^m illico VITAE nostrae, N^CIS
que fieri.


The State of HEALTH, was by the Ancients believed to have such Influence, upon
the Faculties of the Mind, that according to PLATO'S Opinion, an infirm
Constitution is an Obstacle to the Practice of Virtue; because it makes People
imagine themselves always ^ick, and to mind nothing but their own frail
Carcases. When the Body is in Pain, says another PHILOSOPHER, the Mind has no
Relish for the Exercise of Virtue; But HEALTH enlarges the Soul. We are told in
the Book of JOB, that all which a Man has will ^e give for his Life; but it
might with equal Justice be said, that all which a Man has, will he give for
HEALTH: For many are the Instances, in all Ages, and in all Countries, of Men
who have sacrificed LIFE itself, at the Shrine of HEALTH, and anticipated the
Time of their Departure for that "Peaceful SHORE,
Where Billows never break, nor Tempests rore."
GARTH. rather than p^otract it, without HEALTH. Should the Proffer be made to
us, of long LIFE loaded with Infirmities, and the perpetually devoted Prey to
painful, and loathsome Diseases: Who is that Mortal so timid, or such an abject
Slave to the Fears of Death, as to make the Purchase by a single Wish, upon
such humiliating Terms? Who would not rather ardently supplicate, a Release
from such a wretched Existence, than thus drag out a Being, tiresome to
himself, burdensome to his Friends, and nauseous to his Family? While perhaps
his single Petition for Length of Days, is opposed by the fervent Prayers of
Multitudes, for his speedy Exit, and their happy Deliverance from such a
disgusting Mass of Misery? Let those, whose Patience has been tried by
Sickness, whose Bodies have felt the rude Attacks of that MONITOR of MORTALITY,
recall to Mind, the high Valuation they put upon HEALTH, and their eager
Longings after it, while the Scourge of Disease, or Rage of Pain was upon them.
Let them reflect, how much they prized that firm Friend in Adversity, that
faithful Comforter in every Calamity, whenever it has been lost to them. How
feelingly will they then acknowledge, that the Blessings of HEALTH are indeed
inestimable! -- QUEEN OF EVERY JOY! Says ARMSTRONG.
Without thy cheerful, active ENERGY,
No Rapture swells the Breast, no POET sings;
No more the MAIDS of HELICON delight.
Who would not rather embrace Poverty, with HEALTH; than either Grandeur or
Riches with DISEASE? Every Enjoyment of Life, is insipid, without HEALTH. It
may be added, that every Man, besides the Motives which particularly respect
himself, is concerned as a Member of Society, to take Care of his HEALTH; to
enable him to discharge the Duties of his Station. If HEALTH then is so much
preferable to every other earthly Blessing, and gives the only true Relish, for
every social Enjoyment; how ought we to prize that ART, by Means of which this
invaluable BOON is preserved; or recovered to us, when injured, or destroyed?

I shall conclude this Argument with the ingenious DR. GARTH'S Address to
HEALTH.

Hail! BLOOMING GODDESS, Thou PROPITIOUS POWER,
Whose Blessings Mortals more than LIFE implore;
With so much Luster your bright Looks endear,
That Cottages are Courts, when those appear;
Mankind, as you vouchsafe to smile or frown,
Finds EASE in Chains, or ANGUISH in a Crown.
When it is considered, how extensive this SCIENCE is, how many, and how
various are its Objects; can we possibly imagine it to be such a mean
Acquisition, such an easy Attainment, as to be within the Reach of every needy
Trader in PHYSIC, or mercenary Patcher of Cures? Can we suppose, that a Release
from the Importunities of Pain; a Reprieve from the Horrors of the Grave; and a
Restitution to the Blessings of HEALTH, are such contemptible Endowments, as to
be in the Gift of every Adventurer, who takes upon himself to prescribe
Medicines, or to tamper with the Lives of Citizens, as useful to the Community,
as his own is perhaps baneful and pernicious? Equally presumptuous would it be
in any one, to charge himself with the Guidance of a Ship in a Storm, while he
wa^ ignorant of the Use of the Mariner's Compass, and of all her other
necessary Apparel, for the Purposes of Navigation. Yet such too often is the
Infatuation of Mankind, that though they see, and even acknowledge the
Inconsistency of this Conduct, they indolently submit to the Deceit; and
continue to trust their ALL to such Pilots. The vulgar Excuse for the whole
Tribe of IMPOSTORS, whether Medical, or of any other Denomination, is well
known; -- if People will be deceived, say they, let them Si Populus v^lt
decipi, decipiatur.
: Such TENETS very o^viously suit some Characters amongst us; and while the
Cheat is confined to our Money, we may pay that, and perhaps the additional
Tribute of being laughed at: But when LIFE comes to be the Object at Stake; and
perhaps the Well-being, or Existence of a Family dependant upon that LIEE, the
Scene then becomes serious; Imposition here is horrible; and no Necessity,
however painful, can palliate, under these Circumstances, so illiberal and
dishonest a Maxim. Yet many, too many, are the Instances, even in this Place,
of Men otherwise valuable for their Penetration and Good Sense, who have given
up their own Judgments, to the Opinions of the credulous Vulgar; and joining in
the Belief of Nostrums or secret Cures, have countenanced, and even employed
the most obscure and superficial Traders in PHYSIC: While the Practitioner of
Modesty and real Merit, conscious of his own Integrity and Knowledge, and
scorning the little Arts of such licensed Free-booters, and secret Homicides,
or to stoop to the unreasonable Humors or Petulance of every Employer, has
often ha^ very circumscribed Practice; or has been abandoned, in Favor of some
ignorant or mercenary Sycophant. This Conduct in such Men, will ever discourage
genuine Worth, and the Pursuit of farther Discoveries in that useful
Profession; which in all Times, and among all polite Nations, has ever been
esteemed HONORABLE, and worthy of Men of the first Rank and Learning.

Such being the State of PHYSIC here, what Wonder is it that this CITY should
be pestered in so remarkable a Manner, with the needy Outcasts of other Places,
in the Character of Doctors; or that this Profession, of all others, should be
the Receptacle and Common Resource for the Refuse of every other Trade and
Employment? The Wonder indeed is, that we should be such Dupes to their
Effrontery, as to employ them, or buy their pernicious Compositions; not that
they should frequent so beneficial a Market. So amazingly easy of Belief are
some People in these Miracle-Mongers, that, as if there was something creative
in the Name of DOCTOR, seldom any other Test of their Skill is required, than
their assuming that Title: So that this Appellation, with a competent Presence
of Mind, and a String of ready coined ^ures, carefully propagated by such as
find their Account in carrying on the Cheat, have seldom failed of procuring
Traffic in NEW YORK. We are told that the University of TURIN forbids Itinerant
Doctors, to vend Medicines, without a LICENSE from the PROFESSORS of PHYSIC,
under Pain of Death.

We here acknowledge with grateful Respect to the LEGISLATURE of this Province,
that in Consequence of an Application some few Years ago made to them for that
Purpose, they readily passed an ACT for preventing the pernicious, and often
fatal Practices of itinerant Quacks in this CITY! But this ACT, though well
meant, and truly commendable so far as it operates, is evidently inadequate to
remedy all the Mischiefs then complained of; and much less is it calculated to
remove the many others Disadvantages, which the Profession still labors under,
from other Sources. However, from these Beginnings, let us hope that this
infant INSTITUTION, once raised by the kind and fostering Hands of the g^nerous
FRIENDS of SCIENCE; especially such GENTLEMEN as happily have experienced in
themselves, the Benefit and Usefulness of a liberal Education; and cherished by
the more benign Rays of public Favor, will soon be the happy Means of
obviating all such Reproaches for the future, both against this CITY, and the
GENTLEMEN of this FACULTY who shall practice in it. The Uncertainty of forming
an adequate Opinion, of the Abilities and Judgment of such as shall henceforth
practice the HEALING ART among^us, and which has been so frequently and justly
complained of, will now be effectually removed. Every Honor, every Mark or
Title of Distinction, every Reward of Merit which the most celebrated
UNIVERSITIES or COLLEGES in Europe can bestow, may be obtained also in this
COLLEGE; by such Candidates as, by a profitable Application to their Studies, a
diligent Attendance upon the Lectures in the different Branches of Medicine and
a due Proficiency in Medical Knowledge; shall, upon proper and public
Examinations, appear to deserve them.

Before I dismiss this Subject, permit me to add some few Thoughts upon the
relative Duties of PUPILS, PATIENTS, and PHYSICIANS.

No PUPIL ought to apply himself to the Study of PHYSIC, till he has previously
laid the Foundation, in a competent Knowledge of CLASSICAL LEARNING, and some
general Acquaintance with the MATHEMATICS, and NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. No Expense
ought to be put in Balance with the Acquisition of every necessary Branch of
Instruction, to insure a successful Practice. He, who considers how he may go
the cheapest Way to Work, too often purchases the Name, for the Reality; the
Shadow for the Subst^nce: A candid and cursory View of the established
Practitioners here, and in the Country around, will soon convince the most
incredulous, of the Truth of this Observation. As it may be presumed that no
PUPIL puts himself under the Tuition of a Master, but from a Conviction of his
Experience and superior Understanding; he ought therefore to consider himself
as at all Times accountable to his TUTOR in this SCIENCE, not only for the
Progress he makes in his Studies; but also for every other Part of his Conduct,
that can influence his Morals, or affect his Reputation: And to behave to him
on all Occasions, with that Attention and Deference due to a temporary FATHER.
He ought indeed to extend this Respect and Observance, to all in the Character
of MEDICAL MASTERS, though not immediately his own; in Order to conciliate to
himself the Friendship and good Offices of every established Practitioner, who
can any Way contribute to his Instruction and Improvement, by Precept or
Example.

It may appear ostentatious, to give Instructions how a PATIENT ought to
behave, with Respect to his PHYSICIAN: But when it is considered, that both are
only as Assistants, contributing their mutual Endeavors to relieve or support
Nature, as the Principal; and that the Reputation of the PHYSICIAN often
suffers by the Indiscretion or Obstinacy of the PATIENT; some Advice on that
Head may not be altogether improper. I shall now only observe, that a PATIENT
ought to be extremely cautious to whom he commits the Care of his HEALTH; but
when he has once fixed upon this his Friend and Counselor in Distress, he
ought to receive his Visits with that warm Welcome, and his Advice with that
Deference and implicit Obedience, becoming the Importance of the Trust reposed
in him. A Want of Confidence in the PATIENT, naturally begets Disgust or
Neglect in the PHYSICIAN; and it must ever be disadvantageous, and sometimes
hazardous for Valetudinarians to change the PHYSICIAN, who has studied their
Constitutions, in all their Peculiarities; for one who is an entire Stranger to
them. It is for this Reason, that among PHYSICIANS of equal Merit, CELSUS
advises to prefer the FRIEND Ideo-qu^ cum par Scientia fit, utiliorem, tam^n
MEDICUM e^^e AMICUM, q^am Extraneum.
. A PHYSICIAN cannot be sp^nsible either for his Advice or Prescriptions,
unless, not only the Patient, but the Persons also about him, religiously
observe his Directions. Though the Lot of Mortality is such, that the best
PHYSICIAN cannot always be successful; yet even when he fails of his
Expectations, his Care and assiduous Endeavors to restore Health, ought at
least to be remembered with Gratitude. But when he happily obtains his Purpose;
when the late languishing Patient, is at last snatched from the Grasp of the
Grim Tyrant, and relieved from the Loathsomeness of a Sick Bed; a Retrospect of
that dreary and perilous Gulp^ he has just passed, compared with the joyous
Sensations of HEALTH regained, should be the Measure of his Return for Services
performed, and now no longer wanted.

Manifold and important are the Duties of the PHYSICIAN. Every PRACTITIONER who
charges himself with the Instruction of Youth, should be cautious of setting
them any Example, he would not wish them to follow. He ought to conceal Nothing
from them in the Way of his Business, which it imports them to know; unless
where his own Honor is engaged to keep it secret. He should always readily and
with Complacence answer their Questions, and solve such Doubts as occur in
their Reading, or in the Course of his Practice; and in Terms suited to their
Understandings. He ought so to watch over their Studies and Conduct, as well
knowing that the Success or Reputation of the Pupil in Life, may ultimately
reflect Honor or Reproach upon the MASTER. A PHYSICIAN ought to visit his
Patients frequently; and to be minutely attentive to every Thing respecting
them, by which their HEALTH may be affected. He ought to be patient to bear;
and never ashamed of informing himself, even by the meanest People, of Remedies
confirmed by Experience. Let it be remembered also by the PHYSICIAN who does
not administer his own Medicines, that according to the STATUTES of the COLLEGE
of SALERNUM, he ought to be obliged to swear, that he shall have no Share of
Gains with the Apothecary; as the Apothecary, by the same STATUTES, was to take
an Oath, that he would make up his Medicines faithfully, according to the
Prescriptions given him. A prudent PHYSICIAN will never presumptuously warrant
the Success of his Prescriptions; as Experience must have taught him, that the
minutest Circumstances will cause a Variation in the Distemper, either as to
Danger or Duration. He ought to be decent in his Appearance; discreet in his
Manners; cautious in his Expressions; modest and circumspect in his Questions
to his Patients; many of which may often with greater Propriety be proposed to
their Attendants. He should be moderate in all his Actions; yet always ready to
do his Duty, without disconcerting himself. He ought to be humane, and
compassionate; no Talebearer, but secret; no rude Dogmatist, but affable and
polite: In short, all the Qualifications of the HEAD and HEART, becoming the
Character of a GENTLEMAN, are indispensably required to constitute the
PHYSICIAN of Merit, who would secure the Esteem of his Patients, do Honor to
himself, or Support the Dignity of his Profession. If it is commendable in him
to collect Information from every one; he cannot surely, when consistent with
the Duty he owes himself, refuse to consult with other respectable
Practitioners, in every Case of Sickness, upon what can be done for the Benefit
of the Patient. As the humane PHYSICIAN prefers the Welfare of his Patient, and
his own Success in Practice, to every Consideration which Pride or Avarice can
suggest; he will not only with Alacrity join in such CONSULTATIONS, when
requested to it, but solicit them occasionally, as an Indulgence and Relief to
himself: Whereas a contrary Conduct can only proceed from sordid Motives, or
the Dread of having his Ignorance or Mal-Practice exposed, to those who only
can judge of them. He ought to be extremely cautious of decrying the Advice or
Opinions of others, either by open Censure, or private Innuend^s: The former
too often proceeds from Rusticity of Manners; the latter always from interested
Views, or a dishonest Heart. But the significant Shrug, the solemn Shake of the
H^ad, the affected Stare of Surprise, the studied Silence of ill dissembled
Doubts; in short, the insidious Show of good Nature, the subtle and designing
Delicacy of those, who -- Willing to wound, but yet afraid to strike,
Just hint a Fault, and hesitate Dislike;
POPE. are the mean ARTS of needy Pilferers of Fame, and of Spirits poor
indeed. To vaunt of extraordinary Cures, before such as are not competent
Judges, or incapable of inquiring into the Circumstances of them, may justly
render the Belief of them at least doubtful. An Ostentation of LEARNING in
common Discourse, even when his Profession is the Subject, is not always a
Proof of it; on the contrary, to be unable to convey his Sentiments, without
having Recourse to numerous Terms of Art, is generally a Proof of contracted
Ideas, and a narrow Understanding. The Man of real Knowledge is generally
modest, often diffident, always easy and happy in his Choice of Words, and
never loquacious: While the self-sufficient Pretender, like the babbling
shallow STREAM, is ever noisy, froward, and petulant. A PHYSICIAN ought
frequently to revise the different Subjects even of his youthful STUDIES, in
order to run off the Rust of Memory, and render him more habile in Argument, as
well as clear and distinct in Consultations. Every Book upon the Subject of
Medicine, which affords good Observations in Practice, which gives a
Description of any new Distemper, or a new Method of Cure in an old One, or
some remarkable Case, deserves to be looked into, by those who would make the
proper Advantage of other Men's Experience. Perhaps it would be no absolute
Paradox, to say with the learned DR. FRIEND, that a very indifferent
Performance in PHYSIC, may now and then at least be worth the cur^^^y Perusal
of a PHYSICIAN; both as it employs his Thoughts his own Way; and as it must, in
the Course of Reading, give him constant Hints, how far, and in what Manner,
this or that Particular relating to THEORY or MEDICINE may be improved: And
even sometimes might start an Occasion, of striking out Something new of his
own.

One Thing more is seriously recommended to those Gentlemen in Practice, whose
Judgment and Experience in the Diseases of this Country, may have enabled them
to undertake the Task: That they would not only study and improve upon the
Observations of those who have gone before them, but also collect others for
their own Use, and the Benefit of their Successors. The various Changes which
are continually happening in the State of PHYSIC, make this necessary. For
there are many Diseases now existing, which were entirely unknown to the
Ancients: The Names both of Diseases and Drugs, by Custom, are differently
applied; Improvements and Discoveries are daily made; Medicines in the highest
Reputation at one Time, are laid aside, and other substituted in their Place;
and the Forms and Manners of using those retained, are perpetually diversified.
Besides, the PHYSICIANS of this Country have still more forcible Reasons, for
imparting to the World, such Medical Remarks as may seem instructive or
uncommon: For our Climate, Way of Living, and other Circumstances, which ought
always to be regarded in the Treatment of Diseases, are so very different from
those of the Countries, whence the most useful and judicious Observations are
transmitte^ to us; that the young Practitioners of this Continent must be under
the greatest Difficulties, to accommodate those foreign Observations, by which
they must necessarily at first be directed, to the Constitutions and Complaints
of their Country Men. Such a Collection would not only tend to the Benefit of
Mankind in general, but would greatly redound also to the Honor of the
Profession in America.

As there are many ingenious Men, who may have neither Leisure nor Inclination
to appear in Print, and much less to write a Volume, who yet could communicate
very useful Observations, if they had an Opportunity of doing it in a concise
Treatise, and without Trouble; therefore it is justly remarked, that Nothing
has of late Years so much contributed to the Advancement of Learning in
general, and to the Improving of this Profession in particular, as the
Institution of SOCIETIES, or those well regulated ASSOCIATIONS of GENTLEMEN,
who collect, examine, and publish whatever instructive Remarks or Essays are
laid before them, according to their several Merits. Besides, there are some
other particular Advantages, resulting from MEDICAL SOCIETIES to PRACTITIONERS
themselves, as well as to young STUDENTS, and the PUBLIC. For there, different
Opinions and Modes of Practice are examined; Experiments are there directed, or
critically weighed, and applied: Dangerous and extraordinary Cases are
frequently stated and considered, in such SOCIETIES: And there Advice is asked
and given, with that Openess and mutual Confidence becoming FRIENDS, not less
zealous for the Honor of their Profession, than attentive to the Reputation of
each other: While every Member cheerfully contributes his Assistance, to the
Recovery or Relief of such Patients, as are the Subjects of these
CONSULTATIONS. And permit me to add, as one of many Instances of the Utility of
these SOCIETIES, that whatever Merit there is in this present INSTITUTION, it
was first planned and concluded upon, in a MEDICAL SOCIETY now subsisting in
this Place; and MAY IT LONG SUBSIST.

The following Anecdotes were inadvertently omitted, till that Part of the
Impression, which treats of the State of MEDICINE among the Romans, was cast
off. But as I cannot in Justice to my Subject, pass over a Piece of History,
which does so much Honor to the PROFESSION, I must beg Leave to give it here
more at large, though it has already in Part been noticed.

Whatever Discouragements this SCIENCE labored under, in the Time of the Roman
Republic; they were amply compensated by the Honors conferred upon the
FACULTY, by most of their Emperors. The Title of ARCHIATER is found in several
Roman Laws, and in old Authors: Some interpret it (...), Princeps Medicorum, or
CHIEF of PHYSICIANS: Others explain it, (...), Imperatoris Medicus, or
PHYSICIAN to the PRINCE; because we read of no ARCHIATRI before the Days of the
Roman Emperors: The first Interpretation is preferable, because we read of
Theon and Glaucus, ARCHIATRI of Alexandria; and of Cyrus ARCHIATER of Edessa,
though there were then no Sovereign Princes in these Cities. We find ARCHIATRI
also in Constantinople, and in their Provinces of the East, as well as at Rome;
for Oribasius tells us, that Julian assembled all the ARCHIATRI of the Country,
and selected 72 of those he thought most learned; of which Number Oribasius
himself was one. The 14 PHYSICIANS appointed to attend the Sick, in the 14
different Wards of Rome, were called ARCHIATRI: They had Salaries from the
Prince, and visited all Roman Subjects, whither Rich or Poor, without Fees;
except what the Patient's Generosity should prompt him to bestow, after he was
cured: They enjoyed certain Immunities, which could not be claimed by other
Subjects; as, that they, with their Wives and Children, were exempted from all
the Taxes and Burdens of the State; that such as resided in the Provinces were
not obliged to quarter Soldiers, or any other Persons; that they could not be
taken Prisoners, or dragged to the Bar; nor obliged to make a personal
Appearance before the Judge; and that none might insult them, without incurring
the severest Penalties. The LAW which ordains this, seems to extend these
Privileges to all the PHYSICIANS of the Empire; but a subsequent LAW restrains
them to the ARCHIATRI of Rome.

The ARCHIATRI both of Rome and Constantinople were divided into two Classes:
The First were called ARCHIATRI SACRI PALATII INTRA PENETRALIA REGALIS AULAE
FLORENTES, or CHIEF PHYSICIANS who composed Part of the Princes private Family;
and who were always employed about his Person and Court. The others were those
of the City and Country, called ARCHIATRI POPULARES; who attended the
Inhabitants in general, or whoever would employ them. The ARCHIATRI of the
PALACE were again divided into two Ranks, called COMITES ARCHIATRORUM SACRI
PALATII of the first or second Rank; according to the Degree of Confidence
reposed by the Prince in their Skill and Abilities. Those of the first Rank
were equal in Dignity to their Vicarii and Duces, and addressed by the Epithet
(spectabilis) RESPECTABLE; they were by their Office, COMITES CONSISTORII, or
COUNSELORS of STATE; and were next in Honor to the (illustres) ILLUSTRIOUS,
or first Officers of the Empire. These COMITES always attended the Emperor's
Person, whence is derived the Name COMES, a comm^ando, or comitando; and is the
Latin Word to express ^he Title of EAR^ in Britain, of COUN^ in Italy and
France, and of GRA^^ (...) Germany.
; and being entrusted with the Care of his Health, they had Access to him at
all Times. The ARCHIATRI POPULARES were also divided into two Classes: The
first was of those appointed to reside in provincial Cities and Towns, in
Proportion to their Extent, and Number of Inhabitants: The other Class was of
such, as having been examined agreeable to the LAWS, had been newly admitted
into that Order.

This Office of SOVEREIGN PHYSICIAN must have been instituted under the first
Emperors: The Title of ARCHIATER, first used by Andromachus, PHYSICIAN to Nero,
is of the same Import. An ancient Inscription mentions a PRESIDENT of
PHYSICIANS (Superpositus Medicorum) in the Time of Vespasian. We read of
several ARCHIATR^ in the succeeding Reigns: And in the 4th Century,
Vindicianus, in a Letter to Valentinian, styles himself COMES ARCHIATRORUM. We
find in Galen, that the Temple of P^^^^ was at first, the usual Place of Resort
for all the STUDIOUS and LEARNED, where PHYSICIANS too deposited their Books,
as in a Place of Safety; till it was destroyed by Fire. In the Atheneum, a
COLLEGE built by Adrian expressly for the Advancement of the ARTS and SCIENCES,
PHYSICIANS had their Places of Meeting: The Emperor Severus also assigned them
particular Chambers or Apartments; after which, we read of their SECRETARIES
and LIBRARIANS. But under the later Emperors, there was a COLLEGE of ARCHIATRI,
composed of a certain Number of PHYSICIANS, who took their Places, according to
the Dates of their Admission; so that when any of them died, the Person chosen
to succeed, was lowest of all. This COLLEGE judged of the Capacity of
Candidates, and chose, or rejected them accordingly; and the Emperors always
confirmed those who were elected. This is probably that SCHOOL of PHYSICIANS,
in the Quarter of Rome called Esquilia, which according to Mercurialis, was
ornamented with many fine Statues.

After the Subversion of the Roman Empire in Italy, the Gothic Kings introduced
a great Change in this MEDICAL DIGNITY; for instead of several COMITES, they
appointed one COMES ARCHIATRORUM, or SOVEREIGN PHYSICIAN, who had a certain
Jurisdiction over all of that Denomination, and over all the PHYSICIANS of the
State. The Powers of this NOBLE ARCHIATER were very extensive; as we learn from
a Clause in the FORMULA of his Installment; preserved by Cassiodorus, Secretary
to Theodoric in the 6th Century, viz. Henceforth we confer upon you, the
Dignity of COMES of the ARCHIATRI, that you may ALONE be distinguished among
the GUARDIANS of HEALTH; and that all who shall have Disputes respecting
MEDICINE, may submit to your Determination. Be thou the ARBITER of this SACRED
ART, and the sole JUDGE of those Controversies, which were formerly decided by
Caprice or Prejudice. You will in Effect cure the Sick, by putting an End to
those Contests, which are injurious to them. GREAT is your DIGNITY, to rule and
direct Men of Learning and Skill; and to be HONORED by those, who themselves
are HONORABLE in the Eyes of all. After the 6th Century, the Destruction of
BOOKS by the northern Barbarians, involved MEDICINE and the other SCIENCES in
the same Fate. Some Vestiges of them, during this Eclipse of Learning, were
probably preserved at Salernum; for we find different Praeceptors established
there, about the End of the 8th Century. May not the illustrious and noble NAME
of DE MEDICIS, be originally derived from the DIGNIFIED PHYSICIANS above
mentioned; or from such as had formerly followed this PROFESSION? We find James
de Medicis PRESIDENT of a Council at Orvietto, in the Year 1030: Anselmo de
Medicis defended Alexandria against the Emperor Friderick ^^^barossa, in 1162:
And there is a Marble Monument erected in a Church of Florence, to Anthony de
Medicis, second Son of the Grand Duke, who in the 17th Century practiced
PHYSIC there, with great Reputation.

With Respect to this OFFICE of ARCHIATER, we shall farther observe, that it
was an early Institution among the Franks; for we find in a cotemporary Author,
that Marileifus was CHIEF of PHYCIANS to Chilperic, in the 6th Century: And
other Writers tell us, that it thereafter was endowed with great Privileges;
as, that he had Access to the KING at all Times, even when in Bed; that he
ranked with, and wore the same Robes as a COUNSELOR of STATE; that he
superintended the King's Baths, and licensed all Mineral Springs; that he had 8
Substitutes who attended the Court by Turns, and who visited those who had
been, or were to be touched for the King's Evil; and that he was every where
treated by all of the FACULTY, with the Respect due to a SUPERIOR. Mons.
Bourdelot is designed COUNSELOR and PHYSICIAN in ORDINARY to Lewis the GREAT.

Both the Office and Title of ARCHIATER have been instituted ^n Muscovy: He is
CHIEF PHYSICIAN to the Court, and of all the Russia's; with the Powers of
conferring Degrees in MEDICINE, and of licensing APOTHECARIES. This DIGNITY was
very lately enjoyed by a Native of Great Britain, who resided long in Russia.

It would be unnecessary to enlarge upon the many HONORS and REWARDS bestowed
upon MEDICAL MERIT, in the other Kingdoms of Europe. The ESTIMATION this
SCIENCE is every where held in, may generally be judged of, by that of the
other Branches of USEFUL and POLITE LEARNING.

I shall now conclude, with my warmest and most sincere Wishes for the lasting
Prosperity of this COLLEGE; for the Happiness of all who are any Ways
interested in its Welfare and Reputation, whether distinguished as GOVERNORS,
TEACHERS, PUPILS, or FRIENDS: And more particularly for the Success of this
present INSTITUTION; that it may prove an ORNAMENT to this CITY, an HONOR to
the COUNTRY, and the NURSERY of MEN of GENIUS, whose Labors, ever useful,
shall be transmitted with undiminished Praise, to the latest Times, in the
Records of LITERATURE, and Annals of PHYSIC: Whose Pride it shall be, to have
been formed to SCIENCE within these WALLS; and whose Names shall receive
additional Luster, from the wide -- extended Fame, and merited Renown of this
UNIVERSITY.

FINIS.

