A STATE OF THE IMPORTATIONS FROM GREAT BRITAIN Into the Port of BOSTON, From
the beginning of Jan. 1769, to Aug. 17th 1769.

With the Advertisements of a Set of Men who assumed to themselves the TITLE of
"ALL THE WELL DISPOSED MERCHANTS," Who entered into a SOLEMN AGREEMENT, (as
they called it) Not to import GOODS from Britain, and who undertook to give a
"TRUE ACCOUNT" of what should be imported by other Persons.

The whole taken from the Boston Chronicle, in which the following Papers were
first published.

BOSTON: Printed by MEIN and FLEEMING, 1769.

IT may be necessary to inform the Public, that the reason for beginning (...)
publications, were some Votes passed at a meeting of the Well Disposed, Friday
August 11th, 1769, which were printed in the Boston Gazette, and Boston Evening
Post of Monday, August 14th, and the Massachusetts Gazette of August 17th, in
one of which Votes, my name was inserted; for this piece, see Pages 2, 3. in
this collection, which occasioned the Reply that immediately follows it, dated
August 17th. The animadversions which accompanied the several Manifests, were
published in answer to the gross abuse thrown out by the "Well Disposed;" for
when they found they were detected, not daring to argue, they were very lavish
of scurrillity. The "Well Disposed" were likewise at the greatest pains to
prejudice me in my several branches of business, as Bookseller, Stationer,
Bookbinder and Printer, by sending to the Select-men of every Town in the
Province, as they mentioned at one of their Meetings, not to deal with me; and
also, by applying particularly to the persons who dealt with me both in town
and country. In the course of the following papers, I have not considered the
affair of Non-Importation in a political light, it has only been my business to
show the partiality and malice of the "Well Disposed" against me, some of their
Importations being Fifty times the value of mine, and to show, that however
ready they were to enter into a solemn agreement, they were as ready to forget
they had signed such an agreement.

JOHN MEIN,

Copy of the agreement entered into by the Merchants and Traders, August 1768.
THE merchants and traders in the town of Boston having taken into
consideration the deplorable situation of the trade, and the many difficulties
it at present labors under, on account of the scarcity of money, which is
daily increasing for want of the other remittances to discharge our debt^in
Great Britain, and the large sums collected by the officers of the customs for
duties on goods imported; the heavy taxes levied to discharge the debts
contracted by the government in the late war; the trade by several late acts of
parliament; together with the bad success of our ^od fishery this season, and
the discouraging prospect of the whale fishery, by which our principal sources
of remittance are like to be greatly diminished, and we thereby rendered unable
to pay the debts we owe the merchants in Great Britain, and to continue the
importation of goods from thence.

We the subscribers in order to relieve the trade under those discouragements,
to promote industry, frugality and economy, and to discourage luxury, and
every kind of extravagance, do promise and engage to and with each other as
follows*

First, That we will not send for or import from Great Britain, either upon our
own account, or upon commission, this fall, any other goods than what are
already ordered for the fall supply.

Secondly, That we will not send for or import any kind of goods or merchandise
from Great Britain, either on our own account, or on commissions, or any
otherwise, from the 1 st of January 1769, to the 1 st of January 1770. EXCEPT
Salt, Coals, Fish-Hooks, Lines, Hemp, Duck, Bar-Lead, Shot, Wool-Cards, and
Card-Wire.


Thirdly, That we will not purchase of any factor, or others, any kinds of
goods imported from Great Britain, from Jan. 1769, to Jan. 1770.

Fourthly, That we will not import, on our own account, or on commission, or
purchase of any who shall import from any other Colony in America, from January
1769, to Jan. 1770, any Tea, Glass, Paper, (...) other goods commonly imported
from Gr. Britain.

Fifthly, That we will not, from and after the 1 st of January 1769, import
into this province any Tea, Paper, Glass, or Painters colors until the act
(...) duties on those articles shall be repealed.

In witness whereof, we have hereunto set our hands, this first day of August,
1768.

The merchants and traders in Boston, are desired to meet at Faneuil Hall
tomorrow, being Friday, the 21st April; at 4 o'clock P. M. solve business of
the greatest importance being to be laid before them. -- It is hoped there will
be a general meeting.

[In consequence of which Notification,]

The merchants and traders of this town, met on Friday last, and appointed a
committee consisting of seven gentlemen, to examine the manifests of the
cargoes of the vessels lately arrived or that may arrive this spring from any
parts of Great Britain, and to take such other steps as they may think
necessary to determine, whether there have been any goods imported contrary to
the late agreement of the merchants, and by whom, and report at the adjournment
of this meeting. And also, to make enquiry, whether any goods contrary to said
agreement have been imported from the other colonies, and by whom, and to make
report of the same also at the adjournment. -- The merchants meeting stands
adjourned to Thursday the 27th instant.

THE Merchants and Traders in the Town of BOSTON, at a Meeting in August last,
having entered into an agreement not to send for, or import any goods from
Great Britain nor to purchase any that should be imported from thence, or from
any of the Colonies, from January 1769, to January 1770, and similiar
agreements having been come into by the Merchants and Traders in other towns in
this province, and at New York: -- The adhering to which being strongly
recommended by our friends in Great Britain, as the most likely method to
obtain a redress of the difficulties that trade labors under, and a number of
vessels having lately arrived from Great Britain, it was thought advisable to
call another meeting of the Merchants* which was held at Faneuil Hall, the 21st
ult^^ when a Committee was chose to examine the manifests of said vessels
cargoes, and to report if any goods were imported contrary to said agreement,
and by whom: Accordingly the Committee proceeded on that business, and by their
report at the adjournment it appeared that the whole of the goods imported in
said vessels contrary to said agreement amounted to a very inconsiderable sum.
-- That only six persons out of the two hundred and eleven who were signers,
were among the importers, who through inattention had omitted to countermand
their orders: but all of them readily and of their own motion agreed to deliver
up the goods to be disposed of as the Committee should direct. -- That the
gentlemen who declined signing the agreement had in general conformed
themselves to it. -- That as to those who had imported in the ships lately
arrived* their importations were very small, and consisted principally of duck
and such other articles as were not contrary to the agreement, except six or
seven persons whose importations appeared to be as usual: -- It likewise
appeared that a quantity of goods had been imported from New York, since the
first of January ^^st.

The Merchants having considered this report, voted, that the articles of their
agreement, should be printed in the public papers, and so that all concerned
might the more readily recur to the same, and thereby avoid for the future the
importing any goods contrary to the said agreement: They, at the same time
voted unanimously strictly to adhere to the same: and further agreed not to
purchase (...) goods of any persons who lately have, or ^ay import any articles
from Great Britain or from any of the colonies contrary to said agreement.

BOSTON, AUGUST 14, 1769.
THE Merchants of this town met on the 26th of July last? The resolutions they
then passed have been already published -- since which they have met several
times, and received and acted upon the reports of several Committes; some
persons who had heretofore refused to join in the Agreement for Non-Importation
appeared and signed to the Agreement -- Those of the^ who had Imported a few
Articles, in the vessels lately arrived, delivered them to the Committee
appointed ^o receive all such Articles, and others who expect Goods the ensuing
fall, agreed to deliver them up as soon as they are arrived, particularly,
Jonathan Simpson, Esquire: Mr. William Jackson, Mr. Samuel Fletcher, Mr. John
Tailor, and M^ssieures James and Robert Selkrig, who have hitherto been viewed
by the public as Importers, have acceded to the Agreement, and are now to be
considered as Non-Importers, and are accordingly entitled to the favor of the
Public. -- Some others, who though they have not imported contrary to the
general sense of the trade, yet have hitherto not seen their way clear to sign
said Agreement, have now joined the Merchants in this salutary measure. -- The
meetings were large, and there appeared the greatest harmony and union among
the Merchants in all their proceedings. Their conduct was spirited, and
discovered that they were determined faithfully to observe and firmly to adhere
to their Agreement; and that they were resolutely bent upon pursuing every
legal method to guard against, and defeat any attempts that may be made, by
those who were inimical to us, to render the same ineffectual. -- At the
Meetings above mentioned, a number of Votes were passed, and the following were
ordered to be published.

At a Meeting of the Merchants at Faneuil-Hall, August 11, 1769.
WHERE AS all the Well Disposed Merchants, not only of this, but of almost
every Province through the Continent, have entered into an Agreement not to
Import any Goods (some few necessary articles excepted) from Great Britain and
it evidently appeared from the latest advices from our most judicious firmest
and best friends in England, that a strict adherence to, and perseverence in
said agreement, is the most effectual method of obtaining the redress of our
gri^vances the removal of the difficulties under which the commerce of North
America at present labors, and of preserving our invaluable rights, liberties,
and privileges:

VOTED, That such persons as have imported, and continue to import directly or
indirectly, any articles restricted by the agreement above refered to, and
still refuse to join their fellow citizens in so salutary a measure, and
thereby counter-act their generous efforts, ungratefully take an advantage of
those who are sacrificing their private interest to the good of the public, and
at the same time, that they discover a total disregard to the liberty and
welfare of their country, manifest an unwarrentable, base and sordid attah^^ut
to themselves, and their own private concerns; and by continuing their
importations, are conducting in such a manner as will directly and evidently
tend to the great discouragement and real damage of trade; and to defeat the
noble exertation of our friends, and strengthen the hands of our enemies, and
if after the mild treatment they have met with, and the pains that has been
taken to convince them of the utillity and necessity of so salutary measure,
they should persist in importing they must be considered as enemies to the
constitution of their country; and must expect that those who have any regard
for it, will endeavor in every constitutional way to prevent their building
themselves up upon the ruin of their Fellow Citizens.

Voted, That from a regard to our country, a concern for posterity, and in
justice to ourselves, we will not purchase any articles of such persons as
import contrary to the agreement aforesaid* and that a true list of their names
be published in the Newspapers, that we may have the concurrence of every
person on this Continent who has the public welfare at heart, in rendering
their base and dangerous designs abortive. Therefore,

Voted, That the names of the following persons be inserten in the
Public-papers as IMPORTERS contrary to the Agreement of the Merchants, viz.

VOTED, That Mr. Cyrus Baldwin, Mr. Gilbert Deblois, and Mr. John Av^ry, j^n.
be a Committee to prepare an agreement for the Ve^due Masters in this Town to
sign, restricting them from s^lling either publicly or privately, any Goods
that have been or may be imported contrary to the Agreement of the Merchants,
and the Committee be and hereby are directed to publish in the Newspapers, the
Names of such as refuse to sign the same; And if any person or persons shall
take the advantage of this Restriction, and establish a new Office or Offices
for the sale of such Good, that they be waited upon by the Committee to sign
the Agreement before mentioned: and on their refusal, that their names be
likewise published.

To the PUBLIC,
MY NAME being inserted in the above Advertisement, the purpose of which is
sufficiently evident, and published on Monday August 14th 1769, in the
Massachusetts Gazette or Boston-Postboy, printed by J. Green and J. Russell, in
the Boston Evening Post, printed by T. and J. Fleet, in the Boston Gazette or
Country Journal, printed by Edes and Gill, in the Massachusetts Gazette or
Boston News-Letter of this day, printed by R. Draper, and in the Essex Gazette
of the 15th of August, printed by Samuel Hall in Salem; I have thought it
necessary, for the information of the public, and out of regard to my
character, to enter upon my own vindication.

Every individual has a natural right to defend (...) and reputation, and in
society to act (...) ^^^edom under obedience to the Laws; I shall therefore
attend these "WELL DISPOSED MERCHANTS," as they call themselves, through the
whole course of their transactions and the whole tenor of their conduct, being
fortunately possessed of proper materials and authorities for accomplishing
this undertaking, which though laborious will afford matter of great curiosity,
and I hope will prove of singular utility to the public, by opening a view into
the behavior of these "Well Disposed" Gentlemen.

In pursuance of this task, I shall present ^acts, not offer conjectures; and
as I have taken up the pen, not with an intention to injure, but to vindicate
and correct, the public shall find me decent and candid, but not on that
account, le^s resolute and persevering. To render this address useful to the
Gentlemen themselves, it shall ^e my care to collect (...) features of their
actions, which I earnestly recommend to them to ^^^sure up as a precious
record, and when, i^ future, they feel themselves disposed to engage in any
affair of importance, I give i^ a my best advice, that they ought to read this
publication with the most diligent attention, as it will certainly operate
effectually as a p^^^^^vative against the further commission (...) -- * It is
not their (...) but their reformation I fervently wish, (...) ^owever "well
disposed" they may have shown themselves to injure my. -- I therefore bespeak
the candor* the patience, and the attention of the public with whose
countenance and favor I have been so often and so greatly indulged, and o^
which my heart shall ever retain the most grateful remembrance.

In my various Occupations I daily suppor^ no less than seventeen People,
fourteen of whom live under my own roof, the greatest part of these must have
been turned off destitute, o^ have been supported in idleness, had I signed the
Agreement. With regard to the consumption of articles manufactured here, I have
within little more than two years, being the time since I commenced Printer,
purchase^ PAPER, for the Printing Business made (...) Milton, to the value of
between three and four hundred Pounds lawful Money; and I would have purchased
to double the amount, if the Makers could have supplied me. And in particular,
very lately, I wanted to agree with them for paper to the value of upwards
three hundred pounds lawful money, on purpose (...) reprint here, a work, the
production of the most excellent writer now existing, in which order,
government and civil society are trea^ed from the first dawnings of light, till
the advanced to the full splendour of day. -- A work which could hardly fail of
meeting with a favorable reception among a liberal people, whose ^ourses of
instruction ought to equal their thirst for knowledge.

In the BOOKBINDING TRADE, in which I have always four or five People
constantly employed, to the Foreman of whom I pay yearly in Cash Sixty nine
Pounds Six shillings and Eight Pence Lawful money: and in which business I do
not use materials to the value of twenty Pounds Lawful through the whole year
that is not manufactured in this Province.

As to my BUSINESS of BOOKSELLING, the necessity that a people eager after
learning, and possessed of all the natural endowments of genius and parts
requisite to its attainment, are under, of purchasing Books for the education
of youth, for instruction in the arts, sciences and learned professions,
renders their importation not only necessary, but laudable.

Having now given my reasons for declining to sign the Agreement concerning
Non-Importation, which I hope will appear justifiable in the eye of the public;
I now think it my duty to review the conduct of The "well disposed merchants"
and in order to show that I sincerely wish to do them all justice, I shall
print v^rbation their Agreement of August 1768, with their notifications and
advertisements to June 1st 1769, on which day, the snow Pit, Capt. Tapscot,
entered at the Cu^^om house here, from Bristol in England, exactly ten months
after the agreement was signed.

The following manifest, and some others which will be speedily published, with
the many respectable names in them, will best show the truth of their
assertion, that the non-importation Agreement was generaly conformed to, and
that the importation were trifling. -- It must likewise be proper to inform the
public, that upwards of Thirty Vessels have arrived in this port from
Great Britain since January 1st 1769, and that ^e exact account of their
cargoes, shall be published in the course of this paper. -- The one now
published, is all at present that the attention due to my other avocations,
would me allow time to prepare for the inspection of the public.

I entreat "THE WELL DISPOSED MERCHANTS" carfully to peruse the above Manifest,
and recommend it in a partlicular manner to the attention of their Chairman,
who may be a very good Distiller of Rum, for any thing I know, but who has no
title to be called a Merchant, and he never had any concern in importing Goods
from Britain that I can learn.

JOHN MEIN.

Manifest of the Cargo of the Snow Pit, Willian Tapscott, Master from Bristol,
taken from the Cockets and Manifest sworn to by the Master, June 13* 1769.
Marks, Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. A. B. 24 boxes English
white tin-plate containing 5400 with. Timothy Newell Boston 3 bundles wrought
iron 300 with. J. R. Army 1 to 1^ 12 bales (b) blankets, (...). John Row ditto
J. R. 1 to 24 24 casks SHOT 1 to 3 (...) hogsheads LINES G. E. 1 to 4 4 casks
B^^r George Erving ditto 1 ^^^^ ditto (...) 1 (...) Irish linen (...) p^.
498is. J. W. S. (...) (...) cask Wrought Iron James Warden Boston B. G. 1 to 4
1 box (a) Rufus Green ditto 1 box Brass Manufactory 2 bales (b) W. C. 1^ 1
hogshead Refined Sugar William Coffin, jun. ditto A. A. 15 to 21 6 casks
Wrought Iron Dan. and W. Hubbard ditto 16 1 che^t (d) 1 to 12 12 casks Nails S.
A. 3 Anvils 1, 2 2 sheets LEAD 1, 2 2 casks SHOT 40 bars LEAD 6 bundles Steel
(...) box (c) 1 box (b) (...) casks LINES 3 boxes Glass Ware 3 boxes Glass E.
G. 24 half boxes Glass Elbridge Gerry 1 bale (b) S. G. 1 to 5 5 casks Nails Dr.
Sylv. Gardner Boston 3 half boxes Glass (...) in a diamond. 30 half boxes Glass
Nathaniel Rogers ditto 15 sides Glass W. S. 1 to 4 4 bales Bounty Irish Linen
^08 pieces 7109 yards William Scott ditto 5 1 box Irish linen 57 pieces 14^1
yards 6 1 cask Iron Ware 7 1 box Ribbons 8 1 cask Beer E. B. 1, 3 2 casks
Wrought Iron Thomas Russell, Charleston 4 1 cask Pewter 2 1 cask SHOT 12 boxes
Tin plates TR. 10 boxes Tin plates* A. 1 box British (...) 50 pieces 1208 yards
C. F. 1 1 truss (f) Constant Freeman, Boston 2 1 box (g) A. B. 1 to 6 16 casks
Chees^ Andrew Brimmer, ditto 1 to 4 4 boxes Pipes 3e S (...) 1 to 3 3 casks
John ^^tler ditto 1 bag (h) 1 bell ID with a diamond 15 1 box Ir. lin. 10 ps.
246 yds. Elisha Deane Cape Cod 16, 17 2 bales Worsted stuffs 3 bundles Scyths
10 boxes Glass 1, 2 2 casks Nails 1 box Buttons (...). F. 1 to 47 47 casks
Nails The name blotted and to order written over it Boston 40 bars LEAD 48 to
52 5 casks SHOT 40 half fagots Steel 53 to 58 6 casks Brass manufactory 60 to
63 4 casks Pe^ter 1 to 2 2 boxes Pins 59 1 hogshead 20 dozen Felt Hats 64 1
hogshead Pewter 56 half boxes Glass Y in a dim. 1 to 50 50 half boxes Glass
Blank in the Manifest F. x L. 1 to 40 40 casks Nails To Order 4 bundles Pans 2
hogsheads Wrought Iron 1 barrel ditto 1 60 sheets Ralph Inman, Boston 4 cases
50 Cwt. British unwrought copper 4 bottoms NSparhawk 1 cask Bottled Beer N.
Sparhawk, Esquire Kittery J. Royal 1 cask Bottled Beer Blank Medford CN in a
diamond. 16 bars LEAD Clark and Nightengale, (Providen^^^ 1 to 2 2 casks SHOT 6
bundles Steel 23 1 cask Pewter 16 qrt. boxes Glass 8 half boxes ditto 1 to ^3
23 casks Nails J. S. R. 1 to 15 15 casks LEAD Jos. Rotch and son Dartmouth 2
casks SHOT 80 bars LEAD 16, 17 50 qr. boxes Glass 11 to 15 Side Glass T. R. M.
1 to 14 14 casks Nails Thomas Robie 20 1 cask Nails J. H. 1 1 cask Spades Welsh
Milkenson and Company, Order 4 bundles P. F. 1 to 10 10 casks Nails Peter Frye
16 bars LEAD 6 half boxes Glass J. R. co 1, 2, 2 casks Nails Order 79 bars LEAD
G. H. 1 to 44 44 casks Nails Order 20 bundles Pans 45, 46 2 hogsheads Wrought
Iron E. G. G. 1 to 6 6 casks Nails Folsom, Gilman and Gilman New Hampshire. 7,
8 2 tierces Iron Ware W. W. G 1 to 40 40 baskets Cheese Blank T. H. 9 boxes
Tin-plates Ditto H in (...) 1 to 34 3^ casks Nails Order Y in a diamond 51 1
chest Irish linen 31 pieces 1230 yards Order The six following importations
appeared by the Manifest to have come consigned to one person, whose (...) is
blotted out, and the six undermentioned inser^ed.
M. D. 25 1 cask Nails Miss^in and Company, Philadelphia 26 1 box Wrought Iron
(...) (...) A 3^ 1 cask Nails Ab. Usher of ditto 4 1 box Wrought Iron A W 1
cask Nails William Wilson of ditto S. S. 1 to ^3 13 casks Nails Samuel Sanson
of ditto 6 6 boxes Glass (...) 1 cask Ironmongery B. (...). 9 1 cask
Ironmongery Bennet and Barlow of ditto (...) Willing and Tailor of ditto 7 1
cask Ironmongery W 6 1 box ditto (...) WP. 1, 2 2 hogsheads Refined Sugar
William Perry 6 boxes Ti^-plates 1 ring Wire 1 to 9 9 baskets Cheese 1 to 80 80
casks Cheese William Tapscot 1 to 70 70 casks Beer W. T. 1 to 9 9 casks Beer
William Tapscot 1 cask Hats 1 cask Tin-ware 1 cask FISHING-LINES 2 boxes Pipes
21 baskets Cheese J. G. 2 casks Beer W. D. 1, 2 2 casks 10 doz. Men's shoes

(a) A box marked R. G. containing per Cocket, 18 pieces, quantity 410 yards
Irish linen. (b) (...) bales marked I R. army consigned to John Row, 2 bales
marked R. G. consigned to Rufus Green. 1 bale marked E. G. consigned to
Elbridge Gerry. 1 box marked S. A. consigned to Daniel and William Hubbard,
shipped by Griffiths and Thomas, containing per Cocket, 12 pieces bays, 15
pieces German Serge, 20 pieces Shaloon, 2 pieces Short Cloth, 400 pair
blankets, ^00 pair wor^ed stockings, 12 Ruggs, 20with. Haberdashery Ware, 30
dozen Caps. (c) A box marked S. A. containing per Cocket, 16 pieces quantity
188 yards Irish Linen. (d) A chest marked A. A. containing per Cocket. Wrought
Iron. (e) A tr^^^ marked C. F. containing per Cocket, 6 pieces quantity 412
yards British Linen. (f) A box marked C. F. contains per Cocket, 25 pieces,
quantity 60* yards Irish Linen. (g) 3 Casks and a bag marked 3^ ^ontains per
Cocket, Wrought Iron.
Summary of the Cargo of the Snow Pit, William Tapscott, Master, from Bristol,
taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master, June 1st, 1769.
List of Articles allowed to be imported by the Agreement, August, 1768.
By J. Row, D. and W. Hubbard, T. Russell, to Order, Clark and Nightingale, J.
Rotch and Son, P. Frye, Wm. Tapscott. 270 Bars of Lead 38 Casks of Shot 4 Casks
of Lines

List of Articles not allowed to be imported by the Agreement August, 1768.
289 Boxes, Half and Quarter Boxes Glass 16 Sides Glass 3 Boxes Glass Ware 271
Casks of Nails 96 Casks Cheese 70 Baskets Cheese 26 Casks Wrought-Iron 14 Bales
Woolens 24 Bundles Pans 12 Packages Linen 3 Hogsheads refined Sugar 2 Packages
Ha^s 6 Boxes Pipes 2 Boxes Pins 1 Box Buttons 61 Boxes, 3 Bundles and 1 Cask
Tin Plates 52 Bundles Steel 60 Sheets, 4 Ca^^^, 4 Bottoms unwrought Copper 7
Packages Brass Manufactory 7 Casks Pewter 2 Casks Shoes 4 Bundles Sp^des 3
Bundles Scythes 1 Box Ribbons
IMPORTERS NAMES.
D. and W. Hubbard D. Sylvester Gardener, Nathaniel Rogers, To Order Elbridge
Gerry, N Sparhawk, J. Royal, Clark and Nightingale, J. Rotch and Son, Peter
Frye, E. Doane, S. Sanson, Timothy Newell, John Row, George Erving, James
Warden, Rufus Green, Wm. Coffin junr. William Scott, Constant Freeman, Ralph
Inman, Andrew Brimmer, John Catler, All the above in Boston. Those. Robie,
Folsom, and Co. Miss^in and Company A. Usher, Wm. Wilson Bennet and Company
Willing and Company Wm. Perry, W. Tapscott.
Of the above Articles th^se in Italic pay the new Duties here; the Names of
the Importers of (...) are also in Italick: For a distinct State of the whole.

To the PUBLIC.
August 21st, 1769.
HAVING learnt, the day after my last Publication, for the first time, that the
Chairman of the Merchants, really imported goods from England, preceding the
year 1761, I, with the utmost readiness, admit, during the period of his
Importations, he ought to be considered as a Merchant; but being now occupied
in a business so very different and having ceased Importation entirely for many
years -- however honorable he may be by station, or however respectable in his
business, -- as a Distiller, he can, at present, have no title, even to the
name of Merchant.

THE PUBLIC, will no doubt perceive, th^^ the cargoes of the vessels, are given
without regard to what was excluded from or incl^^^^^ in the Non-importation
agreement; a regard to justice inducing me to lay the whole before them -- and
as the penetration of the can did readers must, often naturally, lead them to
recur to the articles, agreed upon August 1768, they are, for that purpose,
inserted anew in this paper.

That the "Well Disposed Merchants" who took the Lead at the different
Meetings, have displayed ill grounded and pointed antipathy, in my case, must
appear evident, as well as great partialities to others, when they allowed so
many respectable and so many large Importers, as were mentioned in our last and
in this Paper, to pass unnoticed. -- A charge, which though sufficiently obvious
already, shall be more ful^-demonstrated in the course of this laborious, yet
necessary Undertaking.

Indeed these Few "Well Disposed" Leaders, not only, acted unjustly, with
regard to me, who never was nor considered myself in the light of a Merchant;
but they have also imposed upon the really well disposed part of the Gentlemen
present at these Meetings, (who implicitly trusted to their information and
report), by exhibiting a partial list of the Importers; and have since, by
their Advertisement, attempted to impose on the Public in general.

The Manifests of the three following Vessels will contribute greatly to place
this in a proper point of view.

Manifest of the Cargo of the Brigantine Last Attempt, Nathaniel Byfield Lyde
Master, from London, taken from the Cockets and Manifest sworn to by the
Master, April 10, 1769, which Day the Vessel was entered at the Custom-House,
Boston: -- Owner, JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire -- The Coals were shipped, January 12,
1769, and the Rest of the Cargo between the 26th January and the 3d February,
1769.
Marks Numbers. Packages Contents. To whom Consigned. T. P. 34 Casks Cheese N.
B. 10 Boxes Lemons R. M. 3 Chests LEAD SHOT Robert Moodis Boston 6 Barrels
Gunpowder R. F. 3 Boxes Ralph Fisher ditto N. S. 1 Case John Leveret ditto WP.
3 matted Parcels ditto O in a diamond 4 Sheets milled LEAD. Edward Lyde ditto 6
Barrels Gunpowder N. L. 10 ditto ditto Nath. Byfield Lyde ditto 2 Boxes 2 Casks
(...). L. (...) Casks Gunpowder Byfield Lyde Esquire ditto 63 Chaldrons COALS John
Hancock Esquire ditto N. B. L. 15 Barrels Gunpowder (...). k. 5 ditto Ditto J. o H.
15 ditto Ditto ^ 5 ditto Ditto J. S. W. 10 ditto Ditto Where the Contents of
the Packages in any of the Manifests are not mentioned the Cockets were
wanting. 5 ditto Ditto 5 ditto Ditto N 4 C 5 ditto Ditto 4 in a diamond 10
ditto Ditto

Manifest of the Cargo of the Brigantine Lydia, Joseph Hood, Master, from
London, taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master, April
18th, 1769, which Day the Vessel was entered at the Custom-House, Boston: --
Owner, JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire -- The Goods were shipped between the 5th January and
12th February, 1769.
Mark. No. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. J. H. 50 Chaldron COALS John
Hancock Boston 1 to 5 5 Bales 100 pieces British Linen W. B. 1 Cask 500 weight
wrought Iron Wm. Bows ditto. T. G. 1, 2, 2 Bales 2181 else German and 570 else
Russia Linen Thomas Gray ditto 50 Matts 100 pieces Russia Duck D. M 2 1 Trunk 4
pieces British and Irish Linen Daniel M'Carty 57else Russia Linen 7 pieces
Callicoe 2 pieces long Cloth 4 pieces Taffities 1 1 Trunk 7 pieces British
Linen 3 pieces Stuff and Haberdashery 3 1 Trunk 42 pieces Stuff in a o diamond
2 1 Trunk Russia Linen, wrought Inckle, and Haberdashery William Jackson Boston
4 1 ditto 43 Pieces British and Irish Linen 5 1 Trunk British and German Linen,
Seles^a, Lawn, whited Holland, Callicoes and Nankins 6 1 ditto Taffities,
Ginghams, Penicascoes and 30 Demi Cambricks. 7 and 8 2 ditto 82 pieces Stuff 9
2 ditto 10 pieces British Linen and 20 dozen gloves 1 1 Box Millenary 3 1 Case
Stationary S. B. 1 Box S. Brimmer J. L. 1 Cable John Langdon J. A. 2 Bales
Russia Duck and 285 else Russia Linen John Appleton R. T. 1 Bale Stationary
Lester Aruery 1 Ca^^ 1 Cask M. V. 1 Box Mary Vans T. O. 1 1 Case Thread and
Cotton Hose Silk and Callimancoe Shoes To Order 3 1 Cask Cheese G. D. 1 Box To
Order directed 1 Box Se^^eu^^er at Boston directed 1 Box Arthur Savage directed
1 Trunk Mrs. Mewell directed 2 Boxes Thomas of the Ro^^^ directed 1 Bundle
Capt. Folgier

Manifest of the Cargo of the Brigantine Paoli, James Hall, Master, from
London, taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master June 10th
1769, which Day the Vessel was entered at the Custom-house, Boston: -- Owner,
JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire -- The Goods were shipped betwixt the 14th and 26th April
1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents To whom consigned. J. C. diam. 1 Cask
Turnery J. Barret and son Boston A in a diamond 1, 2 2 Matts Upholstery J. and
J. Amory Boston 3, 4 2 Cases Cabinet Ware 5 1 Trunk Wrought silk and
Haberdashery A. R. L. 1, 2 2 Bales 20 Pieces British Linen Nath. Wheatly Boston
J. R. 1 and 2 2 Bales 20 ditto ditto ditto (...) in a diam. 1 1 Trunk Demi
Cambricks Silesia Linens, Hollands, wrought inkle, etc. Joseph Pierce Boston 1
1 Cask Wrought Iron 3 1 Case 17 Pieces British Linen 2 1 Box 3lb. 1 oz. wrought
Silk 3 oz sewing Silk 1 4 Cwt. Haberdashery 5 1 Box Stationary 4 1 Truss 21
Pieces 524 Yards Linen S. D. 1 1 Cask Capt. Sam. Dashwood Boston R. C. 1 to 13
13 half Chests Florence Oil Richard Clark and Son ditto R. L C. 1^5 1 cask
Wrought iron Green and Cleverly, Boston G. C. in a diamond. 156 1 cask ditto J.
L. 1 1 trunk Sewing silk and Haberdashery John Lamb ditto S. W. 2 1 bale 15 ps.
stuff and Haberd^^. Samuel Whight 1 1 trunk 4lb 9 oz. wrough ^^lk 1^ pieces
stuff and 1.4 cwt. Haberdashery 2 1 bale 30 pieces stuff 1 bundle Steel R. J. 1
1 trunk Linens, Lawns, Holland Cambricks, Bandanoes, Romals, Gingham and
Callicoes Richard Jones in diam 1 1 trunk Wrought silk William Jackson Boston 1
1 to 50 50 bales RUSSIA DUCK Henry Lloyd Esquire ditto 43 1 27 HEMP M. B. 1 to 6 6
bundles HEMP Meletiah Bourne ditto 96 1 7 1. (...) O. 1, 2 2 bales 20 pieces
british linen ^os. Orne jun. E. W. 1 to 30 30 boxes Lemons Edm. Wendal
Portsmouth 1 to 20 20 hampers Strong Beer T. H. 1 1 trunk 4 pieces Demi
Cambrick Capt. Tho. Hulme Boston R in a diamond. 1 and (...) 2 cases Upholstery
John Robinson 3 1 case Cabinet Ware 4 1 box Wrought iron 5 1 case Upholstery T.
C. 1 1 bale 5 pieces stuff J and W. Russel Providence E. M 3 1 puncheon Port
Wine Edward Marriot Boston 4 1 box Haberdashery The following Marks and Numbers
are from the Cockets, but are not in the Manifest.
E. F. 30 bars Swedish iron J. H. 1300 pieces 22cwt. 2qrs. 24lb. green glass J.
H. 1 to 3 3 casks Upholstery B. 1 1 box 90 ps. Demi cambrick

The PATRIOTIC GENTLEMAN to whom the three Vessels above mentioned belong, may
probably conceive it proper, out of Respect to his own Character, to give the
Public the Names of the Owners of the Packages marked T. O. and G. D. consigned
to Order, as well as those marked E. F. B. and J. H. -- This cannot be a matter
of any difficulty to him, as he must know from whom he received the Freight.

JOHN MEIN.

The following Advertisement was omitted in the Boston Chronicle, August 17,
1769, and is now Published, to show that I am heartily willing to lay before
the Public, all the transactions of the "WELL DISPOSED LEADERS."
BOSTON, May 1st, 1769.
THE Merchants of this town met according to adjournment on Thursday last, when
the committee appointed to make enquiry relative to the importation of goods by
the vessels lately arrived from Great Britain, reported, that five or six
persons, who were signers to the late agreement, had received a few articles
(the remains of former orders) and were ready to deliver them up to the care of
the committee; and that some who where not signers had imported some goods
prohibited by the late agreement, which as to quality and quantity were very
small. -- The Merchants then appointed a committee to confer with the persons
last mentioned, and to consider what measures might be proper to take to
prevent any further importation, and then adjourned their meeting to Tuesday
next (tomorrow) at four o'clock P. M. to be held at Faneuil-hall, at which
time and place a general attendance of the Merchants is desired, and those who
have imported in the ^late vessels are particularly requested to be present.

Anonymous Advertisements published in the Boston Evening Post, and Boston
Gazette of Monday August 21, 1769.
Mr. John Mein, Printer and Bookseller from Scotland, having in his Chronicle
of the 17th instant undertaken to vindicate his importing Goods contrary to the
Agreement of the Merchants, and also subjoined a partial Schedule of the
Importations which have taken place from February to June last, declaring his
intention to render the same complete from the Custom House Entries, in the
course of his Papers, the Public are desired to suspend their judgment upon
this Affair, as we learn the Committee of Merchants have it in their power to
satisfy the most prejudiced that the account Mr* Mein has given cannot in the
least invalidate the declarations that have been made from time to time on that
subject, but choose to wait till Mr. Mein has finished his work, when they will
doubtless undertake to undeceive them and prevent the mischief designed by his
very impertinent and unjust representations of the affair. In the mean time, it
may not be improper to remark, that his attempt to make the Public believe that
the declarations of the Merchants in April last are untrue, because some
importations were made six weeks after that time, is very extraordinary, and
discovers that he has a peculiar knock at reasoning.

From Draper's Massa. Gazette, April 17, 1769.
The Committee of Inspection are not ready to make Report who are Importers in
Capt. SCOTT from London, but are in expectation of having it ready by Monday,
when the Public will have a true account of them and their Goods; as also of
the Importers by Capt SMITH, as soon as possible.

BOSTON, August 21, 1767.
ACCORDING to a few lines inserted in Mr. Draper's paper of the 17th instant
that the Committee were in hopes they should be ready against Monday to give
the Public an account of Capt. Scott's cargo, (which being the more immediately
under their inspection) which is agreeable to their own determination, and not
from any thing Mr. Mein was pleased to publish as to goods imported conformable
to the agreement of the Merchants, and those goods that are delivered up to the
Committee, we shall save the Public the trouble of going over, as well as the
Printers of their labor, and hope the Public will receive it with candor and
truth, notwithstanding it may be Mr* Mein will give it another gloss; But we
defy him to detect any material ^^ror, which, if any, when thoroughly examined
by that critic, may be magnified a Molehill, to a Mountain, but, if when this
comes in course with him, and there appears any thing worthy of notice, or that
may not be satisfactory to the Public we shall endeavor to explain it to their
satisfaction, confining ourselves to this Town, as to detecting any Importers
contrary to agreement and giving account of those persons who persist in
importing, and will not join with the Merchants in the agreement they have
entered into for the good of their country -- They now give the Public an
account of the goods imported in said Ship, for persons of this and other
Towns, expecting their committees take care of their own transgressors. -- They
also insert the goods for others governments.

S. Johnson, 2. Cases, 1 Trunk, for S. Johnson T. of Connecticut.

Crowfoot R 4 Casks for Marblehead, for T. Robie.

NS 2 Cases and 1 Trunk for (...). Sparhawk Esquire Kittery directed to the care of
John Leveret^, Esquire who says they are only sundry Articles from Mr. Sparhawk's
Son in London* as presents to sundry of the (...) and no^ for ^ale

IP 5 Bales* 1 Box* 4 Case* 5 Trunks 35 Chests, 43 Casks, 2 Bundles, 2 B^g^ 10
Barre^s Gunpowder, for Mr. (...) of Newport*

A Diamond with (...) 3 Bales, 3 Cases, 5 Trunks, 3 Chests, 6 Casks, 1 Bag, 16
Barrels Gun Powder for (...) -- Newport*

NA 1 Bale, 2 Casks, for N. Allen, at Shrewsbury.

LA 3 Cases shi^t by a Gentleman not in Trade, to his Friend in the Country,
likewise not in Trade, and supposed to be for his Family Use.

H Crowfoot W 16 Chests of Tea* for T. and E Hutchinson.

An Account of Capt. Smith's Cargo will be given the Public next Week.

To the PUBLIC.
I Present my compliments to the Authors of the above Advertisements; I am
really sorry they neglected to sign their names to their publications; charity
herself must only impute it to forgetfulness, and far be it from me to hint
that it was either owing to shame or timidity. -- On the contrary with real
good will, I beg of the Authors to remedy this omission in their next pieces,
for such naked Advertisements cannot gain any degree of credit with impartial
readers.

I shall make but few strictures on these two publications, it being beneath
any man to contend with opponents sheltered under a mask: I shall however,
condescend for once, and I entreat the Public carefully to read the last
sentence of the first Anonymous Advertisement, and then to consult the Boston
Chronicle of last Monday, ^n which, the manifests of two vessels, belonging to
Mr. Hancock, are given; one of which vessels arrived April 10th, the other on
the 18th of the said month; and also to compare the following cargo, [brought
in the London Packet, Capt. Ca^ef, which vessel was entered at the Custom House
here April 19th, 1769,] with the reports of the few "Well Disposed" Leaders
which were printed May 1st and 4th, 1769. But this, as I have already declared
shall be more fully demonstrated in the course of this undertaking.

On reading the "True account" given of Capt Scott's Cargo by the "Well
Disposed" committee, I felt sentiments arise in my mind, which would be painful
to me to re^earse. -- I therefore merely out of pity and compassion, most
earnestly beg of them, for their own sake, to take their "True account" again
into their serious consideration, and not again present it to the public, till
they have made the necessary amendments. -- Wishing they may adopt this advice,
I shall for the present draw a veil over that Publication.

Manifest of the Cargo of the Ship London Packet, Robert Calef, Master, from
London, taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master, April
19th, 1769, which day the vessel ^as entered at the Custom House, Boston: --
Owners, JOSEPH RO^CH, (...) Nantucket, ALEXANDER CHAMPION and GEORGE HAYLEY, of
London. -- The Goods were shipped between the 27th of January and the 13th of
March, 1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. P. M. 1 Post chaise
Jonathan Mason, Boston S. P. 6 1 bale 343 Else narrow Germany Sam Partridge
ditto H. C. 1, 2 2 trunks Printed Books Thomas Hubbard ditto 3 1 box H. 2 cases
J. M. 2 cases Writing paper, Paper-books and quills John Mein ditto 1 bundle
Magazines W in a dm. 1 and 2 2 hogshead 60 dozen Felt Hats Th. Handyside Peck
ditto T. P. 6 1 case Haberdashery W. D. 1 and 2 2 bales 1424 Else broad Russia
William D^nnie ditto W P. 1 box John Leveret ditto H. G. 5 and 6 2 bales 172
pieces Irish linen James Forest ditto J. F. (...). F. 24 to 27 4 cases 220
pieces ditto J. S. 26 casks Thomas Gray ditto G in a diamond. 34 casks Nath.
Green ditto J. W. 4 to 43 40 matts RUSSIA DUCK Joshua Loring J. L. 1 and 2 2
chests Tea 50 and 51 2 casks Cordage 46 1 trunk Sewing silk, 3 pieces baise and
haberdashery 1 box 21 half t^^s HEMP H. L. 1 to 9 9 bundles Wrought iron Henry
La^ghton Boston B. C. 1 1 cask Benjamin Clark ditto T. B. in a diamond. 1 1
cask 13 dozen Beer Thomas Bulsinch ditto 1 and 2 2 casks Apothecary 3 and 4 2
cases 5 1 bundle T. D. 1 trunk Thomas Danforth ditto W. P. 1 Trunk ^aac Royal 1
Case 2 Casks A. E. C. 2 and 3 Boxes (...) Ame and Eliz. Cummins Boston 1 1
Trunk Stuffs of Silk and ditto 4 1 Case 8^ dozen Chip Ha^s E. G. 1 to 8 8
Bundles Steel ^ben. Greenleaf ditto 1 Bundle Wrought Brass 3 ^un HEMP. J. W. A.
1 Case 435 Else narrow Germany James Warren 17^ Else broad Russia 8 Mat^s DUCK
13^ BARS LEAD T. D. A. 1 Bale 110 Else narrow Germany Thomas Davis Boston 57
ditto broad Russia T. F. 1 1 Trunk 294 yards Callico and 32 Pieces India goods
Timothy Folgier W. V. 1 1 Trunk Haberdashery William Vassal 2 and 3 2 Cases
Wrought Iron 4 1 Hamper Earthen Ware W. C. 1 and 2 2 Casks Wine William
Cockeran A. O. 1 Cask Andrew Oliver C in a diamond 2 Chests Tea Rich. Clark and
Sons ditto T. H. 1 Cask Apothecary Those. Hutchinson ditto T. H. 2 Bales B.
(...). 2 Cases 2880 Packs playing Cards J. H. 2 1 Cask Turnery John Hunt the 3d
ditto 20 half Barrels Powder 5 Casks SHOT 1 ditto 20 dozen Wool Cards 169 Bars
LEAD o in a diamond 6 1 Trunk 10 Diaper Tabling John Penhallow 7 Damask Tabling
78 yards square Callico 14 pieces Silesia Napkining 1 Gurrah and 1 long Cloth C
S. 1 Cask Cordage Green and Boylston Boston J. 4P. 1 Cask Cordage James Pitts
ditto W. R. 1 Cask Cordage William Rotch 1 Bag Pepper W I. 1 Bag Pepper Peter
Hughes Boston 9 Casks Apothecary 5 Chests 1 Hogshead 1 Hamper 3 Boxes ST. 2
Casks Apothecary Samuel Tufts J. F. 1 Chest Apothecary Isaac Foster J. L. 1 Bag
Pepper Jeremiah Lee E. W. 1 Puncheon Beer Elizabeth Williams E. M. 2 Casks 26
dozen Beer No Name in Manifest 3 e. 1 Box Wrought Iron F. in a diamond 4 and 5
2 Trunks Stuffs of Silk only, sewing, Silk and incle 148 yards Irish Linens and
2 pieces British Linen Samuel Fletcher Boston 7 1 Bale Only six Bales in
Manifest.
20 Pieces Stuff 1 1 Trunk 20 Pieces Stuff 6 1 Trunk 9 Pieces Demi Cambrick,
Holland Linen, 108 yards square printed Calico and India goods 3 1 Case Cloves,
Cinnamon, Mace Nutmeg 2 1 Cask Wrought Iron N. in a diamond 3 1 Trunk 36 yards
Callicoes and 1 Long Cloth 1 1 Case Stationary 2 1 Bale 16 Pieces Stuff R. H. 1
to 23 23 Casks Nails Only 34 Casks in Manifest.
Robert Hooper 24 to 35 12 Casks Nails J. P. 2 1 Case Looking Glasses John
Pederick 1 to 8 and 13 9 Casks Nails 14 1 Bale Blankets 16 1 Bale 10 pieces
Baize 9 1 Trunk 20 pieces Stuff 15 1 Trunk Silk and Incle and 20 pieces British
Linen 10 and 11 2 Trunks 1288 Else Narrow Germany 152 Else broad ditto 342 Else
broad Russia TL. 4 1 Bale 20 Pieces Stuff Theophilus Lilly Boston 1 1 Case
Silk Stuff and Haberdashery 1 Bag Pepper 3 1 Case China 1080 pieces A. R. 1 1
Box 20 Pieces British Linen 293 vds. printed Cotton Rob. Robertson Portsmouth 2
1 Bale 16 Pieces Base J P. Ring 1 Box 12 Pieces British Linen 183 yds. printed
Cotton J. P. Ring Dr. (...) 1 Case Dr. Canner Boston N. Rogers 1 Box Nath.
Rogers ditto J. C. 1 to 4 4 Casks Refined Sugar Robert Calef ditto R. C. 1 Cask
Refined Sugar 20 Boxes Lemons 13 Chests Oil 135 Grindstones 4 Iron Hearths 15
Bundles Hoops S 1 Bale James and Rob. Selkrig ditto J. R. J. Pierce 1 Case
Joseph Pierce L. X. 1 Cask Thomas Barret 5 Ton HEMP Isaac Smith D. S. 6 1 Cask
Cordage Daniel Serjant 11 to 15 5 Casks Nails 16 1 Box FISH HOOKS 17 1 Bale 6
Pieces Baize and 11 pieces Stuff 19 1 Trunk 20 pieces British Linen and
Haberdashery 20, 21 2 Casks Cordage 18 1 Bale 851 Else narrow Germany 3 Tun
HEMP 3 Bags SHOT 1 Box J. R. S. 7 Casks Nails J. Russel Spence 6 and 7 2 Casks
Wrought Iron 8 to 12 5 Bundles 8 Bundles 4 Coppers and Ladles 1 and 2 2 Bales
Shirts, Slops, etc. 1 Hamper Hard-ware 1 Cask Tin-ware 1 Bag SHOT 2 Hampers 7
Casks Powder O (...) 1 and 2 2 Cases 1766 yds. British Linen Henry Oman H. 4 O
and H. O. (b) 3 Casks 1 Chest 1 Hamper H. O. By the Cockets, the Packages with
the Contents, marked H. O. appears to be as follows, viz. No. 1 and 2. 2 Bales,
containing 168 pieces Stuff No. 3 and 4. 2 Cases Stationary. No. 7 and 8, 2
Chests British Cottons and Stuffs of Silk and Cotton. No. 9. a Cask. ^4 dozen
Feit H^ts. No. 10, 11, 12, 3 Casks Earthen Ware, 3000 pieces. No. 5. 1 Bale
narrow Germany.
1 Trunk To Order 3 Bales 2 Chests 2 Cases H. G. O. By the Cockets, the
Packages, with their Contents marked H. G. O. appears to be as follows, viz.
No. 2 and 3, 2 Chests German Linen Dritting and 337 yards printed Linen, No. 9,
1 Bundle Millenary. No. 4. 1 Trunk 82 pieces Callico and 42 pieces India goods.
No. 1 Bale 64 pieces Stuff No. 5. 1 Case Haberdashery. No. 6. 1 Trunk 87 pieces
printed Linen and Cotton. No. 7, 1 Bale 4 pieces Serge and 2 pieces Baize. No.
8, 1 Chest, 16 pieces British and 40 pieces Irish Linen. 6 Dozen worsted Hose,
Haberdashery, Millenary, Silk Ribbons, etc.
2 Trunks 2 Bales 3 Chests 1 Case 1 Bundle J. K. 1 and 2 2 Casks Wrought Iron
R. H. S. 8 1 Bale 1786 yds. British Linen 2 1 Bale 160 pieces Stuff 9 and 10 2
Trusses Haberdashery 11 1 Bale 44 pieces British Linen and Haberdashery J. S.
and B. 6 1 Bale 12 pieces British Linen 3, 4, 5, 7 4 Bales 5958 yds. British
bounty Linen. 1 1 Trunk 43lb. stuffs of Silk 19 ditto stuffs of Silk and i^cle
11lb. sewing Silk and Silk La^es 194 yds. square British Cotton 13 pcs. Demi
Cambricks 216 square yds. printed Callico and Haberdashery 2 1 Case
Haberdashery 1 Box J S R 9 to 12 4 Cases 130 pieces 3056 yards square printed
Linen J. R. 4 qrs. Barrels Gunpowder Cox and Berry 1 Bundle Cox and Berry
Boston The following Goods are in the Cockets, but are not in the Manifest.
J. S R 10 and 11 2 Cases 53 pieces Callico 564yds. 52 yds. printed Linen 15
long Cloth D. S. 7, 8, 9 3 Kegs Painters Colors 1 ^ar J. S R. 1 Bale Hosiery 1
Bale 20 pieces Stuff J. 4 W 1 to 3 3 Bundles RUSSIA DUCK. L. B. 1 to 4 4 Cases
China Ware L. T. B. 1 Bale 911 yards British bounty Linen T. H. 2 Boxes
Mathematical instruments E* G. 7 1 Case Wrought Iron 1 to 5 5 Casks Nails J. T.
B. 1 Bale 10 pieces British Linen

As Carriages generally take precedence in every procession, I have followed
the common practice, in placing foremost the Chaise consigned to a worthy
Gentleman of this Town: begging of him at the same time to account to the
Public, how such a Vehicle happened to be imported amidst our resolutions of
economy: I do not say it was for his own use, but why did he become a channel
of conveyance for such an article of Luxury* -- This really ought to be
explained. -- If age or infirmity render a carriage necessary, it is both just
and reasonable, that our own Artists have the preference; and I can point out
to the Importer, a Gentleman, in that branch of business in this Town, equal to
any Artist in Great Britain.

JOHN MEIN.

To the PUBLIC.
Aug. 28, 1769.
MR. Palfrey, Clerk to Mr. Hancock, having made oath before Belcher Noyes, Esquire
Justice of Peace, that the 100 pieces of British linen shipped on board the
Lydia, Joseph Hood, Master, were "100 pieces Russia Duck" I here lay before the
public, a copy of the Cocket attested by the Collector and Comptroller of this
port.

London, 7 Know ye, that George Hayley has Entered one Hundred and Thirty
pieces British Linen. One hundred and thirty Stuffs qt. one thousand three
hundred pounds. Twenty dozen plain leather Gloves, five hundred with. wrought
Iron, one hundred with. Haberdashery, certain Millenary and Stationary wares at
fifty pounds. In the Lydia, Timothy Folger for New England free by Act. dated
7th Feb. 1769. In the ninth year of King George the Third.

Wm. Bates D. Collr. R. Jones, Seal G. Brathwaite D. Sr. 3 6 WB. JN. JC. G. B.
SP.

Custom-House, Boston, 26 th August, 1769. A true Copy from the original
Cocket, Will. Sheaffe, D. Coll. Rob. Hallowell D. Count.

IH 1 a Bale 21 pieces British Linen.? 1 a Ditto 21 pieces Ditto. 3 a Ditto 21
pieces Ditto. 4 a Ditto 21 pieces Ditto. 5 a Ditto 16 pieces Ditto. 1 a Box
Millenary? 2 a Trunk 1 ha^^ ^wt. Haberdashery. C. ^. in a diamond, 2 a Case
(...) Stationary 7 (...) Trunk 40 Stuffs. 8 a Ditto 42 Ditto. 9 a Ditto 10
(...) British Linen and 20 dozen G^oves. D M 1 a Ditto 7 pieces Ditto 3 Stuffs
and 1 4 (...) cwt. Haberdashery. 2 a Ditto 42 Stuffs. W3 1 a Cask 5 cwt wrought
Iron.

Custom-House Boston. 26 th August. 1769. A true Copy from the original Cocket,
Will. Sheaffe D. Coll. Rob. Hallowell D. Comp.

Capt. Folger was Master of the L^d a when the Goods were shipped* but Capt.
Head was Master the voyage out to Boston.



I said in my first publication that I should present facts, not offer
conjecture^ -- I stated this fact just as it appeared by the Cocket, the pieces
on both sides of which are named British Linen. Mr. Hancock's correspondent in
London, George Hayley, Esquire entered out a 100 pieces British Linen, and Mr.
William Palfrey, Clerk to Mr. Hancock in Boston, has made oath that they are
"100 pieces Russia Duck," which he says, in his declaration, preceding his
oath, is frequently mentioned as British Linen in the Cockets. -- Mr. Hancock's
correspondent and the Merchants in London, are really singularly obliged to Mr.
William Palfrey for publishing to the world this ingenious discovery. -- Some
people on reading his declaration, his oath and the above Cocket, might be apt
to imagine that the Merchants in London, "frequently" committed (...): an
imputation which, (...) for my own part, (...)

Mr. (...) engaged in this affair on (...) di^a^e his ma^ter, though I (...) my
(...) that he did not (...) sider the (...) thoroughly: he ^as also been
pleased to say, that I have acted in an ^^^ful and ^^^sive manner through the
whole course of my late extraordinary performance; now I appeal to the public
if (...) evasive, first to state a f^^t, and then to prove (...) by (...).
Hancock's own correspondent, a Merchant of great distinction in the city of
London, an^ by a Cocket signed by the principal officers of that ^o^^ -- ^his
also may appear extraordinary to Mr. Palfrey, and indeed I must (...) it is
somewhat mortifying. -- This affair then at present rests between Mr. Hayley, a
Merchant in London of great character and extensive business, and Mr. William
Palfrey, clerk to Mr. Hancock.

I take this opportunity to declare that I never will enter into a dispute with
servants* except in such a case as this, in which the ma^^^r is absent.

When abusive terms are thrown out, I shall never condescend to take the least,
notice of them, and I shall always support that candor, calmness, and decency,
which becomes every person to show who addresses himself to the Public.

And now let me beg of the "Well disposed Merchants." who have taken upon them
to publish Advertisements and Reports, to produce their second "True Account"
of Capt. Scott's Cargo, and also not to forget Capt. Smith's. I do not wish for
an opportunity to charge them with remissness, but surely they who reported so
expeditiously on upwards of a dozen cargoes which arrived its April, will be
l^able to some suspicion of it, if they withhold from the Public any longer
what they have so confidently and so repeatedly promised.

JOHN MEIN.

Manifest of the Cargo of the Ship Glasgow, John Dunn, Master, from Glasgow,
taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master, 3d of June, 1^^9,
which day the vessel was entered at the Custom-house, Boston: -- Owners DANIEL
WHITE and RICHARD ALLAN of Glasgow, and ROBERT GOULD, of Boston. -- The ^oods
were shipped between the 27th of March and the 10th of April, 1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents To whom consigned. S. B. 3 to 6 4 bales 200
Reams ballad paper Samuel Barret Boston 1 to 2 2 casks Haberdashery 200 with. J.
A. 4 1 cask Haberdashery James Anderson ditto 7, 8 2 boxes Woolens and
haberdashery 5 1 box Haberdashery 6 1 ditto Stuffs of Silk, and Stuffs of Silk
and cotton, Haberdashery 9 1 box Woolens, 50 pieces 1269 yds. Irish bounty
linen 10, 11 2 boxes Haberdashery, 1342 yds. Linen, Woolens 12 1 ditto Woolens,
600 yds. linen and 15 pieces 335 1-half British bounty Linen 13 1 box
Haberdashery 375 yds. linen and 15 pieces 295 yds British bounty linen 14 1 box
Woolens and 300 yds. linen 15 1 box Woolens and Stuffs of silk 16 1 box
Hardware, 18 pieces 442 1 half yards British bounty Linen B. Andrews 1 1 box
470 yds. Linen and 20 pieces 519 yds. British bounty Linen Benj. Andrews ditto
2 1 box 24 pieces 575 1-half yds. British bounty Linen Hys^op and Co. 1, 4 4
Trunks Haberdashery Wm. Hys^op and Co. ditto A. L. 1 cask Shoes Alexander
Le^^ie Esquire R. B. 14 1 box Stuffs of Silk, etc. Robert Blair Boston 15 1 cask
Hardware 1 and 2 2 bales 24 pieces 2790 yds. British bounty Linen 16 1 box
Stuffs of Silk and Cotton 3 and 4 2 boxes Haberdashery 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and
10 8 casks Snuff 1 1 cask manufactured pig-tail Tobacco R. S. 5, 9. 10 and 11 4
boxes Haberdashery, and 201 yds Linen Robert Service ditto 6 1 bale 11 pieces
119^ 1 half yds British bounty linen 7 1 cask Shoes 8 1 box 16 pieces 287
1-half yds. British bounty linen 30 pieces 696 yds Irish bounty, linen Stuffs
of Silk and 188 yds. printed linen 1 to 32 32 casks Haberdashery 12 1 box ditto
W. M. 19 and 20 2 casks Hard-ware William M'Kean ditto 1 to 6 6 Hogsheads
Tobacco 1 box Haberdashery J. M. 1 1 box Stuffs of Silk and Stuffs of Silk and
cotton James M'Master ditto 1 1 cask Pig-tail Tobacco 11, 12, 14, 15, 4 casks
Snuff J. M'Master 13, 16, 17, 18, 4 casks Haberdashery 1 box Haberdashery o in
a diamond 1 1 cask Haberdashery George Brown 2 1 box ditto M Williams 1 Trunk
Haberdashery Mascol Williams Sal^m J. G. 1 to 3 3 casks Earthen-ware To Order
J. D. A. B. 2 casks Haberdashery To Order J. R. 1 to 3 3 casks Earthen-ware
Jon. Russel J Lynde 1 1 box Haberdashery J. Lynde 2 1 cask ditto A. Duncan 1 1
box Haberdashery A. Duncan 2 1 cask A. B. 1 and 2 2 boxes Haberdashery
Archibald Bowman 3 1 cask Shoes

Manifest of the Cargo of the Brigantine Sukey, Isaac Coleman, Master, from
London, taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master, April
18th, 17^9, which day the Vessel was entered at the Custom-House, Boston: --
Owners, EDWARD CLARKE and FITCH POOL of Boston, and PEREZ DREW jun. of Duxbury
-- The Goods were Shipped between the 9th and 22d of March, 17^9.
Mark. No. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned AE C in a diamond 1 1 Case 348
pieces China John Avery Boston 2 1 Trunk 10 pieces British Linen L^. 1 1 Case
Wrought Iron Royal Tyler ditto J. R. 1 Case John Row ditto 1 Cask 1 Box G. C.
in a diamond 140 to 147 8 Bundles Wrought Iron Green and Cleverly ditto 148 150
4 Casks ditto 1^1 1^2 ditto R L. C. 149 Hogshead Wrought Iron 153 Box
Haberdashery WH. 1, 2 2 Casks Wrought Iron William Homes ditto J. H. 1 1 Trunk
1-4th cwt. Wrought Iron and 1cwt* Haberdashery 8 doz. Hose 3 single baize 3
doz. leather Gloves Francis Johonot ditto J. G. 1 1 cask Anniseed John Gould
ditto H. W. 20 to 37 18 chests Tea T. and E. Hutchinson ditto J in a diamond 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 6 Bales RUSSIA DUCK Henderson Inches C. L. Norwich 1 1 Case
1-half Cwt. Wrought Iron Dan. and W. Hubbard ditto AR. 1 1 Box 1 Cwt. wrought
Iron Eliz. Ross Falmouth B. ^ 13 18 Boxes 400 pieces Glass Nathaniel Rogers
Boston 20 1 Case 20 pieces Stuffs S. R. K. 2 1 Trunk 6 Ginghams and 8
Penniascoes J. G. J. in a diamond 1 to 3 3 Cases 1120 pieces China 1 1 Box 610
pieces white Glass X in a diamond 3, 4 2 Casks 1822lb. British refined Sugar 1,
2 2 Cases 720 packs playing Cards 5 1 Trunk 1 Romal 50 Ginghams 13 Peniascoes C
in a diamond 1 2 Cases 39 dz. Silk 40 Pcs. Stuffs Nathaniel Rogers Boston 2 R
in a diamond 1 1 Cask Haberdashery Y in a diamond 2, 3 2 Casks 800 Cwt. 1 qr.
15 lb. 4 1 Cask 700Cwt. 3qr. 16lb. British refined Sugar Y. in a diamond 10 1
Trunk 471 yards Irish bounty Linen 19 silk and worsted 100 Cwt. Haberdashery 27
1 Bale Upholstery 26 1 Trunk 87lb. 2 oz. silk only and Ribbons 134 yds. square
printed Cotton 100 Haberdashery 5 to 19 15 Casks 20Cwt. Wrought Iron 1, 6, 7 3
Cases Millenary 8 1 Bale Stationary 9 1 Case 15 pieces Stuff 1 to 5 5 Casks 10
Cwt. Wrought Iron 16 to 18 3 Cases Upholstery 19 1 Bale 10 small Mi^iken baize
22 1 Trunk 25 Demi Cambricks 35 5-10ths Callicoes 362 yds. square printed
Callicoe 38 narrow Russia Linen 10 Long Cloths 25 Silesia Lawns 23 1 Trunk 3
Romals 50 Ginghams 50 Peniascoes 24 1 Trunk 8 Taffities, 48 Romals 13 Taffities
2 Damasks 20 1 Case 220 pieces China 11, 12, 13 3 Cases 104lb Nutmegs 5 1 Cask
30 dz. WOOL CARDS. 14, 15 2 Casks 21Cwt. Alum 25 1 Trunk 1067 yds. British
bounty Linen O. A. In a diamond 1, 2, 3 3 Bales RUSSIA DUCK Samuel Alyne Otis
ditto J. ROW Army 1 1 Bale 100 with. Haberdashery To Order R. C. 8, 9 2 Bundles
200Cwt. Haberdashery Poole and Clarke Boston 7 1 Box Stationary 13 1 Bundle
100Cwt. Haberdashery 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5 Bales RUSSIA DUCK. 9, 10 2 Casks 21Cwt.
Alum 11, 12 2 Casks 25Cwt. Copperas 10 10 half Barrels Gunpowder 5 Ton 1^4th
HEMP R. x S. 1, 2 2 Bales 30 pieces Stuffs Rufus Green ditto 3 1 Bale 10 small
Miniken baize F in a diamond 4, 5 2 Bales 1815 Else BRITISH SAIL CLOTH Samuel
Fletcher ditto 1 1 Trunk 4lb. 14oz. silk only and Ribbons 4lb. sewing silk and
Fringes 75 yards Irish bounty Linen 10 pieces Stuffs 7 1 Bale 7 small Miniken
baize 1 1 Trunk 100 Else narrow German Linen 2 1 Bale 228 Else Russia Linen 3 1
Trunk 20lb. Nutmegs 10lb. Cloves 10lb. Cinnamon 4lb. Mace L in a diamond 2 1
Case 10 pieces wrought Stuffs Woodbury Langdon Portsmouth 3 1 Case 1Cwt.
Haberdashery 5 to 8 4 Bales 40 small Minicken baize 4 1 Trunk 3lb. sewing Silk
and fringes 20 pieces British Linen 1 1 Trunk 325 Else narrow German Linen 10 1
Trunk 2 Demi Cambricks S in a diamond 1 1 Case 200Cwt. Haberdashery (...)
Portsmouth 3 1 Bale 2 1 Trunk 100Cwt. Haberdashery Silk, Ribbons and Millenary
J* A. 1 1 Cask Wrought Iron John Appleton 1 Bundle Lieut. Col. Leslie 1 Basket
Richard Clark G. B. 3 1 Case Silk and worsted 10 pieces Stuff Griffiths and
Bowls Portsm. 7, 8 2 Cases Silk and Ribbond. 10lb, sewing Silk and Fringes 20
pieces British Linen 13 1 Case Silk, worsted and 1-half Cwt. Haberdashery 12 1
Trunk Sewing silk and 1 half cwt. Wrought Iron. 6, 16, 17 3 Casks 300 ^wt.
Wrought Iron 14 1 Case 119 yds. Irish bounty Linen 1-half ^wt. Haberdashery 2
to 4 3 Cases 200 ^wt. Haberdashery 5 1 Case Stationary 15 1 Bale 5 small
Miniken baize 9 1 Case 100 pieces earthen ware 10 1 Trunk Callicoes, narrow
Germany, narrow Russia Linen, printed Linen 14 demi Cambricks 13 1 Chest 220
Else narrow German Linen 11 1 half wrought Incle 1 1 Bag 316lb. Pepper J. L. 4,
5 2 Bales 953 Else British made SAIL CLOTH John Langdon ditto 7 1 Bale 10 small
Miniken baize 2 1 Trunk 24lb. Silk and worsted 7lb. 3 oz. Silk only and Ribbons
75 yards Irish bounty Linen 10 pieces British Linen Long cloth Callicoes
Gurrahs 1 to 40 40 Coils and Cables Cordage 1116 with. 1 qr. 12lb. 1 1 Bale 694
Else narrow Germany Linen 3 1 Chest Tea x. 2 Anchors N. N. 1 1 Cask Apothecary
Nath. Noyes Boston 2, 3, 6 3 Barrels 1, 4, 5 3 Cases J. G. 1, 2, 3, 6 4 Casks
Apothecary John Greenleaf Boston 1 Chest 8 1 Case 9 1 Box 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 5
Barrels 4, 7 2 Casks Apothecary 40 pieces Glass 16 1 Basket 17 1 Box ditto 1 1
Cask 1 1 Box S. x M. 1 1 Case Apothecary 10 pieces Glass 2 1 Box ditto 1 1 Box
W. 4 1 Box 2lb. 9 oz. Silk and Ribbons 6lb. sewing Silk fringes and Millenary
W. and J. Whipple 5 1 Trunk 16lb. 6 oz. Silk only and Ribbons 11lb. 10 oz.
sewing Silk and fringes 48 yards square printed Cotton 1 Cwt. Haberdashery 6 1
Box Wrought Iron 1 1 Cask Apothecary 3 1 Trunk Calicoes printed, Callicoes and
narrow Germany Printed Linens Long Cloths Gurrahs Bastow's Taffities Bandanos
Romals, D^mask Tabling, Silesia Lawn 12 Demi Cambricks 5 1 Trunk 10lb* Nutmeg
2lb. Cloves 2lb. Cinnamon 1lb. Mace 1 1 Bag 316 lb. Pepper 1 1 Crate 1044
pieces white Glass 4 half Barrels Gunpowder 2 1 Chest Tea 2 1 Chest Apothecary
50 pieces Glass 3 1 Box Apothecary AB. 1 to 40 40 Boxes Lemons To Order T. C. 1
1 Trunk 10 pieces Stuffs J. and W. Russel Providence ooo in a diamond 1 Box
4lb. 1 oz. Silk and Ribbons 44 pieces Stuffs William Jackson HB. 1 1 Chest
10lb. 4 oz. Silk and Ribbons and Millenary Henry Barnes 1, 2 2 Casks SHOT 6
half Barrels Gunpowder 20 Bars LEAD Jo. L. 1, 2, 4, 7 4 Casks Apothecary John
Loring Boston 3, 6 2 Casks 5 1 Case Apothecary A Box A Chest MB. 1, 2 2 Casks
Apothecary Martin Brimmer ditto 3 1 Chest Apothecary 3 1 Chest ditto and 20
pieces Glass W. C. 1 1 Cask Apothecary William Coffin jun. ditto 1 Case
Apothecary 1 Box 1 Bale matted

Manifest of the Cargo of the Brigantine Wolf, John Bryant, Master, from
London, taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master, April
18th, 1769, which day the Vessel was entered at the Custom-House, Boston: --
Owners, NICHOLAS BOYLSTON and JOSEPH GREEN, of Boston. -- The Coals were
shipped the 10th of January, and the other Goods between the 30th January and
6th February 1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. J. 4 P. 25 Matts RUSSIA
DUCK. James Pitts Boston 1 1 Case 368 Else German linen 2 1 Bale containing 10
pieces Stuff J. W. 1 Cask Nails John and Those. Pitts ditto 2 1 Box Wrought Iron
4 1 Cask ditto 5 1 Case ditto 3 1 Cask 12 doz. WOOL CARDS 1 Bundle J. TP. 1 1
Box Wrought Iron 1 Basket G. B. 10 Tons HEMP Green and Boylston Boston 1 to 27
27 Casks Cheese 1 and 2 2 Bales 1459 Else German Linen 20 half Chests Oil 21
Chaldrons COALS 16 Chaldron Grindstones J. H. 12 Boxes 1 Bundle, Wrought Iron
C. S. 1 Cask 1 Bundle J. S. 5 Tons HEMP Isaac Smith ditto X. D. 1 Sheet LEAD
William Tailor 227 Bars LEAD 1 Basket Turnery J. S. 5 Casks Wrought Pewter
Jonathan Simson ditto o in a diamond 12 1 Cask Wrought Iron and Brass TL. 5 1
Trunk 33 pieces Demi Cambrick, Chintz, Ginghams, Pineascoes and Bandanos
Theophilus Lilly ditto 2 1 Case 248 Else German Linen 3 1 Case Nutmegs,
Cinnamon, Cloves 7 1 Trunk Silk Stuffs, sewing Silk inckle and 20 doz Hose 1 1
Trunk 180 yds. bounty Linen L. 20 not bounty, sewing Silk 201 Else Germ. linen
171 Russia linen wrought inckle Twist Tapes, etc. 9 1 Basket Turnery 3 1 Trunk
Silk stuffs and Haberdashery 4 1 ditto ditto and 133yds. bounty Linen 463 Else
German Linen 73 square printed Linen 39 pieces, 402 square yds. Callicoes 10
pieces Long Clothes 2 Trunks (...) 9 1 Case 10 doz. Felt H^tts Samuel Fletcher
Boston 2 1 Trunk Sewing Silk 4^1 yards bounty Linen 12 pieces British Linen,
wrought Brass (...) 1 Trunk Stuffs of Silk and (...) Linen and Haberdashery 4 1
ditto 10 pieces Demi Cambricks 180 yds. ^quare Callicoes 5 pieces long Cloth 1
Trunk (...). B. 1 Bale 90^ Else German Linen 285 Russia Linen 1 Box
Haberdashery 1 Chest Hon. Commissioners W. 30 Baskets Cheese Thomas Webb ditto
20 Chests Oil 1 Case Nutmegs, Cinnamons, Cloves, Mace 6 Casks Painter's Colors
6 ditto Brimstone 8 ditto Alum 2 ditto A. B. 52 to 60 9 Bundles Steel To Order
of the Shipper 61 1 Hogshead Wrought Iron 62 1 Cask ditto 63 to 66 4 Bundles
ditto 30 Casks 4 Bundles G. W. 1 1 Trunk (...) Demi Cambrick Stuffs of Silk
only, and stuffs of Silk and Worsted 380 Else German Linen George Watson 2 1
Bale 1088 Else German Linen 25 Matts RUSSIA DUCK.

Manifest of the Cargo of the Ship Susanna, Henry Johnson Master, from London,
taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master, 1st May 1769,
which day the Vessel was entered at the Custom-house, Boston: -- Owner, FRANCIS
GREEN of Boston. -- The Goods were shipped between the 6th and 17th February
1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages Contents. To whom Consigned F. G. 8 1 Bale 870 Else
Russia Linen Francis Green Boston 1, 2, 3 3 Bales 20 pieces Russia DUCK 4, 5,
6, 7 4 Bales 3158 Else German Linen 1 to 4 4 Casks SHOT 1 to 4 4 Bundles 10 Ton
HEMP 4 Casks Alum and Copperas 1 1 Bale 570^ Else Russia Linen M in a diamond
1, 2 and 4 3 Cases Haberdashery John Marsh 500 with. Cheese OA in a diamond 1 and
2 2 Bales Samuel Otis H. 4 W 9 to 19 11 Chests Tea Those. and Elisha Hutchinson
J. B. 2 1 Case 10lb. Sewing Silk John Bernard 1 1 Bale H. 1 to 5 5 Chests Tea
To Order J. B. 9 Matts RUSSIA DUCK To ditto 2 1 Bale 206 Else German Linen 5,
6, 10 3 Bundles HEMP Peter Frye Salem 9, 11, 12 3 Bundles HEMP Thomas Gerray 7,
8, 9 3 Bundles HEMP Eldridge Gerray The following are in the Cockets but are
not in the Manifest. -- Some goods were landed at Salem.
E G. 5 and 6 2 Casks 13 Cwt. 1 qr. 25lb. refined Sugar 4 1 Trunk Silk in
pieces, sewing Silk, Silk and worsted, and Silk and incle and 112 Else German
Linen 12 2 Cases Haberdashery 13 1 Trunk 10 pieces British Linen 13 13 Casks
1600lb. Cheese 1 box Pewter 8 1 Bundle Haberdashery 7 and 10 2 Boxes ditto 1,
2, 3, 3 Bales 30 pieces Russia DUCK 1 Cask SHOT 64 Bars LEAD C in a diamond 7
Boxes Wrought Iron 1 Bundle Haberdashery T. G. 4 1 Bundle Upholstery 3 1 Trunk
Silk in pieces, sewing Silk and 12 pieces British Linen 5 1 Bale 10 pieces
Stuff 6 1 Trunk 35 yds. Russia Diaper 108 yds. square printed (...), 12 pieces
India goods, 4 Demi Cambricks 1 1 Bale 9 pieces Russia DUCK 2 1 Bale 294 yds.
Germany Linen 58 Else Russia Linen T. 4 G. 1 1 Trunk 10 pieces British Linen
107 Else Germany Linen, 18 ditto P. F. 4 1 Trunk 10 pieces Stuffs 5 1 Bale
Upholstery 3 1 Trunk 428 Else German Linen 290 ditto Russia Linen 1 and 2 2
Bales 18 pieces Russia DUCK L. S. F. 3 Casks, Haberdashery B. P. 1 to 6 6 Bales
50 pieces Russia DUCK

To the PUBLIC.
August 31st, 1769.
MR. Thomas Gray having acted with the candor and good manners becoming a
gentleman of his fair character, I believe what he has declared to be true,
that the "Bales T. G. No. 1 and 2, were Ravens Duck and Ticklingburgh:" These
bales, however, were entered out by the name of German and Russia Linen; and I
could not divine that they had any other name: but granting I had possessed
that happy talent, I could not in justice to the Public or to myself, have
mentioned them, under any other denomination than that expressed in the cocket.
As to the 26 casks marked J. S. and consigned to him, there was no cocket for
them; they were only in the manifest; it was my duty to give them to the Public
exactly as the master had put them in his manifest; for it would have been
improper for me even to conjecture what they contained, when the manifest,
though it mentioned the marks, number of the casks, and persons name to whom
consigned, did not mention the contents. It would not have been amiss, however,
if Mr. Gray had, in his Advertisement, told the Public the contents of these
casks.

Several Anonymous publications having been inserted in Messrs. Fleets and Edes
and Gill's, Newspapers of Monday last -- I call upon the authors of them to
make known their names: as every man who takes the freedom of addressing the
public ought to do, not only that he may be the more readily believed, but
also, out of respect to the tribunal to which he makes his appeal. I have
already repeatedly declared that I would pay no attention to Anonymous Writers:
they indeed sufficiently reply to their own performances by their fear and
shame of avowing them openly. -- If they came from a few of the "Well Disposed"
Leaders, they no doubt shuddered at the very thought of confessing themselves
the authors of such pieces, in which veracity is so deeply wounded and their
own unworthy conduct so filthily slubbered over.

The Merchants in general in this Town, Province, and Continent, and every
unprejudiced Reader, will* at one view, on perusing their weak, confused
performances, see, that the more they struggle against truth, the more they
will expose and bewilder themselves by their contradictions.

I, therefore, out of tenderness to you, the "Well Disposed" recommend again
your "True Account" of Capt. Scott's and Capt. Smith's Cargoes, to your most
serious consideration

Please also to ^avour the Public with a list of the signers to the Agreement
of August; 1768?

Pray let us know who were the six signers, Who through inattention had omitted
to contermand their orders and how you disposed of the goods of these six
inattentive signers?

Do likewise imform us how the Committee disposed of the goods, put into their
hands last April, as well as the Marks, Numbers, Contents of the various
Packages with the persons names to whom they were consigned?

But, above all, it would be a great piece of satisfact^^^ to the Public to
learn, and surely very great condescension in the Committee, to point out where
(...) kept Store May 3d, 1769.

I hope the Committee will feel well disposed to answer these questions; and
that they will not be ashamed to do it in their own proper names: As I shall
then think it a duty incumbent on me to give a pointed reply to every thing
they advance.

At present, the public is greatly at a loss to know, Who ye are? You that have
undertaken to regulate the Trade of the Town and the Province; and who have
assumed a right to praise and to punish.

WHO ARE YE? YOU COMMITTEE MEN OF MERCHANTS! who disturb the Public with your
anonymous clamours. -- WE KNOW YE NOT. -- For from the respectable list of
Importers, we are really at a loss even to conceive, what are your
designations, or where you reside.

May I be indulged in a few observations on some of the "well disposed?" pray
when you review your past conduct, [though the hurry of action may have carried
you through every s^^newithout hesitation,] in your cooler moments, Do you not
even cease to esteem yourselves? Do you never blush in secret, or when you meet
each other in the street? Does reflection never awaken within you? -- Does your
past transactions, in your hours of retirement, never marshal themselves before
your aching imaginations? -- Do you never start in your sleep, while all nature
is hush, and only the soul awake at its self-review? -- Or, are you so dead and
mortified to every sensation of Justice, that you can proceed in the uniform
tenor of depravity, without the least remorse, without ever looking behind you?

If the smallest spark of honor, remains in your breasts, publish your names,
that, perhaps will, however ill you may have behaved, impress the Public with a
belief, that you have acted from principle; and that, however you may have
erred, it must have been from defect in judgment, not because you were
destitute of worth.

Let me before I take leave of you for the present, bestow on you some
wholesome advice: Repent and Reform! -- and if you should find yourselves at
any future meeting, where the real well wishers of the Province are collected,
do not give countenance to any Anonymous Publication; adopt a new plan on more
moderate principles; not such a one as some among you must be the first to
break: and show to the world by your future behavior that if private
resentment, passion, or prejudice hurried you beyond the bounds of your duty to
your fellow citizens, that, on having the right path pointed out to you, you
returned to it with gladness of heart.

JOHN MEIN.
Where the Contents are not expressed there are no Cockets for these Packages.

The Committee are requested to apply to the Owners of the above vessels, for
the names of the persons to whom the Goods Consigned to order belong, who no
doubt, can easily inform them; as they must know from whom they received the
freight.



Manifest of the Cargo of the Ship Pratt, Jonathan Freeman, Master, from
London, taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master, 13th April
1769, which day the vessel was entered at the Custom-House, Boston: -- Owner
GEORGE HAYLEY, of London, Merchant The Goods were shipped between the 20th of
January and the 21st of February, 1769.
Mark. No. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned S. W. 1 Case Stationary
Nicholas Bows Boston T. P. 77 1 Case Hats Those. Handiside Peck ditto W. P. 1
Box John Leveret ditto D. M. 1 1 Bale 4 Stuffs Daniel M'Carty ditto 2 1 Trunk
Millenary and wrought Silk W. P. 1 and 2 2 Casks Turnery William Philips ditto
J. H. 1 to 4 4 Casks Nails John Hyman E. T. 1 Chest Mr. Smith J. 4 B. 1 and 2 2
Bales Long Cloth John Bernard, Esquire 1 Box Hose 1 Box 65th Regiment B. W. 1 and 2
2 Chests Tea Binning Wentworth Portsmouth 1 1 Trunk Demi Cambrick and Holland
Linen, worsted and Silk Hose and Millenary J. B. 1 Trunk Narrow German Linen
Demi Cambrick 21 pieces British Linen, worsted Stuffs, Haberdashery sewing Silk
P. N. N. 1 Box A screw Press J. L. 1 1 Trunk 28 pieces British Linen 6 doz.
Breeches pieces 1 doz. Hose 270 yards square Callicoes 38 yds. square printed
Linen 2 Gurrahs, 6 1 half long Cloths 6 Taffities, 3 Romals Josias Lyndon 2 1
Trunk 3 1 Bale German Linen 1 Box Major Bayard H. B. 3 1 Case Millenary Henry
Barnes 4 to 6 3 Casks Earthen Ware 7 1 Basket ditto 9 1 Cask Wrought Brass 10
to 14 5 Casks Wrought Iron 15 to 16 2 Cases Upholstery 3 Boxes Pipes 21 1 Box
Wrought Brass 23 1 Box Haberdashery 8 1 Trunk Wrought Silk and Inkle 22 1 Chest
Sewing Silk and Haberdashery 20 1 Trunk 22 pieces 517 yds. Irish bounty Linen
and 11 pieces Irish Linen 18 1 Trunk 4 pieces 163 yds. British bounty Linen,
183 narrow Germany 170 drilling 4 Silesia Lawns 19 1 Trunk Demi Cambrick, 44
narrow Germany. 3lb. 14 oz. wrought Silk. 360 yds. Callico ^o long Cloths, 2
Romals, one Taffities 1 and 2 2 Casks Stationary 17 1 Chest 249 Else narrow
Germany 285 Else broad Russia S. W. 1 1 Case Samuel Hughes W. C. 1 to 2 2 Casks
William Catherwood V. 1 to 5 5 Casks Turnery Nathaniel Rogers Boston 4 A. 1
Cask Turnery John Appleton in a?diamond 1 to 3 3 Casks Wrought Pewter William
Jackson 8 1 Cask 9Cwt. 2qr. 21lb. British refined Sugar 1 1 Trunk 5lb. wrought
Silk 7lb. 8 oz. sewing Silk, and Haberdashery 3 1 Trunk 21lb 14 oz. sewing Silk
15 dozen Hose. 4 1 Trunk 148 lb. 3 oz. wrought Silk, 16lb sewing Silk and
Haberdashery 5 1 Trunk 8lb. wrought Silk and Haberdashery 7 1 Trunk 109lb. Silk
and worsted, 14lb. Silk and Inkle and 7 pieces Stuffs 6 1 Trunk 20 pieces
Stuffs 2 1 Bale 11 Stuffs 9 1 Bale 20 ditto 10 to 14 5 Cases Looking Glasses W.
I. 1 Trunk Stuff Shoes A. 4 A. 10 Casks Strong Beer To Order A. 4. A. 2 Casks
ditto Sergeant Ivery 1 Box AE. C. in a diamond 1 1 Case Millenary James Murray
Boston 3 1 Matt Upholstery 2 1 Trunk 2^lb. wrought Silk 18lb. Sewing Silk and
Millenary 4 1 Trunk 1lb. sewing Silk, 5 3 4^hs lb. wrought Inckle and Twist 5 1
Trunk 7 narrow Germany 48 yards. square Linen, 28 Else Russia, 8 Silesia Lawns,
14 pieces India Goods, 5 Demi Cambricks 7 and 8 2 Casks Earthen Ware E. R. 1
and 2 2 Cases Looking glasses -- Richard 3 1 Bundle Wrought Iron 1 and 2 2
Casks Nails J. (...) 1 Cask Earthen Ware a diamond 16 Boxes Tin-plates To Order
1 Box Horn 19 Tons HEMP Jonathan Freeman F. 6 Boxes Tin-plates To Order. J. F.
1 to 13 13 Matts 26 pieces Russia DUCK. Jonathan Freeman 11 to 12 2 Casks 1049
lb. refined Sugar 1 to 10 10 Crates Earthen Ware 7 Baskets ditto 1 to 10 10
Casks Whiting 10 Firkins Herrings 15 Tons Chalk J. A. 1 Basket Trees John
Apthorp

Where the Contents are not expressed there are no Cockets for these Packages.
To the PUBLIC.
September 4 th 1769.
HAVING been very unjustly treated in an anonymous Advertisement, I judged it
necessary, in my own defense, to give my reasons for declining to sign the
non-importation agreement; among which, were, the necessity I was under of
supporting seventeen people employed in a profession worthy of encouragement in
every civilized country, and in two other branches of business, closely
connected with, and immediately depending upon that profession. I have also
shown, that I have given very great encouragement to the manufactures of this
province in my various occupations: And I can, with the most sacred adherence
to truth, declare, that I have all along been deeply impressed with the warmest
sense of gratitude for the many and great favors which I have received, and
daily continue to receive, from the Public.

In this situation then, myself not a merchant, and considering myself as
wholly out of the line of the agreement against importing English goods, for I
never imagined that Books and Paper passed under that denomination; in this
situation, I say, seeing myself attacked in the most unwarrantable and lurking
manner, and being convinced too, that this attack proceeded from the private
enmity of a few of the "well disposed," was it not both natural and proper for
me to undertake my own vindication? -- Which could be accomplished in no other
manner, than by giving my reasons, as I have already done, and also, the state
of the importations since the agreement took place; -- In which state, so many
very respectable Names appear, as must convince the public, that the
non-importation agreement, was not generally conformed to; and that the few
"well disposed," who published the advertisement in which I was so injuriously
used, could only be actuated against, me by the black passions of envy and
mali^^ when they ^permitted so many and such large importations, to pass
unobserved.

In the course of this necessary undertaking I very justly published in the
manifest of the Lydia, Captain Hood, five bales of British Linen, marked J. H.
as they were shipped by Mr. Hancock's correspondent, and entered out in the
Custom-house of London; which five bales so marked are, in the Master's
manifest, said to be consigned to John Hancock, Esquire -- Mr. Hancock having gone
out of town the morning of this publication, Mr. William Palfrey his clerk,
made ^ath, that th^se ^ales contained only "one hundred pieces Russia Duck;
this occasioned a publication of an a^^^sted Copy of the Cocket in the next
Chronicle, to which Mr. William Palfrey made a long reply in the Boston News
Letter of Thursday last, in which, though he says very little indeed to the
matter in dispute, he talks much of his Master, himself, and his motives. --
The case, in short, is just as follows: -- Mr. Hancock's correspondent and the
officers of the port of London, enter out 100 pieces British Linen, in five
bales, marked, J. H. which bales, marked J. H. are mentioned in the manifest,
consigned to John Hancock Esquire so that in whatever light this matter is viewed,
or in whatever manner it may be determined, I am fully defensible. -- I was
obliged to give the contents of these bales as Mr. Hancock's correspondent
entered them out at the port of London, as the Custom officers there cleared
them out, and to annex Mr. Hancock's name to the bales so marked, as the master
of his own vessel had done in the Manifest he delivered into this Custom-house.
-- This affair, therefore rests, as I said before, between Mr. Hancock's
correspondent, a Gentleman of great and established character, and Mr. William
Palfrey, Clerk to Mr. Hancock.

What Mr. William Palfrey says, concerning the publishing of the Cocket, being
intended to convey the idea that his master had imported a quantity of Stuffs,
Gloves and Haberdashery, is both weak and ridiculous; for if his confusion
would have allowed him, to read it, he must have perceived that all the other
articles mentioned in it, have marks quite different from Mr. Hancock's; and if
he had taken the trouble to compare these marks in the attested Cocket, with
the Manifest of Capt. Hood's cargo as published by me, he would in one minute
have found there, the persons names to whom these goods were consigned.

He likewise is very lavish of ill language, and raves much about p^rty. -- I
was always too independent to adopt the principles of any party. Let the public
judge, which of us is engaged in the S^^e^m of Party -- he who in every
sentence foams out abuse and party declamation, or he who solely attending to
his own vindication never deviated so far from the subject, as to mention the
word -- This must appear so obvious to every candid reader, that I shall insist
no farther on the subject.

Without producing any thing to the point in question, Mr. William Palfrey, in
his last publication, parades very much indeed, by which he appears to be
mighty willing to raise a cloud, under the shade of which he might make his
retreat, and at last fairly dives into the region of poetic nonsense, where at
present he remains immersed in obscurity.

The Few "Well Disposed" having been repeatedly called upon to publish a
Manifest of Capt. Scott's cargo, the demand is again made, and I now take the
freedom, with the "Well Disposed" to inform the public, that what has been
published in two of the Mondays, and one of the Thursday's Papers as a True
Account of that cargo, is very far from deserving that name. -- I also desire
them to give an account of the Marks, Numbers, Packages and Contents, of the
goods that arrived in the Nassau, Capt. Smith, all of which are said, by an
Anonymous Advertisement, to be in their stores; if they really are so, they
cannot be at any loss to satisfi^ the public.

The gentlemen concerned in importation, are advised to follow the open and
candid example, shown them by Mr. Gray.

As Messrs. Averys have declared that they have not imported for two years, yet
as the name of John Avery is in Capt. Coleman's manifest, which manifest is
extremely distinct; I recommend also to the Committee, to apply to the owners,
who certainly can inform them who paid the freight for these packages.

Mr. Francis Johonnot, has accounted for the trunk consigned to him with great
clearness.

Mr. Benjamin Andrews, also deserves thanks for signing his name to his
advertisement; though I wish he had been as explicit as Mr. Johonnot; there
being no doubt, that these goods have been imported, it must be the business of
the person to whom they are consigned in the manifest, to point out
particularly how they have been disposed of, especially if that person is a
signer to the agreement.

The few "well disposed" are in fact, at present, undergoing a course of
discipline "a posteriori" that being the only method of attacking them, as they
do not incline to show their faces.

But whatever may be the success of this publication with respect to the
drawing them out to public view, I am well convinced, that it must have a very
salutary effect on their future conduct in life, for they will neither be so
forward, in time to come, to publish anonymous advertisements filled with
untruths, nor will they be so ready to break through "solemn agreements" which
they may have signed.

JOHN MEIN.

Manifest of the Cargo of the Ship Thomas, William Davis, Master, from London,
taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master, 18th April 1769,
which day the vessel was entered at the Custom-House, Boston: -- Owners
BENJAMIN GREEN, sen. and jun. NATHAN, GREEN, and DAN, HUBBARD, of Boston. --
The Goods were shipped between the 3d of January and the 9th of February, 1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. B. G. 1, 2 2 Bales 18
pieces Russia DUCK Benj. Green and Son Boston 6, 7 2 Casks 21Cwt. 2 qr. 8lb.
Brimstone 3 1 Bundle 290 Else Russia Linen 4, 5 2 Casks 22Cwt Alum 8, 9, 10,
11 4 Casks 25cwt. Copperas 12, 13, 14, 15 4 Casks 70 doz. WOOL CARDS 40 half
Barrels Gunpowder 4 Casks LEAD SHOT 123 Bars LEAD D. H W. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 5 Bales
48 pieces Russia DUCK D. and W. Hubbard ditto 6 1 Bundle 580 Else Russia Linen
63 Bars LEAD 4 Casks SHOT 7, 8 2 Casks 40 doz. WOOL CARDS 7 Bundles HEMP 1 Bale
L. S. F. 30 1 Cask G in a diamond. 10 half Barrels Gunpowder Nath. Green ditto
1 to 13 13 Matts CANVAS H. 31 to 35 5 Boxes 100 pieces Glass To Order. 7 1 Case
40lb. Nutmegs 12lb. Cinnamon, 4lb. Cloves, 4lb. Mace 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41,
42, 43, 8 Chests Tea 1 to 6 6 Casks 72 doz. bottled strong Beer, 864 pieces
Glass 8, 9, 10 3 Bags 948lb Pepper 11 to 30 20 Chests Sallad Oil 2 Cases 1 Cask
15 Casks Cheese 1 Bundle HP. 5 1 Case 20 doz. Castor, and 20 doz. Felt Hats
Those. Handiside Peck X. in a diamond. 8, 9, 10, 11 4 Bales 1, 75 Else British
made SAIL CLOTH To Order 1 to 12 12 Hampers Bottled strong Beer, 720 pieces
green Glass J. ROW Army 1 to 8 8 Bales 7281 Else narrow Germany Linen 1 Bale
91 and 2 2 Casks 10 small miniken baize 74^lb. wrought leather T. L. 1, 2 2
Cases Haberdashery Thomas Lee J. K. 1 1 Trunk 60lb. Nutmeg, 20lb. Cinnamon,
12lb. Cloves 8lb. Mace John Knigh^ 20 half Barrels Gunpowder J. C. 1 to 3 3
Casks Painters Colors To Order 5 1 Case Painters Colors, Blushes and leaf
Gold 4 1 Case Verdigrease 6 1 Cask Oaker W. G. 36 to 39 4 Casks Painters Oil
and Colors To Order 40 1 Case Painters Colors and Leaf Gold 41 1 Cask Oaker
J. O. 1 to 10 10 Casks Painters Oil and Colors To Order 1 to 12 1 Case
Painters Colors, brushes and leaf Gold 11 1 Baske^ 100with. Glue 12 1 Case 57lb.
Verdigrease J. G. 40 to 57 18 Casks Painters Colors To Order 58 1 Case
Painters Colors, brushes and leaf Gold W. C. 27 1 Case 36 pieces Glass To
Order 23 and 24 2 Casks Painters Colors 26 1 Case Brushes and Leaf Gold 25 1
Case Verdigrease 28 and 29 2 Casks Oker in a?diamond. 16 1 Cask 225lb. great
Bugle Green and Cleverly 17 1 Case J. B. 1 Cask Cordage G. C. in a diamond. 1
Cask Wrought Iron T. K. 1 to 8 8 bales 75 pieces Russia DUCK Thomas Kemble 9 1
bundle 40^ Else Russia Linen J. S. 1 and 2 Casks Garden-seeds Joseph Scott 3 1
Cask Earthen Ware a diamond. 1 1 Cask Benjamin Clarke MB. 1 1 Cask 200lb.
Saltpetre Martin Brimmer 7 and 8 2 Casks 214lb. Currants 9 and 10 2 Casks
222lb. Turkey ^igs 2 1 Cask 1100lb. Alum 3 1 Cask 1000lb. Copperas 4 1 Hogshead
5cwt. 1 qr. and 18lb. red wood 5 1 Barrel 100lb. Madder 1 Box T. F. 1 1 Cask
Haberdashery Thomas Flucker M. S. 1 Trunk Jonathan Simpson R. L. 1, 2 2 Cases
R. G. 1 1 bale 348 Else Russia Linen Rufus Green 2, 3 2 bales 1503 Else narrow
Germany Linen 4 1 Case 18 pieces Stuffs 5 1 case 6lb. sewing Silk 1cwt.
Haberdashery 12 boxes Wrought Iron 6 1 Trunk 6 Taffities, 10 Peniascoes, 10
Ginghams, 1 Romal I. T. 2 1 trunk 250 Else narrow Germany Linen, 4lb. sewing
Silk, 370 yds. Irish bounty Linen, 10 pieces British, Linen John Tailor 5 1
trunk 8 demi Cambricks, 370 yds. square printed Calicoes, 14 Gurrahs, 12
Ginghams, ^8 narrow Russia, 3 long Cloths 1 1 bale Upholstery 3 1 chest 25
pieces Stuffs 4 1 bale 10 small miniken baize 9 boxes Wrought Iron W. D. 4 1
cask 120lb. Turkey-^igs William Davies 5 1 cask 100lb. sweet Almonds 6 1 cask
110lb. Currants 2 and 3 2 cases 190 pieces China 3 1 trunk 20lb. wrought Silk
and Ribbons, 10 pieces Stuffs 7 1 box 13lb. wrought Silk and Ribbons, 8lb. Silk
and incle 1 1 cask White Glass 2, 3, 4, 5 4 casks Earthen Ware 6 1 cask White
Glass 7 and 8 2 cases 4 1 trunk 3 Callicoes, 18 Taffities, 4 Peniascoes
Ginghams, 10 Ba^da^os, 9 Romals, 398 Else narrow Germany, 1 Demmity, 21 yds.
Napkening, 237 yds. square printed Linen, 2 demi Cambricks 1, 2 2 hampers 8
ozen bottled strong Beer H. in a diamond 1 to 4 4 casks 28 dozen bottled strong
Beer 2 2 casks D. 1 to 6 6 matts 12 pieces Russia DUCK S. in a diamond. 1 to 5
5 casks Pewter J. B. 1 to 11 11 bales 99 pieces Russia DUCK John Bernard Boston
17, 18 2 casks 32cwt. 1qr. 12lb Brimstone 12, 13 2 bales 1408 Else narrow
Germany Linen 14 1 bale 580 Else Russia Linen 19 1 trunk 504 Else narrow
Germany Linen, 12 oz. sewing Silk, 515 yards Irish bounty Linen, 100 with.
Haberdashery 22 to 27 6 boxes 100 pieces Glass 28 1 cask 1cwt. wrought Pewter
29 1 bale 10 small miniken baize 15 half barrels Gunpowder 33 1 box 4 4-10th
Callicoes, 6 Bandanoes. 8 Nankins 30 to 32 3 chests Sallad Oil S S. 2 half
barrels Gunpowder Benja. Green and Comp. 21 chaldron COALS 58 barrels Pork C.
C. 1, 2 2 bales 18 pieces Russia DUCK Charles Chancey, Kittery. 3 1 bale 380
Else narrow Germany Linen, 464 Else Russia Linen 4 1 bale 655 Else narrow
Germany Linen 5 1 case Haberdashery 6 1 trunk 74 yards Irish bounty Linen and
Haberdashery 7, 8, 9 3 bales 30 pieces Stuffs 1 to 8 8 barrels Nails 10 1 trunk
270 yds. square printed Callicoes, 15 Gurraghs 18 narrow Russia, 1 Bastos 2
casks LEAD, SHOT 4 casks Nails L. S. F. 28, 29 2 Casks S. G. 1 to 45 41 casks
Apothecary Sylvester Gardner 1 case Apothecary 1 box Apothecary 2 baskets
Apothecary H. 4 W. 1 to 8 8 chests Tea T. and E. Hutchinson E. D. 1 trunk
Apparel John Vassal J. W. 12 Faggots Steel To Order E. G. 2 half barrels
Gunpowder Elbridge Gerry

To the PUBLIC.
September 7 th 1769.
MR. Francis Green having published, in the Boston-Gazette of last Monday, a
sort of a defense of himself, in which he says, that the German and Russia
linen, as entered out by his correspondent, and as cleared out by the Officers
of the port of London, "are Ravens Duck and Ticklinburgh:" Now, this simple
affirmation of Mr. Francis Green's cannot be deemed a proper exculpation; he is
therefore called upon, to exhibit his invoice, and at the same time, to name
the number of pieces, yards, and time when shipped.

It was rather unfortunate too, for Mr. Francis Green to declare, that he can
make it appear, he never ordered the four ca^ks ^f alum and copperas; which is
by no means a sufficient apology; for to justify himself in the eye of the
Public, it ought to be made evident, that he never received them into his
custody; that the Committee took them into their possession; that they remain
so still; for in saying, that he "submitted them to the direction of the
Committee" is something very jesuitical. -- Pray Mr. Francis Green, how did the
Committee direct them to be disposed of? Do (...) so mention, where the
Committee kept store the 1st of May last, the very day your vessel entered;
because they may have given you "direction" to keep these 4 casks in your own
store; and perhaps, by this time, you may have disposed of them.

(...) kind to yourself, as to mention the names of the six persons, in this
town, whom you yourself confess to have imported goods? and that the town of
Salem may not remain under the general imputation of breaking the agreement,
indulge the public with the names of the Salem Importers?

To whom were the five chests of Tea marked H^ consigned to, and where were
they landed?

I did you all necessary justice concerning the goods landed at Salem, which I
mentioned in the account I gave of your vessels cargo.

It behooves you Mr. Francis Green to be very explicit in your reply, for if you
show any degree of equivocation, charity itself will be almost forced to place
these five chests of tea, consigned to order, to your own particular account.
But that you may vindicate yourself ^ully is really my wish.

Mr. Hancock being now returned to town, it would seem a piece of justice in
him, to inform the public, of the names of the Importers of the 75 barrels
Gunpowder, and 34 casks of Cheese mentioned in the Manifest of the Last
Attempt, Capt. Lyde; and the names of the persons to whom the packages, marked
T. O. and G. D. in the Lydia, Captain Hood, were consigned.

The many attempts that have been made to (...) this dispute in a party light,
sufficiently prove the weakness of my opponents; I am engaged in no Party;
evidence of which may be seen in every thing I have published; having strictly
adhered to my own defense, and (...) the opening a view into the behavior of
the few "Well Disposed," who have labored very hard by their Anonymous
Advertisements and Publications, to deceive the town, province, and continent.
-- And I shall pursue this necessary purpose with proper decency and
determination, unbiassed by fear or affection, prejudice or party.

The candor of the public will never permit them to affix any belief to
anonymous writers; for the purposes of men, who are afraid to avow what they
write, cannot be warrantable.

I now repeat again, what I have already often demanded of you the few "well
disposed," to publish your list of signers; the packages you have in your
custody; and the names of those to whom they belong.

Indeed you appear to have some sense of shame left by your carefully
concealing your own names; though your having some feelings of this sort is not
surprising; as people, whose behavior has been regulated by private interest
and the baser passions, when under the correcting hand of truth, and dreading a
complete exposure of their unworthy practices, must, even to themselves, on
reflection, feel despicable.

Poor mistaken MEN! I leave you, for the present, under that contempt, which
your bad intentions, your subterfuges, and your contradictions, must have
excited in every honest heart.

JOHN MEIN.

Manifest of the Cargo of the Brigantine Hanover, Benjamin Bernard, Master,
from London, taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master 23d
January 1769, which day the vessel was entered at the Custom-House, Boston: --
Owners RICHARD COFFIN, SAMUEL STARBUCK, WILLIAM HUSSY and JOSEPH NICHOLS of
Nantucket -- The Goods were shipped between the 11th and 27th October, 1768.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned D. L. J. 1 to 10 10
Matts Russia DUCK D. and W. Hubbard Boston A. O. 1 bale 497 Else narrow
Germany, 171 Else broad Russia linen Azor Orne Marblehead 1 to 15 15 matts
Russia DUCK 1 to 4 4 bales HEMP F. in a diamond. 1 to 6 6 casks Cheese Samuel
Fletcher Boston G. W. 1 to 3 3 casks Cordage George Watson A. W. 1 1 case 20
pieces Stuffs A^. gail Whitney Boston J. 4 A. 1 1 case 20 Stuffs John Apthorp
ditto B. E. 1 to 12 12 bales HEMP Those. Jenkins, Nantucket G. G. 1 1 box 1 Demi
Cambrick, 12 Else narrow Germany and 12 yds. printed Linen Grafton Gardner
ditto C. D. in a diamond. 2 1 box Wrought brass To order Boston 3 1 case 12
pieces British linen 4 1 trunk 24 doz. worsted hose 10 1 trunk 18 pieces
British linen 11 1 trunk 22 pieces British linen 12 1 case Stationary 9 1 case
297 Else Narrow Germany, 85 Else broad Russia 6lb. Nuts 1 1 trunk 738 yards
Irish bounty Linen 17 1 trunk 58 Else narrow Germany, 58 yds. square printed
linen, 108 Else narrow Russia Linen 70 Silesia Napkening 1 to 6 6 casks C. D. 5
and 6 2 bales 22 pieces baize 7 and 8 2 bales 42 pieces Stuffs 13 1 bale 12
pieces baize 14, 15, and 16 3 bales blankets H. G. (...) 1 to 16 16 casks
Cheese Harrison Gray ditto N. G. 1 to 6 6 casks Cheese Nath^ Gorham,
Charlestown 1 1 trunk 257 Else narrow Germany, 129 yards square printed linen,
53 yds. square printed cottons, 2 Sale^^pores, 2 Taffities, 2 Peneascoes, 10
Demi Cambricks B. L 1 1 bale Blankets Jonathan Burnell Nantucket 4 2 to 9 8
casks Wrought Iron Nathaniel Coffix ditto 10 and 11 2 bundles Wrought Iron 12 1
cask ditto 13 1 cask Wrought Pewter 14 1 bale 24 pieces Stuffs 15 and 16 2
bales Blankets 17 1 trunk 25 dozen Hose 18 1 box Wrought Iron 1 1 bale 684 else
Russia linen 1 to 6 6 boxes 1 to 8 8 casks Powder 1 to 12 12 bars LEAD S. S. C.
1 1 Trunk 45 pieces Stuffs S. Starbuck and Company 2 1 Case 18 pieces British
Linen 9 to 23 15 casks Nails 24 1 bundle Wrought Iron 12 iron Potts 3 chaldron
Grindstones 5 bundles Good steel 2 casks Wrought pewter 2 bales 50 pieces Stuffs
2^ 1 cask Haberdashery 29 and 30 2 box^ Wrought Iron 31 1 box^ Haberdashery 3
and 4 2 bales RUSSIA DUCK 5 1 bale 17 Else narrow Germany, 580 Else Russia
linen 6 1 bale 706 Else narrow Germany, 475 yards British bounty Linen 7 1 bale
25 Else ^r. Germany, 830 yds. British bounty linen and 8 pcs. British Linen 8 1
trunk 360 yds. Irish bounty Linen, 9 Demi Cambricks, 6 Else narrow Germany 10
tons HEMP 32 bars LEAD 32 to 35 4 chests Tea 36 1 cask Pepper (...). B. 1
chests Tea Benjamin Bernard 4 1 bale Blankets 3 1 case Stuffs 1 1 trunk Wrought
Incle and Twist 50 yds. Irish bounty linen and Haberdashery 2 1 trunk 176 Else
narrow Germany, 57 Else broad Russia Linen 5 1 trunk 4 Demi Cambricks, 34 Else
narrow Germany 27 yds. square printed linen, 85 Else broad Russia Linen, 42
yards square printed Callicos 3 pieces India goods B 1 and 2 2 bales 18 pieces
Stuffs C. D. 1 and 2 2 casks Cordage Isaac Smith Boston 3 1 cask Wrought Iron
Z. 1 and 2 2 bales RUSSIA DUCK George Erving ditto 3 to 12 10 bales 1 to 20 20
casks J. R. L. 1 1 cask Wrought Pewter John Ramsdale 3 1 bale Blankets 2 1
trunk 38 yds. Irish bounty Linen, 4 pieces British Linen, 19 Else narrow
Germany, 29 Else broad Russia Linen P. F. 1 1 box Wrought Iron 3 1 bale
Blankets 2 1 trunk 28 Else broad Russia linen 1 and 2 2 Coils Cordage Shubael
Coffin The following are in the Cockets, but are not in the Manifest.
J. B. 1 trunk 31 Else narrow Germany, 12 yds. square printed Linen, 57 Else
broad Russia Linen 1 Romal H. G. 3 1 case Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinnamon and Mace B.
B. 3 Matts Russia DUCK S. C. O. 2 Trusses Turnery

To the PUBLIC
Boston, September 11 th, 1769.
I Hope Mr. Hancock, when he has leisure, will answer the questions, which have
been twice put to him; as for his Clerk, till he can invalidate the attested
Cocket, which I have published, it would conduce more to his master's service
for him to be silent. Mr. Gray's character, so well known, and so fully
established, entitles him to general respect* to mine he had a particular
claim, that of having limited himself solely to his own vindication, without
descending to rake the kennels of abuse.

Mr. Handyside Peck is desired to inform the public, if he is a signer to the
agreement, and to give his reasons for receiving into his custody, two
hogsheads of Hats, and one case of haberdashery, consigned to him, which
arrived in the London Packet, Capt. Cal^s, in April last; and one case of Hats,
(...) the Pratt, Capt. Freemen, which also arrived (...) Apri^; both upwards of
eight months after the non-importation agreement was signed.

Likewise to give an account of the contents of the case, marked THP. mentioned
in the following attested cocket of the ship Thomas, Capt. Davies, to contain
20 dozen Castor, and 20 dozen Felt Hats; as it appears by the Boston Evening
Post of this day, which I have just seen, that he has denied it contained Hats
in a manner somewhat outrageous.

London, Know ye, that Lane, Son, and Fraser, have entered twenty dozen Caster
Hatts, and twenty dozen Felt Hatts, in the Thomas, William Davies for
New England, free by act: dated 27 January 1769, in the ninth year of King
George the third.

Signed Wm. Bates D. Collr. Wm. Richardson D Count. Wm. Hawkins, Ho. 9



Endorsement.
THP 1 Case Hats.
A true Copy of part of a Cocket of the Thomas, W. Davies.
Dated at the Custom-House Boston, the 11th day Sept. 1769. Will. Sheaffe, D.
Coll. Rob. Hollowell, D. (Count.


Which Case marked THP is said in the Manifest, to be consigned to Thomas
Handyside Peck, which Manifest was delivered in, and swore to, at the
Custom-House here, by Capt. Davies.

The above Cocket puts me wholly out of the dispute; it proves the fact I had
asserted: -- How then could this weak man be so blind to all sense of decency
and regard to himself and his friend at home! as to expose the latter to the
charge of a false entry, and himself to be asked this question^ What did the
Box really contain? This man surely deserves pity! but perhaps, the Box
contained Dye stuffs or Indigo; if it was really this last mentioned article,
allow me, Mr. Peck, to propose a small amendment to your next procession with
your Box and Bell; -- be sure to have the Word, INDIGO, painted, in large
capital characters, on the sides of your Box; -- let the number of the bells be
increased, and appended round your own neck, you will, then, be
characteristically dressed, and may prance before your decorated Box, with all
the frantic solemnity becoming such a (...)-show.

Every man before he attacks another, ought carefully to look at home; and
though he thinks himself invulnerable there, a respect to his own character
ought to prevent him from behaving with brutality. Mr. Thomas Handeyside Peck
is therefore desired coolly to consider this hint, and not in future to adopt
hasty measures; for the Public may yet see his name appear in the Manifest of
more than one vessel.

May the curtain of oblivion, for the present, wrap in its thickest folds, all
remembrance of the affair above mentioned, it has only been thus far undrawn,
to serve as a lesson to others, not to deviate into gross abuse.

The "Well Disposed" Committee are entreated to apply to the owners of the ship
Thomas, Capt. Davies, for the names of the persons, to whom, the great quantity
of the duty articles, marked H. the numerous casks and cases of Painters
colors, marked J C. W G. J O. J G. W C. the several packages, marked X in a
dimond, and J. ROW army, were consigned: Under this last mark, several
thousand yards of German Linen, which, it seems, is always Ravens Duck and
Ticklenburgh, Sail-cloth or Duck, have been imported; by which the Public might
be almost persuaded to believe, that the army were much engaged in navigation,
and intended to equip a fleet. From the respectable characters of the owners,
both as Merchants and Gentlemen, the Committee, I make no doubt, will meet with
full satisfaction.

Some dark hints having been circulated by the "well disposed" Leaders, that
they think it beneath them, to reply to me under their own proper names: I
choose to let them know, and they themselves, must be well convinced, that their
behavior greatly requires a vindication; and that to rest under the charges,
with which I have arraigned them before the bar of the Public, displays neither
prudence, patience, nor dignity; but is the strongest proof, that can be given,
of conscious weakness, of conscious ^ear, and of conscious guilt.

If you the "well disposed" had acted justly, you would show, on your part, no
pretenses, no deficiencies; you would appear publicly; you would not be ashamed
of your own cause. Private interest, must have been the motives of your
actions, for men engaged in a great and good purpose, never wear masks, and are
incapable of falsehood.

Deign, then, to take advice from one who is an enemy to your injustice, but in
other respects, your sincere well wisher! would you wish to regain the
attention and confidence of the public! heartily and openly confess your bad
behavior! -- Honestly say, that your private actions have not corresponded
with your publications! ask pardon for the wrongs you have done individuals,
and implore the forgiveness of your country! -- However, deep, therefore, your
blushes may be, in this advised state of penance, it is your only remaining
resource! -- The track you are at present p^rsuing, will only plunge you deeper
and deeper into the slough of disgrace and remorse^ -- You cannot but perceive
it yourselves, that your measures must be softened, and your conduct totally
reformed! -- Indeed, to look back, and return, is the only way you have left
yourselves, to retrieve your reputations; or that can illuminate your breasts,
with the smallest ray of comfort.

JOHN MEIN.

Manifest of the Cargo of the Ship William, James Cathbert Master, from
Glasgow, taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master 26th April
1769, which day the vessel was entered at the Custom-House, Boston: -- Owners
JOHN DOUGLAS, ANDREW RAMSAY, and WILLIAM MONTEATH of Glasgow -- The Goods were
shipped between the 27th February and 8th of March 1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. (...). C. 1 and 2 2
Casks 1300 yds. Linen, Woollen and Haberdashery Alexander Auld 3 and 4 2 Casks
145 pieces 3403 yards Irish bounty Linen 840 yds. linen above bounty 5 1 Bale
13 pieces 1453 yds. British bounty Linen 6 and 7 2 Boxes 31 doz. Hats 16 1 Bale
11 pieces 552 yds. British bounty Linen 33 Casks Haberdashery 17 1 Box
Haberdashery 353 Bars Iron 2 Sheets LEAD 4 Casks Wrought Iron 8 to 15 8 Casks
Wrought Iron 1 Bale R. 4 B. 12 1 Box 250 yards Linen, 186 doz. Linen
Handkerchiefs. Robert Blair Boston 13 1 Box 500 yards Linen and Haberdashery 1
1 Box 90 pieces 141 yards Irish bounty Linen 2 to 5 1 Bale Haberdashery 3 Boxes
6 1 Box 90 pieces 2178 yds. Irish bounty Linen 7 1 Box Haberdashery 8 1 Box 54
pieces 1331 yds. British bounty Linen, 34 pieces 799 yards Irish Linen, Sewing
Silk, Silk Stuffs etc. 10 and 11 1 Box Haberdashery 1 Bale 9 1 Bale 13 pieces,
1289 yards British bounty Linen 1 and 2 2 Boxes Haberdashery James M'Master
ditto J. 4 M'c. 3 1 Box 53 pieces, 537 yds. British bounty Linen, Stuffs of
silk etc. 4 1 Box Haberdashery P. 4 M'c. 5 1 Box Haberdashery W. 4. M'c 1 1 Box
Printing Types William M'Alpsue W in a diamond. 1 to ^ 3 Boxes 5 pieces 120
yds. British bounty Linen, 64 pieces 1532 yards Irish Linen 2451 yds. above
bounty 48 dozen Linen Hand kerchiefs, Haberdashery and Woolens James Cuthbert 4
to 6 3 Bales 30 pieces 2876 yds. British bounty Linen, 42 yds. Linen above
bounty and Haberdashery A. L. 1 Box Colonel Leslie Boston G. R. 1 Box Printing
Types Green and Russell R. J S 1 to 12 12 Casks Snuff James Warden ditto C. C.
1 to 15 15 Casks ditto J. K. 1 to 10 10 Casks ditto S. Venner 5 Trunks
Custom-House B. H. 1, 2, and 3 3 Boxes 3649 yds. Linen, 4doz. Thread Stockings,
James Hunter 4 to 7 4 Boxes 405 yds. Linen, 20 doz. Thread Stockings 14 pieces
365 yds. British bounty linen, 87 pieces 2197 yds. Irish bounty Linen, Woolens
and Haberdashery 8 1 Bale Leather Breeches 9 to 16 1 Bale Woolens and
haberdashery 1 Box 6 Casks 24 to 26 3 Bales 36 pieces 3975 yards British bounty
Linen A and 22 2 Casks Wrought Iron 20 1 Bale 366 yds. Linen, 4 pieces 458 yds.
British bounty linen and Woolens 21 1 Box 340 yds. Linen, 182 yds. square
printed Linen 9 pieces 223 yards Irish bounty linen, Woolens and Haberdashery 3
Casks Wrought Iron 161 Coils Cordage 321 Bars Iron 3 Bundles C. B. 1 and 2 2
Casks Snuff Caleb Blanchard Boston Capt. O Hara 1 Bundle Woollens Capt O Hara
Lt. Napier 1 Box Powder and SHOT Lieut. Napier 2 Casks Capt. O Hara and
Lieutenant Napier. The following are in the Cockets, but not in the Manifest.
A. A. 1 1 Bale 8 pieces 924 yds. British bounty Linen 2 1 Box 375 yds. Linen,
1 doz. Thread Stockings 4 pieces 93 yards Irish bounty linen and Haberdashery 1
Bale Woolens J. C. 1 1 Box 18 pieces 409 yds. Irish bounty linen 450 yds.
Linen, 18 dozen Linen Handkerchiefs.

To the PUBLIC.
Boston, September 14 th, 1769.
JUSTICE, and a regard to my own character, would not permit me to be silent,
after the attempt made to injure me by the "Well disposed' in their anonymous
Advertisement; and I certainly have made it plain, that their are many more
Importers than those they have advertised.

I lay nothing before the Public but what is in the Cockets and in the
Manifests, which are sworn to by the Masters of the several vessels: -- Every
article that has been disputed by people who have signed their names, has been
fully proved; and some of them, by struggling to extricate themselves, have
only been more entangled in the net of evidence.

I therefore entreat Mr. Thomas Handasyd Peck to compare the attested Cocket,
published in the Chronicle of Monday last, with his oath, printed in the Boston
Gazette, or, Country Journal, of the same day; he will in that cocket see 20
dozen Castor, and 20 dozen Felt Hats, entered out in the Custom-house, London,
and signed by the officers of that port; by the Endorsement on the back of the
Cocket, these are said to be packed in a case, marked THP. which case so
marked, is put down to Thomas Handasyd Peck, in the Manifest given in, and
sworn to, at the Custom-house here, by Capt. Davies.

I have proved in the clearest manner, what I had asserted: -- Mr. Peck,
himself has even seen the original cocket: This matter, now, rests between Mr.
Peck and his Correspondent, against whom, his oath, has proved a false entry.

I again call upon you, the "Well Disposed," to publish your list of Signers;
-- to mention the number of packages you have in your store, and the names of
those to whom they belong: and also to give the Public a more "true Account" of
Capt. Scott's and Capt. Smith's cargoes: -- and above all, do not forget to
sign your own names; though, after so many repeated calls, I have little hope
left, of your avowing transactions, of which I believe you are thoroughly
ashamed.

Does not cruel reflection haunt your solitary hours? -- Do you not feel
miserable under the stripes which your folly, impudence, and iniquity, have
brought upon you? -- If you have any thing human in you, you must feel them --
It is a mortifying truth, but I must tell it to you, that in the whole tenor of
your conduct, you never seem to have been actuated by the slenderest idea of
justice. -- Do not then continue to abuse the patience of the Public, with
anonymous falsehoods! for words unsupported by proofs, must, to the judicious
and candid, appear dishonest and contemptible -- It is impossible to build a
durable superstructure upon deceit and injustice; you may go on, indeed, for a
while, and from hope may snatch a momentary gleam of success; -- but time and
truth, the te^^ of all things, will soon discover the insufficiency of your
labor; and it will melt, like an image of ice, before the rays of the Meridian
Sun.

JOHN MEIN.

Manifest of the Cargo of the Ship Boston Packet, James Scott, Master, from
London, taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master 17th
January 1769, which day the vessel was entered at the Custom-Boston: -- Owner
JOHN HANCOCK, ESQUIRE -- The Goods were shipped between the 20th October, and 16th
of November, 1768.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom Consigned. J. 4 P. 5 1 box Wrought
Iron James Pitts 1 to 4 4 casks Cordage no bounty ED. 2 1 case Wrought silk,
sewing silk, silk and worsted and 10 pieces stuffs Joseph Winslow 4 1 box 72
square yds. Callico, 4 Gurrahs 1 Taffity, 3 Romals 1 1 cask 150lb. Pepper 1
bale M. B. 1 box 1 bundle G. C. in a diamond. 4 casks Wrought Iro^ and Brass
Green and Cleverly 1 bundle W. P. 2 cases John Leveret 1 trunk 4 in a Heart 1
cask Wm. Hyslop and Co. J. R. S. 1 and 2 2 cases Haberdashery James and Wm.
Selkrig J. T. 1 1 cask Wrought Iron John Timmius S. o A. 2 casks To Order C. 4
B. 1 1 case 27lb. 12oz. Gold lace Cox and Berry 16lb. 12oz. silver lace 2 1
case 29lb. silk Hose 3 1 case Toys and Cotton Hose W. D. 5 casks To Order P in
a diamond 3 casks To Order. J. Na. 1 cask John Nazro 1 case B. C. 15, 16, 17 3
bales RUSSIA DUCK Barnabas Clark J. V. 1 box John Vassal R. Hall 2 casks R.
Hall 1 bundle AE. C. 1 1 trunk Wrought silk, sewing silk and Haberdashery
Abigail Rand 5 trunks 1 box 2 casks G. G. 1 1 bale Blankets Grafton Gardner 5
matts DUCK A. S. 3 1 trunk 107 Else narrow Germany 17 yds. square printed linen
12 lb. wrought incle, 4 Taffities and 6 Demi Cambricks Abigail Stevens 3 trunks
G. D in a diamond 5 1 cask Wrought Iron Gilbert Deblois 2 1 trunk 101lb. 14oz*
wrought silk, in pieces 8lb. 3oz. sewing silk and Millenary S. W. 1 1 box
Turnery Robert Gould (...). 4 G 1 cask Turnery C o N 1 1 cask Turnery J. W. 4 C
1 1 cask Wrought Iron T. and W. Cuzneau T. H. 11 bundles HEMP Thomas Hulme J H.
12 bundles HEMP John Hancock 42 chaldrons COALS A in a diamond. 3 bundles HEMP
J. and J. Amory L. D. 1 to 13 1 cask Turnery Lydia Dyer 2 casks Turnary A. H. 1
to 9 9 bales RUSSIA DUCK Alexander Hill J. S. 1 1 cask 25 doz. Wool CARDS
Jonathan Simpson J. B. 1 to 2 2 boxes 100 pieces Earthen Ware John Bernard 3 1
case 30 pieces Stuffs 1 to 8 8 casks Wrought Pewter 6 casks P. T. 14 1 cask
Cordage Joseph Jackson 5 to 13 9 bales 1746 Else narrow Germany Linen, 261 Else
Russia linen and 45 pieces RUSSIA DUCK 1 to 4 4 chests Tea ^ 3 bundles HEMP N.
S. 2 1 trunk 120 Else narrow Germany Linen Nath. Sherburne 1 bundle 222 Else
narrow Germany Linen (...). J. 1 1 chest Tea C in a diamond. 1 1 bale 435 Else
Russia Linen E. Johnson 1 1 trunk 16lb. Thread 10 pieces British Linen
Nathaniel Carter (...) in a diamond. 1 1 cask Turnery John Homands W. 7 bundles
HEMP Jonathan Warner D. T. 5 1 chest Tea David Todd 1 1 trunk Silk and worsted,
stuffs of silk and 24 Stuffs 2 1 bale 20 pieces Stuffs 3 1 box Silk and Ribbons
silk Hose and Haberdashery 7 to 10 4 casks Wrought Iron 2 1 bale 8 Short Cloths
1 box IV 3 casks John Vassal The following are in the Cockets, but are not in
the Manifest.
G. D. in a diamond. 1 chest Wrought Iron 1 chest 49lb. Inckle and Stuffs 4 1
chest Haberdashery (...) in a diamond. 3 1 trunk 482 yards square printed linen
4 Silesia lawns 642 Else narrow Germany 4 1 trunk 22 Demi Cambricks 6 6 10ths
Callicoes, 12 Nankeens and (...) Peniascoes, 10 pieces Stuffs 2 1 box Mace,
Cloves, Cinnamon and Nutmegs 1 1 cask 200 lb. Pepper 5 1 cask Earthen Ware 6 1
trunk 11 pieces Stuffs 7 1 trunk 20 doz. worsted Hose 8 1 trunk 62 lb. 7 oz
wrought silk in pieces 18lb. 9 oz. sewing silk and Haberdashery ^O in a
diamond. 1 1 cask Turnery JA. in a diamond. 1 cask Turnery J.3 N. 1 1 case
Earthen Ware 2 1 cask A 5 1 1 trunk 12 pieces British Linen 2 1 trunk 10 Stuffs
G. E. 1 1 case Turnery

Messrs. MEIN, and FL^EMING,

The enclosed piece inserted in the New-port Mercury, of Sept. 4, please to
publish in your Paper, with the following answer to what relates to the
Custom-House.

From the Newport Mercury, Inserted by desire of opposite Parties,
THE Boston News-Writers make JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire one of the foremost of the
Patriots in Boston, and the strictest observer of the agreement for non
importation: he would perhaps shine more conspicuously, and be less suspected
in this character, if he did not keep a number of vessels running to London,
and back, full freighted, getting rich, by receiving freight on goods made
contraband by the Colonies.

WHEREAS it is asserted in Messrs Edes and Gill's paper of Monday last, that
the Merchants in Boston had applied to the Custom-House Officers to examine the
Cockets of the goods mentioned in the Boston Chronicle, and were refused: and
as this assertion is denied by a number here, who say they pay greater regard
to Mr. Sheafe's certificate, than to Mr. Palfrey's oath, it is requested that
for the sake of truth, the said assertion, if possible, be authentically
proved, and published in the next Boston Papers. And at the same time, it is
expected that Mr. Palfrey will confirm the truth of his oath, by the most
substantial and unquestionable evidence.

N. B. Take care B^st^n -- ^s, Whigs or To^^es, that you deal fairly with the
Public, or -- will overtake you sooner or later!

August 31, 1769. AMERICAN SPY.
Two or three persons having called (...) different times at the Custom House,
in order to satisfy themselves if some of the packages published in the Boston
Chronicle were exactly taken from the Cockets, they were informed that the
Cockets were, at that time, in one of the Offices at the Board: and those who
ch^sed to call there, were showed what they wanted, by the principal of that
Office himself. --



To the PUBLIC.
Boston September 18 th, 1769
THE Publication, taken from the Newport Mercury, would draw from me some
animadversions, if Mr. Hancock was at present, in the Province; but on account
of his absence they shall be delayed.

Mr. Francis Green notwithstanding his vapouring, in the Boston Gazette, of
monday September the 4th, seems now by his silence, to be much puzzled, with
the few simple questions, which I thought proper to ask him, the Thursday after
his appearance in print: this silence ^ears a very doubtful aspect, he ought to
have embraced the first opportunity to vindicate himself; if he is at a loss,
let him take my advice, which I present to him with the greatest sincerity;
that is, at once, to tell the whole truth, concerning the tea, alum, etc. and
then he will neither be reduced to the necessity of having recourse to
subterfuges, nor will he lie under the suspicion of having imported contrary to
agreement.

The "well disposed" still obstinately continuing to conceal their faces, in
spite of the severe Castigation so frequently applied, must really excuse me,
when I tell them, once more, that their account of Capt. Scotts Cargo, is very
far from being a "true account:" I therefore, advise them, to be expeditious in
making o^t another; otherwise I shall think myself in duty bound to compare
that which they have already published with a manifest in my possession; which,
if the "w^ll disposed" have the least grain of modesty remaining, will either
prevent them from dece^ving the public with false accounts of the importations,
or will oblige them, in future, to give much honester reports. For the public
begin shrewdly to suspect, that, however "well disposed" some people may have
been to sign, they have been fully, as "well disposed" to forget they had
signed "their solemn agreement."

The publication I am engaged in, may, with great propriety, be termed The
Catechism of the "well disposed;" and I will venture to assure them, if they
decline returning the proper answers, they shall suffer due chastisement. --
Heartily, therefore, wishing their amendment, and recommending to their serious
consideration, the manifests already published, and the corrections and
admonitions, already bestowed, I take leave of them ^till next Thursday.

JOHN MEIN.

Manifest of the Cargo of the Brigantine Industry, Alexander Coffin, Master,
from London, taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master ^4th
April 1769, which day the vessel was entered at the Custom-House, Boston: --
Owners, SAMUEL ENDERBY, and JOHN BUX^ON, of London. -- The Goods were shipped
between the 20th February and 4th of March, 1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. E. C. 1 to 4 2 cases
Haberdashery Edward Church Boston 2 trusses J. R. S. 1 1 bale 715 Else Russia
Linen Soseph Rotch and son 1 to 25 25 matts 50 pieces Russia Duck B. I. B. 1 to
12 12 chests Oil Bunker, Jenkins and Bernard 1 to 9 9 casks Nails 3 1 case 451
Else narow Germany 4 1 trunk 131 Else narrow Germany, 12^ square printed linen,
5 Romals 1 (...) cask Pewter 2 and 5 2 bales 20 pieces Stuffs 6 and 7 2 casks
Wrought Iron 8 1 case Wrought Iron 9 to 11 3 bundles Wrought Iron 14 tons HEMP
T. J. 1 1 trunk 59 Else narrow Germany, 52 yds square printed linen, 120 yds.
square printed Callicoes, 4 Demi Cambricks, 3 long Cloths, 8lb. wrought Inckle
Thomas Jenkins 2 1 trunk 114 Else narrow Germany, and wrought Inckle and 10
Stuffs TF. 1 1 bale 432 Else narrow Germany Timothy Folgier. N. R. 1 to 3 3
che^^s Tea Nathaniel Rogers 1 to 7 7 casks Oil 7 packages L. B. 1 1 trunk 10
pieces Stuffs Jonathan Burnall J. s. R. 1 1 trunk (...) Else narrow Germany, 23
yds. narrow Russia Diaper, 31 yds. square printed Holland* 5 Gurraghs (...)
Cloths 498 yds. square printed Callicoes To Order. 4 1 trunk 18 Else narrow
Russia Linen 24 Demi Cambricks, 5 Taffities, 4 Bandanos, 4 Peniascoes, 6
G^^ghams 2 1 trunk 30 (...) 719 yards (...) Linen 6 pieces (...) Linen 12lb
sewing silk, 22 yds. Silesia Tabling, etc. 3 1 case Haberdashery J. Mc. 1 1
trunk 79 Else narrow Germany, 69 Else broad Russia Linen 23 yds. narrow Russia
Diaper 76 yds. square printed linen. 11 long Cloths, 486 yds, square printed
Callicoes. To Order 3 1 bale 920 Else narrow Germany. 4 1 trunk 15 Else narrow
Russia Linen, 24 Demi Cambricks, 10 Taffities, 4 Peniascoes, 6 Ginghams 2 1
trunk 32 pieces 754 yds. Irish bounty Linen and 6 pieces Irish Linen 5 1 case
Haberdashery 6 1 case Sewing silk, Silk in pieces and Haberdashery J. A. in a
diamond. 1 1 bale 29^ Else broad Russia Linen To Order 2 1 box Haberdashery J.
4 W. 1 1 bale 850 Else narrow Germany Joshua Loring J. 4 L. 44 1 trunk 31
pieces 741 yds. Irish bounty Linen, 15 Silesia Lawns 14 yds. square printed
linen W. W. 1 1 trunk 10 Else narrow Germany, 10 long cloths 360 is. square
printed Callicoes James and Robert Selkrig 1 1 case Haberdashery 1 1 bale J. C.
1 1 bale 3 pieces 72 yds. Irish bounty linen, 1 piece Irish linen, 683 Else
narrow Germany Jonathan Carry J. M. G. 1 1 case 6 demi Cambricks, 3 long cloths,
and 126 yds. square printed Callicoes James M'Gregore 3 1 trunk 10 pieces
Stuffs J. M. G. 1 1 bale The following are in the Cockets, but not in the
Manifest.
J A in a dimond. 3 15 matts DUCK 1 puncheon FISHING LINES

Manifest of the Cargo of the Brigantine Nantucket Packet, Timothy Folgier
Master, from London, taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the
Master, 3d May, 1769, which day the Vessel was entered at the Custom-House,
Boston: -- Owners, JOSHUA GARDNER, of Boston, CHRISTOPHER, SYLVANUS and GEORGE
HUSSY, of Nantucket. -- The Goods were shipped between the 10th and 14th
February 1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents To whom consigned. C. M. 1 1 trunk 25 yds,
Irish bounty linen, and 91 Else narrow Germany Caleb Macey 2 1 bale 4 pieces
Baize T. F 2 1 trunk 10 pieces Stuffs Timothy Folgier 1 1 trunk 75 yds. Irish
bounty linen and Irish Linen S. H. 2 1 trunk 69 Else narrow Germany* 101 yds.
square printed Callicoes, 3 long Cloths and 2 deym Cambricks Sarah Hussy 1 1
trunk 120 yds* Irish bounty linen, and 10 pieces stuffs and Irish Linen 2 1
case Russia linen, and 1 Penisacoe 1 1 bale Narrow Germany and Russia Linen and
4 pieces DUCK C. H. C. 1 to 9 9 casks Nails Christ, Hussy and Company 10 and
11 2 casks Wrought Pewter 13 1 cask Wrought Iron 17 1 trunk Haberdashery 18 1
bale Baize 14 1 case 552 yds. British bounty linen and 8 pieces British linen,
142 Else broad Russia 15 1 trunk 71 yds. Irish bounty linen, Haberdashery and
Irish Linen 16 1 trunk 82 Else narrow Germany, 212 yds. square Callicoes, 5
long Cloths, 1 Emertee, 1 Taffitie 12 1 case 285 else broad Russia 25 matts
RUSSIA DUCK G. H. 2 to 6 5 casks Painters colors George Hussy 7 1 bale 10
pieces Stuffs 1 1 trunk 187 Else narrow Germany 114 Else broad Russia, 2lb.
wrought Inckle 3 matts RUSSIA DUCK 4 bundles HEMP T. G. 1 1 trunk ^09 Else
narrow Germany Tristram Gardner 2 1 bale 12 pieces Stuffs S. B. 1 1 trunk 37
yds. Irish bounty linen and 84 Else narrow Germany Sarah Barney 2 1 bale 12
pieces Stuffs J. B. 1 1 crate Turnery Judeth Bernard 3 1 bale Blankets 2 1
trunk 13 Else narrow Germany, 36 yds. square printed (...), 1 ^o^g Cloth, 57
Else broad Russia

Brigantine TRITON, Stephen Davies, Master, from ^ull, entered at the Custom
house, Boston, 18th April 1769. -- Owners: SOLOMON DAVIES and BENJAMIN FANEUIL
of Boston. -- The Goods were shipped in J^nuary, 1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. C. S. 35 Chaldron COAL
Solomon Davis 1 bale Russia Linen 956 Else 75 matts Russia SAIL CLOTH 27 casks
Al^ Snow THISTLE, Alexander Marquis, Master, (...) House Boston, April 20th,
1769. -- Owned in Glasgow. -- The Goods were shipped between the 2d and 15th
February, 1769.
Mark. Number. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. M E. 1 to 8 8 casks
Haberdashery Captain Hugh Brown 9 to 12 4 boxes 5000 yds. Linen and
Haberdashery 13 1 box 9 pieces 213 yards British bounty Linen 53 pieces 1267
yards Irish bounty Linen 28 pieces 414 yards printed linen 14 1 bale 4 pieces
81 yds. British bounty Linen 8 pieces 466 yds. Irish bounty Linen and
Haberdashery 15 and 16 2 bales Haberdashery A 1 bale 12 pieces 1285 yards
British bounty Linen 17 1 bale Leather Breeches M. F. in a diamond 18 and 10 2
casks Haberdashery 1 to 14 14 ^^^ts SAIL CLOTH 70 coils Cordage 184 bars Iron 4
Anchors 1 sheet LEAD W. L. 1 box William Lata B.B S. 1 1 box 69 pieces 1624
yards Irish bounty Linen Capt. Patrick Bogle 1 box 30 pieces, 701 yards Irish
bounty Linen, 26 pieces 677 yards British bounty Linen 3 1 box 66 pieces 1631
yards* Irish bounty Linen, 17 pieces 292 yards British bounty linen 4 to 7 4
boxes 5493 yds. colored and white linen and Haberdashery 8 1 box Haberdashery
9 1 bale Woolens 10 1 box 198 doz. and 11 checked Handkerchiefs and
Haberdashery 11 and 2 2 bales 23 dozen Leather Breeches 13 1 box 397 yards
colored and white linens, 26 doz. and 9 check Handkerchiefs 15 to 30 15 casks
Haberdashery 31 to 35 5 bales 54 pieces 8326 yards British bounty linen P. B. 1
box 6 1-half doz. Hats 2 casks Hard-ware 397 bars Iron 3 1 box 700 yds. Linen
The following are in the Cockets, but are not in the Manifest.
H. B. 1 1 bale 13 pieces 1333 yards British bounty Linen 2 1 box 16 pieces 368
yards Irish bounty Linen Ship America, Robert Park, Master, from Glasgow,
entered at the Custom-House, Boston, 22d April* 1769. -- Owned in Glasgow --
The goods were shipped 21st March, 1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom Consigned. R. P. 1 1 trunk 1 piece
129 yds. British bounty Linen, 12 pieces 285 yds. Irish bounty linen and
Haberdashery Captain Robert Park 2 1 bale 7 pieces, 624 yds. British bounty
Linen 2 1 box 7 pieces 165 yds. Irish bounty Linen and Haberdashery

THE FIRST PART of the CATECHISM of the WELL DISPOSED.
I ENTREAT the "Well Disposed", to answer the following questions; some of
which have been repeatedly asked them.

Who were the "Seven Gentlemen" appointed, at the meeting Friday April 21st
1769, a Committee to examine the Manifests of the Cargoes of the vessels lately
arrived, or that may arrive this spring from any parts of Great Britain. -- Why
were not the reports of these seven Gentlemen published? -- What are the names
of these seven Gentlemen? --

When the meeting was held again, according to adjournment on Thursday April
27th, and when the Committee appointed to make enquiry relative to the
importation of goods by the vessels lately arrived from Great Britain,
REPORTED, that FIVE or SIX PERSONS who were Signers to the late agreement, had
received a few articles, (the remains of former orders) and were ready to
deliver them up to the care of the Committee. -- I ask, why were not the names
of the five or six Signers, who were so unlucky as to receive "the remains of
former orders," about eight months after the agreement was signed, made public,
with an account of the contents.

The signers, who received "the remains of former orders" after such a distance
of time, must have very dilatory Correspondents.

Please publish the marks, numbers, and packages, containing the "few Articles"
so received?

Well, but, it seems, they "were ready to deliver them up to the care of the
Committee." Did the "well disposed" take care of these "few Articles"? and,
where did they keep store, Thursday April 27th, 1769?

At this Thursday meeting, it was also reported, that some Gentlemen who were
not signers, had imported some goods prohibited by the late agreement, which as
to Quality and Quantity were small.

Who were the "some Gentlemen" that imported the "some goods prohibited," by
the late agreement, which, as to Quality and Quantity were small?

Pray lay before the Public the packages and Contents? -- It would also be very
kind in the "Well Disposed," when they publish the quantity of these some Goods
prohibited, to explain the meaning of "which" in "quality" "were small." --
This phrase is, certainly, above the comprehension of most Readers; and,
perhaps, may even exceed that, of most part of the Committee: -- If this should
really be the case, I beg of them to consult their intelligent Chairman, whose
deep discernment and* extensive knowledge, few things, within the circle of
Science, can nonplus.

In the Advertisement, agreed upon at the next meeting, Tuesday, May 2d, it is
said that by the report of the Committee, it appeared that the whole of the
Goods imported in said vessels contrary to agreement, amounted to a very
inconsiderable Sum. -- Pray what Sum? -- That only six persons out of the two
hundred and eleven, who were Signers, were among ^he Importers, who, through
inattention, (...) omitted to countermand their orders* (...) all of them
readily and of their own motion, agreed to deliver up the goods to be disposed
of as the Committee should direct. -- Who were the two hundred and eleven
signers? -- Do likewise publish the names of the six inattentive Signers, who
imported?

Did you, the "Well Disposed" Committee, "readily" acquiesce, in the motion so,
"readily" made by the six inattentive signers; and how did you "direct" "the
Goods to be disposed of?"

I will be much obliged to the Well Disposed, if they will (...) gi^^ honest
and faithful answers to the above questions; as I have some more to trouble
them with.

The "well disposed" appear by their advertisements, to be perfect masters of
the "Double Entendre:" and I really believe that a "well disposed" Committee of
the compleatest Proficients, from the schools of Loyola, could not surpass them.

JOHN MEIN.

Manifest of the Cargo of the Brigantine Whalebone, Benjamin Jenkins Master,
from London, taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master, 21st
April 1769, which day the vessel was entered at the Custom-House, Boston: --
Owners, JOHN HANCOCK of Boston, JOSIAH and JONATHAN BURNELL, of Nantucket. --
The Goods were shipped between the 7th, and 1^th December, 1768.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned T. C. J. 2 and 3 2 casks
Nails Tristram Coffin 1 1 bale 108 Else narrow Germany 171 Else broad Russia, 6
pieces Russia DUCK 3 bales HEMP S. G. 1 1 bale 171 Else broad Russia Stephen
Gardner 12 pieces Russia Duck 6 1 trunk 28 Else narrow Germany, 104 Else broad
Russia, 2 demi Cambricks (...) 1 bundle Gad Steel 3 1 trunk 5 Stuffs and
Haberdashery 4 1 case Looking-glasses 5 1 bale Stuffs R. S. 1 bundle Steel
Reuben Swan G. G. 1 bale HEMP Grafton Gardner D. B. 1, 2, and 4 3 casks Wrought
Iron David Bashard 3 1 bale 10 Stuffs 1 box S. 20 matts DUCK Josiah Barker and
Company 9 bales HEMP R. G. 1 1 bale 171 Else broad Russia, 20 pieces Russia
DUCK Reuben Gardner J. B. 3 1 trunk 57 Else narrow Germany, 57 Else broad
Russia, 144 yds. square printed Callico, 4 long Cloths, 4 Romals, 4 demi
Cambricks, 2lb. wrought inckle Jonathan Burnel 1 1 case 285 Else broad Russia
10 matts RUSSIA DUCK 2 1 trunk 5 Stuff^ and Wrought Iron 4 1 cask Cheese 5 1
bale 20 Stuffs 1 box 1 trunk S. J. 3 1 trunk 28 Else broad Russia 15 yds.
square printed Callico, 1 Em^rte 1 Taffity, 4 d^my Cambricks and Irish Linen
Seth Jenkins 1 and 2 2 casks Nails 4 1 bale Blankets B. J. 1 1 cask Brimstone
Benjamin Jenkins 2 1 case 399 Else broad Russia 1 1 case 229 Else narrow
Germany, 318 ^ds. square printed Callico, 7 long Cloths, 3 Gurrahs, 1 Taffity,
3 Romals. 3 Ginghams, 4 Bandanoes, 4 demi Cambricks 1 1 trunk 7 pieces 166 yds.
Irish bounty Linen 3 1 bale 4 Stuffs

Manifest of the Cargo of the Brigantine Nancy, John Skimmer, Master, from
Bristol, taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master, 13th
April, 1769, which day the Vessel was entered at the Custom-House, Boston: --
Owner, JOHN ROW, of Boston. -- The Goods were shipped between the 7th and 19th
December 1768.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. T. R. 40 baskets Five
Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty Empty common British green Glass Bottles John
Row^ Boston 30 tons SALT A. A. N. 160 baskets 5^0 Cwt. Cheese John Jones T. H.
17 casks Nails Thomas Hubbard A. B. 9 casks Cheese Andrew Brimmer T. 4 E 1 and
2 2 hogsheads FISHING LINES John Skimmer 15 hampers Beer S. H. 10 baskets
Cheese J. S. 14 baskets ditto J. K. 8 baskets ditto J. S. 3 baskets ditto W. S.
4 baskets ditto 1 hamper Beer Colonel Royal (...) Adventure, Isaac* Myrick*
Master* from London, entered at the Custom-house, Boston, 24th April 1769. --
Owners, ISAAC MYRICK, junr. JOSEPH ROC^, junr. ANDREW MYRICK junr. and JAMES
CHASE of Nantucket. -- The Coals were shipped the 10th January, and the Goods
the 15th February, 1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom Consigned. A. M. J. 1 1 cask Nails
Andrew Myrick and Andrew Myrick, jun. 2 1 bale 10 Stuffs 3 1 trunk 6 pieces
British linen and wrought Iron 1 to 3 3 casks Nails 4 1 trunk 10 Stuffs 10
pieces British Linen 5 to 7 3 casks Painters Colors A. M. 4 bales HEMP 9 matts
DUCK 21 chaldrons COALS R. G. 4 1 bale Blankets Richard Gardner R. G. A. 2
matts DUCK W. L. 1 1 cask Nails William Long 2 1 case Wrought Iron M. x 3 1
trunk 20 pieces British linen

To the PUBLIC.
September 25 th 1769.
IN pursuance of my promise to lay before the Public, a state of the goods
imported from Great Britain, since the beginning of January 1769 -- I
published, on Monday, August 31st, the manifest of the cargo of the ship
Susanna, Henry Johnson, master, from London, and owned by Mr. Francis Green of
Boston; at the same time, civilly requesting, the nameless Committee of the
"Well Disposed" to apply to the Owner, for the names (...) the persons to whom
the goods consigned To ORDER belonged: in the manifest published by (...),
which was taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the master of the
vessel, were two bales of Russia Linen, ^our bales of German Linen, and ^our
casks of Alum and Copperas, consigned to Mr. Francis Green.

Mr. Francis Green, in the Boston Gazette, and Country Journal, of Sept. 4th,
replied, that to frustrate the base design of deceiving the public, (which it
seems is lately become a favorite point with a few men more artful than honest)
I take this method of publicly declaring, that the articles (consigned to me)
termed Russia linen and German linen in the manifest of the Susanna, Henry
Johnson, from London, are Ravens Duck and Ticklinburgh^, which it is well known
were comprehended in that of Sa^^ Cloth or Duck. It is true the Alum and
Copper as were not enumerated among the allowed articles in the first
agreement; but it is as true that I never ordered them, (which I am ready to
make appear) and that I submitted them to the direction of the Committee.

There were but six persons residing in this town who imported goods of any
kind in the above vessel, the (...) of what little was on board, were for Salem
and Marblehead, where they were accordingly entered and delivered before the
ship proceeded for this port. --

I do not assert that the copy of the manifest and cockets is not literally
true, yet if such a publication of it ( without an explanation which might have
been given) has a tendency to deceive, as effectually as a direct falsehood
could, the good intention and candor of the publisher, are ( in charity,)
referred to the judgment of the Public.

It was observed, in the next Boston Chronicle, Sept. 7th, that Mr. Francis
Green, to exculpate himself, ought to exhibit his Invoice, and mention the day
the goods were shipped.

The following observations were also made and the following questions asked,
which, Mr. Francis Green was entreated to answer, with candor, for the sake of
his own character.

It was rather unfortunate too, for Mr. Francis Green to declare that he can
make it appear, he never ordered the ^our casks of alum and copperas; which is
by no means a sufficient apology; for to justify himself in the eye of the
Public, it ought to be made evident, that he never received them into his
custody; that the Committee took them into their possession; that they remain
so (...); for in saying, that he "submitted them to the direction of the
Committee" is something very jesuitical. -- Pray Mr. Francis Green, how did the
Committee direct them to be disposed of? Do also mention, where the Committee
kept store the 1st of May last, the very day your vessel entered; because they
may have given you "direction" to keep these 4 casks in your own store; and
perhaps by this time, you may have disposed of them.

Be so kind to yourself, as to mention the names of the six persons, in this
town, whom you yourself confess to have imported goods? and that the town of
the Salem may not remain under the general imputation of breaking the
agreement, indulge the public with the names of the Salem Importers?

To whom were the five chests of Tea marked H^ consigned, and where were they
landed?

I did you all necessary justice concerning the goods landed at Salem, which I
mentioned in the account I gave of your vessel's cargo.

It behooves you Mr. Francis Green to be very explicit in your reply, for if you
show any degree of equivocation, even "charity" itself, will be almost forced
to place these five chests of tea, consigned To Order, to your own particular
account. But that you may vindi^ate yourself fully, is really my wi^h.

On Sept. 18th, no reply being made by Mr. Francis Green, I put him in mind,
that he seemed now by his silence to be much puzzled, with the few simple
questions which I thought proper to ask him, the Thursday after his appearance
in print: this silence bears a very doubtful aspect, he ought to have embraced
the first opportunity to vindicate himself; if he is at a loss, let him take my
advice, which I present to him with the greatest sincerity; that is, at once to
tell the whole truth, concerning the tea, alum, etc. and then he will neither
be reduced to the necessity of having recourse to subterfuges, (...) or will he
lie under the suspicion of having imported contrary to agreement.

In answer to this, Mr. Francis Green published a piece in the Massachusetts
Gazette, or Boston News-Letter, of September 21st, of which the following
extract contains the only apology, which he condescends to make for himself.

"DISDAIN," is the true cause of my not having hitherto given any attention to
his late public impertinent and arrogant queries and objections. -- "I now
assure the World" if any Gentleman (...) yet unsatisfied, and chooses to apply
either to the Committee of Merchants or to (...) he may and shall be convinced
beyond all possibility of doubt, that I did not deviate from the agreement in
any-instance, of course, did not import any Tea.

Then after throwing out the most illiberal abuse, without the least shadow of
argument, he thinks proper to declare, that he will never answer any of my
future publications.

Now it is very likely, Mr. Francis Green, heartily regrets his not having
adopted this prudent resolution much sooner.

When Mr* Francis Green, says, that the Alum and Copperas were not allowed by
the first agreement, he is very right; his ^our casks were imported here, May
1st, and the vote allowing their importation, passed the 26th day of July after.

Mr. Francis Green also says, that HE was ready to make it appear, that HE
never ordered them, and that HE had submitted them to the direction of the
Committee.

The public will naturally judge from his "disdain" to vindicate himself, of
the truth of these assertions. As for applying to him, after he had declared in
print, that he was ready to make it appear, he never ordered the four casks,
etc. he may be very ingenious at proving a negative, but every impartial man
will consider him as a delinquent, till he makes his vindication as public as
his assertions. -- As to the casks having been submitted to the care of the
Committee, their silence and Mr. Francis Green's own words, will fully
determine the opinion of the public; from me, they scarcely require a comment.

At the same time, that Mr. Francis Green desired those who were unsatisfied
with his conduct, to apply to the Committee, he ought surely, for the
information of the public, to have given the names of those, who compose that
tribunal of deceit: For the Public are, at present, greatly at a loss, to
conceive who they are.

It was very weak in Mr. Francis Green, when pressed by the above facts, and
arguments, to have recourse to "disdain" and gross reproach, instead of
attempting to justify himself; when a man descends to (...) its a sure sign of
his defeat.

Now, to use the very words of Mr. Francis Green, let the public judge, who he
is that entertains "the base design of deceiving" (...) and who he is that
witholds the Explanation which might have been given. I really a (...) so far,
with Mr. Francis Green, that deceiving the Public is lately become a favorite
point with "a ^ew men (...) "more as artful than honest;" but as the, public
probably will think, neither artful nor honest.

Mr. Francis Green has yet to answer all the above Questions, which were put to
him September 7^^.

Having heard that Mr. Francis Green's first (...) was in the army; I am sorry,
I did not know it sooner, that I might have given (...) his (...) of, Francis
Green, Gentleman; his Majesty honored him with a commission, but Mr. Francis
Green, Gentleman, be^^ knows the means which procured it: He there, I dare say,
experienced that* among Gentlemen, questions must be answered pointedly, and in
propria persona; but perhaps, this method of procedure was (...) and did not
suit his constitution: (...) therefore from danger, and the most honorable
walk in life, he forced himself behind the counter, and exchanged the deadly
(...) for the yard stick and (...): -- Even there, the character of an English
merchant, so justly respected in a trading nation, could not prevail upon him
to give a civil answer, to a ^ew civil questions, which were asked him, and
which, a regard to his profession and reputation, ought to have made him
perceive the necessity of answering: -- Two paths were open to him, that of
truth, which led to reformation, and that of evasion, which led to the
encampment of the "Well Disposed." -- The world need not be told, Francis
Green, Gentleman, need not be told, which of these paths he has chose^.

I congratulate the "Well Disposed" on their noble acquisition, and him on his
safe retreat from the character of an English merchant, to the vale of artifice
and subterfuge, in the domains of the "Well Disposed."

Francis Green, Gentleman, living so near me, if he thought himself affronted
at my civilly entreating the Committee to apply to him, as owner of the
Susanna, might have waited upon me, and endeavored to convince me, that he had
some title to the appellation, so frequently, here, bestowed on him: but the
dirty road of abuse, best suiting his natural bias, he wallowed in its more,
with that intemperance* be sitting a man, afraid of argument and hardened
against plain dealing, though under the ^^s;h of conviction*

But perhaps, after all, the weakness of his intellects has only made him the
tool of some more c^n^^ing man. -- If this should be the case he is indeed much
to be pitied!

Let Francis Green, Gentleman, accept the advice I now give him, which is, if
he has another opportunity of addressing the public, for his own sake to do it
with decency.

The "Well disposed" will please to consider the following question as part of
their Catechism.

Was it your intention to confine the whole Trade to yourselves and your
friends, that you might ^^ll your refuse goods; and import anew under the mask
TO ORDER, on purpose to ^^ll at a higher advance, than the usual profit? This,
whatever gloss you may please to put upon it when you reply, the public in
general, and the Gentlemen and Traders, in the Country in particular, are
probably sensible of by this time.

JOHN MEIN.

Manifest of the Cargo of the Brigantine Lucretia, George Folger, Master, from
London, taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master, 3d May,
1769, which day the vessel was entered at the Custom-House, Boston: -- Owners,
ROBERT BARKER of Nantucket, CHAMPION and HAYLEY of London. -- The Goods were
shipped between the 10th and 17th of February 176^.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. C. 4 S. 2 1 bale 10
pieces stuffs Christopher Starbuck 3 1 bale 348 Else Russia Linen 238 Else
narrow Germany 4 1 trunk 50 Else narrow Germany 10 pieces British linen 5 1 box
Haberdashery 1 bundle Gad steel 3 bundles HEMP C. S. C. 3 1 case Wrought Iron
Christ. Starbuck and Co. 4 1 cask ditto 5 and 6 2 bundles ditto 7 1 trunk 12
pieces British linen 2 1 trunk 141 yds. Irish bounty linen, 20 stuffs and Irish
linen 8 1 trunk 7 long cloths, 291 yds. square printed callico, 2 Moorees and 8
Demi Cambricks 1 bale T. D. 3 1 case 15 Else narrow Russia 14 yds. Silesia
Napkening 20lb. wrought incle 108yds. square printed Callico, 1 long cloth, 4
Gurrahs, 1 Taffity, 7 demi Cambricks Thomas Delano 1 1 trunk 57 Else narrow
Germany, 57 Else broad Russia 2 1 trunk 75 yds Irish bounty linen and
Haberdashery 2 matts DUCK C. D. in a diamond 1 and 2 2 bales (...) To Order 3 1
case (...) Else narrow Germany 4 1 case Wrought (...) 5 1 trunk ^5 Else broad
Russia and 6lb. N^^ts 6 1 trunk Stationary 7 1 trunk 15 (...) Hos^ 8 1 trunk
(...) yds. Irish bounty linen (...) Irish Linen 9 1 case 5 (...) 10 1 trunk 100
Else narrow Germany, 109 Else narrow Russia, 31 yds. (...) Lawn, 70 yds. (...)
Nampkening B. F. 1 1 trunk 37 yds. Irish bounty (...), etc. Benjamin (...) G.
F. 1 1 trunk 247 yds. Irish bounty linen and 10 pieces linen, 57 Else broad
Russia, 3 3-4ths lb. incle and 2 lb. (...) Thread George Folger 2 1 trunk 24
yds. Irish bounty linen ^^^ookwrought Iron 3 1 trunk 60 Else narrow Germany, 43
Else narrow Russia, 28 Else broad Russia, 15 1-half yds. (...) lawns, 14 yds.
(...) Napkening, 48 yds. square printed Callico, 1 long Cloth 1 Taffity, 3 demi
Cambricks 4 1 trunk 20 stuffs 5 1 case (...) Callico, narrow Russia Diaper,
Long Cloths and narrow Germany 6 1 bale (...) S. C. O. 1 trunk 101 Else narrow
Germany, 115 Else broad Russia Shubael Coffin 2 matts DUCK 3 1 cask Wrought
Iron 4 1 bale 10 Stuffs (...) 1 trunk 155 yds. Irish bounty linen, stuffs and
Irish Linen 1 box 2 casks R. M. 2 1 trunk 75 yds. Irish bounty linen and
Blankets Richard Mitchell 1 1 cask Wrought Pewter 2 1 trunk 175 Else narrow
Germany S. S. P. 2 1 bale Blankets Seth Spooner 1 1 trunk 72 Else narrow
Germany T. D. O. 2 1 bale Stuffs Thomas Delano 3 matts DUCK 3 1 trunk 169 yards
square printed Callico, 1 long Cloth, 2 Gurrahs, 3 Sal^mpores, 2 Moorees, 16
Demi Cambricks 1 trunk S. 4 C. 1 and 2 2 casks Wrought Iron David Bashard (...)
1 1 trunk (...) yds. Irish bounty linen, 20 pieces British linen, 54 Else
Russia linen, 6lb. (...) thread and 154 Else narrow Germany 3 1 trunk
Haberdashery 4 1 trunk 241yds. square printed (...), 6 Gurrahs, (...) long
Cloths, 25 (...), 49 yards Napkening, 1 Battell^^ (...), 1 Taffity and 3 demi
Cambricks (...) 1 case 4 dozen (...) (...) (...) (...) J. P. 1 1 trunk 22 yds.
narrow Russia linen John Pinkham R. S. 1 and 2 2 matts (...) Else broad Russia
4 pieces Russia DUCK Reuben Swain The following are in the Cockers, but are not
in the Manifest.
C. 4 S. 1 bundle Steel 1 cask Haberdashery (...) 1 bale 81 yds. square printed
linen 81 Else narrow Germany D. B. (...) (...) box Haberdashery 1 to 4 4 (...)
Wrought Iron

Ship NANCY, James Moodie, Master, from Glasg^^, entered at the Custom-House
Boston, May 9th 1769. -- Owned in (...). -- The Goods were shipped the 30th and
31st March 1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. A. W. 1 1 box ^0 doz.
check Handkerchiefs and Haberdashery Mr. Wilson 2 1 case Cutlery 1 to 3 3 casks
Haberdashery 3 1 box Stationary M. 4 M. 1 1 bale ^1 pieces 1215 yards British
bounty linen Mr. Galloway 2 and 4 2 (...) Haberdashery 3 1 bale 11 pieces 1187
yards British bounty linen 5 1 box Stuffs of silk and silk and Incle M. Mc. A.
1 box 25 pieces 598 yds. Irish bounty linen and Haberdashery B. 1 bale
Haberdashery C. 1 cask 1 cask Mc. 4 Mc. and Co. 5 bales Haberdashery R. 4 B. 1
bale Haberdashery 24 chaldrons COALS (...) Firkins Herrings 2 bundles Thread
(...) M. 1 bale Mr. Moodie The following are in the Cockets, but are not in the
Manifest
Mc. 4 Mc. and Co. 2 bales Haberdashery 1 cask Hard Ware M. B.^ 1 bale SAIL
CLOTH 1 bundle Haberdashery 1 bundle Saws 1 bundle Stuffs of Silk Brigantine
John, John Gray, Master, from Liverpool entered at the Custom-house, Boston.
24th February 1769. -- Owner, WILLIAM SPEAR of Maryland, -- The Goods were
shipped betwixt the 12th and 24th December 1768.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. J. G. 1300 bushels SALT
Nathaniel Holmes 472 chaldron COALS 1 pack 16 pieces 512 Else British made Sail
Cloth J. G. 12 crates Earthen Ware Barnabas Clarks S. R. W. W. B. C. 1 tierce
Bottled Beer D. 4 M. 1 tierce 9cwt. wrought Iron Benjamin Clark 12 baskets
18cwt. Cheese John Gray Brigantine London, William Weston, Master, from,
Liverpool, entered at the Custom-house, Boston, 13th January 1769. -- Owners
GEORGE and ELKANAH WATSON, of Plymouth
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom Consigned. R. S. 1 and 2 2 chests
80 pieces Checks Richard Smith H. P. 1 bale 737 Else British made Sail Cloth
Nathaniel Gooden N. G. 1 bale 40 pieces Cotton and Linen Check 6 crates Earthen
Ware W. W. 2 barrels Earthen Ware William Weston 1 chest 30 pieces Callicoe
plains 4400 bushels White SALT Geoge and Elk Watson, and Nathaniel Gooden. Brig
Friendship, Jonathan Burnel, Master, from London, entered at the Custom house,
Boston, 4th May 1769. -- Owners, JOHN HARRISON and ROBERT WALKINSON of London.
-- The Hemp was shipped 2d March, 1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. B. F. 7 bundles HEMP
Josiah Barker, Nantucket Sloop Betsey, Isaac^Cuzneau, Master, from London,
entered at the Custom house, Boston, 11th April 1769. -- Owner, JOHN HANCOCK.
-- The Coals were shipped between the 24th of January 1769.
31 chaldrons COALS John Hancock, Boston

IF there are any among us so base as to break through a solemn agreement, I
would beg leave of the public, to exculpate myself from the scandal of being
ranked among the number, by informing them that (although my name justly
appears in Messrs. Mein and Freeming's paper of last Thursday as an importer)
at the time the agreement took place here, I was in London; therefore could not
become a subscriber. Immediately after my return, understanding the agreement
was general, and strictly adhered to, that I might not be any ways instrumental
in counteracting the good design, I unsolicited countermanded large orders
which I left in London for spring-goods; thereby in a great measure frustrating
my design in going home. -- The few haberdashery goods which arrived, I had
ordered, and expected to be sent immediately after me, which was the only
reason of my not countermanding them. One of the Commitee was fully satisfied
by me at the time, of the truth of the above, and of the trifling value of the
goods, which prove that there could not be either a fradu^^nt or mercenary
design in that importation.

EDWARD CHURCH.

To the PUBLIC.
September 28 th 1769.
MR. EDWARD CHURCH, by the above Advertisement, has fully cleared himself from
the imputation of (...) the agreement, as it appears* (...) not a Subscriber.
-- But the poor (...)-man must be asked, how he was "(...)" -- was it by
lodging the Goods in (...) store? -- which again obliges me to repeat another
very puzzling question, where did the Committee keep store in April last?

I now take this (...) ^^^^nity of recommending to every Gentleman, who may be
concerned in importation, the following publication of Mr. Francis Johonnot, as
an example of openness and candor, worthy of imitation.

Massachusetts Gazette, Thursday, August 31 st.
In the BOSTON CHRONICLE of Monday last, [August 28] Mr. John Mein has
published my name as an Importer of a trunk of goods from London, in the
Brigantine, Su^^y, Isaac Coleman, master.

Now I do hereby declare that I have not imported one single article of Goods
from Great Britain contrary to the agreement of the merchants, and I do further
declare, that the said trunk of goods, without my knowledge or ^^^sent, was
directed to my care, to (...) John Harris, Esquire at Annapolis Royal (...)
accordingly sent the said Trunk of Good (...) now have Mr. Harris's letter,
acknowledging the receipt thereof.

FRANCIS JOHONNOT.

Dr. Martin Brimmer, having last Monday evening, just after the Chronicle was
published, politely informed me, that he imagined the 9 Casks of Cheese
mentioned in the Manifest of the Nancy, to be consigned to Martin Brimmer,
should have been put down to Andrew Brimmer. -- On inspecting the Manifest, he
was found to be in the right, and (...) was immediately altered in all the
papers not printed off: and this is now inf^^ted, that our Subscribers may
correct it in those wrought off before the mistake was discovered. This Error
was occasioned by the word being written in a very indistinct manner, in the
Master's manifest.

Notwithstanding all our care, in such a laborious task, a small error may
sometimes escape our notice; we, however, have reason to be pleased, that the
above is the only one we have been able hitherto to discover after repeated
comparisons; and if in the remaining part, any others should happen, we shall
acknowledge them without the least reserve.

CATECHISM of the WELL DISPOSED, Continued.
Did you the few "Well Disposed," when an inattentive signer, imported several
valuable packages, appoint him, the said inattentive signer (...) of the
Committee, who were to receive the Goods, so imported, into their custody, by
which masterly stroke of ingenuity, he was one of the very men to take charge
of his own Goods* and so, of course they remained carefully deposited, in his
own store, waiting a market.

JOHN MEIN.

Manifest of the Cargo of the Brigantine Abigail, George Rolland, Master, from
London, taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master, 17th
January 1769, which day the vessel was entered at the Custom-house Boston: --
Owners, JOHN ROW and JOSEPH JACKSON of Boston. The Goods were shipped between
the 30th September and 15th October 1768.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned T. 2 1 trunk 58lb. silk
and ribbons 3lb. sewing silk 375 yds. Irish bounty linen 47 narrow Russia
linen, 22 lb. 12 oz Wrought Incle To Order 3 1 trunk 9lb 14 oz silk and
ribbons, 20 pieces linen 4 1 chest 20 doz. worsted Hose 5, 10, 11 3 boxes
Millenary 14 1 trunk 20 demi Cambricks, 10 Taffities 11 1 trunk With this Mark
^. by the Manifest, there are 2 boxes. 5 chests Tea, 7 trunks, 1 case
1381 yards square printed Callico, 67 yds. square printed linen, 18 Else
Russia Diaper, 18 1-3d Gurrahs, 29 long Cloths 12 1 trunk 828yds. square
printed Callicoe, 552 yds. square printed linen 18 Else Russia Diaper 24
Gurrahs, 10 2^^d long Cloth, 1 (...) 225 narrow Germany 13 1 trunk 40
peniascoes 40 ginghams, 11 Romals, 10 Taffities 1 1 bale 1^25 Else narrow
Germany linen 6,7,89, 4 chests Tea M W. 1 1 bale 10 pieces British linen T.
Mason and G. Williams 1 cask N. T. 1 1 cask Sylvester Gardner Z. 17, 18 2 bales
20 small miniken baize Nathaniel Rogers 24, 25 2 bales 20 Stuffs 26 1 bale
Haberdashery 27 1 box ditto 27 1 trunk Taffities 20 barrels Powder L. S. F. 27
and 1 to 3 1 cask 3 bundles Y in a diamond 1 to 2 2 bales W. B. in a diamond 1
1 bale Z. 1 to 8 8 chests Tea George Erving 9, 10, 11 3 bags Pepper R. G. 1 1
bale ^99 Else narrow Germany linen Rusus Green 1 cask A. 1 to 10 10 casks
15cwt. Cheese George Erving W. H. 1 1 bale 10 Stuffs William Hyslop and Comp. 2
1 chest 10 pieces British linen 4 1 bale 20 small miniken baize 3 1 trunk 18lb.
silk and worsted 455 yds. Irish bounty linen and Haberdashery 5 1 box 3lb. 14
oz. silk and ribbons and Haberdashery 6 1 trunk 27 demi Cambricks 10 Taffities
MTB 1 1 bale With these Marks MTB. and by the Manifest, are only 2 bales, 1
bundle, 2 cases, and 2 bales Hemp.
660 Else narrow Germany M. and F. Dalton 2 and 3 2 bales 18, pieces Russia
DUCK 2 and 3 2 cases 10 pieces British linen? 1 12 bundles HEMP J. S. a Corn
Fan Joseph Sherburne O. A. in a diamond 1 1 bale With these Marks O. A. in a
diamond, and L. S. F. by the Manifest, are, 1 bale 5 1- half barrels Gunpowder,
2 bundles. 1 Corn Fan.
10 stuffs Samuel A. Otis 2 1 box Haberdashery 5 half barrels Gunpowder a Corn
Fan L. S. F. 4 and 5 2 packages (b) E. A. H. With these Marks E.A.H. S. x B.
L.S.F. by the Manifest, there are only 3 casks 1 bundle and 2 cases.
1 1 cask 100 pieces Glass S. Barton, Jun. 2 1 case S. x B. (d) 2 1 case 5
pieces British linen 3 barrels Gunpowder 1 1 cask Wrought Iron 1 1 bale 9
pieces Russia DUCK 100 Else Russia linen L. S. F. (d) 6, 21 2 packages P in a
dim. 1 to 5 5 Chests Tea James Perkins W. W. 1 and 2 2 cask 50 ^oz. Wool CARDS
William Witwell N in a dimd To this Mark, N in a diamond, by the Cocket, No. 1.
a Cask.
2 2 cases 5 pieces Stuffs John Nazro S. H To this Mark, S. H by the Manifest a
chest of Tea.
1 1 case 970 yds. Irish bounty linen Stephen Hall J. x B. 1 to 5 5 casks
40cwt. Brimstone John Bernard X in a diamond 1 1 case Wrought Iron John Row
19, 20 4 casks 24, 25 J. 4 S. 5 1 cask John Short R^. 1 1 ficken Wrought Iron ^
Two of the bundle with this ^ Mark not in the Manifest.
1, 2 2 casks Wrought Iron P. Tracey 4 bundles ditto 2 cases Cabinet Ware E. 4
N With the Marks E 4 N and F. W. by the Manifest, there are 2 bales, 1 box and
4 barrels powder
1 2 barrels Gunpowder S. Kneeland F. W. Stores R. 4. I. 1 1 trunk 50 ^oz.
leather gloves R. Inman J. G. With these Marks J G. and W. G. by the Manifest,
are only 9 casks 1 bundle, and 1 case
^5 to ^9 5 casks Painters Colors Mr. Gore W. G. (i) 2^ to 31 6 barrels ditto
33, 34 35 1 box ditto and leaf gold 32 1 roll LEAD WV. 1 box William Vassal X
in a diam 1 cask 20 doz. Wool CARDS B. and E. Davies 4 1 to 3 3 bundles Those.
Hubbard J. G. 1 1 cask Jos. Green M 4 W. 141 to 152 ^2 chests Tea T. and E.
Hutchinson J. H. 1 cask John Hynman B. E. 1 to 7 17 bales HEMP Jos. Rotch and
sons 12 ba^rs Iron Royal Tyler B. W. 1 to 3 3 casks Wrought Iron Benjamin Webb
ST. With the Mark, S^ by the Manifest, are 1 bale, 2 casks, 1 box, 1 trunk, 1
chest Tea.
1 and 2 2 casks Apothecary Joseph Jackson 3, 4 2 chests 5 1 box J. S. 1 1
trunk 24 Stuffs J. Simpkins P 2, 3 2 cases Turnery J. x L. 1 1 box John Loring
D. C. 1 to 7 (...) casks Daniel (...) T. D. 1 1 cask Wrought Iron Those. Davies
R. x H. 1 to 13 13 matts RUSSIA DUCK John Russel and R. Hooper 1, 2 2 casks
4cwt. cheese 3 1 cask ^ails 4 1 trunk 20 pieces British linen and wrought iron
5 1 bale (...) baize B. E. 1 to 5 5 matts Russia DUCK Benj. ^^ton T. P. 1 to 5
15 matts Russia DUCK Those. Pedrick J. L. 1 to 40 40 matts Russia DUCK Jeremiah
Lee 4 With the Mark, 4. by the Manifest, are 5 bales.
(...) 1 to 8 8 bundles HEMP Robert Hooper F in a diamond 1 to 6 6 casks 6cwt.
Cheese Samuel Fletcher 1 1 cask Saltpetre H. G. 20 boxes Lemons H. Gray, jun. 2
chests Tea 1 and 2 1 case 4 boxes J. x S. 1 and 2 2 casks Wrought Iron Isaac
Smith 3 1 bale 12 Baize 1 to 60 60 matts Russia DUCK C. D. in a diamond 3 1 bag
Pepper Jos. Nichols 12 2 chests Tea N. G. 1 1 trunk 22 Stuffs Nath. Gorham 7, 9
2 casks Wrought Iron 8 1 bale 26 Stuffs 2, 3, 4 3 chests Tea 1 and 2 2 casks
4cwt. Cheese 5 1 trunk 7lb. 10 oz. silk and ribbons, 14 oz. sewing silk and
fringes, 326 yds. Irish bounty linen. Irish linen, value 15 l. 1 half cwt
wrought Iron 6 1 trunk 7 (...). 15 oz. sewing silk and (...) 7 b.silk and incle
20 pieces British linen, 10 doz. Hose J. C. 1 1 chest Tea John Clarke J. 4 W. 1
1 bag Pepper John Waldron B. C. 1 to 12 12 chests Tea Barnabas Clarke 13, 14,
15 3 b^gs Pepper D. S. 1 and2 2 casks Haberdashery Daniel Sergent 1 bale 2 tons
HEMP E. S. To this Mark, E. S. by the Manifest, are 2 bales and 1 box.
1, 4, 8 3 casks 40 pieces British linen Epes Sergent R in diam. 131 to 133 3
casks Green and Cleverly S. G. 1, 2 2 casks Apothecary Sylvester Gardner A. B.
1, 2 2 chests Tea Andrew Brimmer B. C. 3 1 chests Tea Benj. Clarke 1 box W. H.
1 1 case 50 Else narrow Germany, 3 demi Cambricks, 71 yds. Irish bounty linen,
10 pieces British linen John Welsh J. W. 1 to 3 4 boxes 1 The following are in
the Cockets, but are not in the Manifest.
NPT. 1 1 case Haberdashery R. I. 1 1 case Haberdashery G.C. in dia. 1 bundle
Steel 130 1 box Wrought Iron 132, 133 2 casks ditto R. C. S. 7^, 77 2 chests
Tea

To the PUBLIC.
October 2^, 1769.
PREVIOUS to the continuation of the Catechism of the "Well disposed", and to
the observations that it may be necessary to make on their Advertisements, I
^^treat the attention of the Public to the following story; which every Reader
shall, for the present, be left to apply as he shall think proper.

ONE Evening, in the month of August, no matter for the day or year, two
travelers arrived at a certain town in the western hemisphere, and took
possession of a large front room in the coffee house, which for the sake of the
story, we shall, at once, suppose, to be the British Coffee-house, King Street,
Boston; intending to solace themselves after the fatigues of a warm day's ^ide:
-- They were scarcely seated, when a clamor of tongues issuing from an
adjoining room, though they were not fond of listening, first drew, and then by
its continuance, fixed their attention. It was soon discovered, notwithstanding
the incoherency of the conversation, that this noise proceeded from a motley
Crew, called a Committee, as our Travelers lea^^t from their own mouths: --
And we, on our part, shall suppose, for the j^ke's sake, that they too were,
"Well Disposed."

This "Well Disposed" Committee, "then, by their own account, appeared to have
been, for some time, engaged in a deep and complicated scheme to deceive the
whole country, by declaring confidently in the face of the Public, that there
was no necessity for importing goods from the Mother country, and that none
should be imported: -- The motives that first occasioned this scheme to be set
on foot being foreign to our purpose, we shall not pretend to explain them; our
sole intention being only to make it evident, in what manner this agreement was
kept, after it was entered into,

In the sequel, however, it will be plain beyond dispute, as it was to our
Travelers who overheard these "Well Disposed," that views of private
emolument, not regard for the public weal, had prompted many of them to insist
in this undertaking; -- in furtherance of which they had carried about a
subscription against importation, among the Merchants and Traders, several of
whom they had either wheedled or frightened into their measures; assuring all
they applied to, that the plan was now generally adopted, and that it would be
hurtful to themselves, if they, and longer, withstood the opinion of the whole
Community.

Here it ought to be observed, that although many among them engaged from the
most disinterested motives, others signed merely out of o^t^^ ^^^^on, never
having dealt in the articles they had agreed not to deal in, being in very
different (...) of life; and so making a merit of signing, not to do, what they
had never done before; and what severals of them had neither opportunity nor
inclination to do. The "Well Disposed" Leaders, however, pushed their project
with all the artifices and machinations that self-interest could dictate to
men, totally deadened to or devoid of, every principle of justice: -- And, at
last they arrived to such a pitch of enormity, that, when some individuals, who
solely depended on their trade for support, refused to starve themselves, while
some of the principal of the "Well Disposed," even Committee Men, infringed the
agreement in the grossest manner, and by importing largely, carried on their
trade with superior advantages, these "Well Disposed*" printed Advertisements,
and circulated them through the whole country, painting these Refusers in the
most odious and malignant colors.

Unluckily for the "Well Disposed," in this list, they inserted the name of a
very peaceable man, one who was not a Merchant, and who had always closely
attended to his own business, without interfering with that of other men's; now,
as good natured folks are generally the worst to deal with when thoroughly
provoked, this person had been so assiduous in tracing their past transactions
as really to discover their whole design: and was then entertaining the Public
with an exposure of the conduct and honesty of these "well disposed"
Committee Men, who were now met together, for the purpose of replying to this
very Person.

Our Travelers received from this occurrence, a sort of Tragi Comic
entertainment; the mean evasions to which the "well disposed" resorted, and the
weak subterfuges, under which they attempted to conceal or slur over the truth,
frequently excited laughter, indignation and contempt: for when they spoke
singly, they were as far from agreeing upon what was proper to be done, though
they all agreed something ought to be done, as when they clamoured in concert.

Their Chairman, then, not being able to bring them to any consistent
resolution, and never having depended much on his own genius, even in writing
"well disposed" Advertisements. because he had just sense enough to discover
his own deficiency; and what is also part of the truth, he was, really and
truly, in other people's trammels, who goaded him which ever way they pleased;
he at last thought fit to pull out of his pocket, a very long paper, which had
been purposely prepared for this occasion, by a select few of the particularly
well disposed, who very well knew that nothing passable could be produced from
the grave solemn heads of the Committee; whose appearance, at first sight,
announced them to be men of Weight, without Importance. It is not to be
doubted, but this paper was introduced with a very proper speech from the
Chair; indeed it might, with great justice, he called, the Mystery of the "Well
disposed"; and it is to be hoped, that by some chance or other, this Mystery
may happen in time to be opened up.

As it was read in an audible voice, paragraph by paragraph, commented and
recommented upon, not with an intention to tell the truth, but very piously to
avoid it, our Travelers heard every word distinctly; the declared design of
this committee Meeting was to shroud the truth, to throw a specious gloss over
their own behavior, and to please, at the same time, that they deluded the
people. Nevertheless, while we correct, let us be just -- One of the Committee,
though a great offender, not being able to smother the gnawings of conscience,
often attempted to retire, but though the Monitor within, in spite of the
support of his Confederates around him, pointed out the right path, he had not
strength of mind sufficient to resist their repeated entreaties, or, to forsake
them, and leave them to their own devices.

But now let us rehearse some part of their mystical composition, -- It was
mentioned in it, that there were few who had refused to join them; yet in the
cargo of the Pit, Capt. Tapscott, from Bristol, the very first of the
manifests published, they declared that of the 15, who were inhabitants of this
town, only FOUR were signers to the agreement. -- It is something surprising,
that so many of the "few who had refused to join," should appear in the very
first Manifest.

The Story shall be shortened for the present, because it shall figure more at
large; -- but the following quotations, which are supposed to approach nearly
to the very words of the "Well disposed," cannot be omitted, with any
propriety. Mr. Newell imported only tin and iron plates, which, although they
were not inserted in the agreement, yet at the time of entering into the same,
it was generally understood, that the importing of them would not be considered
as breach of the agreement. Now it naturally occurs to the writers of this
narrative, that it was certainly a very great pity, and probably a very great
loss, to every (...) in this town, in this province, and in every other town on
this continent, who had not the (...) understanding, as Mr. Newell.

Mr. Newell's pardon is (...) if his ordinary denomination is (...) Well
Disposed Committee are solely to blame for this want of respect. We ^^st
therefore continue to mention this Gentleman, only by the name of Mr. Newell,
with the additional title of Timothy, with which we now address him with great
pleasure, both from the authority we have for bestowing (...), as well as from
our particular regard to a gentleman (...) his worth. We cannot help repeating
it, that it is much to be lamented, that a^^o Tin and Iron plates, it was not
so generally understood, that the importing of them would not be considered as
a breach of the agreement* If it had been de signed to be understood, surely it
would have been advertised, and then the heart of every Tin man would have
rejoiced: Yea! and the heart of every other IMPORTER too, for every one would
then with as good reason, as Mr. Timothy Newell, have understood that the
particular articles they dealt in, when imported, would not be considered as a
breach of the agreement -- Even though they never had signed the Agreement, and
what is more, never had been of the Committee, who carried the paper about, and
pressed for subscriptions.

Now, also, in the Brig Paoli, Capt. Hall were imported, by Messirs. Barrett
and (...) a case called FOR SOME GOOD (...) DOUBT TURNERY, whereas in (...) and
should have been called WOOL-CARDS. Now i^ Messrs. Barrett and Sons, are Mr.
Deacon Barrett and Sons, the Good Deacon can easily b^ informed, that the "some
good reason" why WOOL-CARDS" were entered out as TUR^NERY, was to cheat the
King of the duty on Wool-Cards. -- This was really a very (...) lucky
observation in the "well disposed (...) they are therefore desired to Apply to
the Good Deacon, who certainly will without ^^^sitation inform them, who
enjoyed the benefit of this fraud.

Want of time will not allow us, at present to relate much more of the
particulars (...) received from our friends, the Travelers, concerning what
they heard, and what they saw, (...) m^^^^ing at the "well disposed." -- A few
observations (...) made by the Travelers on what they heard, however, may be
mentioned.

On (...) Travelers, who were deeply read in (...), in a familiar conversation
informed (...), that the doctrine of the ancient (...) seemed to flourish with
new vigor in this (...) c^^^me. -- On being desired to explain themselves,
they said, that when a ^ew, in time of distress o^ necessity, made a ^ow,
either to God or M^n, which he afterward found would be extremely inconvenient
for him to fulfill, that all he had to do, was, to assemble there other Jews.
and they, agreeable to their (...) doctrine, could absolve him from
performance. -- On this, it was asked, how the doctrine of the Robbins could be
applied to the present times; -- but the Enquirer was immediately silenced
with, -- have not two saints a power to exercise a greater privilege than three
Jews.

Let us for a moment return to our Travelers account of the "well disposed
Committee." They after determining to print (...) honest effusion of theirs, in
some of the first newspapers, really signed to if, not their own names, but the
collective name of a worthy body of men, most of whom detested the practices,
and despis^d the intellects of this Precious Set, and very few of whom even
knew (...) "well disposed" meeting.

This important affair being then so far settled, yet as the most hardened mind
cannot help feeling severe compunctious, when about to commit a crime. -- One
even of the well disposed, struck with dread at what he had just consented to,
ventured to enquire if all they had resolved to declare to the public, was
true. -- Hackneyed as the Chairman was in the ways of the "well disposed," this
simple question, fairly put him out, and by a p^u^e and an inarticulate sound
which followed, it was imagined, he had been occupied in scratching his head,
and pulling up his breeches: -- but, at last, having gathered up his wits, he
declared, It was to matter, part of it was true enough* and they had a right to
say the test: -- having disburthened himself, in this manner, he huddled up the
paper, into his packet; and they all retired, with conscious gu^^t glaring on
their faces.

This narration was communicated by several gentlemen, who heard it from the
two Travelers: It is here inserted, and the candid reader is left to make his
own reflections on this strange though very true story.

In what a miserable situation are the "well disposed," without honesty enough
to declare the truth, to confess their faults, and endeavor amendment; they
choose rather to proceed in the uniform tenor of corruption; unhappy in
themselves, execrating the honest part of mankind, and pitied, despised and
detested by every man of sensibility and principle. -- What consultations must
such men have, and what must be their reflections after such consultations! --
Every new determination of theirs must ^it heavier and heavier on their souls!
-- They are again beseeched to bethink themselves, the sooner they do it, the
less they will have to repent of! -- A candid and public confession of their
bad behavior will convince the public of their sincerity, and entitle them, at
least, to forgiveness, if not to favor.

They have already attempted to screen themselves under the name of a
respectable communit^, who are shocked at their conduct. -- They, it is easy to
conceive, would be glad to gain a refuge still more general. -- Men conscious
of their own weakness, folly, and depravity never think themselves under too
close and hick a covert.

JOHN MEIN.

Manifest of the Cargo of the Ship John Galley, Thomas Hulme Master, from
London, taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master, 2nd
February 1769. which day the vessel was entered at the Custom-house, Boston: --
Owner, THOMAS HULME of Boston. -- The Goods were shipped between the 8th and
21st October 1768.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. T. H. V. 1 to 4 4 casks
2391lb. Brimstone To Order 11 1 bale 1425 else, broad Russia 12 1 bale 224 Else
narrow Germany 570 Else broad Russia 100 matts 200 pieces Russia Duck 31
bundles 2^ tons HEMP 5 and 6 2 bales Stationary 7 to 10 4 casks Cordage 21
chaldron COALS 13 1 box 51b. 10 oz. Wrought silk in pieces and 2 stuffs 10
chaldron Grindstones 14 casks Cheese 23 boxes Pipes G. D. in a diamond 1 1 tub
30 doz. Chipt Hats Gilbert D^^^^^^ 2 and 3 2 casks Wrought Iron 4 1 chest 6lb.
silk and incle, and 90 pieces British linen 5 and 7 2 trunks Haberdashery 6 1
case Stationary 8 and 9 2 cases Wrought Brass 10 1 trunk 63 Stuffs 11 1 trunk
47lb. wrought incle, and 111 great bugle 12 1 case 60lb. Nutmegs, 30lb.
Cinnamon, 10lb. Cloves and 10lb. Mace 13 and 14 2 cases 1310 Else narrow
Germany, 221 Else Drilling, 135 pieces 3762 yds. Irish bounty linen, 78 Else
Di^aper Tabling. 15 to 22 8 trunks 1^2 Else narrow Germany, 649 yds. square
printed linen, 55 Else Diaper Tabling, 4986 yds. square printed Callico, 111
5-6ths long Cloths, 36 Gurrahs, 6 Bas^oes and 12 Cossaes 23 1 trunk 132 Demi
Cambricks 24 and 25 2 trunks 30 Ginghams, 40 Peneascoes, 22 Bandanoes, 4 Romals
and 45 Taffities 26 1 trunk 61lb. wrought silk in pieces and Haberdashery 27 1
case Cabinet Ware 28 to 31 4 cases 33 doz Felt Hatts 32 1 trunk 21lb. wrought
silk in pieces, 12lb. sewing silk, 76lb. silk and incle and 14 pieces British
linen 33 1 trunk Stuff Shoes 34 to 37 4 trunks 110lb. wrought silk in pieces,
141lb. 7oz. Sewing silk, 130 doz. Hose and Haberdashery 38 1 package E. S. 19
and 20 2 bales 30 pieces Russia Duck Epes Sergeant D. S. 5 1 bale 285 Else
Russia linen Daniel Sergeant J. A. 21 1 cask Wrought Brass To Order 22 and 23 2
casks Ship Chandlery 24 1 cask Wrought Iron 25 1 box Wrought Pewter 26 and 27 2
bundles Turnery T. in diam. 1 to 4 4 casks Wrought Pewter John Timmins J. O. 1
to 4 4 casks Cordage Jonathan Orne C. 4 S. 5 1 cask Wrought Iron 1 1 case 1^8
Great Bugle To Order 2 to 5 3 casks Pewter X. in a dm. 1 26 bundles 10 tons
HEMP To Order A. J. 1 to 20 20 bales DUCK E^^ Johnson (...) D. J. 1 1 case Hats
William Vassal Mrs. Gill 1 1 cask Ship Chandlery Mrs. Gill THP. Called a case
in the Cocket, and a Box in the Manifest.
1 case Haberdashery Handyside Peck J A. 1 1 case 8yds. square printed linen, 1
6-10ths Callico, 1 Bettellies, 1 Poisee Jane ^ustis 2 1 box Felt Hats 3 1 trunk
32 lb. 4 oz. wrought silk in pieces, and Haberdashery J. G. 1 1 trunk 302 yds.
square printed linen 78yds. square printed Callico, 3 Bastoes, and 3 Moorees
William Greenleaf AE. C. 1 1 trunk 21lb. 14 oz. wrought silk in pieces, 4 lb,
sewing silk and Haberdashery A. and E. Cummins 2 1 trunk 21 stuffs and
Haberdashery

Manifest of the Cargo of the Brigantine Hannah, Robert Jarvis Master, from
London, taken from the Cocket^ and Manifest, sworn to by the Master, 25th July
1769, which day the Vessel was entered at the Custom-House, Boston: -- Owners,
JOHN ROW of Boston, Messrs. LAN^, Son, and FRAZER of London. -- The Goods were
shipped between the 5th and 7th of May, 1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom Consigned. H. C. B. 1 truss 6
Stuffs Hyslop, Cunninghame and Burton J. M. 1 to 3 3 trunks English printed
books John Mein S O A 1 box To order H^. 1 1 case Looking-glasses Henry Barnes
MHW. 1 box Stores Mrs. Wentworth G. A. 1 1 trunk 2 pieces Irish linen,
Millenary, toys, and Jewelry Grizzel Apthorp 2 1 crate D. Lloyd 1 1 box Dr.
Lloyd L. D. 1 1 cask Lewis Deblois G. D. 1 1 trunk Gilbert Deblois (...) in a
diam. 1 1 bale 10 Stuffs Joseph Pierce 2 1 box Haberdashery N in diam. 1 1 cask
Timothy Newell R. J. 1 1 trunk Jonathan Simpson S. H 1 to 100 100 Grindstones 1
to 3 3 barrels Powder Stephen Hall B. in a diamond 1 and 2 20 casks 240 doz.
bottled beer and 28^0 pieces Green glass R. Jarvis 1 and 2 2 hampers 8 doz
bottled Beer and 96 pieces green glass B. 1 to 7 7 half hogsheads Portugal Wine
To Order R. J. (...) to 13 13 half hogsheads ditto 2 1 cask Wrought Iron 1 and
3 2 casks J. in a dm. 1 to 4 4 butts Strong Beer T. H. 1 to 3 3 casks Thomas
Hooper A. B. 1 to 12 12 hampers 36 doz. bottled strong beer and 432 pieces
green glass Andrew Brimmer 1 to 12 12 casks 1 to 14 14 boxes X in a diamond 1
to 50 50 hampers 200 dozen bottled strong beer and 2400 pieces green glass To
Order for Halifax 1 to 16 16 bundles 12 tons HEMP S. H. 1 to 3 3 bales 1464
Else British made SAIL CLOTH To Order 1 to 31 31 coils 153:2:1 Cordage 32 1
bale A. 264 Grindstones To Order The following are in the Cockets, but are not
in the Manifest.
HB. 1 and 2 2 cases Upholstery NL. 1 1 trunk Haberdashery R. J. 1 box
Haberdashery J. x R. S. 2 1 bundle 5 pieces British linen J. Robinson 1 case
Haberdashery C. Paxton 1 case Haberdashery J. T. 1 box Wrought Iron R. J. 1 to
4 4 hampers 16doz. bottled strong beer, and 192 pieces green glass B. in diam.
1 to 6 6 barrels 1 ton strong beer Schooner Mermaid, Nathaniel Coffin Master
from London, Entered at the Custom house, Boston 24th April 1769. -- Owners,
NATHAN COFFIN and WILLIAM ROTCH of Nantucke -- The Goods were shipped in
January 1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom Consigned. W. R. 1 to 11 11 casks
Nails William Rotch 1 to 17 17 casks Nails 12 and 13 2 casks Wrought Pewter 15
1 bale 20 pieces British Linen 18 1 trunk 20 stuffs and 10 pieces British Linen
19 1 case Looking glasses 21 1 trunk Haberdashery and 10 dozen Hose 22 1 trunk
Wrought Iron and Haberdashery 23 and 29 2 bales 20 Stuffs 24 and 28 2 cases
Wrought Iron 25 to 27 3 bundles Steel W. R. ^0 1 trunk 171 Else narrow Germany,
137 yds. square printed Callico, 1 long Cloth, 3 Gurrahs, 2 Emerties, and 1
Demi Cambrick William Rotch 1 and 2 1 bales 1425 Else (...) 16 1 trunk 808 Else
narrow Germany 17 tons HEMP 25 tons DUCK 64 bars LEAD 2 sheets LEAD 2 casks
SHOT 14 1 cask 10 doz. Wool CARDS 10 casks Powder 12 chaldron COALS 15 iron
Potts 3 casks 1 bale F. B. 1 box Wrought Iron Sam. Starbuck and Company C. S.
C. 1 cask SHOT Christ. Starbuck and Comp. 4 casks Powder N. C. 1 and 2 2 casks
Nails Nathaniel Coffin 3 1 bale Blankets 2 casks SHOT 4 1 trunk 89 Else narrow
Germany 36 yds. square printed Callico, 1 long Cloth 6 barrels Gunpowder

To the PUBLIC.
Boston, October 5 th, 1769.
MR. William Palfrey, Clerk to Mr. Hancock having again attacked me in print,
for publishing in the Chronicle, a piece from the Newport Mercury, signed the
AMERICAN SPY, on which account he charges me with inconsistency, as I had often
declared that I would take no notice of Anonymous publications; -- Now, that
publication was sent from the Custom-house, Boston, together with the answer to
what related to the Custom-house, both which pieces were desired to be
published, in order to contradict a falsehood which had been asserted in the
Boston Gazette -- that the merchants had applied to the Custom-house and were
refused a sight of the Cockets. -- To make this plain, I even printed the Note
in which the two pieces were enclosed, and Mr. William Palfrey must have seen
it clearly himself, but it did not suit his purpose to represent it in the true
light.

What Mr. William Palfrey says of his master, John Hancock, Esquire being singled
out by me as a particular object of resentment, must appear untrue to every
impartial man; he has hitherto only been asked the question which all the
owners of the other vessels have been asked. -- Who paid the freight of the
goods consigned To Order? -- They were called upon publicly, and it was the
duty of every owner to make the truth appear as far as he was able, that the
public might not be deceived.

To make general charges of inconsistencies, misrepresentations and calumnies.
-- Impudence only is requisite: -- but if any person, whose name is mentioned
in the Manifests published in this paper, chooses to dispute any article, it
shall be authenticated in such a manner as to convince every candid Reader: --
not one article that has been objected to as yet, by those who have signed
their names, but has been proved by the most incontestible evidence.

As, Mr. William Palfrey, if I am not much mistaken, was Clerk at the Merchants
meetings, I must ask him one question. -- Pray Mr. William Palfrey, -- What are
the names of the "Well Disposed" Committee; -- Are they the respectable
Committee of White-washers? -- This question you surely are able to answer; if,
therefore, you should appear in print again, please to answer it honestly.

The repeated attempts that are daily made to place this dispute in a party
light, fully display, as I have said before, the weakness of my opponents: if
they had not inserted my (...) in their Advertisement of August 14th, they
might have gone on their way without interuption from me: after that
publication, no other choice was left, but to give my reasons for declining to
sign, to lay before the world a state of the importations, and to show that the
underhand behavior of the "well disposed" did not agree with their declarations.

The "well disposed" are advised to reform before the Review of the proofs, and
to make an open confession of their devices; they will never be able to justify
their conduct to the upright Mechants in this Town and Province, and to the
neighboring Colonies; I would therefore entreat them for their own sake, and
for the sake of truth and justice, to condemn all their past unjust
proceedings, and fairly to set out on a new, honest, and legal foundation.

JOHN MEIN.

Manifest of the Cargo of the Ship Boscawen, Howard Jacobson, Master, from
London, taken from the Cockets, and Manifest, sworn to by the Master, 1st
August, 1769, which day the Vessel was entered at the Custom-House, Boston: --
Owners, JOHN ROW, of Boston, Messrs. LANE, Son, and FRAZER and HOWARD JACOBSON
of London. -- The Goods were shipped between the 22d March and 9th May 1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. R. S. 1 1 box Wrought
Iron Rufus Green Boston L. S. F. 40, 41 2 casks 200 pieces glass and Earthen
ware W. S. 1 cask William S^en^^e 1 hamper R. S. 5 1 bale Upholstery Robert
Stevens Newport 18 half barrels Powder 4 1 box Haberdashery 1, 2, 3 3 bales 24
pieces Russia DUCK X in a diamond 50 half barrels Powder John Row Boston 1 to
10 10 pipes Portugal Wine Y in a diamond 30 half barrels Powder Nathaniel
Rogers ditto 5 1 case 20 pieces British linen 1 and 2 2 bales 1666 Else narrow
Germany 3 1 bale 580 Else Russia linen 4 1 bale 369 Else Dritons 6, 7, 8 3
chests Tea 2 tubs 1 cask R. K. 4 1 trunk Silk and worsted silk and ribbons, 75
yds. Irish bounty linen 10 pieces Stuff Richard Keating Portsmouth 5 1 trunk 20
doz. worsted Hose 6 1 trunk 20 pieces stuffs 16 1 trunk 197 yds. Irish bounty
linen, 10 pieces British Linen 17 1 bale 10 pieces Stuffs 18 1 cask Wrought
Iron 7 1 case Haberdashery 8 to 12 5 casks Wrought Iron 14 1 box Wrought Iron 1
and 2 (...) bales RUSSIA DUCK 3 and 13 2 bales 1046 Else narrow Germany 15 1
trunk 9 pieces Demi Cambricks, 109 yds. square printed Callico^, narrow
Germany, printed linen and India goods J. x B. (...) 1 trunk Ribbons, sewing
silk, 97 yds. Irish bounty linen John Bernard ditto 8 1 trunk 12 pieces Stuffs,
250 Ell narrow Germany 11 1 bale 20 pieces stuffs 13 1 trunk 22 Demi Cambricks
4 Taffities 11 Romals 5 and 6 (...) bales 1729 Else narrow Germany 9 and 10 2
bales 1160 Else Russia linen 12 1 trunk 828 yds. printed Callico, 49 yds.
Russia Diaper, 23 long Cloths 1 to 4 4 casks 42cwt. Alum S C. 5 1 bale
Upholstery Samuel Cut Portsmouth 8 to 11 6 barrels Wrought Iron 14 and 15 7 1
case Haberdashery 6 1 case Silk and worsted and 15 pieces stuffs 13 1 bale 10
pieces stuffs 17 1 trunk Stationary 4 1 trunk Silk Ribbons and Haberdashery 1
and 2 2 bales 1362 Else narrow Germany 3 1 bale 12 pieces Russia DUCK 16 1
trunk 4 pieces Demi Cambri^ks, 90 yds printed Callico, narrow Germany, printed
linen and long Cloths 1 bale 1 box JM. 2 1 case 275 yds. Irish bounty linen, 10
pieces British linen John Moffat Portsmouth NP T. 1 and 2 2 casks Figs Dr.
Sylvester Gardner Boston 3 1 cask Prunes 6 1 cask Apothecary 1 box 1 case 5
bundles HEMP Francis Cabot Salem S. D. 1 case Samuel Dashwood Boston W. B. 1 1
trunk 1037 yds. Irish bounty linen To Order 2 1 trunk Haberdashery 3 1 trunk
Printed Callico^ linen and narrow Germany F. G. 1 and 2 2 bales 616 Else
British made SAIL CLOTH To Order F in a diamond 2 1 bale Upholstery 1 1 case
Upholstery 4 1 case 200 pieces China 3 1 case 100 pieces Glass T. R. in a
diamond 1 1 box Wrought Iron Thomas Russel 1 cask THP. 18 half barrels Powder
Thomas H. Peels Boston 10 casks SHOT 3 bundles HEMP Joseph Jackson B. 268
Grindstones Owners S. B. 30 hampers R. B. 1 box for Lady Franklin to deliver to
Richard Bowers 1 case 1 and 2 2 boxes Lieut. Napier 14th Regt. 1 box directed
for Com. Hood 1 box directed for Lady Fra^kl^^ 1 box for the commanding officer
of the 64th Rt. Major Fleming 1 cask S. G. 1 1 box 120 pieces 3097 yds. Irish
bounty Linen Samuel Gordon 2 1 chest 3 1 trunk 712 yds. Irish linen 4 and 5 2
boxes 7 doz. fine Hats 6 1 paper parcel 11 doz. thread Hose 8 1 paper parcel
Merca^^s Quilting 7 1 case an Organ W. V. 8 hogsheads Beer Com. Hood T. G. 1
hogshead Thomas Greeno^h C. S. 5 cases 3600 packs playing Cards Jonathan
Simpson J. F. 28 1 bale 73 pieces 1823 yards Irish bounty linen James Forest
29 1 case 9 pieces 224 yds. Irish bounty linen, 55 pieces ditto above bounty 30
1 case 1 Stuff 535 Else Russia linen J. R. 2 1 case 37 pieces 905 yards Irish
bounty linen 32 pieces ditto above bounty 3 1 case silk thread and Cotton Hose
and Worsted pieces T. R. 14 to 23 10 half barrels Powder Thomas Robie 1 to 3 3
casks Pewter and Brass 4 1 case Stationary 5 1 case 24 pieces Glass 6 to 13 8
casks Cheese 1 to 3 3 casks Nails 4 and 5 2 casks Wrought Iron 6 to 21 15
bundles Wrought Iron 22 to 48 27 casks Nails W. C. 30 to 33 4 barrels painters
colors William Cunninghame W. 4 G. 42 to 45 4 barrels painters colors William
Gouch J. O. 14 to 17 4 barrels painters colors John Osborne J. R. S. 20 crates
15000 p^^earthan ware James and Robert Selkrig 1 cask Wrought Iron T. B. in a
diamond 11 casks Apothecary Thomas Bulfinch 1 box ditto A. B. 67 to 72 6
bundles Steel To Order A. O. 1 1 trunk 277 yds. Irish bounty linen 10 pieces
British 20 pieces stuffs Andrew Oliver 2 1 trunk 3 1 trunk 42 1-half lb. silk
and ribbons, 10lb. sewing silk and fringes 252yds. printed Callico, 5 Romals A.
4 O. 1 and 2 2 bales Upholstery J. E. 3 cases To the College W. V. 1 trunk 176
yds. Irish bounty linen, Silk ribbons and Haberdashery William Vassal 1 cask N.
R. 20 half chests Oil Nathaniel Rogers JA in diam. 1 cask To Order P. G. K. 1
and 4 to 12 11 casks Apothecary Philip G. Kast 2 1 chest ditto 1 1 case
Apothecary* John Pidgeon 2 1 trunk ditto 3 1 chest ditto 4 1 cask ditto 5 and 6
2 boxes ditto W 4 C. 1, 3, and 4 3 casks Apothecary William Coffin 2 1 box
ditto M. B. 1 1 box Martin Brimmer J. H. 1 and 2 2 trunks Haberdashery Isaac
Herault C. D. 16 1 cask Cordage Robert Hooper R. H. 1 1 cask Wrought Iron C. D.
15 1 cask Cordage Ebenezer Stayley TP. 1 1 cask Cordage J and T. Pitts C. D. 70
and 71 5 casks Cordage Jeremiah Lee 10 to 12 J. L. 1 1 cask C. D. 13 and 14 2
casks Cordage John Pedrick J. S. R. 1 to 6 6 casks SHOT William Rotch and son
C. D. 72 and 73 2 casks Cordage William Brown W. B. 2 1 box Wrought Iron 3 1
bale Minikin baize 3 bundles HEMP 1 bale 343 Else narrow Germany, 174 Else
Russia linen 10 matts Russia DUCK C. D. 74, and 75 2 casks Cordage Isaac Smith
38 matts Russia DUCK 62 bars LEAD 2 casks SHOT 4 1 box Wrought Iron 1, 2, 3 3
bales 1214 Else narrow Gemany, 870 Else Russia linen J. B. G 2 1 trunk 18
pieces British linen To Order 1 1 trunk 379 yds. Irish bounty linen X in a
diamond 2 1 cask Cordage William Tyler. 10 matts Russia DUCK 1 bale 565 Else
narrow Germany, 348 Else Russia linen 1 ton HEMP 1 cask N. G. 1 cask Wrought
Iron Nathaniel Gorham N. F. 1 1 cask Wrought Iron Nathan. Frazer 2 1 box 20
pieces Glass G. and R. 1 to 3 3 cases Stationary Green and Russel T. H. 1 case
Stationary Thomas Hickling 3^ 1 1 cask 365 lb. great bugle Benjamin Clarke B.
C. 12 half barrels Powder 1 case John Copley L. M. 1 to 6 6 hogsheads Brimstone
John Gillespie 4 boxes Manna 1 case J. S. 1 to 91 91 packages Household
furniture, wearing apparel and stores John Sober, Esquire N. G. B. 1 chest Tea N.
and G. Bethune 1 paper parcel John Boreland Esquire (...). 4 S. 1 1 bale 20 pieces
British linen and sewing silk To order of the Shipper 2 1 box 10 pieces stuffs,
silk, ribbons, sewing silk and fringes 3 1 cask Wrought Iron 4 1 bale
Haberdashery H. O. 1 1 bale 11 pieces 1322 yards British, and 10 pieces 300
yds. Irish bounty linen Captain Oman J. K. 20 half barrels Powder John Knight 1
1 trunk Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Mace The following are in the Cockets but
are not in the Manifest.
1 case 864 packs playing cards 1 trunk stuffs of silk and ribbons Hugh
Galloway 2 matted parcels Cabinet Ware 1 chest 137lb. Hyson Tea A. 4 B. 1 box
India goods H. x G. 1 cask Apothecary 1 bag Apothecary J. x W. 1 case Silk and
Ribbons J. R. S. 1 chest 50 pieces Stuffs NP. T. 1 basket 100 pieces Glass

To the PUBLIC.
Boston, October 9 th, 1769.
THE taking into consideration the long Advertisement of the "well disposed"
published in the Massachusetts Gazette or Boston Weekly News-Letter, August
31st, has been delayed till this day, in expectation, that the applications, so
often, conferred on them, would have operated more effectually, and induced
them, to appear under their own proper names: but, no vestige of hope remaining
of their discovering themselves, I shall now proceed to examine it. -- The
first vessel published is the Snow Pit, Capt. Tapscott, from Bristol. which
arrived here June 1st, 1769, in which the "well disposed" say, there were
thirty one Importers, sixteen of whom did not belong here, and of the fifteen
who were Inhabitants of this Town, only four were signers to the Agreement,
viz. Messieurs Newell, Row, Erving and Hubbards; Mr. Newell Imported only Tin
and Iron Plates which although they were not inserted in the Agreement, yet at
the time of entering into the same, it was generally understood that the
Importing of them would not be considered as a breach of the agreement; (...)
have since been permitted by on express vote of the Merchants. It must be plain
to every person o^ common discernment, if it had been intended that the
importation of Tin and Iron plates, would not be considered as a breach of the
agreement, at the time of entering into the same in August 1768, they should
have been advertised along with the other articles allowed: and it is, no
doubt, matter of grief to every man in the same business with Mr. Newell, that
this affair so generally understood as the "will disposed" say, was not made
public. -- True, they permitted them by an express vote, July 26th, but Mr.
Newell's Tin and Iron Plates, unluckily ^^^rived here the first of June
preceding that (...)

I must ask the "well disposed" it this gentleman was a Committee man to
procure subscribers to the Non-importation agreement, while he understood, even
at the time the agreement was come into, that they had given him a
dispensation, which was not made public with the other allowed articles. I wish
the "well disposed" joy on their exercising a dispensing power; though the
world may think they have encroached on the prerogative of his Holiness at Rome.

Mr. ROW imported only SHOT and LINES which were allowed. The Articles allowed
are always printed in the same paper with the Manifest to make this evident.
The Blankets and Hose were consigned to him for the use of the Army. It would
not have been improper if the "well disposed" had mentioned the Gentlemen of
the Army, who gave the orders for these 12 bales of blankets, etc. and to whom
Mr. Row delivered them: Or, did you, the "well disposed" also grant Mr. Row,
a dispensation to import goods under the mark, A^MY^ for I have good reason to
believe, that no such orders were given, nor these goods brought for the army,
unless they thought proper to purchase them after they arrived here.

Mr. ERVING imported some Irish linen and Beer, which were sent for before the
agreement was come into, and actually countermanded, but his orders did not
arrive in time to revert their being shipped, and he has put them under the
care of the Committee. So, the Irish linen and beer were ordered before the
agreement in August 1768; yet the cases of beer were not shipped at Bristol,
till March 22 d, nor the linen till the 10th of April, 1769; by this it would
appear, that the letter commissioning these articles, had been very long,
indeed, in getting to Bristol, (...) well as the orders countermanding them. --
Well! but now they are come, and he has put them under the care of the
Committee* pray how did you the "well disposed" take (...) them, and where did
you store these packages?

The goods for Messrs. Hubbards were only directed to their care, for Stephen
Ayr^^^t, merchant at Newport. This (...) a short, but distinct account of
Messrs. Hubbards goods, and as name and place are mentioned, leaves no room for
doubt. I would compliment the "well disposed" on this occasion, for being so
explicit, a virtue they are not remarkable for; but it is probable, the public
are more indebted to the candor of the gentlemen to whom Mr. Ayrault's goods
were consigned, "than to the well disposed."

As to the six importations, that appeared in the manifest, to come consigned
to one person, whose name was blotted out, and others inserted, those who
furnished Mr. Mein with this manifest, must have known, they were shipped to
Philadelphia, and the inserting them in the manner he has done, is base, and
could be intended for no other purpose, than to impose on the Public, by
insinuating that those goods were for some person or persons here, whose names
were secreted. Certainly, the person, whose name was so carefully blotted out,
that it could not be read, ought openly and honestly to have let the public
know, who he was; as well as the time when and the vessel, in which, these six
importations, into this port, were shipped for Philadelphia: If the person to
whom these goods were consigned, inclines to follow this plan, he will both do
a duty to himself and to the public. It was my duty to the public to mention
the contents as expressed in the Cockets: and to give the names which appeared
in the manifest, just as they had been written and corrected in that sworn to
by the master of the vessel. I give the importations from the cockets and
manifests; it is every man's business concerned in these importations, to
vindicate himself: the Committee ought not to have "secreted" either their own
names, the name of that one person or those of the other importers, To Order:
Acting in this manner, is both underhand and "base;" and they are now after
many repeated calls, again summoned to discover themselves.

In the Brigantine Last Attempt; Captain Lyde, which arrived in this port,
April 10th 1769. The "will disposed" have asserted, there were no goods but
what were allowed except one parcel of cheese and ten boxes of Lemons belonging
to persons who were not signers of the agreement. -- nor were there any kind of
good^ for the signers, except Coals for Mr. Hancock, and one case and a matt,
consigned Mr. Leverett for the use of a Gentleman; family at Kittery. The "well
disposed" should not have "secreted" the names of the persons to whom the
Cheese and Lemons belonged, -- The Public will be completely convinced of the
gross fallacy and impudence of the well disposed, to use their own words, on
comparing with the Manifest published August, 21st, their positive declaration
that nothing contrary to agreement was imported in this vessel, in which are to
be seen no less than 167 casks and barrels of gunpowder, consigned to different
persons, imported here April 10th, 1769; for the vote allowing it, did not pass
till the 26th of July following. -- Mr. Leverett, being a signer, was very
unfortunate in serving as a Conveyer for goods imported for the use of a
Gentleman's family: goods not allowed, and imported for such a purpose, may,
with greater propriety be accounted a breach of the non-importation agreement,
than those which necessity dictates to bring for common sale: Besides, this
Gentleman will have the same excuse to make more than once.

If the "well disposed" shall think ^it to grant dispensations to signers for
this (...) of importing, none of them will, for the future, have occasion to
use their own names; as their customers may have whatever goods they want
imported, and ^^he cloak for family use, and, each of the "well disposed"
signers be as heretofore entitled to his usual advance.

Capt. Hood in the Brigantine Lydia, entered here, April 18th. In this vessel
were, according to the confession of the "well disposed" 17 Importers in all, 6
of whom were not of this town and only two of them were signers, Mr. Hancock
and Mr. William B^wes, the former had fifty Chaldron of Coal, and 100 pieces of
Russia Duck, falsely called British Linen; they latter had a cask of Card Wire,
called in the Manifest Wrought Iron. -- Mr. Hancock's importation in this
vessel, has been fully cleared up^on my part, by an attested cocket, published
the 28th of August; and as to Mr. William Bowes's; Card Wire, it is named in
the Cocket, Wrought Iron.

The Brig P^^li, Capt. Hall, arrived at Boston the 10th of June, and the "well
disposed" confess in this vessel were twenty three importers five of whom were
signers of the agreements, viz. Messirs. Barrett and Sons, who had a Case,
called in Mein's Manifest, for some good reason (...) doubt, Turnery, whereas
in fact they were and should have been called Wool Cards. Why did the "well
disposed" make this mischievous discovery, but perhaps I do them wrong, it
might be owing to pure ignorance, not design; however, let the public judge
(...) There is a duty on Wool Cards exported, which is "the some good reason no
doubt" why they were entered out, "Turnerys" and a (...) reason too, as this
trifling alteration "no doubt" saved the duty.

Messirs J and J. AMORY who had six packages, being the remains of Household
Furniture, part of which came before the agreement was entered into, but these
not being ready could not be shipped before. There are only by the cockets and
masters manifest, five packages, which were shipped, at London, the 19th of
April, about eight months after the agreement was entered into: but I hope when
they arrived they were submitted to the care of the well disposed: they are
also liable to the same objection as the Case for the use of a Gentleman's
family consigned to Mr. Leverett.

N. WHEATLEY 40 pieces Russia Duck again falsely called British Linen. The well
disposed are very unhappy whenever they arise to positive assertion and strong
expression; for Mr. N. Wheatley's correspondent; entered out at the
Custom-house of London, 40 pieces British Linen, in 4 bales, two of them marked
A. L. the other two, J. R R. and the bales so marked, are mentioned to be
consigned to Mr. Nathaniel Wheatley, in the Manifest sworn to by the master at
this port. -- If this should be disputed by any of the well disposed, and if
they sign their names, proper proof will be brought.

Captain DASHWOOD, a cask, containing some trifles he bought at Vendue in
London, value only 37 s. 6 d. -- Captain Dashwood in the Brigantine Deep-bay,
arrived at Boston, December 3d, 1768, after a tedious passage, havving sailed
from London in September: It is very extraordinary, that HE should leave these
trifles in London till April 1769, instead of bringing them with him in his own
vessel. -- There is something very arch in this transaction of the Captain's,
and the "well disposed" have really vouchsafed to make a very satisfactory
apology for an under Committee man.

MELATIAH BOURN, Esquire, six Bundles of H^^^p, one of the allowed articles. The
articles, allowed which are printed along with this manifest, make it fully
evident to every reader, that this Gentleman, is entirely clear from any
imp^tation of importing contrary to agreement: therefore the above need not
have been mentioned by the well disposed.

It is observed by Mr. Mein that there were some articles taken from the
cockets which were not in the manifest, among these were 36 hampers of beer, 20
of which were really inserted in the manifest, consigned E. Wendell of
Portsmouth, and the remaining 16 were for sea stores -- It is probable no
notice would be taken of this but with intent to misrepresent and abuse Mr.
Hancock, as the persons wh^ furnished this manifest must have known by the
cocket that the 1^00 pieces of glass, were really bottles of beer, part of
which had been used for sea stores, and the remainder were consigned to the
gentleman at Portsmouth aforementioned.

Where our ingenious "well disposed" discovered the 36 hampers of beer they
best can tell; Capt. Wendell's 20 were inserted, they grant; but the other
sixteen hampers being neither in the cockets, nor manifest surely could not be
inserted in the manifest printed in the Chronicle: the 1300 pieces of green
glass, weight, 22cwt. 2qr. 24lb. in packages marked J. H. were not published,
with an intent, to misrepresent or abuse any person, and if they had contained
beer, it would have been expressed in the cocket: if this is contested by any
of the "well disposed" who chooses of sign his name, what is here said, shall be
properly authenticated.

In the Chronicle of the 24 th instant, is a very long manifest of the carge by
Capt. Calef, in which there appeared to be greater number of importers than in
any of the other vessels, but no goods of any consequence beloning to any
merchant here except one parcel consigned to a person who has since signed the
agreement. The large number of packages consigned to order were for Capt. Oman,
great part of which belonged to persons who have since also acceded to the
agreement.

Among the importers in this vessel, only the following gentlemen were signers.

Jonathan Mason, a Post-Chaise. This was a present to a gentleman in
Connecticut, and directed to his care.

Mr. MASON, as the post chaise was a present directed to his care, cannot be
considered as an importer: but in our present days of scarcity and economy, I
hope the Gentleman to whom it was sent, will convert it into cash, and give the
produce to the poor. -- It is with great pleasure, I embrace this opportunity
of doing justice to Mr. Mason, and although I have examined the importations,
in upwards of thirty vessels, his name has never appeared but in the above
instance.

Samuel Partridge, ^42 else Ticklingburg, called in the manifest, narrow
Germany.

This Tickle^burgh of Mr. Patridge's, was entered out by his correspondent, at
the port of London, by the name of Narrow Germany.

Thomas Handasyd Peck, 60 dozen hatts These were wrote for the 7 th of July
1768* before the agreement was come into and expected in the fall and therefore
not countermanded.

The 60 dozen Felt Hats, though written for July 7th 1768, were not shipped
till February 21st, 1769: but this Gentleman has also to account for a case of
Haberdashery, shipped February 25th 1769, which is not even apologized for by
the "well disposed."

William Dennie, 1424 else broad Russia Duck allowed.

Called in the Manifest, published in the Chronicle, broad Russia from the
Cocket.

J. Leverett, one box -- directed to his care, for a Lady, at Kittery.

Liable to the same great objection as the case and the household furniture.

N. Green, 34 casks. This was pork sent from hence and not meeting a sale in
London, was returned.

Those 34 casks are in the master's manifest, but no contents mentioned, and
those was no cocket for them; Now if ^he "well disposed" had been ^ood at
making conjurers, (...) ^^dlet me into the mysteries of the art, I might not
only have discovered th^^^ (...) to have contained Pork, though the contents
were not mentioned in the manifest, but might perhaps under their ^^ition,
arrived at such proficiency as not only to delude many by a positive
declaration, into a temporary belief without condescending to proofs, or even
without affixing a real name to that declaration, that every package landed in
this town, since, the commencement of the Non-Importation agreement, or that
may be ^^nded during the continuance thereof, contained or shall contain only
ALLOWED ARTICLES.

P. Hughes, Sundries for an apothecary, allowed to be imported as necessary.

Every one must from hence immediately see the "gross fallacy and impudence" of
the well disposed to use their own words: as sundries for an Apothecary, were,
on April 19th they day Captain Calef entered here, as much prohibited by the
Non importation agreement, as Tea, Glass, Painters Colors, Bibles, Paper or
Scotch snuff: Drugs and medicines were indeed allowed July 26th, but not
before: the very words, therefore, of the "well disposed" have again given the
Public a complete proof of their exercising a dispensing power, without their
having been either candid or honest enough to publish it for the benefit of the
whole. Beside the Apothecary, there is a bag of Pepper which the "well
disposed" have carefully avoided mentioning; and it is now left for them to
inform the public, whether it was generally understood at the time the
agreement was signed, that the importing pepper would not be considered as a
breach of the same, or if it was allowed by way of dispensation.

"Isaac Smith, -- (...) tons hemp, allowed." -- This is evidently shown by the
list of allowed articles printed in the Chronicle.

Cox and Berry, I bundle -- containing magazines and pamphlets.

From what has been said above, it will pear plain to the Public, that what
with (...) understanding that such and such portations would not be considered
as (...) of the agreement, and what with allowing others "to be imported as
necessary," though not in the public l^st of allowed articles, that the "well
disposed" have not only been liberal in dispensations, but have displayed a
great deal of meekness, charity and forgiveness, to inattentive signers.

The reviewing the remaining part of the advertisement of the "well disposed"
must be delayed till next publication.

I intimated to the "well disposed" several weeks ago, that their present
course, of discipline could not fail of having a very salutary effect on their
future conduct in life; and I now congratulate them on their seeming
resolution, since the arrival of Captain Bryant, to pay a strict observance to
their solemn agreement, as well as on their alertness in compelling people to
come in

JOHN MEIN.

Manifest of the Cargo of the Ship Boston Packet, James Scott, Master, from
London, taken from the Cockets and manifests, sworn to by the Master, 10th
August, 1769, which day the vessel was entered at the Custom-house, Boston: --
Owner, JOHN HANCOCK of Boston. -- The Goods were shipped between the 6th, and
23d June, 1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. in a diamond. 1 and 2 2
casks Wrought Iron William Jackson 9 1 trunk 18 pieces stuffs 10 1 bale 276
yds. F^ize 11 1 bale 12 pieces stuffs 12 1 bale Upholstery 15 1 bale 10 pieces
Stuff 16 1 case Looking-glasses 14 1 trunk Wrought silk, inkle Millenary and 1^
pieces British linen 30 half barrels Powder 3, 4 5 3 chests Tea 6, 1 bag Pepper
7 1 trunk Printed linen, Callicoes, and 14 pieces 358 yds. Irish Linen 1 box
and 1 chest W. ^. 1 case H. B. 2 casks Wrought Iron Herman Brimmer S. Johnson.
1 1 trunk Haberdashery Stephen Johnson 2 and 3 2 cases Cabinet Ware J. F. 31
and 32 2 cases 62 pieces 1489 yards Irish bounty linen 28 pieces linen valued
at L. 70. James Forest (...). A. 1 and 2 2 casks Cordage Nathaniel All^^ 3 1
bale 4 pieces stuffs J. H. 1 1 bale 855 Else broad Russia linen John Hancock 6
bundles 5 tons HEMP 20 casks SHOT 261 half chaldrons COALS C in a diamond John
Powell, Esquire: has informed me, that the packages marked C in a diamond, were for
Mr. Christopher Champlin of Newport; were consigned to him only to pay the
freight, and are re-shipped by Captain Hubbel for Newport.
4 1 cask Pewter J. and W. Powell 5 1 cask Wrought Brass 7 1 case Stationary 8
1 trunk 30 doz. Hose and 100 Else German linen 13 and 14 2 bales 24 pieces
Stuffs 15 1 chest, 30 pieces British linen 17 1 bale 9 pieces Stuffs 12 1 trunk
Silk and worsted and 42 pieces stuffs 6 and 16 2 trunks Wrought silk sewing
silk, silk and Haberdashery wrought inkle and twist^ 16 qr. barrels Gunpowder 2
chests Tea 11 1 trunk 9 Demi Cambricks, 360 yds. square printed Callico, 128
Else German linen, 106 yds. printed linen, Taffities, and Bandanos 3 1 bag
Peper 10 1 case 65 pieces Irish linen, 255 Else German linen 52 Else Russia
linen, 28 yds. Napkening Diaper and Damask Tabling, Silesia Lawns etc. 9 1 box
250 pieces China Ware 4 Casks SHOT N. S. 2 1 trunk Haberdashery John Leveret X
in diam. 3 1 case Haberdashery WP. 1 1 case Printed Books, etc. J. A. J. 1 case
Stationary J. and J. Amory J. E. 1 case Stationary Joseph Edwards W. M. in a
diamond 1, 6, 7, and 8 4 casks Apothecary William Mollineaux 9, and 10 2 cases
ditto 11 1 bundle ditto 2, 3, 4, 5 4 casks Alum and Copperas THP. Mr. T. H.
Peck has also informed me by a line, that the case marked THP. was for Mr.
(...) at Newport.
1 case Haberdashery Thomas H. Peck H. 4 W. 15 chests Tea T. and E. Hutchinson
J. A. Boston 1, 2 2 cases Turnery To Order J 4 S. 1 to 5 5 casks Wrought Pewter
Jonathan Simpson C. A. P. 1 1 cask Apothecary 2 1 chest ditto diamond and
Square 2 chests Tea To Order 3 ditto ditto A. B. 73, 74, 75 3 casks Wrought
iron To Order 76 to 80 5 bundles Steel 20 half barrels Powder J. A. 1 to 3 3
cases Upholstery John Apthorp B. C. 2 cases Wrought Iron Cox and Berry J.
Russel 4 cases Wrought Iron Joseph Russel R. C. S. 19 chests Tea Richard Clark
and son R. M. 4 casks SHOT Robert Moodie 1^ half barrels Gunpowder O in diam.
13 1 cask Wrought iron and brass To Order T R. 4 casks Thomas Robie (...) O x
T. 1, 2 2 chests Apothecary Simon Tufts, jun. 3^ to 8 6 casks ditto ST. 1 and 2
2 casks ditto W in a diamond. 1 1 case 234 pieces, 2387 yds. square printed
Callico, 52 pieces long Cloths, 8 pieces Silesia lawns, 14 pieces Succatoons,
1^ pieces Sumertees. etc. To Order 2 1 case 39 pieces 928 yards square printed
Birtish Cottons I. L. 3 Casks Apothecary John Loring 1 chest ditto J. C. 2
boxes Apothecary John Greenleaf 2 casks ditto 1 bundle ditto M. B. 1 bundle
Apothecary Martin Brimmer J. x R. S. 2 cases J. and R. Selkrig J. ^. 1 1 cask
Wrought Iron To Order 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 5 casks Pewter 14 1 box Wrought Brass 13 1
cask Nails 15 to 44 30 casks Nails 45 to 47 3 bundles Gad Steel 2 1 chest 80
pieces British linen 79 1 chest Wrought Brass 89 1 chest Stationary 80 1 trunk
Wrought and sewing sik and 2^ pieces British linen 10 half barrels Powder 8 to
12 5 chests Tea 85, 86 2 bags Pepper 90 1 case 800 Else German linen, 110
pieces Irish linen 91 to 94 4 trunks 118 pieces 1192 yds. square Callico, 659
Else German linen 194 Else Russia linen 8 and 9 2 cases 1008 packs playing
Cards 4 casks SHOT 87, 88 2 casks 29 doz. Wool CARDS 48 to 77 30 chests Window
Glass 78, 81, 82, 83 and 84 5 bales 4259 Else Germ. linen 855 Else Russia Linen
G. C. 1 box Wrought Iron J. S. 6 half barrels Gunpowder 30 hampers Bottled Beer
A. B. ^1 1 cask Wrought Iron 1 paper parcel Magazines John Mein

To the PUBLIC.
Boston, October 12 th, 1769.
IN the last Chronicle having reviewed the apologies made by the "well
disposed," in their Advertisement dated August 31st, for the signers who
appeared to have received good^ co^^^^^y to agreement, by the Cockets and
Manifests, sworn to by the Masters of the Pit, Last Attempt, Lydia, Paoli, and
London Packet, from which, the public will judge, if any persons, according to
the phrases of the "well disposed" have "perfidiously departed from their
solemn agreement:" and whether or no, the "well disposed" have acted with
candor, and integrity, or with "gross fallacy, and impudence."

I shall now proceed to examine, the remaining part of that Advertisement.

In this Manifest (the London Packet, Captain C^^e^) are several casks called
cordage, which contain cod lines for the fishery, and are allowed to be
imported.

Just 8 casks called Cordage in the Cockets.

This manifest is said to be taken from the cockets -- If so, is there not an
apparent design to deceive the public, in omitting to mention the contents of
the 34 casks of pork, consigned Mr. Green, and the 26 casks of ditto, consigned
Mr. T. Gray? The contents of these casks were undoubtedly mentioned in the
cockets; and therefore might have been as easily published, as the contents of
other packages, if it would have answered the design of the publisher.

It has been already declared there were no Cockets for these casks, and that
the Master's Manifest did not express the Contents; -- To explain which the
"well disposed" are referred to the Custom-house.

It is worthy of remark that several packages consigned to order, and those
that are not directed either to order or any particular person in the manifest,
were imported by those who refused to come into the agreement, and some to
others who have acceded to it since those vessels arrived.

Why did the "well disposed" in this Advertisement, secret the names of those
Importers of several packages, especially, as they had refused to come into the
agreement. -- Let the "well disposed" print their whole list of Subscribers
w^^h the date of their signing. It is to be hoped too, that the goods imported
by those who have acceded, since the arrival of th^se vessels, are all lodged
in the Committee's Store.

Many of the consignments which appear to be for Boston, were for persons that
do not reside in the town or province.

The "well disposed" are entreated to ^oin^ out these many consignments.

The Box marked B. said to be in the Cockets, and to contain 90 pieces
Cambrick, belonged to a person unknown and was not called for when Captain Hall
^ailed, as the freight was only 2^^ and 4^^. it is not probable it could
contain so many pieces of Cambrick.

With the mark B. by two Cockets there appear to be entered out at London, 90
pieces Demi Cambricks, and if the box does not contain so many, it is the fault
of the shipper.

In these five vessels, whose manifests have been published, it may be
observed, that many of the Importers were persons out of trade who had only a
single package for the use of their families, some were e^ergy-men who had a
few books, one consignment was books, etc. for the use of the college, another
was presents for the Indians, some packages were for the officers for the navy,
some for officers of the Customs, and others had some trifles which were all
put in the manifests, to increase the number of packages and of Importers.

Names of those mentioned in the five Manifests, who may be supposed to be out
of trade, and the Goods for Family Use.
The Hon Nath. Sparhawk, Esquire 1 Cask Beer. The Hon. Isaac Royal, Esquire 1 Cask
Beer. 1 Trunk, 1 Case, 2 Casks. The Hon. Andrew Oliver, Esquire 1 Cask. William
Vassal, Esquire 1 Trunk, 2 Cases, 1 Hamper. Edward Marriott, Esquire 1 Puncheon, 1 Box.
John Leverett, Esquire 1 Box. Mr. Danforth, 1 Trunk. Mrs. Mewell, 1 trunk. Miss
Mary Vans, Mr. Savage, Mr. Seteusler, 3 Boxes. Mr. William Cockeran, 2 Casks.
Mrs. E. Williams, 1 Puncheon.
If there are any more importations for family use, the "well disposed" are
entreated to point them out.

Clergymen.

Rev. Dr. Caner, 1 Case

Presents for the Indians.

One consignment. -- Granted. -- Though the "well disposed," it is to be
expected, can ^el to whom consigned.

Packages for Officers of the Navy.

Mr. Thomas, Purser of the Romney, 2 Boxes.

It is to be hoped the "well disposed" will mention the rest.

Officers of the Customs.

Supposed to be John Robinson, Esquire 4 Cases, 1 Box.

And others had SOME TRIFLES which were all put in the Manifests to increase
the number of PACKAGES and of IMPORTERS.

Here the "well disposed" have partly spoke the truth; every article in the
Cockets and Manifests, were exhibited in those printed in the Chronicle, on
purpose to give the Public a fair state of the importations from Britain into
this port.

And now, justice to the "well disposed" obliges me to lay before the Public
the NAMES of those residing in Boston, who imported these SOME TRIFLES as well
as an account of the PACKAGES and CONTENTS. The importations of the Signers are
excluded, having been already examined: The goods imported for other provinces,
and even for people living in the country, in this province, and also the Goods
consigned to the Gentlemen as above, are all left out of the following list.

List of Packages and their Contents, imported by NON-SIGNERS to the Agreement
for NON IMPORTATION, brought in the Last Attempt, Lydia, and Boston-Packet,
Captains Lyde, Hood, and Calef, all which entered here, April 10th, 18th, and
19th.
Packages.
143 casks 25 bales 32 cases 2 tru^^es 21 trunks 1 hamper 97 barrels 23 chests
20 bundles 20 half barrels 4 quarter ditto 1 bag 43 boxes 3 kegs 1 jarr 135
grind-stones 4 iron hearths
Contents.
Tea Irish and British linen Sewing silk Baize Haberdashery Wrought iron Beer
Apothecary Turnery, Stuffs of silk Chipt hats Steel Wrought brass Incle
Cambricks Holland linen Callicoes Printed Linen Cinnamon Cloves Nutmegs Mace
Pepper Stationary Books China Oil Refined Sugar Long Cloths British cottons
Stuffs of silk and cotton Felt Hats Earthen Ware Millenary Serge Silk Ribbons
and Laces Painters Colors Hosiery Cheese Gunpowder Lemons Nankeens Ginghams
Peneascoes Taffities Stuffs Gloves Shoes Hose Nails
To whom consigned.
Richard Clark, Esquire Nath. Rogers, Esquire Tho. Hutchinson, Esquire By field Lyde, Esquire
Messrs Edward Lyde Nathl. B. Lyde R. Moodie R. Fisher James Forest Joshua
Loring Henry La^ghton Benjamin Clark Thomas Bulfinch (...). and (...). Cummings
Eben. Greenleaf Samuel Fletcher Theophilus Lilly John Hunt 3d Robert Calef J
and R. Selkrig Joseph Pierce Thomas Barrett Daniel M'Carty Wm. Jackson S
Brimmer L. Arrurery Henry Oman and 18 consignments to Order and Blank 9 Marks
blank
The "well disposed" published in their Advertisement May 2d, That the
Gentlemen who declined signing the Agreement, had in general conformed
themselves to it. That as to those who had imported in the ships lately
arrived, their importations were very small, and consisted principally of Duck
and such other Articles as were not contrary to the agreement, except six or
seven persons whose importations appeared to be as usual. This assertion, to
use a favorite word of the "well disposed" is plainly proved by the above
list, to be "false:" and establishes what was said in my first publication,
that the many respectable names in the manifests, would show the Agreement was
not generally conformed to.

The above are the Goods for Boston, imported in only three vessels: there are,
yet, at least; FIFTEEN more, some with large Cargoes, all of which arrived
before the "well disposed" published their account, dated the 2d of May.

The "well disposed" are entreated to animadvert on these FIFTEEN other
Manifests.

List of Packages and their Contents imported by NON-SIGNERS to the Agreement
for NON-IMPORTATION, brought in the S^^^ Pit, and Brig Paolt (...) Hall,
entered here the (...) of (...)
Packages.
372 Casks 8 bales 5 trunks ^0 boxes 1 box 1 chest 13 half chests 25 bundles
139 halt boxes 2 tru^^es 1 case 9 hogsheads 1 barrel 15 sides Glass 40 half
faggots Steel 70 baskets 4 cases, 4 bottoms (...) 60 (...) containing 5cwt.
unwrought copper
Contents.
Demi Cambricks Silesia Lawns Silesia linens Hollands Wrought Incle Wrought
Iron British linen Wrought silk Sewing silk Haberdashery Florence Oil Stuffs
Steel Stationary Brass Manufactury Refined Sugar Nails Glass Irish Linen
Ribbons Beer Pipes Pewter Cheese Pins Felt Hats Tin-plates Shoes
To whom Consigned.
Ralph Inman, Esquire Nathaniel Rogers, Esquire Sylvester Gardner, Esquire Rich. Clark, Esquire
William Coffin, jun. Esquire Messrs. Rufus Green Green and Cleverly Samuel Whight
William Jackson Capt. Thomas Hulme Joseph Pierce James Warden William Scott
Constant Freeman Andrew Brimmer John Cutler John Lamb William Tapscot 5 Blanks
6 To Order
The articles to Capt. Oman, and most of the consignments, To Order, have been
inserted, till the Committee make it appear either that they have these
packages in their store, or that they were for some other province, and that no
profit acc^^^d from these goods to the persons to whom they were consigned.

On considering the above state of importations from Great-British into Boston,
in only five vessels, amounting to upwards of Eleven Hundred Packages, more
than eight hundred of which were for Gentlemen in the town, and many of the
rest, though consigned To Order, can be proved to have been received by the
Merchants here; if the "well disposed" choose to dispute it, and will sign their
names. It must appear clear to every reader, that the SOME TRIFLES of the "well
disposed" when stated impartially, are trifles of considerable value. And I
again beg of them, to give one more proof of their genius, in explaining away
the SOME TRIFLES brought in upwards of THIRTY VESSELS even excluding the above
five, which have arrived in this port, from Great Britain, between January 1st,
and the date of their Advertisement August 31st. 1769.

It is necessary also to acquaint the reader, that the contents of many of the
packages are very different from what they ARE SAID to contain in the manifest
published by Mr. Mein, particularly Russia and English duck are called British
linens, small duck is called German linen, and Wool cards are called turnery,
etc. -- whether these are really called so in the cockets is undertain, as the
Merchants upon application made to the Custom House Officers have not been
permitted to see them, but we have reason to believe they are published in this
manner to deceive the public, the committee had all the manifests before them,
which they carefully examined and the public may depend on the accounts they
have published relating to the several importations.

With regard to Russia and English Duck, being called British linen, that has
been fully cleared up, on my side, by an attested cocket^ and as to the other
articles, if the correspondents of some people here choose to make false
entries, the blame must fall upon themselves. ^^^uppose a certain Gentleman
does not want to hear any thing more about Wool Cards or Turnery.

The Public will now be sensible there is great "reason to believe" that the
long Advertisement of the "well disposed" was published with an intention to
deceive, more so, as they have declared they had all the Manifests before them,
which they carefully examined.

Of what is said concerning the Custom-house, I am authorized to declare, that,
if the "well disposed" will condescend to mention when the Merchants, as they
call themselves, made application, and were refused, and, at the same time,
will sign their names to their publication -- The Gentleman who sent the note
to me, which was published in the Chronicle of September the 8th, will,
immediately after, make known his name: and then, what the "well disposed" have
asserted above, will be proved, to use their own style, False. -- This too,
will serve as an answer to Mr. William Palfrey, who has fallen into the gross
absurdity of whispering in a News-paper; a whisper is a private intimation,
uttered only to the person to whom it is addressed, in a low soft voice.

It will therefore be needless, particularly to remark upon every manifest that
may be published, but if any thing worthy of observation appears in the course
of Mr. Mein's publications, it will be properly noticed and explained, and if
needful animadverted upon.

Our "well disposed" Veterans in Deceit, from the above paragraph, appear now
very willing to be silent, and if they had adopted such a wise resolution
before they published the Advertisement under review, they would have shown
much prudence, for then, they would not have made public Deacon Newell's
dispensation; Mr. Rowe's importations under the mark ARMY; -- Mr. George
Erving's inattention; -- Deacon Barretts Wool Cards, "FALSELY" called Turnery,
no doubt to says the duty: -- The several packages for Fanny Use: Mr.
Wheatley's Russia Duck (...) British Linen: -- Capt. (...) value 37s. 6d.
bought by himself at vendue in London, from whence he failed in September 1768,
but no doubt, room being w^^^ing for these Trifles on board his own vessel,
they remained in London, till April 1769, and then were shipped on board the
Paoli, Capt. Hall; But above all, the foregoing list of what they call SOME
TRIFLES, would not have been at this time held up to the "well disposed" as a
looking glass for them to contemplate the features of their actions.

The "well disposed" if they should think it needful to animadvert on the
Manifest of the Pratt, Captain Freeman, which arrived here the 13th April 1769,
are requested to ask the Good Deacon William Phillips, if the 2 casks of
Turnery, marked W. P consigned to William Phillips, were for him, and if they
also are Wool Cards.

Beside the above list of Importers, the following Gentlemen have Imported,
either articles allowed or apologized for by the "well disposed" and who, were
not signers, as appears from the Advertisement in the Massachusetts Gazette,
31st August, 1769.

The Hon. J. Pitts, Esquire Hon. T. Hubbard, Esquire Henry Lloyd, Esquire Joseph Green, Esquire
Nicholas Boylston Esquire Mr. Thomas Gray
The Public are therefore entreated carefully to read over the following
Quotation from the publication of the "well disposed," dated August 11th, 1769,
"Whereas all the Well Disposed Merchants, not only of this but almost every
Province through the Continent, have entered into an Agreement not to Import
any Goods, some few necessary articles excepted from Great Britain."

And then to peruse the three foregoing lists of (...), among which they will
see many Gentlem^n, as respectable for ^^ation, fortune and character, as any
in (...) who, by the confession of the "well disposed" in the Advertisement of
August 31st, (...).

From this (...), the Public, will be convinced, (...) "well disposed" have, to
use a sew of their own choice expressions, adopted "the (...) of fraud and
imposition." and that th^^ (...) to ^pan^ them (...) "the (...) not to say
impudent (...), offered the (...) body of (...) people in this province, and on
this (...), whom they entertained the "base" design of deceiving is as
indicative of their want of virtue, as their concealing their names is of their
"want of breeding."

And "every disinterested and impartial mind" will now perceive that in my
case, they have given strong proofs of partiality, "rancourous spirit" and
personal malice; of which farther evidence may soon be laid before the Public.

Two of the Cases in the London Packet containing Books and a Parcel of
Magazines were for J. Mein.

The friend of the "well disposed," should, out of mere compassion, urge them
to ^^^use with attention this Review of their Advertisement of August 31st,
that they may not in future publish others equally liable to detection; for
facts are too powerful for their cobweb publications.

In the Manifest of the Brigantine Triton, from H^ll, published in the
Chronicle of September 21st, the cargo should have been mentioned, to be
consigned to Benjamin Fanueil, Esquire as well as to Mr. Solomon Davis: -- Mr.
Davis having called and acquainted me of this omission, I take this
opportunity, of publicly returning him thanks for the candid and frank manner
in which he communicated the information.

In the Manifest of the cargo of the John Galley, Captain (...) published in
the Chronicle the 5th instant, a trunk was mentioned (...) be consigned to Mr.
William Greenleaf (...) of Mr. John Greenlaw: his, however, (...) mistake of
mine -- Mr. Greenleaf's (...) being distinctly written in the Manifest given
into the Custom-house: At the same time it is proper to observe, that Capt.
Hulme's Manifest was the most exact with the Cockets of any that has yet been
published. -- It is with pleasure that this justice is done to Mr. Greenleaf,
who before the Non-Importation Agreement, was a very considerable importer, and
yet since the 1st of January, 1769, he has never appeared to have imported the
^in (...) article, This is inserted, out of respect to this Gentleman, and I
sincerely wish, I could pay the same compliment to some who are supposed to be
intimately connected with the "well disposed."

The "TRUE ACCOUNT" of Capt. Scott's Cargo, as given by the "Well disposed."
BOSTON, August 21, 1769.
ACcording to a few lines inserted in Mr Draper's paper of the 1^th ^ust that
the Committee were in hopes they should be ready against Monday to give the
Public an account of Captain Scott's cargo (which being the more immediately
under their inspection) which is agreeable to their own determination, and not
from any thing Mr. Mein was pleased to publish, as to goods imported
conformable to the agreement of the Merchants, and those goods that are
delivered up to the Committee, we shall save the Public the trouble of going
over, as well as the Printers of their labor, and hope the Public will receive
it with candor and truth, notwithstanding it may be Mr. Mein will give it
another gloss* But we defy him to detect any material error, which, if any,
when thoroughly examined by that (...), may be magnified a molehill to a
mountain: but, if when this comes in course, with him, and their appears any
thing worthy of notice, or that may not be satisfactory to the public, we shall
endeavor to explain it to their satisfaction, confining ourselves to this
town, as to detecting any Importers contrary to the agreement and giving
account of those persons who (...) in importing, and will not join with the
merchants in the agreement they have entered into for the good o^ their
country* -- They now give the public an account of the goods imported in said
Ship, for persons of this and other towns, expecting their committees take care
of their own transgressors. -- They also insert the goods for other governments.

S. Johnson, 2 Cases, 1 Trunk, for S. Johnson of Connecticut. T. Crowfoot R 4
Casks for Marblehead, for T Robie. NS 2 Cases and 1 Trunk for N. Sparhawk, Esquire
Kittery, directed to the care of John Leverett, Esquire who says they are only
sundry articles from Mr. Sparhawks Son in London, as presents to sundry of the
Family, and not for sale. P 5 Bales, 1 Box, 4 Cases, 5 Trunks, 35 Chests* 43
Casks, 2 Bundles, 2 Bags, 10 Barrels Gun Powder, for Mr. Pollock of Newport. A
Diamond with a cipher in it, 3 Bales, 3 Cases, 5 Trunks, 3 Chests, 6 Casks, 1
Bag, 16 Barrel Gun Powder, for -- Newport NA 1 Bale, 2 Casks, for N. Allen, at
Shrewsbury. LA 3 Cases shipped by a Gentleman not in trade, to his friend in
the country, likewise not in trade, and supposed to be for his Family Use. H.
Crowfoot W. 15 Chests Tea, for T. and E. Hutchinson.
It has been since published, that Mr. Allen, of Shrewsbury, did not import any
Goods.

As the "well disposed" have affirmed, they have published "the Goods Imported
in said ship, for persons of this and other towns;" and also, "The Goods for
other Government," the public are ^^^cited to compare their "true account" with
the manifest in this paper: which will make very plain the "gross fallacy and
impudence" of the Poor "well disposed."

This Manifest may be animadverted upon in some future publication; but, for
the present, I shall take my leave of the well disposed wishing them
REFORMATION.

JOHN MEIN.

Manifest of the Cargo of the Brigantine Nassau, Isaac Smith, Master, from
London, taken from the Cockets and Manifest, sworn to by the Master, 15th
August 1769, which day the Vessel was entered at the Custom-House, Boston: --
Owner, THOMAS RUSSEL, of Charlestown. -- The Goods contained in one of the
Cockets, were shipped the 31st of March, and those, in the other 14 Cockets,
between the 30th May and 20th June, 1769.
Copy of the Cargo from the Cockets, with the names, as exact as they could be
discovered, when compared with the Marks in the Manifest.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom Consigned. T. R. in a diamond 11,
12, 13, 14 4 bales 36 pieces Russia Duck To Order 15 1 bale 290 Else Russia
linen 16, 17, 18 3 bales 1860 Else narrow Germany linen 38 to 43 6 bales ^0
small miniken baize 50 1 bale Stationary L. 20 value 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49 6
casks 42cwt. 2qr. 15lb British refined Sugar being 4907 lb. 1 to 10 10 casks
120 dozen bottled strong beer, 25cwt. green Glass, 1440 pieces 1 to 20 20 boxes
Tobacco pipes 100 small gross 1 1 cask Cordage 20cwt. 2qr. and 18lb. T. R. in a
diamond. 20 half barrels Gunpowder Thomas Russel 1 to 20 20 crates 500 pieces,
glass and Earthen Ware 1 to 20 20 boxes 5000 lemons 6, 7 8 3 casks 28cwt. Alum
9 and 10 2 casks 19 cwt. Copperas 1 1 cask 10 doz. Wool CARDS F.^ 2 and 43 2
casks Cordage S in a diamond 3 1 case 7lb. silk and worsted 10 pieces British
linen Jacob Sheaffe 4 1 bale 4^4 Else British made SAIL CLOTH 5 1 trunk 5 lb. 5
oz. Wrought silk (...), 4lb. sewing silk and fringes 3lb. 2 oz silk and inkle
10 stuffs 7 1 trunk 1cwt. Haberdashery 9 1 case Upholstery 10 1 cask Wrought
Pewter 11, 12 2 bales 10 pieces British linen 1 1 cask Wrought Iron 1 to 17
Cables and Coils Cordage, 31cwt. 3qr. 2lb. 1, 2 2 bales 120^ Else narrow
Germany linen 3 1 trunk 96 yds. printed Callico,8 Bastoes, 30yds. Diaper
tabling, 15 Russia Diaper, 12 Demi Cambricks 1 1 cask 10 doz. Wool CARDS H. 4
w. 55 1 chests Tea E. D. 2 1 trunk 1lb. 5 oz. wrought silk and ribbons 1lb 7
oz. silk and inkle, (...) pieces British line Joshua Winslow 8 half barrels
Gunpowder 3, 4 2 casks Wrough iron 1 1 cask LEAD, SHOT 5 1 trunk 108 yds
printed Callico, 2 Romals, 2 Taffities, 2 long Cloths 3 Bastoes, 2 Demi
Cambricks R. C. 1 to 19 19 casks 147cwt. 25lb. British refined sugar Richard
Clarke J. K. 7 to 12 6 cask 6cwt. Currants John Knight 13 to 22 10 casks 9cwt
4lb. Raisins 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28 6 casks 6cwt. 2. qr. 17 lb Turkey Figs 1 to
6 9 half chests Sallad Oil J. M. 10 half barrels Gunpowder Jonathan Mason S. W.
1 1 trunk 3lb. 12 oz. Wrought silk and ribbons, and 10 Stuffs Samuel White 1 to
4 4 bundles Wrought Iron D. in a diamond 1 to 10 10 boxes Tobacco pipes 50
small gross Jacob M'Daniel 1 20 20 casks 20cwt. Currants M B. 1 1 cask Wrought
Iron J. x B. 2 1 case 1lb. wrought silk and Ribbons and Haberdashery John
Bernard (...) 1 case 12lb. Quicksilver J in diam. 1 to 9 9 boxes Tin-plates
Captain Jarvis WL. 1 to 4 4 bales 1352 Else British made SAIL CLOTH Woodbury
Langdon NL. 1 to 4 4 casks Bottled strong Beer 7cwt. 2qr. 24lb. green glass
Nic. Lechmere J. V. 1 and 2 2 casks Painter's Colors Mr. Vassal (...) to 5 3
jar^ Painters Colors A. B. 1 to 12 12 boxes Tin plates To Order 13 1 cask
Lanthorn leaves 14 1 box ditto H. 4 W. (...) to 54 and 56 18 chests Tea
Hutchinson PL. 1, 2, and 3 3 chests Tea 4, 5, and 6 3 bags Pepper B^ydel 1 to
18 18 casks Portugal wine To Order J. B. 1 and 2 2 bales ^0 Stuffs To Order 3 1
bale 5 small miniken baize T. H. 4 1 bale 5 pieces British linen E. W. 1 1 case
Printed books L. S. F. 4 1 cask Cordage Sam. Cut W. V. 1 and 2 2 casks Wrought
Iron 1 to ^ 8 bundles 6 ton HEMP J. S. 1 to 4 4 hampers 12 doz. strong beer
bottled, 2cwt. 2qrs. green glass 1 to 5 5 hampers 20doz. bottled strong beer,
420 lb. green glass RG. 1 to 12 12 boxes Wrought Iron Rufus Green L. S. F. 45
and 46 2 casks Cordage J. R. 1 to 10 10 casks 2103 pieces 6cwt. 2qr. White
glass To Order Y in a diamond 1 to 3 3 bales Upholstery To Order 7 1 bale ditto
8 to 16 9 bales 40 small miniken baize 21 1 bale 10 small miniken baize 17 1
case 57lb. 5 oz. wrought silk and Ribbons 18 1 case 10 lb wrought silk and
Ribbons and 1 stuff 19 and 20 2 bales 20 Stuffs 4, 5, 6 3 bales 1733 Else
narrow Germany linen D. S. S. 5 1 case 14lb. silk and worsted and Haberdashery
Dan. and W. Sherborne 2 1 trunk 1lb. wrought silk and ribbons 4lb. sewing silk
and fringes, 1lb. 1 oz. silk and incle and Haberdashery 8 1 trunk 6 lb. 13 oz.
wrought silk and ribbons and 10 Stuffs 4 1 cask Wrought Pewter 6 to 12 7 casks
Wrought Iron 1 1 cask Wrought Iron 13 and 14 2 bales 20 pieces Stuffs 1 1 bale
370 Else narrow Germany linen 2 1 trunk 285 Else narrow Germany linen, 7. b.
8oz. wrought inkle 1 sheet LEAD 9 1 box 7 pieces Demi Cambricks, 3 Romals 1
Bandano 1 1 cask 5 doz Wool CARDS Copy of the Manifest.
Marks Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. T. R. in a diamond. 11
to 18 bales Russia DUCK To Order^ 38 to 43 and 50 ditto Oznabrig and
Ticklingburgh 44 to 49 casks 1 to 10 ditto Porter T. R. in a diamond. 1 to 36
boxes Pipes Those. Russel 20 half barrels Gunpowder 1 to 10 casks Copperas 1
ditto LINES Alum and Whitning 19 to 27 casks and crates Earthen Ware 1 to 20
ditto ditto 50 cask WOOL CARDS 6 tons HEMP 18 Stone Bottles L. S. F. 42 and 43
casks LINES L. S. F. 44 cask LINES Samuel Cut 1 bundle Twine D^^o 45 and 46
casks LINES Ru^us Green RG. 1 to 12 boxes (...) T. 4 R. 1 to 10 casks Glass To
Order Y in a diamond 1 to 16 and 19 to 21 bales To ditto 17 and 18 cases R C. 1
to 19 casks Sugar Richard Clarke S in a diamond 1, 2, 4, 11, 12 bales Jacob
Sheaffe 5, 7, 13 trunks 6 box 3 and 9 cases 18 and 10 casks 1 a cable 2 to 17
coils rope H. 4 W. 2 bundle Frying-pans ditto 55 (...) chest Tea MD. in a
diamond. 1 to 20 casks Fruit Jacob M'Daniel 1 to 25 boxes Pipes E. D. 1 and 1
casks Joshua Winslow, Esquire 2 and 5 trunks 5 a case 1 and 4 bales 1 and 2 casks
Nails 1 to 8 1-half bar^els Gunpowder J. K. 1 to 6 chests Oil John Knight 7 to
28 casks Fruit D. S. S. 1, 3, and 4 casks Danl. and Saml. Sherbourn 1 case 5,
6, and 7 bales 9 a box 2 and 8 trunks 1 to 7 casks Nails (...) a bundle
Frying-pans 1 ditto Sheet LEAD G. B. 2 boxes Griffiths and Bowls J. x B. 1 2
cask John Bernard, Esquire 1 and2 cases L. S. E. 1 a bundle Twine J in a diam. 1 to
9 boxes Tin Plates Captain Robert Jarvis WL. 1 to 4 bales Woodbury Langdon 4
tons HEMP L. S. F. 3 and 4 bundles Twin John Row, Esquire NL. 1 to 4 casks Porter
Nicholas Lechmere J. V. 3 4 and 5 ju^^ Printers Oil Mr. Vassal 1 and 2 ke^s
ditto 1 and 2 boxes A. B. 1 to 12 ditto Tin Plates To Order 13 a cask 14 a box
J. M. 1 a cask Jonathan Mason 1 to 10 1-half barrels Gunpowder H. 4 W. 38 to 54
56 chests Tea Hutchinson PL. 1, 2, and 3 ditto ditto 1, 2, and 3 bags Pepper
Boydell 1 to 18 casks Wine To Order S W. 1 to 4 bundles Steel Samuel White 1 a
trunk J. R. 1, 2 and 3 bales To Order T. H. 4 ditto E. W. 1 a case

To the PUBLIC.
Boston, October 15 th, 1769.
THE long Advertisement of the "well disposed" published in the Massachusetts
Gazette, August 31st, having been exposed to public view in the two last
Chronicles -- the Manifest and Contents of the Packages, imported in the
Nassau, Capt. Smith, which entered here August 15th, is now laid before the
Public; the reason for altering the mode of publication with regard to this
vessel, was the great difficulty found to reconcile the Manifest with the
cockets on comparing them; It was therefore thought best, that mistakes might
be avoided, to print both, and by so doing, submit the whole to the penetration
of the Reader. The summary and ingenious account given of this Cargo by the
"well disposed," is as follows: Boston, Aug. 28 th. 1769.

THE Committee appointed to examine the Manifests of the Goods imported in the
vessels lately arrived from England, having carefully examined the Manifest of
the Cargo of the Brigantine Nassau, Capt. Smith, hereby inform the public, that
all the goods imported in said vessel contrary to the Agreement of the
Merchants belonging to the inhabitants of Boston and Charlestown have been
delivered up to the Committee, and put into the Stores provided for that
purpose except six Chests of Oil, and twenty-one Casks of Figgs and Raisins,
marked E. K. the Orders, for which had been countermanded by the person to whom
they were consigned, and the several packages consigned Messieurs --. who have
been and are now advertised as Importers.

The "well disposed" are begged to inform the Public, if Mr. Thomas Russel of
Charlestown, is a Signer: and as they have carefully examined the Manifest it
is wished they would name the Committee to whom all the Goods imported in said
vessel contrary to agreement have been delivered; and having said, these Goods
were put into stores provided for that purpose, it would not be amiss, to point
out in what part of Boston or Charlestown, these Stores are situated. Or, were
they the very Stores of the gentlemen to whom the Goods were consigned? Are the
Packages still unopened? Are the Goods yet unsold?

Most of the Manifests of the vessels which arrived between January 1st, and
August 31st, 1769, the date of the vindication of the well disposed being now
published, it may be conceived, that the public are expecting the "well
disposed" will make another laudable effort in their own defense, or will they
to borow a choice word of theirs, shelter themselves under a general denial,
commonly the dernier resort of detected "Impudence."

However, if they should muster brass enough to re-appear, which seems to be a
never failing resource with them on all emergencies; their friends ought to
beseech them carefully to consult their own "well disposed" Advertisement of
August 11th, from whence their present self-assumed title originated, and which
I have too much respect for them to withold on any occasion: They ought to read
the first line -- "Whereas ALL the Well Disposed" and immediately after turn to
the Review of their Advertisement August 31st, in which, they will see, three
several lists of Non-signers, among whom, are many of the most respectable
Gentlemen in the province.

A definition of the Words "Well disposed" given by the Precious Set themselves
certainly would be very entertaining.

And it would indeed be kind in the "well disposed," to give the Public a list
of the great and good Qualities requisite to entitle a Candidate to the mighty
honor of such an appellation; and in my humble opinion, the best plan to
adopt, would be for the "well disposed" to publish their Names, that the world
might look up or more properly down, and take example.

Also before they proceed to the consideration of the other Thirty Vessels,
which arrived preceding the 31st of August and the large importations by them,
it would not be improper for them soberly to reflect on what has been published
concerning The first Five, which brought upwards of Eleven Hundred Packages for
this town, after excluding the Goods for other Provinces, and every part of
this Province, except Boston; also the allo^ed Goods of Signers, those for
Family Use, and those even brought under the indulgencies granted by the "well
disposed."

SECOND PART of the CATECHISM of the "WELL DISPOSED." interspersed with some
wholesome Advice.
Pray how have you managed with your new recruits?

Are all the goods imported since January 1st, contrary to agreement, honestly
lodged in your stores?

Do you imagine that your new acquisitions have imbibed all your principles,
have really consolidated with you, or will they seize the first opportunity to
desert?

What are your terms of enlisting? it is thought you have different
encouragements suited to the disposition of your Recruits.

Are not some, after having largely supplied themselves, allowed to keep all
the goods they have imported, provided they come in?

Have you not prevailed on a few, on account of the shortness of time till
January 1770?

It is said, when you can prevail upon a new Recruit to give up his Goods, you
take them into your custody; but is it not also true, that you sometimes give
them back again?

Did you ever allow delinquent Signers to keep their Goods in their own Store,
on promise not to open them?

Were not others permitted to carry the Packages to their own Store, open, and
sell them, after having performed the ceremony of submitting them to the
direction of the Committee.

And when every other encouragement proved abortive, did not a bountiful
application of strong scented aromatics, in part, occasion the desired effect?

Pray was this natural discovery, the spontaneous production of a single genius
among, you, the "well disposed;" or did the idea ascend, and diffuse itself
universally among you from the retrograde collisions of certain well known
parts, where it is said, honor chiefly resides.

Had you an unanimous vote for it, at your private meetings? did each of you
according to the strength of his zeal, proportion the quantity and quality of
his contribution? -- did not each of you, for that purpose, come properly
charged? or upon inspection, finding the collection of matter too small, not
withstanding you were so "well disposed," did you, to supply the deficiency,
send about a subscription for to multiply the dose? And pray, which of the
Committees were deputed to perform the savoury operation?

But if a second application should be tried, perhaps the ^worthies who
administer it, may meet with a gracious reception, and receive a weightier
compliment, in return, though perhaps, one, not to sweetly perfumed.

It has been whispered about, that you have generously given up some goods that
were really once in your possession, with this remarkable saying, You know we
are never hard upon Signers. This, the Public have long suspected.

The Public have also had good reason to believe, that some of you, the "well
disposed," have been and now are among the greatest delinquents.

May Scotch Snuff be imported with impunity by any of the "well disposed."

Would not the life and conversation of some of you, the "well disposed" if
held up to public view in their true color, present an example, tending
greatly to the edification of mankind.

Cannot the "well disposed," give the Public a list of of sundries imported
under the denomination, Turnery?

Is it not certain, that you, ^he "well disposed" know the names of Importers,
To Order, some of whom have not signed, and whose names you have "secreted."

Did a very good Christian, ever attempt to persuade a Merchant not to fell
Bibles, as being contrary to the good of the country?

Was a certain in Chairman ever told, when repeatedly pressing a person, who
was not a Merchant, to sign, that he should begin to think seriously of it,
when he, the said Chairman, made a motion from the Chair, to stop the
importation of Molasses, from which the greatest revenue was drawn?

Did that Gentleman ever make such a motion?

Did he ever consult a certain person about writing a "well disposed"
Advertisement, after being told, that the first and last part of the one be had
produced, in writing, contradicted each other.

Was he not told, that if he meant to publish the truth, he had no occasion to
consult any person? but that not being altogether the point in view, Was he not
recomended back to the Committee for their sage assistance? After having by
himself, thrice, in vain, attempted to write some thing that would hang
together? However it must be confessed, that, after retiring for a day or two,
he produced one, which, if not very consistent with truth, was at least nicely
fitted for present use.

The same Gentleman, several months ago, once saying that if a certain person
stood out, he must be advertised; did not that person repeat an Advertisement
to him, extempore, which made him start and shake his ears?

Are the "well disposed" ignorant, that even signers, have sold great
quantities of Goods Imported since the Agreement was entered into?

Have any of the six inattentive signers, offended more than once?

Do the "well disposed" think the public is ignorant, that one of their number,
and a Committee-man too, has been a great transgressor, though the signs of
grace, which he showed on a late occasion, entitled him to some mercy.

How many of the Subscribers to the Agreement were never any way concerned in
importing British Goods?

At your next meeting, pray exclude all such, even though the Chair should be
vacated, and follow a more equitable plan than you have hitherto done?

Would it not be an excellent maneuver, on the 1st of January next, to propose
giving up the Goods you may have in possession, in order to engage the signers,
to prolong the term of their Agreement? -- Other Goods you know might be
ordered to arrive about the expiration of this second Agreement, especially if
the time should only be six months, and then delivering up these new goods,
might again serve as a bait to encourage Signers to lengthen the Agreement to
the end of the year. Are not these clever expedients for you!

The "well disposed" are also asked, if they have not piously used all their
endeavors, to stop the circulation of a certain pa^^^ through the country, by
influencing the people at the different houses where the papers used to be
left, to refuse taking them in*

Have they not also industriously sent to almost every town in the province for
the same and for other "well disposed" purposes? though some Gentlemen in the
country, have been so anxious to enquire into, and to propagate the truth, as
to point out new methods of conveying the papers with safety.

Do some Signers retain the privilege of inattention, or of digressing and
varying from the allowed articles as they please: and do the "well disposed'
still use the Anti christian freedom of granting dispensations and indulgencies?

The "well disposed," with their usual confidence, may declare, they despise
answering these interrogatories, but the Public will judge with more justice,
and conceive it to be incapacity that prevents them.

Though the "well disposed" have not yet told the Public their Names,
opportunities have offered of lustily pulling their ears, which have often
appeared, with affected briskness, through the gloom that surrounded them; as
well as of bestowing repeated applications, which have had a very Prolific
effect, on another part, that shall be nameless.

Before you, the "well disposed" proceed further in your gradation downwards,
it would perhaps be conducive to your future peace, seriously to examine your
past lives, and ^f you think the hue of your actions fair enough to suffer the
light, you may go on, but perhaps you may bear about in your minds for life,
the mortifying and cutting remembrance of having slighted this advice.

JOHN MEIN.

Manifest of the Cargo of the Skip Sally, Lawrence Frazer, Master, from Leith,
entered the 8th August, 1769. Goods Shipped in May and June, 1769.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. 2400 bushels Salt James
Anderson 30 chaldron COALS D. J. 1 to 3 3 boxes 27 pieces 272 yards British
bounty linen 16 pieces stuffs of silk mixed with cotton, 1318yds plain and
spotted lawn, 39 doz. white handkerchiefs Callimancos Shal^ons and Thread Hose
To Order 4 1 cask Hard Ware 5 1 cask 36 pair leather shoes S. D. 1 1 bundle 10
pieces 251 yards British bounty linen and 25 yds. Lawn. L 1 cask 100 pair
leather shoes Colonel Leslie 3 bales Hose

Manifest of the Cargo of the Ship Jamieson and Peggy, John Aitken, Master,
from Kirkaldy, entered 8 June, 1769. Goods shipped in April.
Marks. Numbers. Packages. Contents. To whom consigned. 4 barrels SALT James
Anderson 32 chaldron COALS A 1 bale 13 pieces 301 yards British bounty linen 4
pieces British linen 2 pieces bed Tick 2 hosheads Ale 2 bundles Books 1 cask
Hose 2 crates Stone Ware

To the PUBLIC.
Boston, October 19 th, 1769.
More than Thirty-Five Manifests
OF Vessels which arrived in this port between January 1st, and August 17th,
1769, the date of my first publication, being now printed, it must be evident
to every reader, that malice alone, could have instigated the "well disposed,"
to select me out of such a great number of Non-Signers and Importers.

Every disinterested man on the continent, who has the opportunity of reviewing
their transactions, must, now, be convinced of their partiality, and "Gross
fallacy and impudence."

The "well disposed" having, as yet, only ventured to apologize for the first
five Manifests, they are desired to exert their dexterity, in accounting for
the Goods brought in the other vessels.

One or two of the "well disposed" and some of their Coadjutors, not Merchants,
who have been peculiarly alert behind the curtain in moving the puppets. and,
artful as they think they have been in concealing themselves, may yet be
dragged out and exhibited to the Public in all their blackness and deformity.
-- I shall however soon stop for a few papers, having finished the Manifests
previous to my first publication, on purpose to wait for the vindication of the
"Well Disposed" which they have given the Public reason to expect; and which
they are now again called upon to publish.

(...) have never yet addressed myself to the "well disposed" Committee, but as
a collective body, and if they behave with proper (...) in their reply, they
may be allowed to escape, after having been fully refuted; whereas, i^ they
continue their abusive bints and publications, either here or at New York, the
Public shall be entertained with Anecdotes of the lives and practices of many
of these Worthies as individuals; for all due pains shall be taken to unkennel
them; and already, from a suspicion of the Authors and Abettors, great store of
materials has been collected.

Catechism [Continued.]
Will the good Deacons William Phillips and John Barrett, men of great
property, and who are said to have a very large assortment of goods on hand,
fell, at the sterling cost and charges to those who used to import, and to
Retailers who have no fortune, who have stopped importation, and who have not
had it in their power to lay in vast quantities, at a time that some others
did, before the Non-importation Agreement: It is asked again, if they will sell
to people in these circumstances, at the sterling cost and charges, in order to
preserve them and their families from want?

The "well disposed" are desired to inform the Public, whether or no the price
of Tea, has risen full thirty per cent within these few weeks?

JOHN MEIN.

To the PUBLIC.
Boston, October 23d, 1769.
Catechism OF THE "WELL DISPOSED". PART III.
DID not a certain Committee the last spring declare, that goods for ship
building were not meant to be included in the Non-importation agreement?

In direct opposition to this, have not a very "Well Disposed" Committee lately
asserted, that the above mentioned Committee had no right to make such a
declaration, that goods for ship-building were as much excluded as any other
article whatever, and that Gentlemen concerned in that branch of trade, ought
to inform their correspondents at home, not to send goods for such a purpose?

Which of these Committees are to be believed? -- Why do the "well disposed"
conceal any of their transactions or resolves! Why are they not published for
the information of this town, province and continent?

Is not the building of ships a very great benefit to the tradesmen in this
town?

Have not the tradesmen in this town, been principally supported for some years
past, by the building of ships for the Merchants of Great Britain?

Will not the prohibition of these articles, ^end to the almost immediate ruin
of that industrious and valuable part of the community?

Were they in a matter that so nearly concerned their interest, and the support
of their families, advised with and consulted?

Was a vote, prohibiting such goods, ever passed at any of the Merchants
meetings?

Or did the "Well Disposed" Committee that went about recruiting, dare to
arrogate to themselves such a supreme command over the bread of others, earned
with the sweet of the brow, as of their own mere motion, to stop up the channel
from whence it flowed; while they themselves fattened in case and plenty?

Will any of the "Well Disposed" part with his red Cloak and best white Wig, to
support a family in distress?

Or, for that humane purpose, will they part with the additional advance they
have laid on their goods since the commencement of the non-importation
agreement?

Have the other seaport towns in this province, stopped the importation of goods
for ship-building?

Will not such resolutions force that valuable trade into other channels, or
oblige the British Merchants to build their vessels at home?

How many dispensations have the Well Disposed granted for the importation of
Irish linen from England?

Are the Merchants who import goods for building, entitled to dispensations;
Or, are the "Well Disposed" ashamed of any longer encroaching on the assumed
unchristian privileges of the Whore of Babylon?

At a late meeting, was there any new agreement proposed? -- Was there a vote
passed, not to import till all the Revenue acts were repealed, and even the
Molasses act?

Was there a large company present when a certain vote passed? or, only between
twenty and thirty?

Let us call them Thirty! Were they unanimous?

When the Gentlemen present were called to sign, did the first signer, a worthy
deacon, and a very warm supporter of the scheme, say, with the pen in his hand,
that he was ashamed to put down his name, on account of the small number of his
followers?

Did the principal Orator in favor of it, prudently decline signing, saying
for excuse, it was well known he did not import any of the prohibited articles?

Have not several people signed, on being granted the trifling dispensation of
importing every article requisite for carrying on their own branch of business?

How many signed this new Agreement at the meeting? -- Were they twenty.

If a few of the "well disposed" have taken into their wise consideration, the
repeal of the molasses duty, why, to strengthen that resolution, do they not
also vote against their importation, for it molasses are not imported, no
revenue can be drawn from them?

Pray how many REBUFFS have you, the well disposed met with, from former
PENITENTS?

Have you ever waited upon any refractory Committee Men?

Did you ever choose a Committee-Man who was not a signer?

Do the Public begin to suspect, that a certain scheme, is principally
calculated to crush all the young Merchants and importers, that the trade may
still remain in the hands of a few grave "well disposed" Dons, who are believed
to be exceedingly well stocked with Goods?

Has not the course of discipline, which the "well disposed." have undergone
for these two months past, and the advice that has been bestowed on them,
opened the eyes of the Public, to see them in their true colors?

When the "well disposed" a few days ago, white-washed some importers, they
surely displayed much "Want of breeding" in secreting their own Names.

From whence does this "want of breeding" arise? -- Is it the effect of
singular modesty of fear?

Pray what is become of the alert Committee, consisting of seven "well
disposed" Gentlemen, who were to report on the manifests of the vessels as they
arrived?

Did one of these seven Worthies, who is an excellent Prompter behind the
curtain prudently on a late occasion, procure another Gentleman to put down his
name in his place; or did he previously resign?

Why don't they lay before the public, their "True Account" of the cargo of the
Brigantine Wolf, Capt. Bryant, which was entered here, the third, and their
"True Account" of the cargo of the ship Thomas, Capt. Davies, also entered here
the 12th of this month?

Are these seven "well disposed" asleep, or lazy, or more cautions, or less,
"well disposed than heretofore?

Have not full Eleven Hundred Packages Consisting of

Bales, Trunks, Cases, Chests of Tea Boxes, Casks, Barrels, Trusses, etc. etc.
etc.
been imported in the Wolf and Thomas!

Do not upwards of Eight Hundred of these contain articles contrary to
Agreement?

Was there not imported about a fortnight ago, in the Jenny, Captain Orr,
Thirty-five Casks of Scotch Snuff for Mr. William Dennie? -- Is there not a
Gentleman of this name mentioned, in a well disposed Advertisement, dated
August 31st, as a Signer?

JOHN MEIN.

A QUESTION FOR THE "WELL DISPOSED,"
WHO are the "Committee" who have entertained the "base" design of deceiving
the Public, by publishing "false" accounts of the importations and of the
Importers into this port? -- Surely the following cannot be of the number.

Thomas Cushing, John Hancock, J. Row, Edward Pain, Wm. Phillips, Jno.
Barrett,
To the PUBLIC.
Boston, October 26, 1769.
ONE Daniel Bailey, having published a scurrilous advertisement, concerning the
settlement of a barter account, with me, to which he was no doubt prompted by
the "well disposed:" almost every thing asserted in his Publication being
untrue, except my desiring him never to come into any place belonging to me. He
had, my account several weeks before our settlement, and I did not receive his
till the moment we settled. -- Mr. Hodgson, will show what Bailey has asserted
with regard to him to be "false."

I here desire every person, in the province, to whom I am indebted, to send me
their accounts, and they shall be paid. -- And I recommend to all the "Well
Disposed," to follow the example.

As the Advertisement of the foolish fellow Bailey, undoubtedly, was published
through the instigation of the "well disposed", as well as his behavior which
preceded it, occasioned by their sage advice, I not choosing to remain in their
debt, for the entertainment of the "well disposed" of the present day, and for
the benefit of their Posterity after them Advertise The following Lives and
Characters, which shall be printed with every proper decoration, as soon as the
"well disposed" have subscribed a sufficient quantity of abuse.

The following hints are therefore referred to their sober hours of reflection,
and if they are sond of seeing the whole at full length, they will continue to
publish abusive letters, etc. from Salem, Connecticut and other places; though
most of them may be manufactured in Boston.

Outlines OF THE Characters of some who are thought to be "WELL DISPOSED."
Tommy Trifle, Esquire Johnny Dupe, Esquire alias the Milch-Cow of the "Well Disposed;"
a characteristick plate will be given with this history, representing a good
natured young man with long ears -- a silly conceited grin on his countenance
-- a fool's cap on his head -- a bandage tied over his eyes -- richly dressed
and surrounded with crowd of people, some of whom are stroaking his ears,
others tickling his nose with straws, while the rest are employed in riffling
his pockets: all of them with labels out of their mouths, bearing these Words,
Our Common Friend.
In this history will be related in what manner the great fortune he is
possessed of was accumulated; justice shall also be done to the amiable part of
his own character; but wherever he has deviated, as he often has widely, from
the rule of right, he shall undergo due correction; but as it is believed he is
not irretrievably lost, he will naturally be entitled to some share of pity and
advice. -- Likewise will be given, a scheme for an application to Assessors: --
a dissertation on the nature of Oaths: -- with many mournful reflections on the
sudden death of a friend.

**** ****, Esquire Ned Spindle, The ill bred apologizer for the "Well Disposed,"
who thought the vindication of their characters too trifling a matter to sign
their names to it. Deacon Clodpate, alias Tribulation Turnery, Esquire with a
particular account of his gratitude to his best friends, and the way in which
he obtained his money. Transmutation Wool-Cards, Esquire alias Deacon Conceit. ****
******, Esquire
The two that follow, though they have not appeared so publicly, are suspected
of being even more "Well Disposed" than the above seven.

Counselor Muddlehead, alias J^mmy with the Maiden Nose, author of many "well
disposed" pieces from Salem, one of them of ancient date. -- An account of his
progenitors, and of a famous expedition to Londonderry, with the succeeding
glorious retreat, of a certain Doctor. -- His own great valor. -- His
desperate challenge to his brother the Barber; and the prudence which held
splayed in changing his mind, through the persuasion of his friends. To all
which will be added, his great integrity, consistency, and firmness in various
scenes of life; with a critical dissertation on two of his learned pamphlets.
The Experience of Samuel the Publican, alias The Psalm Signer, with the gifted
face. -- In which may be introduced the author of Alfred, and some curious
anecdotes relating to a Land Bank Scheme, for the instruction of the Country
Gentlemen.
Others of inferior note.
William, the Knave. The Grunting Captain, alias one of the unclean Beasts out
of Noah's Ark. Tom Gawky, alias the English Calf. -- Under this head, will be
narrated all his droll practices behind the counter, with the wonderful story
of his falling in love, and his ridiculous behavior under disappointment.
William the Horner, With an emblematical print. Capt. Tommy Lazy, alias Market
Tom, alias Belly-Gut Tom, -- Many curious anecdotes will be given in this life,
and. Such as the valorous achievements of his Fore fathers, some of their
hairbreadth escapes -- The Chapter of Nose^ -- A new plain for Letter-Writing
from Connecticut, with a Specimen. -- The whole illustrated with a Frontispiece
descriptive of a journey to and from the Southward, during which there was good
eating and drinking, and nothing, to pay. -- The principal Figure with a pair
of ^at Ducks in one hand and the others in Squire Dupe's Pocket. The Lean
Apothecary, or the writer of a piece signed Humanus: with a detail of his
behavior in youth: -- in his profession of retailing drugs and simples -- and
in the marriage state. -- The dissection of this living subject will be very
disagreeable from its mortified state, yet if will have the effect of operating
in terrorem, just as gibbeted malefactors.
* The Public are desired to consider all these characters, etc. as imaginary,
and to believe that no such people ever existed.

Many other Worthies will figure in print, exclusive of the above mentioned,
but want of time will not admit at present of enumerating all the personages:
only a surprising relation may be published concerning the disposal of Money,
commonly called Poors Money.

The above, is but A very faint ketch of what will be produced, if the "Well
disposed continue their weekly emissions.

Mr. William Palfrey's charge of plagiarism will appear an untruth to every
person who reads the story of the two Travelers: -- I did not give it as may
production, not do I lay claim to a single word of it.

I undertook to give the public a state of the importations into Boston, from
the cockets and manifests, sworn to by the masters of the vessels: when
therefore it appears by the cockets that a packages contains broad Russia
linen, I am obliged to give it that name, whether it be Ravens Duck or any
thing else, nor could I without the power of divination, discover that a bale
entered out Broad Russia Linen, contained Ravens Duck, and more, than that a
cask entered out Turnery, contained Wool Cards.

Mr. Hancock being now returned to this town, I imagine he will not be very
ready to thank his Clerk, for his publications; in which, abuse and impudence,
supply the place of argument.

Yet, notwithstanding his imprudence with regard to him, and his s^urrility to
me, I shall be extremely glad to hear, that his matter has raised his wages a
hundred pounds Old Tenor a year.

I have declared before, that to bring general charges of falsehoods, nothing is
wanting but impudence; but let any person whose name is mentioned in the
manifests, make his objections, and sign his name and the clearest proof shall
be produced.

Catechism OF THE "WELL DISPOSED," [continued.]
HAS any Signer bought Goods, that were once submitted to the Committee. --
Wa^^ the buyer a Committee-man?

Have the "well disposed," sent back Mr. Barrell's Goods to England, or, are
they now in his own Ship, at the service of purchasers?

Do the "well disposed" know of quantities of Cheese, lately Imported, and who
were the Importers and purchasers?

Can the "well disposed" inform the public, under what title Garlix and Dowlass
are imported? -- Are they entered out under the denomination of Narrow Germany?

Was there a considerable assortment of Linen, lately brought from another
province, and sold here?

At a late meeting, was (...) not publicly told, that at least thirty persons
had absolutely refused to sign or even to promise not to import? -- Was it
voted not to publish their names? -- Were not some of the "well disposed," much
against publishing the names? -- Were not these same "well disposed" the very
persons who published (...)? -- Is such conduct, a proof of partiality and
malice?

Is not the detection of the "Well disposed,' owing to the Glorious LIBERTY of
the PRESS?

The "well disposed,' if they retain the remembrance of (...) past lives, and
of their connections, ought when they attempt to (...) themselves, to be very
careful, least whole (...) imagine they are ^^king each other (...) s^ow, they
(...) reality, only be ex^^^^^^ the blacking-ball, and so appear to the world,
after all their labor lost, more of an Ethiopic ^^ue, than before their
attempted vindication.

I shall now stop for a few papers, sincerely wishing that the "well disposed,"
may repent of their wicked devices.

JOHN MEIN.

MR. Bailey's publication of his affair with Mr. Mein seems to carry strong
marks of malice; however, he ought to have told the Public the truth, from
which he has very far deviated, particularly where he brings in Mr. Mein,
saying to me If you have any more to say to him or do with him, I have no more
to say to you, which words Mr. Mein never spoke, consequently Mr. Barley could
not hear them. I am obliged to Mr. Bailey, for telling the world of my kindness
concerning his cloak, but he is hereby informed, that Mr. Mein desired me to
give him his cloak.

JOHN HODGSON.


