BRIEF REMARKS ON A (...) False Pro^^^^ions, (...) Dangerous ^^^ors, Which are
spreading in the Country; Collected out of sundry Discourses lately published,
wrote by Dr. WHITAKER and Mr. HOPKINS. Written by Way of DIALOGUE,

By WILLIAM HEART, A. M. Pastor of the First Church in SAY-BROOK.

GREAT Men are not always wise. ELIHU. THE Lord said unto Eliphaz, My Wrath is
kindled against thee, and against thy two Friends; for ye have not spoken of me
the Thing that is right.

Therefore now offer up for yourselves a burnt Offering, lest I deal with you
after your Folly.

JOB 42.7, 8. NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by Timothy Green. 1769.

THE PREFACE.
I Take no pleasure in noisy controversies and contentious disputes, neither
will I be engaged in any such. Matters which have any relation to the kingdom
of God, which is the dominion of truth, righteousness and peace, ought to be
discoursed with great fairness, calmness and equity.

I hope no envy toward any man, nor the least disposition to lessen the just
reputation, and fully the honor of any of my brethren in the ministry; but
should rejoice to see them all, by a clear manifestation of the truth, and
calm, consistent testimony against hurtful errors, commend themselves,
throughout, to every man's conscience in the sight of God. I have no quarrel
against any of the gentlemen, some of whose sentiments are remarked upon in the
following dialogue, nor will I.

It Is error, hurtful error that I censure and contend against, not men. Such
gentlemen as have distinguishing marks of honor conferred on them by public
societies, I would willingly, as is fit, give honor to: But then they are
expected to do more than barely to show the feathers in their caps; they must
show themselves worthy of them. It is doing such too great honor, to connive at
errors because they embrace and teach them.

Hurtful errors ought to have no sanctuary; not to be protected from just
censure, under the covert of a bishop's gown nor even under the shadow of the
throne; for they are laid under censure by a just sentence given from the
supreme throne. And it is too dangerous to countenance what God has condemned,
and contradict what he has said.

The following dialogue has been shown to most of the gentlemen in the
ministry, in my neighborhood, who have given it me as their opinion, that it
is necessary to hear a public testimony against the dangerous errors which are
spreading among our churches, and that the following testimony is so calulcated
to serve the interest of truth, that it will be for the edification of the
churches to publish it. And as no public testimony is preparing, at present,
against a most destructive scheme of false doctrines, breaking in upon us as a
flood, that I know of, I present this to the public; desiring all to whom it
may come, calmly and impartially to weigh the things which are offered to their
consideration, by

Their Servant in the gospel of Jesus Christ, WILLIAM HEART.

BRIEF REMARKS, etc.
A Clergyman and a Gentleman of the Laity, his acquaintance and friend, being
in company together the other day, their conversation, by insensible steps, led
them into the following DIALOGUE.
GENTLEMAN. I HAVE observed, sir, that you gentlemen of the clergy, though you
differ in sentiments from one another, yet all claim to yourselves the honor of
being orthodox; and the same man, though he differs from himself in different
stages of his life, yea, and even at the same time, and in the same discourse,
yet is orthodox still, and inconsistent and contrary propositions are sound
doctrine. How is this to be accounted for; Does orthodoxy follow the motions of
the clergy, as the shadow upon the dial does that of the fun? And when your
motions are retrogade, does orthodoxy go backward like the shadow upon the dial
of Abaz?


CLERGYMAN. YOU are merry upon us, sir. But we are agreed in this, that true
orthodoxy is a fixed thing, and that the holy scriptures are the only true rule
of faith, and standard by which doctrines of religion are to be tried, and
determined to be orthodox or not. We may possibly differ in our understanding
of the sense of the scriptures, in some things. So do the gentlemen, and judges
of the law in their interpretations of the law, in some particulars. But it
don't at all follow from thence, that true orthodoxy, either in law or
divinity, is a wavering or uncertain thing: it only shows that men are
fallible. We may possibly err in some things, in our profession, as well as the
best of men in other professions; but I hope we don't willingly err from the
truth in any thing.


GENT. I am glad, sir, to find your thoughts so just: But I believe it is a
pretty difficult thing, for men who are teachers of others by office, and have
presided in the church a number of years, to be themselves, perfectly teachable.


CLERG. It is indeed fo: and if we are not truly humble we shall not be so. If
the defire of worldly honor and pre-eminence, and love of the praise of men
prevails in us above the desire of pleasing God, and being approved by our
great master, we shall become obstinate in defending our own unhappy mistakes,
and sooner run into two popular errors than acknowledge one. However, we ought
all of us, to sit at the feet of Jesus with as much humility and meek
teachableness as the least of our hearers, that we may hear and learn of him,
and be corrected by him, wherein we have unhappily erred from his truth, and
willingly receive his corrections of our errors, by whosoever hands they are
ministered to us.


GENT. I am right well pleased with your modest and just sentiments; and wish
all the gentlemen of your order, throughout the christian world, had them
written on their hearts.


CLERG. I wish so too, and that they may be deeply engraved upon mine, and ever
be attended to.


GENT. Under the influence of these tho'ts, and in your present temper of mind,
I believe you will be an impartial examiner, and justly censure such errors in
religion as deserve censure. I will therefore, if it be agreeable to you, sir,
mention to you several things which I have collected out of sundry discourses
of several of our clergy, which have been lately published, which appear to me
very wrong, and of very evil tendency; some of which are, I think, nearly
related to Sandeman's heresies, and desire your thoughts upon them.


CLERG. Do as you. please, sir. As to Sandomen, his books are written in a very
artful manner, but are, in my opinion, the worst and most pernicious of any
that ever I read, which were pretended to serve the cause of christianity. What
the author's design was in writing them, I do not pretend to say; but the
tendency of his scheme of doctrine, represented by him at the true gospel
scheme, is to pervert and turn the gospel into ridicule, and in the issue to
serve the interest of deism. It is to me very surprising that any of our clergy
should go into his sentiments, so far as some of them seem to have done. I am
sure these things disserve the interest of christian truth and virtue.


GENT. I will then first mention some of the things I have collected out of two
discourses of Dr. Whitaker, lately printed in London.


CLERG. I have not the happiness of any particular acquaintance with the Dr.
but have heard some things spoken of him to his honor, and wish the discourses
you refer to, were calculated to do him more honor than they do. I have read
them, and confess my expectations were greatly disappointed. I observed sundry
particulars which I greatly dislike, and think the general plan of the
discourse is wrong. But what are the things you have remarked as erroneuos?


GENT. Passing by various lesser matters, I will only mention some things which
appear to me of importance. And first, the Dr. says, p, 7. Man's enmity is the
cause why God, became his enemy; and this enmity or anger of God is most
reasonable and righteous.


CLERG. The Dr. does not do well to represent God's holy displeasure against
man for his first apostasy and rebellion, as the same with enmity. They are as
different from each other as the displeasure of a gracious, compassionate
father, toward an offending child, is from the hatred of an enemy. But if God
did become his enemy, whence did he love him so, as to give his own Son to save
him? The Dr. shall be his own corrector. He says, p. 27. The gift of Christ was
the effect, not the cause of God's love.


GENT. I believe your tho'ts are right, sir; but the Dr. says further, p. 10.
It is good, just and reasonable for God to be an enemy to rebellious man: It
was and is infinitely just and reasonable for God to treat him as an enemy.


CLERG. How came he then to be infinitely kind to him, and love him while in
his enmity and rebellion? Can directly opposite affections and methods of
treatment toward the same person, under the same character and circumstances,
be both infinitely reasonable? If not, then, supposing the Dr.'s assertion is
true, God's good will and kindness toward rebellious man is infinitely
unreasonable.


GENT. Your answers encourage me to proceed. The Dr. quoting these words of the
apostle, Romans 3.25, 26. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through
faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that
are past -- that he might be just, and the justifier of him that believes in
Jesus, says, From this scripture it plainly appears, that the great end for
which Christ was made a sacrifice for sin, was to declare, manifest, vindicate
and honor the righteousness of God, (that is, as he explains himself, his
punishing justice) not to declare his kindness, and persuade men that God is
very merciful and ready to forgive them. And he says that men are of themselves
too ready to believe this without any arguments and persuations, and thence
infers, p. 26. Therefore Christ did not come into the world to declare or
demonstrate that God is merciful, for it was not doubted before; but it was to
manifest the truth and righteousness of God discovered in the law. -- What say
you to these things, sir?


CLERG. In the first place I say, the Dr. here inverts the order of the gospel,
and spreads a very dishonoring cloud over the glory of this dispensation. The
scripture every where represents the immediate and grand design of Christ's
appearing and suffering in the flesh, as being to manifest God's mercy, and to
minister to and accomplish the designs of his love to man. He became a
sacrifice, to the honor of justice, only as an expedient to open the way, for
mercy or love to do all the good pleasure of its will, in consistence with
justice; as the apostle says, that God might be just, and the justifier of the
sinner who believes in Jesus. In this dispensation justice ministers to, and
follows the lead of mercy. The Dr. acknowleges the truth in these words, The
love of God broke out first in the glorious act of giving Christ: to open a way
for its honorable exercise in the salvation of sinners. p. 27.

2dly. The good Dr. has undoubtedly mistaken the sense of the text you mention.
By the righteousness of God there, he supposes his punishing justice to be
intended; whereas the apostle intends his righteousness in pardoning sin and
justifying the sinner; that righteousness of God by which sinners are
justified, which the apostle opposes to the righteousness of obedience to the
law. This, I think, is very manifest from the apostle's reasning from the 20th
to the 28th verse of this third chapter of Romans. The apostle uses the word
righteousness, in the same sense as it is here used in many other texts.

3dly. The Dr. is greatly mistaken in saying, God's mercy in freely pardoning
and saving poor guilty sinners, was not doubted before Christ revealed it, and
that men are of themselves too prone to believe it. What he observes of carnal,
secure sinners easily believing the mercy of God, but not his justice, is to no
purpose -- they only seem to believe it: If they really believe any thing, it
is that they have very little need of mercy. The true trial of their faith is
taken from their being bro't under just conviction of their sin and evil
desert. And now they are found more easily and earnestly to believe God's
justice than his mercy. What a guilty world wanted was a just ground of faith
concerning God's mercy and readiness to forgive the penitent, and to be shown
how this can be done consistently with justice, which the guilty do more
readily believe; and this is done only by the gospel. -- But if it is as the
Dr. says, whence is it that our first parents before they had received any
revelation of God's purposes of mercy to them, believed his justice but not his
mercy, and were afraid when they heard the voice of their Lord, and hid
themselves among the trees? Fear or dread of divine wrath is the natural result
of a sense of guilt, and what all mankind feel the impression of, and cannot be
effectually relieved from but by the discovery of God's mercy made by the
gospel. Accordingly the apostle sparks of the Gentiles as mourning without
hope, and says Jesus Christ has redeemed those who through fear of death were all
their life time subject to bondage.


GENT. The Dr. says, To assert that the death of Christ has caused any reason
for our reconciliation to God to exist which did not exist before, and which
would not have existed had not Christ died, is to assert that it is now more
reasonable to love God than it would otherwise have been. But how could the
death of Christ make this more reasonable? p. 42.


CLERG. The apostle John knew how, and so does every sensible christian: He
says, We love him because he first loved us: and Paul says, The love of Christ
constrains us: Which sayings evidently suppose some new motives, and
additional reasons to love God, which arise out of this dispensation of grace,
and which would never have existed if this dispensation had not taken place.


GENT. The Dr. says again, p. 50. All that makes it reasonable to love God now,
would have existed if Christ had never died.


CLERG. The love of God in giving his Son to die for us, is constantly and
justly represented in scripture as a new, peculiar and powerful reason, why we
should love and be reconciled to him, see 2 Cor. 5.20, 21. Now according to the
Dr. is Christ never had died, this reason would have existed in the same
strength it does now; that is, if God had not so loved the world as to give his
Son to die for us, yet he would still have so loved us. I know the Dr. will not
admit this; and for this reason he should not have laid down the premise.


GENT. He also says, The sacrifice of Christ, and the love of God, does not
make it more reasonable for sinners to return, (that is, to God and their duty)
than it was before, only that it is an additional obligation. p. 50,


CLERG. That is, only as it makes it more abundantly reasonable. I had rather
be without the honor of making new discoveries in the mysteries of divinity,
than to take up with such poor ones as serve to no other purpose than to set
people a staring.


GENT. I am of your mind, sir. But the good Dr. has made some other
discoveries, which possibly you may like better. I will in the next place give
you some of the things he says concerning the natural enmity of the hearts of
the children of Adam against God. Speaking of this natural enmity as an enmity
to God's whole character, he says, This contrariety to God is innate and
interwoven with the very frame of our hearts, p. 15.


CLERG. Is this consistent with Mr. Edwards's doctrine? He says, There is not
the least need of supposing any evil quality infused, implanted, or wrought
into the nature of man by any positive cause or influence whatever; or of
supposing that man is conceived and born with a fountain of evil in his heart,
such as is any thing properly positive, in order to account for a sinful
corruption of nature. Edwards's Answer to Tailor, p, 316.



GENT. The Dr. says, That man, through the first apostasy, lost all taste for
moral beauty and excellency; the perfections of the Deity became hateful in his
view, the objects of his utter aversion.


CLERG. There is a moral beauty and excellence in equity, righteousness,
veracity, faithfulness, goodness, benignity, bountifulness, mercy, compassion,
pity, placableness, readiness to forgive and overcome evil with good. These are
the characters of that great Being, whose we are. There is a moral deformity,
ugliness and baseness in all the contrary characters, tempers and actions. Is
the present frame or constitution of human nature such, so totally inverted,
that God is hated as being thus excellent, and morally perfect? Are
righteousness, equity, goodness, kindness, etc. in their nature hateful in our
view of them, 'till we are new made? Do we hate them as being what they are in
themselves? Are they the objects of our utter aversion? If so, doubtless we
naturally approve the contrary vices. They are beautiful, excellent and amiable
characters in our view and taste of them. And if this is the case with man,
this hatred of all moral excellence, as such, must show itself in a
proportionable hatred of it in men, as they appear to bear any resemblance to
God: for nature is consistent with itself.


GENT. The Dr. acknowleges this consequence, saying, The more resemblance any
persons bear to the divine perfections, the more they are conformed to Jesus
Christ, the more they are treated like their glorious head by those who hate
God and his ways. p. 20. That is, as he must be understood, by all natural men,
and on account of those virtues, by which they resemble him.


CLERG. I hope it will be allowed that those who are followers of that which is
good, are, therein, followers of God, and conformed to Jesus Christ. Now the
apostle Peter says, Who is he that will harm you if ye be followers of that
which is good? 1 Pet. 3.13. Implying that moral good is not naturally hateful
to men, but rather approved and countenanced as good, in their esteem. But I
will not insist on this now, for our new apostles have thrown the old ones quite
out of the saddle. But if it is as the Dr. says, we ought to see this utter
aversion to all that is morally good and Christ-like universally expressed in
the life and actions of all unconverted men. But do we see them generally
express such a hatred and utter aversion to equitable conduct, in cases where
they are uninterested to all the expressions and actions of justice, goodness,
kindness, graciousness, compassion, meekness, forbearance, placableness,
veracity and faithfulness? Do we see the contrary vices generally approved and
commended by natural men, in instances where, they are uninterested? All the
world are witnesses to the contrary: It would not be a more glaring
contradiction to notorious fact to assert, that all men walk upon their heads
with their feet stretched up into the air. -- I believe it will be found, on a
critical examination, that the enmity of carnal men to God's character, is an
interested and partial affection, contrary to their own inward and natural
sense of what is right and morally good and excellent; like that of a corrupt,
bribed judge against the sentence of righteousness. But I don't enlarge here.
-- How does the Dr. account for the introduction of that horrible spirit of
enmity against the perfections of God, and all moral excellence which he speaks
of as the character of the human heart ever since Adam's offense?


GENT. He says, Whether this hatred of God or depravity arises from the
withdrawing the aids of his Spirit, or from some positive viciousness I shall
not spend time to determine, though I believe the former. p. 11.


CLERG. If so, he ought not to have said that this hatred is innate and
interwoven with the very frame of our hearts. But the good gentleman's faith in
this particular was very short-lived; for by the time he came to the fourteenth
page, he changed his mind, and says, It is clear that this enmity arises from
the viciocity of our hearts, and that it is innate and interwoven with their
very frame. And this notion runs through the remainder of his discourse.


GENT. It does so. He says, p. 19. All natural men's hearts are so contrary to
all God's perfections that nothing can give them greater pain, or render them
more miserable than a fight of them as they are in him.


CLERG. Yes, doubtless it must give a poor sinner great torment to hear God
saying of himself, I am the Lord God, gracious and merciful, flow to anger,
abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, and
by no means clearing the guilty; and calling to him, saying, Wherefore, turn
thou unto me and live. Or shall we say that God has drawn his own character
wrong, that the Dr. may be justified? -- But if the case be so as he says it
is, I don't see how any discoveries of God's glory to the minds of sinners, or
any sense of it impressed on their hearts, can be a means of reconciling them
to him: It should seem rather calculated to inflame the disease than to cure it.


GENT. The Dr. is aware of this consequence and approves it, and it is one
essential part of his system of orthodoxy. He says, p. 18. The nature of man
and the nature of God are opposite to each other. And p. 35. God's character is
so contrary to fallen men, that the more they know of him the more does their
enmity stir and exert itself against him, till by the renewing of the Holy
Ghost they are conformed to the divine image.


CLERG. If it be so, the manifestation of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ to the mind and heart of a sinner, is the most unsuitable means that can
be used to convert and reconcile him; it is like throwing oil into fire in
order to quench it: and the devil is sadly out in his politics, in endeavoring
to blind the eyes of unconverted people left the light of the glorious gospel
of Jesus Christ should shine unto them.


GENT. Well, the Dr. also says, The wonderful manifestation of his (God's) love
and grace, in the gospel, with all the moving and melting accents of his mercy,
are not sufficient to prevail with one sinner to make up the quarrel with God.
-- The sacrifice of Christ, and the love of God manifested therein, is not
sufficient, by way of motive, to prevail with one sinner to return to him. p.
44 -- Again, The manifestation of divine glory by Christ transcends every other
method in which God has revealed his perfection, and unfolds more of his
nature and attributes than the works of creation and providence. -- But all
this serves not to engage unrenewed man to love, but more sensibly to abhor
God, in proportion to the clearer manifestation of his nature and perfections.
For if there is enmity in our hearts to God, the clearer views we have of him,
the more will it work and show itself, till a change takes place, p. 50, 51. I
think the Dr. is now quite perfect in his way.


CLERG. If the case is such, Jesus Christ expressed himself very improperly
when he said, If I be lifted up, I will draw all men unto me; and when he makes
the drawing influence of the truth the great instrument of engaging men to come
to him, saying, No man can come unto me except the Father draw him. It is
written in the prophets, and they shall all be taught of God. Every one
therefore that has heard and learned of the Father comes unto me. John 7.44,
45.
And it is to no purpose to address unconverted men in the apostle's manner,
saying, We beseech you and pray you, in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to
God; for he has made him sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him. 2 Cor. 5.20, 21.
For the hearts of men are so monstrously framed, that moral and gospel motives
can take no hold of them, till they are first new-made, without the word; but
the more gospel truth draws them, so much the more they pull back. These are no
more calculated to draw such hearts, than they are to draw a cart. But I can
more easily believe the Dr. has blundered into a gross and abominable error,
than admit these things as true. But if it is as the Dr. says, that "the
sacrifice of Christ, and the love and the melting mercy of God are not
sufficient, by way of motive, to prevail with one sinner to be reconciled to
him," no possible motives are sufficient, and there is an end of all reasoning
with them; and ministers might as well preach to their people the doctrines of
Mahomet as of CHRIST, for any good effect of them.


GENT. The Dr. acknowleges it, saying, God takes much pains to persuade man to
be reconciled to him, yet, alas! the enmity remains; man is still totally
averse to a reconciliation; and all the threatenings and promises, all the
entreaties and arguments which can be proposed, are insufficient to overcome
and bow his will and reconcile him to God. Natural men laugh at his counsels
and despite his reproof; and so they will do till the arm of God's power is
revealed to make them willing. p. 33, 34. I think the Dr. must be understood to
intend here a different kind of power from the moral power of gospel truth and
love; for this power is opposed by him to the persuasive power of the gospel:
that can effect nothing; this alone can subdue the enmity and make the sinner
willing. So the Dr. robs the gospel of all its moral power over the minds of
sinners, and of all the glory of drawing men to God, or persuading them to be
reconciled to him. The gospel, in his hands, is rendered as weak as the law;
whereas it was in the apostles time, the power of God. The law of the Spirit of
Life in Christ Jesus, says Paul, has made me free from the law of sin. Romans 8,
3.



CLERG. If it is as the Dr. says, to what purpose is all this pains taken with
these poor mad-hearted creatures, in reasoning with, and persuading them, when
the nature of the hereditary disease is known to be such that power alone, and
not argument and moral force is adapted to cure it? If his Majesty, out of his
pity to the poor, mad creatures, confined in Bedlam, should send his bishops
among them from week to week, and from year to year, to preach to them, and
exhort them to lay aside their wrong and wild imaginations, and become sober
and reasonable, what high tho'ts should we entertain of his Majesty's wisdom,
and great skill in curing madness? But if we knew his Majesty perfectly
understood the nature of their disease, and knew that all this parade of
preaching, reasoning and exhorting them could effect nothing, and that he could
otherwise cure their disease by the exercise of mechanic power, what tho'ts
should we have of his sincerity, and of his prosessed love and pity to those
poor creatures? How shocking is the injury and disonor which is done the
all-wise and most gracious God, by such infamous misrepresntations of him, as
the doctrine before us gives! Gentlemen who talk in this wild manner would do
well to lay to heart the words of Job, whereby he reproves the partial,
perverse reasonings of his friends, Will you speak wickedly for God, and talk
deceitfully for him? Will you accept his person? Shall not his excellency make
you afraid, and his dread fall upon you? Surely he will reprove you.


GENT. The Dr. says, No moral arguments, except the terrors of the Lord, are
adapted to influence carnal sinners to attend to their salvation. p. 53.


CLERG. If so, Jesus Christ and his holy apostles were very injudicious
preachers, and took abundance of impertinent pains to persuade sinners; and yet
no man ever persuaded them so successfully: the multitude flocked about Jesus
to hear his preaching. Did he thunder and terrify them as at the mount that was
covered with blackness, and burned with fire, and quaked with fear? No: They
wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth, and their eyes
were fastened upon him. -- But suppose it is as the Dr. here says, that "no
moral arguments except the terrors of the Lord are adapted to influence carnal
sinners, etc." He also says, p. 34. " They despise his reproof: and so they
will do till the arm of God's power is revealed to make them willing." So you
see the terrors of the Lord can have no more influence than his love. There is
some edification in seeing men who contradict the truth, at the same time
inconsistent with themselves.


GENT. The Dr. says it down as a just inference from what he said before
concerning the nature and power of the enmity of man's heart against the nature
and moral character of God, that men are not converted to God by moral suasion,
i. e. by any rational arguments whereby their hearts are influenced to turn
from sin to God. p. 50. He adds, The minds of men are too full of enmity to
God, to be persuaded to love and be reconciled to him, by any, though the most
powerful arguments, addressed to their understanding, or affections; therefore
I don't think that regeneration is effected by light, i. e. by presenting the
things of religion to their minds, or even by opening their eyes to see them;
but in order to this the power of God must be exerted, and by this alone men
are created anew. p. 53.


CLERG. If the premises are true, the inference is undoubtedly just. If a man
has woven ven into hit frame and constitution, a fixed, incurable aversion and
detestation to all sweets, it is in vain to go about to cure this
constitutional aversion by feeding him with sugar and honey: His constitution
must be mechanically changed before he can be reconciled to them. So if the
case be with man as the Dr. says it is, the very frame of his nature must be
altered before he can be brought to love God: A view of his moral perfections,
and gospel truths can do nothing toward working this change, but this must
first be wrought by absolute power, before these truths can take any hold of
the heart. This change, according to the Dr. is wrought only by the exertion of
a power of the holy Spirit upon the soul of man, altogether of a different kind
from the power of divine truth and love, a power which produces its effects,
not by moral exertions and means, but by a physical, forcible exertion of
strength. This is the darling doctrine of the Sandemanian divines, the
quinteffence of the new orthodoxy.


GENT. Well; but the Dr. speaktng of the means by which God ordinarily brings
men to be reconciled to him, says, p. 48. God to effects the new birth by his
own almighty power, yet he makes use of means in order thereto. He deals with
men as rational creatures, proposes all those motives and arguments to their
consideration, which would be sufficient to engage their love to him, were it
not for their hatred of his unchangable perfections; and these motives have a
powerful influence on all those whose hearts are conformed to God in
regeneration. Preaching the gospel is the ordinary means which God makes use of
to reconcile sinners to himself, and it is as well calculated to work on the
minds of sinners as any means can possibly be: But yet all the motives the
gospel sets before sinners will be ineffectual, without the agency of divine
power to renew their hearts and conform them to his glorious character.


CLERG. God does indeed treat men as rational creatures, capable of being
persuaded, or drawn to be reconciled to him by gospel motives and arguments:
and this is to me a demonstration that they are so; but the Dr. says they are
not; that their inwrought enmity is of such a kind that all those means can
have no effect, till they are first renewed; then he allows they will have a
powerful influence. If so, God treats man, in the gospel dispensation, as being
what he is not; which is to treat him. contrary, to truth, improperly and
wrong, and solemnly applies a course of means for the cure of sinners, which
can have no effect till the cure is first wrought by a different kind of
application. He that imputes folly, and such absurd conduct to his Maker, let
him answer it.


GENT. I don't know how he can, otherwise than on his knees, with Job's
confession in his mouth, Behold I am vile; what shall I answer thee? I will lay
my hand on my mouth. Once have I spoken, but I will not answer; yea twice, but
I will proceed no further.

I will now let the Dr. rest; but have a few things collected from Mr. Hopkins,
out of many, which are very faulty, which I desire your thoughts upon. -- In
his treatise, entitled, An Enquiry concerning the Promises of the Gospel, he
says, p. 124, 125. The awakened, convinced sinner, who has taken a great deal
of pains in the use of means, and has hereby got a great degree of instruction
and knowledge, and yet remains impenitent, is, in this respect, much more guilty
and vile, and a greater criminal in God's sight, than if he had never attained
to this conviction and knowledge: yea, his impenitence, and all his other sins,
are so aggravated by the light and conviction he obtains, that whatever
particular ways of known sin he has forsaken, and how many soever external
duties he attends upon, yet, on the whole, he is undoubtedly a greater sinner
than he was when he lived in security, and the neglect of the means of grace.
So that the impenitent, unregenerate sinner does not grow better, but rather
worse by all the instruction and knowledge he gets in the use of means. And
awakened, convinced sinners, with whom most means are used, and who are most
attentive to the concerns of their souls, and most in earnest in the use of
means, are commonly, if not always, really more guilty and odious in God's
sight than they who are secure and at ease in their sins. -- p. 127. If these
things be so, then the sinners who continue impenitent under the greatest
convictions of consceience, and the most concern about their souls and
salvation, and are consequently taking the most pains, and using unwearied
endeavors, are usually the greatest sinners, really more guilty, more vicious
and vile than they were when in a state of security; and lived in a great
measure in the neglect of the means of grace. And if they live and die
impenitent, their condemnation will be more intolerable than if they never had
that conviction and knowledge, which by their attention to the gospel they have
attained. How do you like these things, sir?


CLERG. Not at all. It Is usual for enlightened, convinced sinners to complain
that they grow worse: they see more of their own badness than formerly, and so
imagine they really grow more wicked, and are in danger of being discouraged.
But it is a new thing to teach them doctrinally, that they really do so, and
are more odious to God in proportion as they are more, awakened, and take more
pains to become better, as Hopkins does. This is a ready way to throw them
directly into the devil's arms. If this author was alone in these fentiments, I
would not trouble myself with any attention to them; but as they are embraced
and taught by too many, I will a little remark upon them. -- This gentleman
puts the case of a sinner who by his attention to the gospel is enlightened, has
gained much christian knowledge, and is under strong convictions, and is thereby
put upon using his best endeavors to obtain mercy and grace, in the use of the
means of grace, and engaged to abstain from his old ways of sin, and carefully
to practice outward duties. Such he supposes to be still impenitent. By which
he must be understood to intend that his repentance does not spring from the
highest motives or principles, a supreme love to God and holiness, and a
disinterested governing hatred of sin, and so is not of the saving kind. For
such a sinner as he here describes does repent in some fort. He has a change of
mind and conduct with respect to sin and duty, with respect to God and the
eternal world, which is effected by the knowledge and belief he has obtained of
gospel truths. Hopkins describes him as forsaking and abstaining from his old
sins, (sorry, no doubt, that he ever practiced them) as reforming his life and
practicing the duties of religion, as far as he can, and as earnestly seeking
God's mercy and salvation in the careful use of the appointed means of grace,
and in a word, as going as far as he can under the influence of common grace,
and the highest illuminations and influences of the Spirit of God, by the word,
which are short of regenerating and saving. Is he now become a greater sinner
than, he was before? Is he now more guilty and vile, and odious to God than he
would have been if his mind and conduct was contrary to what it is? The motives
he acts upon are suggested to his mind by the word and Spirit of God. If they
are not the highest motives, they are true motives, gospel motives to such a
conduct as he now observes; and the conduct is such as is required, though not
the whole that is required. Is it then more wicked to act right in part, than
not at all? to be influenced to do part of our duty, by some of the reasons and
motives God sets before sinners to engage them thereto, than to be influenced
by none of them, and do no part of our duty, but to despise them all? Is it a
viler thing for a poor sinner to believe and fear God's wrath, and endeavor to
flee from it, than to disbelieve and despise it, and run upon the point of his
sword? Is it more odious to God to hear a sinner, under deep conviction, cry to
him for mercy, than to hear him profane his name and imprecate his curse upon
his head? Is a thief, who being hardened in his first theft, goes
presumptuously and commits a second, less guilty than he would have been, if
convinced of his first sin, he had brought again that which he stole, and
seriously asked God's forgiveness?


GENT. It is said that the awakened, convinced sinner acts upon selfish
principles and motives in all that he does in religion, not from the love, and
for the glory of God; and this is a wicked thing.


CLERG. God acts with a view to his own glory, and to our true interest,
subordinate thereto; and requires that we do so too. If the convinced sinner
cannot yet act upon the first and highest motive, yet in acting as he ought on
the subordinate principle, he acts right as far as he goes, and as God wills
him to do, though he does not go so far as he ought. His present conduct is
therefore criminal in a less degree than it would be if he neither respected
the glory of God, nor cared for his own soul and future well-being. And he who
acts right now, as far as he can, may, through the grace of God, attain to act
also upon the best principles: But if men will not be influenced by the lower,
there is no probability that they will ever have given them the higher.


GENT. Mr. Hopkins seems to make the increased wickedness of the convinced
sinner to be the result of his increased light. He says, His impenitence and
all his other sins are so aggravated by the light and conviction he attains
that, etc.


GLERG. When, in proportion as light increases, men's enmity and opposition to
the truth, and obstinacy in their evil ways increase, they do indeed grow more
vile and odious in God's fight, and in men's too. So it was with the
incorrigible, malicious Pharisees, as our Lord observes of them, If had not
done among them the works which no other man did, they had not had sin; but now
they have no cloak for their sin. Now they have both seen and hated both me and
my father. But the case of the convinced sinner which Mr. Hopkins puts, is
widely different from this. He does not drive against his convictions, and
maliciously resist and rebel against the light which shines in his mind, but
submits to its reproofs, and amends his ways, and applies himself to do his
duty as he is able; is struggling against his lust, and cries out, O wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me? and cries to God for mercy and
deliverance. If his repentance is imperfect, so is his present light: It is
proportioned to his light; if one is short of saving, so is the other. Where,
or what then is the great aggravation of his present sins by the light he has
obtained, above that of all his sins in his careless state of mind? I wonder
gentlemen will talk so absurdly. -- Indeed, if it were true as Dr. Whitaker
says, "that the more natural men are enlightened the more they necessarily hate
and abhor God," Hopkins's doctrine would also be true: But then the scriptures
would be false; for they certainly teach a contrary doctrine to these. -- This
doctrine reflects great dishonor upon the holy Spirit; for it is under his
influence that sinners are awakened and put upon seeking mercy in an earnest
attendance on the means of religion: It also strongly tends to dishearten and
discourage awakened sinners from applying themselves to the means of religion,
and to make them desperately bold in wickedness.


GENT. Mr. Hopkins says (upon his principles) There is reason why the sinner
should diligently attend all means of instruction and knowledge, and sufficient
encouragement hereto. For without this instruction and knowledge the sinner
cannot be saved. p. 127.


CLERG. A very poor encouragement is then sufficient. This thought, that let
him do his best he only becomes more guilty, vicious and vile than he would be
if he shut his eyes and sinned away in the dark, at all adventures, will not
greatly encourage him to open them: this reflection, that he only becomes more
wicked by all his endeavors and prayers to become better, and that if he fails
at last, it will be much worse with him forever, than it would have been if he
had never troubled his head about these matters, can never animate his heart in
striving to enter in at the straight gate: And a persuasion, that by all he
does, or can do, he only becomes more odious in the sight of God, than he would
be if he cared for none of these things, will never convince him that such
seeking as he is capable of, is a likely means for obtaining what he seeks. --
These discouraging thoughts are wholly unballanced by these other thoughts,
viz. "that without that knowledge and conviction which makes the sinner worse,
he cannot be saved; and that this knowledge can be obtained only in the use of
means." If you urge a poor, guilty, concerned, low-spirited sinner to earnest,
persevering diligence in seeking God's mercy and grace in the use of means,
upon these principles, telling him that without this knowledge and application
he cannot be saved, he will readily reply, that he has become much worse already
by the pains he has taken in seeking God, and that the more he does, he shall
only become the more odious and vile in his fight; and you shall never persuade
him that this is a likely way to obtain his mercy; that if your principles are
true, the best way is to sit still and do nothing: If God designs to save him,
he shall be brought home one time or other; and if not, that he shall be less
miserable in this way than in that you urge him to. Upon these principles, it is
so far from being true that there is sufficient encouragement to a poor sinner
to seek, that he has no true encouragement at all, This doctrine is a perfect
snare of the fowler to poor, ignorant, perplexed souls. -- Such tho'ts and
reasonings, used formerly, sometimes, to be secretly suggested, and urged upon
the minds of awakened, concerned sinners, by the devil, with a view to
discourage them from seeking; and it has ever been the care of skilful and
tender guides of souls to detect the sophistry of the deceiver, and deliver
poor sinners out of these snares, craftily laid for them. But what a terrible
advantage has the enemy gotten against us now, that his vile suggestions and
ensnaring, false reasonings are mingled in with the doctrines of Jesus Christ,
publicly taught and defended as doctrines of God, from the sacred desk, and by
the press, by guides of the flock of God! Is this the fruit of our boasted zeal
against errors, and of our refining upon orthodoxy? We seem, some of us, to
have refined all the spirit and virtue of it away, and to be bringing in a
system of errors, which have the most destructive influence upon the interest
of virtue and genuine christianity. What have we done that God should set loose
the spirit of error among us in so awful and threatening a manner? Are our
churches so far departed from the faith as to approve of these things? If so,
our glory is departing; if not, they ought strongly to testify their
disapprobation.


GENT. I had thoughts of mentioning several particulars in a sermon of Rev.
Timothy Allen, on these words, What is Truth? which are, I think, very wrong;
but I fear to be tedious.


CLERG. I have seen the sermon you mention. It is a very bad one, and abounds
with Sandemanian errors: and the author is heretical his notions of the
Trinity, and has many other wild imaginations. But his reputation and influence
are so much sunk, that there is no great danger of his doing much mischief; so
we will take no further notice of him.


GENT. I had thoughts also of giving you a few extracts from some of Dr.
Bellamy's writings, which, I think, deserve censure; but they don't lie
directly in your road; so I pass them by. I think he has not published much
upon the Sandemanian errors: But it is said that in his discourse delivered at
the college chapel last commencement, he advanced this notion of Dr.
Whitaker's, viz. That regeneration is not effected by light, but preceeds
faith, and is wrought by the absolute power n of the Spirit.


CLERK. I did not hear that discourse; but have heard several gentlemen who
were present speak of it, who gave me, much the same account of his doctrine as
you do; and said that many of our most judicious, orthodox divines were much
offended with it. However, I hope the Dr. is not gone fully into this new
scheme. He is a gentleman of so much sense, that upon further reflection, I
presume he will retract that erroneous notion concerning regeneration, if he
has ever at all admitted it, and approve himself sound in the faith, and
thereby give joy to his brethren, whom he once made sad.

That scheme of errors which we have been remarking upon is bad in it is self,
and worse in it is consequences; fatally destructive of christianity. These
which follow are inevitable consequences of these false notions, viz.

First, That the enmity of natural men to God is not a moral disease, but a
constitutional, mental, mechanical madness, is such an expression may be
admitted. For moral diseases are, from their nature, as moral, ^^^^able, if at
all, only by moral means, and the exertion of a moral power. But this disease
of our nature, according to these new notions, is curable by power only, only
by the exertion of a power as different from the power of divine truth and
love, as a mechanic power is from a syllogism.

Another consequence is, that natural man is not a moral agent. How can he be
so, if his nature is such that moral truth and motive necessarily produce
effects in him contrary to their nature? as Dr. Whitaker's doctrine says they
do. He is a moral monster, and mad by nature. Is such a creature a fit subject
of moral government?

Another necessary consequence is, that it is to no more purpose to urge gospel
truths and motives on unconverted men, to persuade them to be reconciled to
God, than to reason with a mad man, with a view to cure him of his distraction;
and that the gospel ministry, as it respects the unconverted, is the vainest,
foolishest, and absurdest thing in the whole world. What would you think of the
conduct of a physician, who, with a show of great compassion to a sick and
distracted servant, should prescribe to him, and command him to take a course
of medicines in order to his cure, which (though of excellent virtue in some
cases) he knows are not at all adapted to his case, but will only inflame his
disease and make him more raving: and because he does not mend, but grows worse
under the use of these means, kindles wrath against him, and commands him to be
burnt to death as a despiser and abuser of his love and care for him, saying,
with tears of seeming compassion in his eyes, I would have healed you, but you
would not be healed? Tears, as deceitful as Judas's kisses.


GENT. I should think him the most false, unreasonable and cruel person in the
whole world: And the doctrines which imply such horrible consequences, most
certainly, are not from above, but from beneath.


CLERG. Doubtless they are so. We justly abhor the rack and inquisition as
instruments of great cruelty. But this system of fal^^ doctrines prepares
torments for souls in tra^^il.

Another consequence is, that there is no preparatory work of the Spirit, no
influence of common grace which does at all prepare and predispose men to
receive the kingdom of God; but that the most careless, abandoned and
profligate wretches are as near to the kingdom of God, and as well disposed to
receive it as the most enlightened, concerned, and earnest seeker, Sandeman
avows this consequence, and makes it a pillar in his building. And Dr. Whitaker
and Mr. Hopkins, upon their principles must admit it, if they will be
self-consistent. For one says, the more natural men see of God's character, the
more their hatred to it arises; and the other says, the more they know of
gospel truth and strive to enter in at the straight gate, the worse they grow.
If these things are so, common grace is no grace. It is, not only, eventually
no favor to those who never obtain special grace, through their abuse of it;
but it is no grace to such, in its nature, tendency, and design: And all the
common influences of the holy Spirit on them are vain triflings. They are a
means that don't at all prepare the subject for the end that is professedly
aimed at by them -- And sinners cannot, in equity, be answerable for not
profiting by them; for they are not improvable by them to any spiritual
advantage.

Another necessary consequence of this scheme is, that the Spirit of Christ,
acting in character, as the great teacher of his truth and love, and enlightner
and drawer of souls, can do no more toward converting sinners, than you or I
can. We used to think and say, as our venerable fathers taught us, and the holy
apostles before them, that men, and ministers of the gospel, cannot convert
sinners and draw them to God, because they can only speak the quickening,
converting truths into their ears; but that the Spirit of Christ, by speaking
it into their hearts prevails, and divinely persuades and draws them home to
God in Christ. But according to our new divines, this internal teaching can do
no more toward converting the soul than the merely external. The holy Spirit
acting as the Spirit of truth and endearing love, upon the minds and hearts of
poor sinners can effect nothing. The more clearly and strongly he represents
and impresses the glorious truth upon them, the more furiously they rage in
their enmity against the truth, and the fountain of truth. Their enmity turns
the edge of his sword: " The sword of the Spirit is the word of God," with
which he was girded when he was sent forth from the Father, by the Son, as his
minister, to subdue the enmity of men and make them willing captives to the
Savior. But he can effect nothing by it; the harder he strikes the head of this
enmity with his sword, the stronger and more lively it grows: (for the more
natural men see of God's character and glory in the face of Jesus Christ, the
more does their enmity rise and exert itself; if we may believe our new
teachers.) In short, he is quite defeated, in the use of his own proper
weapons, by every foolish snner: And if he will conquer at last, he finds
himself obliged to throw away his sword, and betake himself to a very different
kind of power, which has nothing more of the moral kind in it, than the action
of a watch-maker in taking out of a badly constructed watch a superfluous
spring which prevents the action of the true spring. How far the doctrine which
draws such horrible consequences, reflects impious dishonor upon the Spirit of
Jesus Christ, those gentlemen would do well seriously to consider, who teach it.


GENT. If the covenant people refuse to bear their testimony against such
abominable doctrine, the stones of the street will cry out. -- But by what
further testimonies of scripture could you disprove this scheme?


CLERG. By innumerable. I only mention, two or three. Paul says, We all with
open face, beholding as in a glass (the gospel dispensation) the glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same image. Jesus Christ says to the unconverted
Jews, If ye continue in my word, ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall
make you free. The apostle James says, Of his own will begat be us, with the
word of truth, of gospel truth. And Dr. Whitaker himself, after all he has said
against the truth, has given full testimony to it, in these words, "A realising
view and perception of the moral beauty and glory of God is that which is the
motive that first prevails with the sinner to return and be reconciled to him."
p. 34. -- In this he does indeed contradict himself, as he frequently does in
these discourses. But I am glad his thoughts are sometimes right; I hope he
will soon become consistently so.


GENT. I wish he may, and all the gentlemen of your cloth; for some of you, by
your frequent inconsistencies and self-contradictions, perplex and consound our
understandings, and give great occasion of ridicule to those who are disposed
to take it. -- But though you will not allow this scheme of doctrine to be
apostolical and divine, yet I suppose you will admit it as found Calvinism.


CLERG. No sir, by no means. All judicious Calvinist divines, who understand
themselves, constantly assert that conversion or regeneration is wrought by
light, by the moral power of divine truth and love, as believed and realized.
They indeed acknowledge the weakness and corruption of human nature since the
fall to be such, that men neither will, nor can, so believe and realize gospel
truth as to be renewed by its influence, unless the Spirit of truth accompany
the word and speak it, as it were, to the heart, (which is true): But then the
power he exerts is, as they acknowledge, a moral power, i. e. the powerful
energy of the Spirit, acting as the Spirit of truth, righteousness and love. A
gentleman of sense to whom this dialogue was read, observed that the apostle
seems to represent the power by which men are quickened from the deadness of
sin, as of the same kind with that by which Jesus Christ was raised from the
dead, Ephesians. 1.18 -- 20. And that in other texts this is spoken of as the effect
of the power of the holy Ghost; which seems to favor Dr. Whitaker's notion of
the power by which men are regenerated. Perhaps some others in reading this may
have the same objection in their thoughts. I therefore remark a little on that
text. -- The apostle there tells the Ephesian churches that he prayed for them,
that the eyes of their understanding way be enlightened, that they may know
what is the hope of God's calling, and what the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the saints; and what the exceeding greatness of his power to us
word who believe, (which is) according to the working of his mighty power,
which he wrought in Jesus Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him
at his own right hand, etc. It is, I think, very manifest that the apostle is
not speaking of that power which God exerted in quickening them from the moral
death of sin, but of a power which he will hereafter exert in favor to them,
thus quickened already; a power like to that by which he raised Christ from the
dead and exalted him to glory, and productive of like effects in them, quickened
their mortal bodies, and exalting them to glory with him. -- He gives us a
perfect explanation of his meaning here, (if it can be thought to need any
explanation) in Phil. 3.20, 21 Jesus Christ shall change our vile body that it
may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby
he is able to subdue all things unto himself. The moral change of the mind is
of an essentially different kind from the literal or mechanical change of the
body, and is effected by the exertion of a different kind of power. -- Each
effect requires a power suited to its nature: and the power proper to one
effect, can never produce the other. To argue from one to the other is
therefore idle and impertinent. The Spirit of God is possessed of these two
different kinds of power, and exerts the one or the other according as he wills
to produce a change of the moral or physical kind, in moral beings or others.
-- Exalt the power of the holy Spirit as much as you please, in effecting the
moral change in the soul, called regeneration; but then don't confound it with
the power exerted upon dead bodies in quickening and glorifying them; but
consider and represent it according to its nature, as a moral power, which is
he power of gospel truth and love, applied by the Spirit of truth and love to
the soul, with his own peculiar energy. This will free us from abundance of
confusion and absurdity in our thoughts and reasonings on this subject.


In Calvin's time there were some who held that regeneration and repentance go
before faith. He censures this as error, confutes their reasonings in support
of this notion, and maintains that repentance springs from faith as fruit out
of a tree; and says, that regeneration is included in repentance. See his
Institutions, b. 3. chapter 3, to which he gives this title, That we be regenerate
by faith; and his discourse answers the title.


GENT. Well, be that as it will, it little concerns me. My care is to know what
is the doctrine that Jesus Christ, and his holy apostles taught, and to believe
and practice accordingly. You have censured the Dr's wrong notions of the
enmity of man's heart against God. But is there no such thing as a spirit of
enmity against God working in the carnal heart?


CLERG. Doubtless there is. The apostle says, the carnal mind is enmity against
God; and sinners find it so in their own experience of the workings of their
own hearts.


GENT. And the apostle says, this carnal mind cannot be subject to the law of
God.


CLERG. And for this reason this carnal temper must be mortified, and a better
and holy temper introduced into the mind or heart. The apostle does not say
this happy change of mind and heart cannot be effected by the influence and
power of gospel truth and love, but the contrary. God graciously subdues the
enmity, changes and reconciles the soul by letting in the light, and a sweet,
attractive sense of his holy truth and love. The new divines indeed are so bold
as to say all this is not sufficient to convert and reconcile one soul. But
there are more than ten thousand times ten thousand holy, happy saints, whose
experience condem is them, and who are prepared to bear their joyful testimony
to the quickening, converting power of the gospel.


GENT. I highly approve your sentiments, sir, and thank you for the free
communication of them. But I should be well pleased to know a little more of
your thoughts concerning this monstrous passion of enmity to God's moral
character.


CLERG. If it will please you, you shall -- But to set that subject in a clear
light, and guard the truth against misrepresentations now, would too much
interrupt us: If you please therefore we will reserve this subject for another
day's conversation. This is a subject of great importance: for on the wrong
defining of this enmity, has been founded a whole system of destructive errors;
and by a right stating and explaining of it, they fall to the ground.


GENT. I gladly accept your proposal. -- The doctrines which have been above
remarked upon, are some of the doctrines which belong to the new scheme of
orthodoxy which is spreading among us. Do you think the churches may safely
hold their peace, and suffer them to be taught in them?


CLERG. NO, sir, unless they may safely suffer the gospel to be perverted, and
betrayed into the hands of the deists. This new scheme of divinity is called
the orthodox heresy, and very justly; for it contains a monstrous medly of
great truths, and great errors, utterly inconsistent with them. The errors are
of such a nature and tendency that they devour the truths, as Pharaoh's seven
lean kine did the seven well-favored and fat-fleshed kine: and they are also
like them, poor, very ill-favored, and lean-fleshed, such as were never seen in
all the land for badness. -- These are the forerunners of infidelity and all
impiety, on one hand; and on the other, they prepare the ignorant,
superstitious and enthusiastical, to become totally subverted in their
understanding, and an easy prey to the first plausible invader. -- This new
system, or rather chaos of divinity, is a hardhearted, arbitrary, cruel tyrant,
a tormentor of souls; it scandalously misrepresents the character and conduct
of God, and implicitly blasphemes the dispensation of his his grace to a sinful
world; it offers as great affront to reason, common sense and experience, as
the doctrines of Rome; and the highest possible abuse and insult to human
nature. Dr. Whitaker says, "Man is turned devil;" and before he gets out of his
hands he makes him look worse than a devil. -- It is greatly to be wished that
all who have the office of teachers of religion to others, would themselves
learn of Jesus Christ, to give a honoring representation of his Father's more
than paternal kindness and love toward man, and breath Jesus's compassionate
tenderness toward poor perishing sinners, in their doctrine.


GENT. Well sir, I wish the happy time may soon come. But you acknowledge there
is some truth retained in this new scheme, that may perhaps correct the noxious
qualities of the errors, and render the whole a safe medicine for souls.


CLERG. The truth has the misfortune and dishonor to be very unequally yoked. I
wish they were kept apart. The truth would do much more good, and the errors
much less hurt; I believe none at all, but only serve as a foil to set off to
advantage the excellence and glory of the truth. But this blundering mixture of
new orthodoxy with the old, only serves to spoil both; it is, in one respect,
like putting new wine into old bottles: and I think no man, in his right mind,
having drank of the old wine, straightway desires the new, for he faith the
old is better.


DIALOGUE Second.
Upon the Subject of Man's Enmity against God.
GENT. YOU remember, sir, that yesterday you gave me leave to hope that at
another time you would cominunicate your tho'ts on the subject of man's natural
enmity against God. If the present is agreeable to you, I will now expect that
favor.


CLERG. I am at your service, sir.


GENT. Dr. Whitaker says, as I observed yesterday, that "the quarrel is against
God as clothed with his true character; that the whole character of God, every
tittle of it, is the object of the sinner's hatred; that this enmity is innate
and interwoven with the very frame of the heart; and that the more God's
character is known, the more it will be hated by all natural men." -- I think,
sir, you don't approve of this doctrine.


CLERG. It appears to me that the Dr's tho'ts on this subject are indigested,
superficial, and not exactly just. Perhaps you will think mine more so:
however, I will let you know them. Suffer me to make several observations; as,

First, That the general passions of love and hatred are indeed "innate, and
interwoven with the very frame of our hearts," and constitute part of their
natural character -- That good is the natural and right object of the passion
of love, and evil of hatred -- Good may be distinguished into two general
kinds, natural and moral: so may evil. A spirit of equity and benignity is
morally good: Unrighteousness, partiality, fraud, malignity, and cruelty are
morally evil.

Observe also, There is in man a natural faculty whereby he is rendered capable
of discerning and distinguishing between moral good and evil, as well as
natural, and readily perceives the one to be right, amiable, and worthy of
esteem and honor, the other wrong, hateful and blame^^^rthy immediately, as
soon as these object are seen by the mind in their true light, or as being what
they really are, without any further reasoning about them. This faculty is
"innate," an essential part of the natural constitution of all intelligent and
moral beings, as such; and is found in experience, actually existing both in
righteous and wicked men. On this is founded the principle and power of natural
conscience. Beasts want this faculty of moral discernment, and therefore are
naturally incapable of moral government; take, it out of our nature, or suppose
it destroyed or inverted in man, and he is as unfit a subject of such a
government as they.

From hence it necessarily follows, that actions and characters which are
morally good, when viewed by the mind in their true light, or as being what
they really are, cannot but appear good, amiable, and worthy of esteem and
honor, considered absolutely in themselves and they are in fact so regarded by
all men, in this view of them, and cannot be hated for their own sakes; and, on
the contrary, actions and characters morally evil, viewed as above, appear to
the mind evil, are disapproved as objects of moral hatred. To suppose the
contrary is inconsistent with the existence and exercise of the abovementioned
faculty of discerning and distinguishing between moral good and evil; or
otherwise, is to suppose the same object, in the same view of it, to appear
both good and evil, at the same time, and for the same reason; which is absurd
and impossible. We do in fact see things in real life, as this reasoning shows
them to be. Nothing is more common than to hear vicious men condemn the vices
in others, which they allow in themselves, when circumstances are so varied
that they don't see themselves in them; and on the other hand, approve and
commend those virtues in others which they refuse to practice: and what is
more, in their calm and serious intervals, they do, and cannot but secretly
disapprove their own evil conduct and blame themselves for it, (and would cease
from it too if particular lusts did not draw them on) according to that ancient
acknowlegement of the heathen philosopher, " I see and approve those things
which are good, but practice those that are evil." Which is a demonstration
that virtue is not hated as virtue, nor vice loved as vice. Vicious men do
indeed too often call evil good, and good evil; but this is 'always effected by
misrepresenting them to themselves, and clothing them with unnatural
circumstances, whereby they make them appear to their minds with a different
face from the true.


GENT. What you say, sir, seems to carry a great strength of evidence with it;
but will it not hence follow, that carnal men have and can have no enmity to
God, contrary to what you acknowleged yesterday?


CLERG. No, sir: Please to have a little patience, and keep up a calm,
unjealous attention; I trust things will come out right presently, to the honor
of God, advantage of religion, and your own satisfaction. Suffer me to observe
further,

Actions, and agents or characters morally good, may be considered in a twofold
view; either first, simply, or absolutely as they are in themselves: in which
view of them, I have said, and I believe proved, that they cannot be hated,
cannot but be approved as right and good by the mind of man, and by all moral
beings: -- Or secondly, they may be considered relatively, or as they respect
us. In this relative view of them, they may possibly be hated, and in fact they
too often are, because they militate against some particular lust of our's, or
are inconsistent with some private interest we have much at heart. Thus a man
who is guilty of treason, seeing the equity of the judge's sentence against
another person, as a cruel murderer, who he has no interest in, will very
readily approve the judgment, because he sees the righteousness and equity of
it: but let him be arraigned, and upon a fair trial, condemned for his treason,
and his heart may very possibly rise in enmity against his judge, against the
law, and against the king; and perhaps he will push his enmity so far, if he
can, as to dethrone his rightful sovereign. But what is his enmity levelled
against? Is it against the condemning sentence simply as righteous? Not at all:
It is against it only as militating against his life. His love to his life is
stronger than his regard to righteousness, and suppresses the acting of that.
However, we often see the sense of righteousness so strong, even in
unsanctified minds, under condemnation for their crimes, as to prevent the
risings of this unjust enmity, and bring them to yield themselves to the hands
of justice. And all convinced sinners are bro't to ascribe righteousness to the
great God, and submit at his foot, before they receive his renewing and
pardoning mercy; (and this Dr. Whitaker owns, and even carries the matter too
far) which they never could be bro't to till they are new made, if the enmity
was against righteousness for it is own sake, or as righteous, and innate, and a
part of the present frame of the human heart, as he represents the matter: and
so he sometimes says. He says, p. 15 I firmly believe that no man ever was or
will be reconciled to God, till he is brought to approve and willingly submit
to that righteousness of God which is revealed from heaven against all
unrighteousness and ungodliness of men, and according to which he will render
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul or man that
does evil: Which implies more in it than a bare owning that God is righteous,
and will take vengeance on the wicked; -- It implies an approbation of, and
love to it, so as to delight in God on this account, as well as for his
infinite grace, love and mercy to those that are saved.

The good gentleman is here got over into the contrary extreme so that which
generally prevails in these discourses. -- He had said, p. 12. "It is
impossible for such a depraved soul," (the carnal, unconverted) while under the
power of corruption, so to submit to the punishment of his crimes, as heartily
to approve the law, and the judge that condemns him.




Observe further, The character of the blessed God is the first, the highest,
the most excellent of all moral characters. All moral perfections are united in
him, and in the highest possible degree; and the natural perfections as united
with, and exerted for the purpose of displaying and exercising the moral, are,
in this view of them, amiable as well as awful. God is therefore in himself
absolutely and infinitely amiable. He cannot then be the object of hatred to any
moral being, considered simply in himself; or in other words, his character
cannot be hated for its own sake, or as appearing to the mind wrong and worthy
of disapprobation in its own nature. If any do hate it, as wicked men in some
sense do, it is only as relatively considered, and from interested views.


GENT. It may be as you say, for ought that I know to the contrary; but Dr.
Whitaker says, p. 13. Is it not very absurd to suppose that our native enmity
to God arises only from the apprehension of his anger against us? If this were
true, it would follow that men would have no enmity against God or his law,
till they come to believe he is angry with them. But is there not a manifest
contrariety to God in the hearts of men, apart from all considerations of him
as an avenger.


CLERG. Doubtless there is such a prevailing contrariety to God and his laws in
the hearts of men, so far as lusts of sin rule in them. But then, in this they
are contrary to themselves, as well as to God. If they have light in their
understanding, they disapprove what they allow in practice, and approve the law
as just and good, at the same time that, for their lusts sake, they bear
partial enmity to it, as contrary to them. And if they thus hate the law, they
at the same time blame and condemn themselves as acting wrong in acting
contrary to it; which is a justificasion of God and his law, and a
demonstration that this enmity to God is an interested and unnatural passion,
and does violence to the moral sense planted in the mind by the hand of the
Creator: and herein lies the great malignity of wilful sin.

From what has been observed on this subject, it follows, that it is not enough
to engage a sinner to love God with a supreme practical regard, to show him the
character of God, as amiable in itself; he must also be shown how it is
consistent with his happiness, and has a benign aspect upon him, and how his
life and happiness are connected with his duty to God. It Is the great design of
the gospel to do both these. And when the holy Spirit gives this double view to
the mind of a poor sinner, by the word of the gospel, and srongly impresses
this sense upon the heart, there needs no more; his enmity dies, slain by the
moral power of this glorious light of the truth and love of God; his heart is
reconciled, and flows out in admiring love and praise, and dissolves in genuine
repentance: he is a new creature, in the moral sense. This agrees both with the
doctrine and experience of the holy apostles. Paul says, We all with open
(unveiled) face, beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed
into the self same image. And again, God has shined in our hearts to give the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. And John
says, We love God, because he first loved us.


GENT. Dr. Whitaker, mentioning these words of John, says to this purpose,
God's love to us is not the moral cause of our loves to him, but the efficient
cause of it. p. 41.


CLERG. I suppose he goes into this forced and unjust interpretation, of the
text, from hard necessity: for in the obvious sense of the apostle's words,
they oppose and overthrow his new scheme of doctrine. But I think it is much
saser, much better, and more honorable for men to remove their own wrong
notions put of the way of the holy apostle's, than to compel them to give the
way to their upstart errors. But I return to the subject.

Another consequence is, that the enmity of man's heart against God is not,
properly speaking, one of the "innate," or natural passions, "interwoven with
the frame of our hearts," as Dr. Whitaker says it is; or in other words, it is
not one of the primary passions of human nature in the present slate of it, but
is a secondary passion only, a consequence and result of particular wrong
affections, indulged in opposition to the law and will of God. Any particular
sinful affection, whether of the sensual, covetous, or ambitious kind, (of
which we have the seeds of more than enough in us ever since the fall) thus
indulged, is practical opposition, or enmity, if you please, to the law of God.
And these persisted in against light, will draw after them a higher and more
malignant kind of enmity againt God, as standing in the way of such indulged
lusts. And in this case, if the sense of God's righteousness in opposing and
condemning the sinner in his evil way is weak, (as it too commonly is) and the
sense of his own faultiness low and cull, this enmity may flame out dreadfully,
and work up to blasphemy and cursing: This is the present state of devils, and
in a sad degree the case of some men. But it is a great mistake to suppose and
teach that things will remain in this horrid confusion in wicked minds forever,
as too many do. -- When God comes near to judgment he will reveal his
righteousness from heaven, and impress upon all wicked souls both of men and
devils, such a clear, convincing, strong sense of the equity and fairness, and
real kindness of his dispensations toward them in their former state of trial,
of the heinousness of their offenses, and of the justice and moral necessity of
his present sentence of condemnation, (which impression will never be suffered
to wear off any more) as will so far over balance their natural self-love, as
to oblige them to justify God's character, conduct, and judgment, in word and
mind; and forever silence all murmurings, injurious reflections, and hard
speeches against him, and all blasphemy and cursings of their Maker: Their rage
will then turn inward against themselves, as the flame of a reverberating
furnace falls with all its force upon the melting metal. This is the view which
he who knew gives us of the final condition of lost souls: There shall be
weeping, and wailing, and grashing of teeth, he tells us; but not a word of
blasphemous rage against God. No: Hell will at last, in this respect, be as
silent as the grave.

I observed above, that the enmity of sinful souls against God's true character
is directed against it only as relatively considered, and is a secondary
passion, which arises in the heart in consequence of men's indulgence of
particular lusts, which first lead them into a practical opposition to the law
and righteous will of God. When the light of truth manifests their deeds to be
evil and reproves them, and kindly calls them back into the right way, if they
submit to the reproof, and obey the merciful call, their opposition to God
ceases, no higher enmity can rise in their hearts; their enmity is turned
against their own lusts; But if they refuse to receive reproof, and persist in
their sins against light, the light becomes offensive, and they hate it, as
reproving them; The scorner hates him that reproves him. But still, even in
spite of themselves, they do, and cannot but secretly approve God's character as
right and good, whenever they are brought to view it in it is true light; such
is the natural and unchangable frame or constitution of their souls, as
intelligent and moral beings. God has placed in every man's breast, and will
forever maintain there, a true witness for himself, and against their own
wickedness; which will speak, and cannot but he regarded as "reproving with
equity," whenever the light pf God breaks in upon the mind. A certain gentleman
hearing this dialogue read, objected to the that I misrepresented the
sentiments of those gentlemen who think with Dr. Whitaker; that he never knew
any among them who do not acknowledge a moral constitution of nature, the
natural powers of reason and conscience. Perhaps some others in reading, may
make the same reflection. For their sakes, I here give the answer I gave him.
"It is true they do acknowledge such faculties in human nature; I have not said
they do not: But they are inconsistent with themselves, and give such a
description of the natural enmity of she heart to God's whole character and all
moral excellence, as, if true, necessarily implies the destruction of natural
conscience" Natural conscience necessarily implies a faculty by which we
discern the difference between moral good or excellence, and its contrary, and
that the mind seeing this difference approves the good, as excellent, and
worthy of esteem and honor, and disapproves the evil as wrong, hateful, and
blameworthy. This is absolutely inconsistency with such a kind of enmity, and
total want of taste for moral excellency, and ulter abhorrence of God's whole
character, interwoven with the very frame of the heart, as D. Whitaker and
"others dream of. -- Gentlemen ought to attend better to their own ideas, and
compare them so as to see their inconsistance, that they may clear their
disconfess of contradictions, and not advance principles subversive of each
other.


The Pharisees, in, our Savior's time, carried their enmity against God and
all that is morally good, as far as most men have done; and yet they are
practical witnesses to the truth of what I have laid. Our Lord represented
their own wicked character to them, in his parable of the vineyard let out to
husbandmen, in such a manner as to give them a clear and just view of it, and
at the same time to conceal from them their concern in it; and then asked them,
saying, When therefore the lord of the vineyard comes, what will he do to
those husbandmen? They say unto him he will miserably destroy those wicked men,
Mat. 21.40, 41. -- They readily saw the moral badness of their character, and
hated and condemned it; they saw what justice required to be done in the case,
and readily approved it as good and fit. The Lord then applied the parable to
them; and they seeing their own face in the glass, cry out, God forbid; and
sought to lay hold on him, and would have immediately slain and cast him out of
the vineyard, but they feared the people. This is a full testimony, and
decisive witness to the truth of my account of the spring and nature of the
enmity of wicked hearts against God, given to us by the human heart, by human
nature itself; (and innumerable more might be produced.) One such witness is of
more weight than ten thousand confident assertions of speculative men, in
contradiction thereto.

This doctrine concerning the enmity of carnal men against God, is further
confirmed by this observation, which holds universally true in fact, viz. Men
who hate God, his ways, and righteous servants, always misrepresent their
characters to themselves, paint them in false and odious colors, and place
them in such a wrong view as to make them appear either contemptible, or
morally evil: This is the method they always take to justify to themseves, well
as toothers, their enmity to them; which they would not do if moral rectitude,
wisdom, righteousness and goodness, were, in themselves, objects of their
natural hatred; but their hatred would point itself directly against them, as
being what they really are; as in the case of natural aversions to some
particular kinds of food. This hatred of wicked men against God is then an
interested and partial affection, taken up in aid and support of some carnal
lusts and interests they are devoted to.

Jesus Christ, who knows all the secret springs of human passions and actions,
points out to us the true root and spring of this wicked enmity, in such a
clear manner as, I think, ought to be decisive, when he says, speaking of the
wicked who shall be condemned, Men loved darkness rather than light, (whence
this absurd and monstrous preference of darkness to light?) because their deeds
are evil. Particular wrong affections and sinfill passions, first draw men away
to do evil, (these passions, in human nature, in its present state, will act
wrong and be springs of evil works, till the truth and grace of God rectify
their disorders, and take them under their lead) and then for their lusts sake,
and with a view to justify and quiet themselves in their evil ways, they love
darkness rather than light. For every one that does evil (with habitual
wilfulness) hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds
should be reproved, or discovered to himself to be what they really are, in
their nature and tendency. For then he must be strongly self-condemned, and
filled with fear; which wicked men will avoid as long as they can They
therefore hate the light, just as every judge, who has taken a bribe, hates
the light of righteousness, and him that discovers and reproves him for his
bribery and corruption. Ahab expressed the very soul of this wicked, interested
enmity when he said to the King of Judah, speaking of Michajah, I hate him, for
he does not prophesy good concerning me, but evil. Had we Michajah's character,
as drawn by Ahab, doubtless it would be a very bad one. The wilful
misrepresentations which wicked men make to themselves of God's character and
works, their evil speakings and blasphemies of him, are a full evidence that
their enmity against him is initerested, not such as Dr. Whitaker and some
others represent it. No man ever did speak evil of God's ways, viewing them as
they truly are, as equitable and good, but as placing them in a wrong light to
themselves. When they are obliged to see them as they are, they are reduced to
silence, can object nothing to them, but justify and approve them as right, and
condemn themselves. These are not idle and arbitrary speculations, but
observations grounded upon facts and experience of the workings of the human
heart in real life.

Our Lord directs his disciples saying, Let your light shine before men, that
they seeing your good works, may glorify your Father who is in heaven. Now,
according to the notion under censure, the more clearly the light shines and is
seen by men, the more furiously does their enmity flame and rage against God
and those that bear his image. This is a way of glorifying God which Jesus
Christ never advised his disciples to stir men up to.


GENT. The evidence is full, the opposite scale kicks the beam. All reasonable
and honest men, I think, can beat at no loss to determine on which side the
truth lies. The notion which Dr. Whitaker and many others teach, viz. That
enmity to the true character of God, for its own sake, is an innate principle,
and interwoven with the very frame of the human heart, is manifestly false, and
I wish it may soon perish, for it is the grand foundation of the Sandemanian
scheme of doctrine, which is one of the worst schemes that was ever invented.


CLERG. You grow zealous, sir; but we ought to consider that it is extreme
difficult even for honest minds, to break through the power of old habits of
wrong thinking, and to make great I allowances for their unhappy entanglements,
and forbear them in love; blessing God, with all humility, that he has saved or
rescued us from such dangerous snares. But your closing remark is just. The new
doctrines which are propagating among us, are built entirely on this false
notion of man's innate, implacable enmity against the true and whole character
of God; and are supported, if this is admitted: But if the true notion and
scriptural account of this enmity, (which experience and observation confirm)
is received, this system of errors falls at once, as a castle built in the air.


GENT. I esteem it such a castle.


CLERG. Since we are upon the melancholy subject of the enmity of poor sinners
against God, I will just mention one thing more.

Many very honest and good people bave often complained of the workings of a
secret enmity and hard thoughts of God, and quarrellings against him; which
does not, like that we have been discoursing upon, arise out of the wickedness
of the heart, but is wholly occasioned by misrepresentations of the character
and ways of God to the mind, and false and wrong views of him, which have
unhappily gotten possession of the mind, and are supposed, through ignorance and
wrong instruction, to be the true and genuine views of his character and works.
In the light wherein they view them, they appear morally evil, wrong, and
objects of just hatred. The enmity which the mind conceives against them,
viewed in this wrong light, is, in a proper sense, a natural enmity; that is,
it arises from the moral frame of the mind, and the innate sense of the
hatefulness of actions and characters morally, evil and wrong. And if the heart
is gracious, this sense is greatly heightened. This kind of enmity is, in no
true construction, a hatred of God's true character, which may be heartily
approved and loved at the same time; but only of a really bad character,
falsely ascribed to him, merely through ignorance, mistake and misinformation.
This may be illustrated by the case of a child educated abroad, who has
instilled into his mind, perhaps by the foolish tattle of his nurse or
schoolmaster, very wrong and injurious notions of his father's character, and
temper, and designs toward him; representing of him as very unreasonable,
arbitrary and cruel, or false and hypocritical toward him; whereas, in truth,
he is quite the revsrse. This wrong view raises in the child disiffection, and
hard and blaming tho'ts. His father, who knows the case, pities him,
considering it as ignorance and error, not malice against his true father. --
The true and effectual cure of this kind of enmity, is accomplished by
correcting these unhappy misapprehensions, and giving the mind a just view of
the true character of God, and setting his actions and dispensations in that
true light wherein he himself has placed them.


GENT. If so, gentlemen of your cloth ought to take all possible care to be
themselves well instructed in the character and dispensations of that great and
glorious God and Savior, who you are, by the duty of your office, to make
known to others. I don't know how honest men can easily forgive you, if by your
ignorant and presumptuous misrepresentations of the great Lord and Father of
the universe, you minister to them the occasion of hard and injurious tho'ts of
him, whom they ought to adore and bless continually, with all humility and
joyfulness.


CLERG. What you now observe if worthy is four most serious consideration. But
our hearers ought not to receive implicitly, with a lazy credulity, all that
their teachers say, without examination, but to study the word of God with
humility and prayer; where they may hear God himself teaching the good knowledge
of himself. But I am very apprehensive, that after all our care and study, we
all, both teachers and hearers, shall still need to have great allowances made
by the heavenly father, for our weaknesses and misapprehensions concerning him,
and his dispensations toward man, in too many instances; and be in some
measure liable to the rebuke God himself gave to Job's friends, Ye have not
spoken the thing that is right concerning me. Yet, if we have not spoken and
reasoned wrong, carelessly, presumptuously, and in the pride of our hearts, or
as seeking to please men and gain their applause, or to shelter ourselves from
their displeafure, or through covetousness, or any biasing lust; but in
simplicity, through weakness, and pitiable mistake; this is the support of our
hope, that one greater than Job is appointed to pray for us.


Advertisement.
THERE is now preparing for the Press, a Scriptural Answer to the Question so
much controverted among us, viz. What are the Qualifications for a lawful and
acceptable Attendance on the Sacraments of the New Covenant: By the Author of
the foregoing Dialogues; which may possibly be completed and published this
Fall, if suitable Encouragement be given thereto.


