Iniquity purged by Mercy and Truth. A SERMON Preached at GRAFTON, October 23d,
1768. Being the Sabbath after the Execution of ARTHUR, A Negro Man, at
Worcester, aged about 21. For a RAPE.

By AARON HUTCHINSON, M. A. Pastor of the Church of Christ in said GRAFTON.

Published by Desire of some of the Hearers.

Mercy and Truth are met together.

PSALM. lxxxv.10. -- Ride prosperously, because of Truth, and Meekness, and
righteousness.

PSALM. xlv.4. And in Mercy shall the Throne be established: and he shall sit
upon it in Truth, in the Tabernacle of David, judging and seeking Judgment, and
hasting Righteousness.

ISAI. xvi. 5. BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed by THOMAS and JOHN FLEET, at the
HEART and CROWN in Cornhill, 1769.

Iniquity purged by Mercy and Truth.
PROVE. XVI.6. By Mercy and Truth Iniquity is purged.


IT is a point established by the reason of mankind, and by the divine
authority of the holy scriptures, that the glory of God is his ultimate end in
all his works, of creation, providence, and grace. No higher end can possibly
be proposed, and all reasonable beings must be allowed to act upon the highest
principles, and most exalted views. God is the first cause and last end of all
things.

And as his glory is his end in all his works, so he is sure never to be
baffled in his designs, nor frustrated in any of his means devised for his own
glory. His wisdom counterplots, and his power controuls, all the counsels of
men or devils, and makes their wrath to praise him. -- A remarkable instance
in mankind -- Sinners. Our first father sinned, and came short of the glory of
God; lost the moral image and favor of God; and it seemed as if God had made
mankind in vain. But O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge
of God! Man's apostasy is God's opportunity to declare his glory, and show the
exceeding riches of wisdom and grace. -- Divine mercy hitherto hid in God from
angels and men, now appears to both; free abundant mercy and divine pity to the
miserable. Now shall mercy be built up forever, and God will declare his
righteousness, in the remission of sin, by the great propitiation, and through
the tender mercies of our God. Yea, God will exalt himself in all the displays
of unmerited grace, and show forth the glory of holiness, in a consistency with
mercy to sinners, maintain and vindicate the honor of truth, and magnify the
law and make it honorable, and show himself a God in his pardoning mercy, and
all without the least wrong to his name and honor; yea, with the most perfect
harmony of all his moral attributes, in our redemption by Christ.

A thread of justice runs through the whole web of his administrations. Justice
and judgment are the habitation (or basis) of his throne. A God of truth, and
without iniquity: His tender mercies are over all his work (...) and truth are
interwoven in the whole plan of our redemption, cordially unite in all the
works of regenerating grace, and are manifest in all the dispensations of
divine providence toward his people.

And all that, by efficacious grace, are made partakers of the divine nature in
its glorious properties, being renewed in knowledge, righteousness, and true
holiness, have in these a resemblance to God, they are holy as God is holy,
merciful as their Father which is in heaven is merciful; true and faithful,
doing justice, loving mercy, and walking humbly with their God; are imitators
of God as dear children, being influenced by mercy and truth, in all their
conduct in the world. And, as they have experienced the divine power of truth
and mercy, they are sanctified through the truth, and clean through the word
that Christ has spoken; have an heart of flesh; being tenderhearted, of a
compassionate and forgiving temper; and under the divine influence of mercy and
truth, they go on cleansing themselves from all filthiness, both of flesh and
spirit, until they finish their sanctification in the fear of the Lord. God
will send forth his mercy and his truth to preserve them, and more and more
purify their hearts by faith, till their iniquities shall be sought for and not
be found. For as for their transgressions God will fully purge them away in the
blood of the Lamb, who appeared to take away sin by the sacrifice of himself.

These happily furnish them with the meekness of wisdom, that wisdom which is
from above, which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated, full of mercies and good fruits; whereby to deal prudently, in all
their endeavors for a reformation, in the land, in the churches, or in their
own families.

We propose to give the text it is full scope and latitude, showing how God by
mercy and truth purges iniquity; then how we are to be herein imitators of God.

God purges iniquity by mercy and truth in our redemption, in regeneration, and
in his providential dispensations. Mercy and truth unite in the whole scheme of
our redemption, and in every line of the gospel covenant. They both meet in the
person of Christ. He is a merciful and faithful high priest, in things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of his people: Merciful
to men, and ever faithful to his Father, saved the honor of divine truth, law,
and justice; and opened a way for mercy to be displayed, to the glory of all
the other moral attributes of God. Grace and truth both came by Jesus Christ;
and mercy is built up forever; and truth, or the covenant faithfulness of God,
established in the very heavens. All his divine love and pity, in which he
redeemed us, never moved him to discharge one guilty soul, otherwise than as
satisfaction be made for his offenses. So he indented with the traitor: If ye
seek me, let these go their way, q. d. justice requires not double payment. If
the surety be arrested and pay their debt, let them be discharged. All the
sounding of his bowels and mercies never prompted him to give up the honor of
truth and justice. All his conduct on earth evinces that he was faithful to his
Father, as well as merciful to mankind -- sinners. Faithful to him that
appointed him, as a son over his own house: as the faithful and true witness,
he bare witness unto the truth, and at last sealed it with his blood; yet
showed all that tender pity to men, consistent with unshaken constancy in the
truth. And though he knew well that God was gracious and merciful, slow unto
anger, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, yet he never made the least
motion to have him clear the guilty, by any means short of full satisfaction;
and thus submitted to drink the bitter cup: Father glorify thy name; thy will
be done.

Mercy and truth are conspicuous in his death. Mercy beyond expression; a love
stronger than death, which all the waters of afflictions could not quench, nor
all the floods of ungodly men drown. A love passing knowledge. He loved the
church and gave himself for it. His sacred regard to truth runs parallel with
his dying love. Let me die the most shameful, bitter, and accursed death of the
cross, rather than that divine truth be violated, or the rights of justice in
the least infringed. The surety suffers. There is no abatement. Truth is
unchangeable. The soul that sins shall die, and if one died for all, then all
have died * in their surety; and God is a just God, and a Savior: just, and
yet justifying the ungodly: and his truth endures throughout all generations.

Mercy and truth are happily united in all the great and precious promises in
Christ, which are yea, and in him amen, to the glory of God. Mercy in promising
and truth in performing. God helps his servants, as ever mindful of his
covenant, and in remembrance of his own mercy. God that cannot lie has
promised. His mercy promised to the posterity of Abraham the old Canaan, his
truth performed it, so that there failed not ought of all the good he had
promised to Israel, so all the new covenant promises of pardon of sin, of grace
and glory, are from mercy; and all these words of grace are forever settled in
heaven, and God has magnified his word above all his name, making it a special
point of his divine honor, to be as good as his word. And truth, as well as
grace, will appear glorious indeed, when God has accomplished his whole work on
mount Zion, and it shall appear, that there has not failed ought of all that
good promised to his true Israel, in all the sacred volumes of the gracious
covenant.

By mercy and truth God purges iniquity in regeneration. These by the divine
spirit, taking hold of us, purge away our sinful inclinations. By mercy wrought
on us, and having a sanctifying influence upon us, iniquity is purged away.

Truth first takes hold of the conscience of the unregenerate sinner. He is
convinced by the law as a transgressor. And he is obliged to own, that the law,
by which he is condemned, is holy, just and good. By the law is the knowledge
of sin. Through the law, he becomes dead to the law, and sees nothing but
destruction before him, he sees no possible way for mercy to be displayed. But
God from the throne of grace, shows the riches of abundant mercy, and a way to
display that mercy through the Son of his love, consistent with truth and
justice: the soul is then bowed to truth, and falls before the mercy-seat,
sprinkled with blood; approves justice and truth in the law of God; and how
sweet is divine mercy streaming in the blood of atonement! he accepts
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of
his grace; and sees something of the divine wisdom and prudence, in adjusting
matters so, for our salvation, as that the riches of grace are the more
glorious, for flowing to sinners through the bleeding veins of a crucified
Redeemer. Hence a change in the nature. Free mercy melts the soul to unfeigned
repentance; to become merciful and forgiving to all but himself. At the same
time to reverence the truth, and adore the justice, and love the law of God,
because it is pure. Thus are we made partakers of the divine nature, and escape
the corruption that is in the world.

They, that being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish
their own righteousness, and have not submitted to the righteousness of God, do
not unite mercy and truth, but trust to truth in a mistaken sense, without
mercy. And secure sinners that presume, because God is merciful, they shall not
be damned; do trust to mercy in direct contradiction to truth. They see not
that mercy is holy. And neither of these have any just notion of divine mercy
or truth. But all that, under a work of the Holy Spirit, have these united in
their hearts, are in a measure sanctified through the truth, have their hearts
turned to hate sin, and love holiness; to do justice, love mercy, and walk
humbly with God. Their faith works by love to God, and all mankind. They have
that charity that hops all things, that rejoiceth not in iniquity, but
rejoiceth in the truth. And while they love, not only saints, with a pure
heart, for the truth's sake that is in them, and all mankind in general, with a
tender, ingenuous benevolence, and even their most malignant enemies; they
cannot endure that which is evil; but hate their work that turn aside; it shall
not cleave to them. Yet, ever tender to other persons, and are willing to cover
a multitude of sins in them, if it may be consistent with truth and justice.

Thus Joseph, the reputed father of our Lord, finding Mary his espoused wife
with child, and not knowing it to be by the Holy Ghost, being a just man, was
minded to put her away privily, and not make her a public example, or expose
her to death as an adultress. His very justice, tempered with mercy, engaged
him to conceal the private espousals, that she might suffer no more, than for
simple fornication.

Being convinced of their own transgressions, how they have exceeded: and being
melted, with that great mercy, which has forgiven them ten thousand talents,
and delivered their souls from the lowest hell; they learn to have compassion
on their fellow servants, even, as the Lord has had pity on them. And all the
personal wrongs and injuries, they may receive from their fellow creatures,
appear to them scarce an hundred pence, compared with their wrongs to God; and
which they now can readily forgive. Their sins and ingratitude to God, their
sins against heaven and in his sight, appear so great, that the wrongs of men,
to them, appear as nothing.

Thus David could hear, without any considerable resentment, all the cruel
cursing of an abandoned Shimei. Behold! (says he) my son which came forth of my
bowels seeks my life, and how much more may this Benjamite do it! Christ has
been broken with my whorish heart, how much more may my heart be broken with
the reproaches of men! Father, forgive them, they know not what they do. Lay
not sin to their charge. These have truth in their inward parts; and blessed
are these merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. They forgive men their
trespasses and their heavenly father will also forgive them. That iniquity,
which used to harden the heart against God and men, is now in a measure purged
away, and these Israelites indeed, in whom is no allowed guile, shall finally
be redeemed, with all God's true Israel, from all their iniquities.

By mercy and truth God purges iniquity in his providential dispensations
toward his people. He purges his floor and refines his people, not only by his
word and spirit, but by the mixed dispensations of providence, calling them to
sing of mercy and judgment: visits in wrath, and in that wrath remembers mercy;
stays his rough wind in the day of his eastwind; and by this shall the iniquity
of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away sin. God does not
mete out a cup of naked inexorable justice to them, without a mixture of mercy;
nor yet of mercy, without truth and justice; but sends forth both mercy and
truth to preserve them. Thus in wrath he visited Israel in the wilderness; but
being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not: yea,
many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath. For he
remembered that they were flesh: He is a God that forgave them, though he took
vengeance on their sinful inventions. God answers the prayers of his people,
and gives them what they need; but not without some terrible things in
righteousness, to strike an awe upon them. He corrects them, but it is in
judgment, and a merciful mitigation, not in his anger, so as to consume them.
He puts them into the furnace, melts them and trys them; but there knows their
souls in adversity, carries them through fire and through water, and brings them
out into a wealthy place; visits their transgressions with a rod, and their
iniquity with stripes, but his loving kindness he does not take from them, nor
suffer his faithfulness to fail. He chastises his people, but not according to
their iniquity. But as fathers pity their children under the smarting rod of a
just correction, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. And after his fatherly
rebukes and discipline, often comforts his people, as a child whom his mother
comfort, by wiping away the penitent tears, excited by her own tender and
faithful correction. So God corrected Solomon, but did not take his mercy from
him, as he took it from Saul. If his people are, in a just severity, put away
into a miserable captivity in Babylon; yet such are the Lord's mercies, that
they are not consumed; yea, they are visited in mercy, and brought forth out of
those their graves, and come again to their own land.

These mixed dispensations are much for the divine glory, and which are very
much the delight of the supreme ruler. God often conducts in this manner
toward sinners, as well as saints, toward the world, as well as the church.

Thus a sinner is chastened with pain on his bed, and by pining sickness,
brought nigh to the grave; but taught out of God's law, as well as corrected;
and the rod and reproof give him wisdom; he is withdrawn from his sinful
purposes, and pride hid from him; his ears opened to discipline, and
instruction sealed to him; he is effectually convinced of God's righteousness,
and of his own wickedness, accepts the punishment of his iniquity; then he is
gracious unto him, delivers him from going down to the pit of destruction,
through the divine invention of that ransom provided for our souls; and in love
to his soul delivers him from the grave, and his eyes see the light. Lo! these,
and such like things, God works oftentimes with man, to bring back his soul
from the pit of hell, and his life from the destroyers.

Of all the events of providence, represented Zech. 6th chap. by four chariots,
coming out from between two mountains of brass, i. e. from those counsels and
decrees of heaven, as immovable as mountains of brass; of all these none seem
so pleasing to God, as those in which were mixed colored horses, denoting the
mixed dispensations of providence: These going toward the north country,
quieted his spirit (i. e. appeased his anger) there. They served to vindicate
his name, and maintain the honor of his rectoral righteousness, and show his
tender mercies to be over all his works. And were exactly adapted to reform,
and bring to repentance, and so to purge iniquity.

And even to the dark places of the earth, that are full of the habitations of
cruelty, God leaves not himself without witness of his goodness, in giving them
rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food and
gladness.

We are now to show, how we are herein to be imitators of God, and unite mercy
and truth in all our endeavors for the purging of sin. Not by mercy alone
without truth, nor by truth alone without mercy; but both by an amiable union.
And this we are to observe, as heads of families, members of a christian
church, or of civil society. As heads of families, we should put away iniquity
far from our tabernacles; command our children and household after us, to keep
the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment. And here, if we would do any
thing to purpose, a parental tenderness and justice must be at an even
balance. We must not, by an unmerciful kind of haughty severity, provoke our
children to wrath; nor yet, by a false pity, by a foolish fondness, and
mistaken tenderness, spare the rod. The former would discourage them, and break
their spirits, and spoil their manhood; and the latter be more pernicious to
them than hatred itself; and both these extremes tend rather to increase sin,
than to purge it. But tenderness, justice, love and faithfulness, sweetly
tempered, and united; an affectionate tenderness to their persons, and a just
hatred to their sins, will, if any thing, prevail to amend our children, and
keep them from those excesses too incident to our thoughtless, inconsiderate
youth and children.

As members of a church, we are to unite truth and mercy. The great, important
truths of the gospel are not to be given up; but these truths must ever be
spoken in love. A pure gospel, and truth in it is native simplicity, must be
firmly and steadfastly maintained, but with unfeigned tenderness to the
children, and even to the enemies of the truth; but must never be given up out
of complaisance to any in the world. Buy the truth and sell it not. But in the
discipline of the christian churches, truth or justice must not be strained to
the wrong of (...), but in a godly discipline, mercy must temper our judgments
respecting the miscarriages of others. And many lesser failings may be passed
over with a "peradventure it was an oversight." And all proper allowance is to
be made for the natural infirmities of others: And we that are strong must,
with a generous compassion, bear the infirmities of the weak, and not please a
self-sufficient temper in ourselves. Children in a family are to be born with,
but not so far as to be suffered to rule the house: Let all your things be done
with charity, is especially wholesome and necessary in all brotherly duties. No
ill will must influence: The truth of facts must not be given up; but mercy as
much as may be mitigate the strictness and severity which justice and truth may
seem to demand: the golden rule of our Savior, of doing to others, as we would
in a like case, they should do unto us, is, if it can be, more binding in
matters of church discipline than in common morality. If a brother be overtaken
in a fault, we must put ourselves in his soul's stead, and restore him with the
spirit of meekness, considering ourselves, and as we should think it reasonable
to be restored; and remembering that, if the Lord should strictly mark
iniquity, no flesh could stand in his presence. We should imitate the patience
and long-suffering of God, and his ready forgiveness.

"He saw their flesh was weak and frail,
"He saw temptations still prevail;
"The God of Abraham loved them still,
"And led them to his holy hill."
Eli's mercy had no truth or justice in it, except in too gentle and cold
reasonings; while he honored his sons above God. The truth or justice of
Diotrephe^ was intolerably severe, to refuse the brethren recommended by an
Apostle, forbidding them that would, and casting them out of the church. And
why all this merciless severity, but the petty differences betwixt the jewish
and the gentile christians? The old saying is hereby verified; extreme right is
extreme wrong. But all that set truth and purity before peace, and judiciously
unite them, take the direct way to church purity. For God himself purges away
the filth of the daughter of Zion, and blood of Jerusalem, by the spirit of
judgment, and by the spirit of burning.

Thus also, in civil society, all that would do any thing to purpose for
purging the iniquity of a nation or land, must be sure to proceed with truth,
mercy and justice. It is a sad time, indeed, when there is no truth nor mercy,
nor knowledge of God in the land. Sin will be the reproach and ruin of such a
people. But where these prevail, righteousness will exalt a nation or people.

Suppose our ministers of justice, in their superabounding mercy, should spare
the vilest criminals: No evil would be put away, and they would bear the sword
in vain. Vice would be daring, and the wicked walk on all hands; and men would
treat the civil ministers, as they treat their God; and because sentence
against their evil works, is not speedily executed, their hearts would be fully
set in them to do evil. And all the honor of government would be lost, and in
their much mercy prostituted in favor of wickedness. Thus Saul, in foolish
pity, spared Agag, contrary to truth, and the just command of God; and by his
misplaced tenderness lost his kingdom. So David, in the very weakness of
parental mercy, spared Absalom; who not long after arose in an unnatural
rebellion against his father, and attempted to jostle him from the throne, and
hunted for his precious life; requiting his lenity, as other false favors used
to be.

Thus Ahab spared Benhadad, a man God had appointed to utter destruction; but
it is hard to say, whether in a more infatuated mercy, or ill concerted policy;
for his life must go, and that of his people for the king and people that he
spared. The next war, they will fight only or especially with the king of
Israel to requite him for his superlative tenderness, in saying of Benhadad, "
is he yet alive? he is my brother." It would be easy to prove by dint of common
sense, and by the Roman orator, as well as by the holy BIBLE, that such
ministers of justice would be some of the most unmerciful men in the world;
cruel to society, and even to the criminals, (who would hereby be hardened in
sin) as well as false and treacherous to their God, whose deputies and
vicegerents they are.

Suppose, on the other hand, ministers of justice, in a relentless kind of
severity, and casting off all pity, should strain every charge to the highest
pitch, and punish to the utmost extremity of law; connive at the most vexatious
suits, under pretense of zeal against wrong and injustice; would not
righteousness spring up as poisonous hemlock in the furrows of the field; and
much mischief be daily framed by law? Thus merciless was the truth and justice
of Saul, in his rash sentence upon his son Jonathan, dooming him to sure death,
only for tasting a little honey, while he knew nothing of the prohibition; but
the people had sense, humanity and mercy enough to rescue from that cruel
sentence, a man, by whom God had wrought so great a salvation that day. Jehu's
truth and justice, in executing the house of Ahab, were so overstrained, that
God afterward visited that blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu.

So the hypocritical Israelites executed without mercy the inhabitants of
Jabesh-Gilead, because they came not to the war against Benjamin; because not
God's honor, but their own, was a little touched. And we are sorry to find
such a blemish to the reign of the man after God's own heart, as his putting
the children of Ammon under saws and harrows of iron, and making them to pass
through the brick kilns. But it is supposed to happen when his heart was
hardened in the matter of Uriah.

But let justice take place, so far as to suppress vice, maintain right and
equity, and support the honor of government; but not at the expense of mercy,
and even of humanity. Let the vilest criminals be pitied, as much as may be,
consistent with truth and justice. Let evil be put away with such a just
severity, that all Israel may hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly. But
let judge and jury act with pity, and none prosecute with a rage that reaches
unto heaven. Let neither court nor jury be tools of malice, but crush all
vexatious informations or warrants, and like Gallio (in this a pattern) drive
them from the judgment seat.

This tempering mercy with judgment is the way to purge the iniquity of the
land, and to secure peace to the people, and in their own minds, in all their
administrations of justice. Then are our officers peace, and our exactors
righteousness. Iniquity stops her mouth, and vice is shamed and virtue crowned.
Men will be afraid of such a well tempered power, and be subject not only for
wrath, but for conscience sake.

When he that rules over men is just, ruling in the fear of God; in that
ingenuous pity that never fails to accompany the fear of the Almighty; the end
of civil government is attained, public judgments prevented, our lives and
properties secured, and all our natural and charter rights maintained, and
every man may live and rejoice under his own vine and fig tree, and there be
none to make him afraid.

Pause here a little, and consider the importance of this doctrine: Iniquity
not purged will be bitterness in the latter end. Woe forever unto all workers of
iniquity, that live and die unpurged. For so he that is filthy must be filthy
still, and that to all eternity. Nothing can be more tremendous than the divide
threatening, surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you 'till ye die,
says the Lord of Hosts. And thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness,
'till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. None but they that are purged
from their old sins, and have clean hands and pure hearts, can enter into the
holy hill above: the unclean shall not come before him.

Iniquity harbored and practiced in a family, will be it is ruin. The curse of
God is in the house of the wicked.

Iniquity connived at in churches will incense the Savior, incur his
displeasure; be a worm at the root of all their purity, peace, and growth;
weaken the nerves of a godly discipline, and sap the very foundation of their
faith, of which they will soon make shipwreck, after that of a good conscience.

Iniquity connived at, and unpunished, will soon bring judgments upon the land.
Achan committed a trespass, and God was wroth with the whole congregation, and
that man perished not alone in his iniquity. Such is the divine abhorrence of
blood and murder, that if a man was found near a city of Israel in his blood,
and the assassin not known, God would make inquisition for blood, and visit it
upon that city, if they did not purge away, and show their just abhorrence and
detestation of the murder. It is a law of nature as well as the written law of
God, him that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. And we
humbly apprehend, that no authority upon earth can pardon a wilful murderer,
without stepping into God's throne, and violating the very light and law of
nature, and leaving the land greatly polluted, and exposed to the vengeance of
the supreme ruler; by whom king's reign and princes decree justice; but never
gives authority against himself.

Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge! by this iniquity the land is
polluted. A man in Israel must not give his daughter to be a prostitute, lest
the land be given to whoredom, and the land be defiled. This is an iniquity to
be punished by the judges; and we know who has said, that such shall not
inherit the kingdom of God, and there shall by no means enter therein, any
thing that defiles, or that works abomination: But without are dogs, and
sorcerers, and whoremongers. And woe to the drunkards; their glory (if they have
any) shall be a fading flower. Whoredom, and wine, and new wine, take away the
heart, captivate and enslave the whole soul, erase all the seeds of virtue and
religion, spoil the manly sense, and level a man with the brute creatures. God
has, of late years, sent an army of noxious vermin to lay waste the fruits of
our orchards, before they be grown, to reveal his wrath from heaven against the
ungodliness and unrighteousness of this sin.

Because of swearing the land mourns. God is jealous of his honor, and will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain. So perjury, lying and
stealing defile the land, as well as bring ruin upon the sinners themselves.
The curse that goes forth enters into the house of the thief, and into the
house of him that swears falsely by God's name, abides in his house to
consume it, with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof. God himself will
come near to judgment, and be a swift witness against adulterers, and against
false swearers. We add to these the profanation of the day of sacred rest, the
Lord's day, appropriated to his honor; in which to celebrate the wonders of
redeeming grace, on this resurrection day. To profane it by speaking our own
words, or doing our own secular business, or finding our own pleasure; or by
neglect of the holy solemnities of the day; is to throw contempt on all the
works of redemption, to despise all the benefits of the redeemer's purchase,
and to despise and destroy our own souls; no wonder then, that an affronted
Savior so often for this sin blasts us in all our labors; and that upon them
that come not up to keep this christian feast of tabernacles, there shall be no
rain of heavenly grace; or that he so often visits us with droughts.

Because we execute not his judgments, nor keep his sabbaths, God may ever long
be provoked to give us statutes (civil or ecclesiastical) that are not good,
and judgments whereby we cannot live. With what affectionate a pathos did the
pious governor Nehemiah remonstrate against this sin? chap. xiii. ver. 17, 18.
Then I contended with the nobles of Judah, and said unto them, what evil thing
is this that ye do, and profane the sabbath day? did not your fathers thus? and
did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon this city? yet ye bring
more wrath upon Israel by profaning the sabbath.

But thus are we led to what was more especially designed, in a way of
application, and to the occasion of the present discourse, viz. to improve the
awful dispensation in the week past. Iniquity purged, by purging the sinner out
of the world. As we are at the distance of but eight miles, many of you, my
brethren, attended the execution three days ago: You beheld the bitter effects
of sin, in a miscreant hung up between heaven and earth, as fit for neither:
you heard a solemn and pertinent sermon on the shocking occasion: you beheld
his dying agonies; and I trust the eye affected the heart. The like has not
been done in this county for more than twenty years.

Perhaps there never was an execution like to this, wherein mercy and truth, or
mercy and justice, were better united. A whole year passed after he was found
guilty, before his sentence. This gave room for mercy, if any way could be hit
upon, for mercy to rejoice against judgment. No way was sound. They that were
most acquainted with his high-handed wickedness, were obliged to say, in
tenderness to mankind, and especially to the female sex, what they maliciously
said of Paul, away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not fit that he
should live. There was mercy to his soul, in affording him a year to consider
his latter end, and prepare for it. In him seemed to be literally verified the
intercession of Christ for the barren fig tree; Lord, let it alone this year,
'till I shall dig about it and dung it, and if it bear fruit well, and if not
then after that thou shall cut it down.

Tenderness to a poor wretch, with a just indignation against his enormous
villainies* seemed to govern the whole affair. And thus the land is purged, and
we hope will still be purged, and that all our Israel will hear and fear, and
do no more so wickedly. He is set up as a Lot's wife for us to remember, and be
cautioned and warned. I have learned, that when a child, he began to steal, to
lie, and refuse all wholesome discipline; though taught to read and write, was
never the better for all the instructions and corrections, so early applied.
When about 14 years of age, ran away from his master, got into wicked company,
and was soon debauched and hardened in sin, and his heart fully set in him to
do evil: soon became overmuch wicked, and has now died before his time. His
darling lusts were idleness, drunkenness, uncleanness, and lying and stealing,
with a most profane contempt of the name and day of God, and all sacred things.
He drew iniquity with cords of vanity, and sinned as with a cart-rope. So past
all feeling or remorse of conscience, that he gave himself over to work all
uncleanness, and the foulest vices, with greediness. And O shocking stupidity!
could laugh at hell and damnation, even while he did not professedly deny their
reality. He was led captive by the Devil at his will. For seven years,
especially, he served him with all his power, and often wearied himself to
commit iniquity. And if all his enormous villainies, and wrongs to men, could be
enumerated, and a balance made for his injuries, what a black catalogue would
there be of his crimes, and what a vast sum to repair the wrongs he has done!

He appeared hardened in his sin, till after his sentence, about four weeks
before his untimely death. After which he read his bible, and much pains was
taken with him, to what purpose God only knows; to me his repentance seemed not
equal to the enormous wickedness of his life; and there is reason to fear, that
one who had been so arch and hypocritical in his wickedness, might not be
without some degree of dissimulation in his repentance. It may be said of him,
as of Judas, he repented; but whether he was sorry for sin because he must be
hanged; or was really pricked in his heart, and mourned for sin, as a dishonor
to God and grief to Christ; or would not, if set at liberty, have returned to
sin again, as a dog to his vomit, must be left to the great decisive day; when
we shall clearly discern betwixt the righteous and the wicked; between him that
serves God and him that serves him not. He is fallen a victim to justice, and
for a warning to all, that they may not follow his pernicious ways, lest they
come to the like woeful end. In him is literally fulfilled that of the Apostle,
when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished
brings forth death. Have thou heedfully marked the old way which wicked men
have trodden, which were cut down out of time? Or, are ye willing to hear, in a
way of caution and warning, some remarks upon the wicked way of this poor
criminal, that has not lived half his days.

REMARK I. The deserting our lawful business, place or calling, is the open
door to ruin. Let every man in the calling wherein he is called, therein abide
with God. But they that will not do their own business, nor act in character,
go out of the way of duty into the way of temptation; and, in a sense, outrun
the divine protection, which it is presumption to expect out of our way. What
do thou here, Elijah? is implicitly demanded of all that forsake their duty
and functions in life. Thus Absalom, to screen himself from justice, ran away
to his pagan grandfather; and there hardened in sin, and learned, it seems, to
despise his own father, for the meanness of his extraction; and was ripened for
the most unnatural treason, and most infamous ruin. Such in effect invert the
sixth petition in the Lord's prayer, saying, lead us into temptation and
deliver us not from evil. Nor will they go unto the wise, that would counsel
them to return to their duty, but walk in the counsel of the ungodly, and stand
in the way of sinners, that will patronize their wickedness, and entice them on
in the way to destruction. All this is verified, not only in this instance, so
recent in our memory, but the last that was executed in the county of
Middlesex, listed into the regular service, without the consent (I think) of
parents or master; and by the like headstrong pride, and ignorant
self-sufficiency, he forfeited his life several times before it was taken from
him. It is thought that the Angels not keeping their first estate, but leaving
their own habitation, means their deserting their post, place, station, and
business assigned them by their creator, in the rank of beings; and so, instead
of remaining bright stars in the firmament of glory, were hurled down from the
lofty battlements of heaven, and became comets or wandering stars, to whom is
reserved the blackness of darkness forever.

REMARK II. That drunkenness and whoredom not only estrange a person from all
piety and religion; but destroy the natural sense, benumb conscience, and erase
humanity itself. He that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall into this pit.
Their very hearts hate instruction, and despise reproof. And though you should
bray such a fool in a mortar, with a pestle among wheat, yet will not his
foolishness depart from him.

This wretched creature being deeply plunged in these vices, at the age of
about 14, soon threw away all the checks of conscience and restraints of
education, and did not at all stickle at lying, stealing, and the greatest
wrongs, to support his debaucheries. In his printed confession he says, "but in
a particular manner, I would solemnly warn those of my own color, as they
regard their own souls, to avoid desertion from their masters, drunkenness, and
lewdness, which three crimes was ( were it should be) the source from which
have flowed the many evils and miseries of my short life."

REMARK III. The wilful contempt of the name, day, and word of God, is in
effect to give place to the Devil, who is always ready to rule the children of
disobedience. They that will not have Christ to reign over them, do virtually
submit to the slavery of the Devil, who will see to it that the wicked man
travels in pain all his days. No man knows the tour of that fatal night, but
must own the hand of a just, incensed God, in giving him over; and the hand of
Satan in precipitating him headlong to destruction. He arose out of a warm bed,
on a cold night, and left all asleep, and after a complicated theft, in favor
of his wicked design, rode several miles to find out one who had before been
the infamous instrument of his ruin; missing of her, the Devil put it into his
head, in the dead of night, to go so many miles, to perpetrate the villainy for
which he suffered. Thus he wearied himself to commit a capital iniquity. Satan
is a hard and cruel master.

REMARK IV. The escaping with impunity hardens the wicked, and emboldens them
in sin yet more and more. If they do evil an hundred times, and their days be
prolonged; and the tabernacles of robbers prosper for a while; they grow
audacious and presumptuous, and conclude tomorrow shall be as this day and
much more abundant. His escapes were often strange and hard to be accounted
for, but by supposing him to be left of God to go on without control, the
sooner to fill up his measure of sin, and knowing his fall to be at hand. The
Lord shall laugh at him, for he sees that his day is coming. However his many
escapes from condign punishment, and his having lost all sense of sin, rendered
him insensible of danger, not only of the wrath to come, but of the verdict of
the jury; flattering himself, it seems, all the year, that he should escape
that death of which he has been found guilty; and I have good reason to think,
that, even after his sentence, he still flattered himself in his own eyes, till
he found all had abandoned him, in regard to his forfeited life. Thus Satan
could prompt Agag to say, " surely the bitterness of death is past." He
flattereth himself in his own eyes, until his iniquity be found (by woeful
experience) to be hateful. The same Devil that decoys into sin, flatters with
impunity, and so hardens the heart, 'till they fall into further mischief and
ruin.

REMARK V. Not the most shocking death, but only almighty grace will break an
heart of stone. Israel could see all the terrors of Mount Sinai, and Lot's two
daughters behold, and narrowly escape the flames of Sodom, yet remain as they
were. The impenitent thief (or both while impenitent) could rail at the Lord of
glory on the cross. It is the peculiar work of the almighty Spirit, to take the
stony heart out of out flesh, and give us hearts of flesh. Condemned criminals
will go no further in their repentance than legal sorrow for sin, because they
must suffer for it; unless the divine Spirit work in them that repentance which
is unto salvation. At the last, he had an hope that supported him against the
terrors of a shocking death, or was, to astonishment, stupid and insensible of
his danger. He said, when going to the place of execution, that he was willing
to die; and just before he was turned off, being asked by the officer, if he
had any thing to say, answered with a low voice, "No; but that I would that
poor creatures be warned that they come not to my doleful end." If he found
mercy with the Lord, in that day, he will praise and magnify his name
forevermore, for his great mercy toward him, in delivering his soul from the
lowest hell; and in timely softening his heart by omnipotent grace, as that of
the penitent thief on the cross.

REMARK VI. All whose hearts are fully set in them to do these, or like evils,
and will not be reclaimed, are in the high road to destruction, if not by the
way of the gallows. When any are so joined to idols, as that they must needs be
let alone, to sin without control; and the most gentle means, or just
severities, are in vain, their case is very sad, if not desperate. Let favor
be showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness, in the land of
uprightness (or religion) he will deal unjustly, and will not behold the
majesty of the Lord: Why should he be stricken any more? he will revolt more
and more. He that hates and despises reproof shall die. Correct thy son, and
it may be expected that he will give thee rest; but if, out of a foolish
fondness, you indulge him in wickedness, he will give you trouble enough: But
the best instructions, and most tender corrections, will not reclaim them that,
like this now ruined youth, have their hearts fully set in them to do evil. So
we must leave them to take their course, and choose the road to death. If they
are wise, they are wise for themselves; if they are scorners, they alone must
bear it.

REMARK VII. If any young people are resolved upon their own ruin, the way is
open and broad, and easy to find -- it is, in a word, to walk in pride, in the
way of their own heart, and in the sight of their own eyes; rejecting all the
counsels of God, of pastors, or parents, against themselves. Let the eye that
loves death mock at his father and despise to obey his mother, the ravens of
the valley shall pick it out, the young eagles shall eat it. Let them pull away
the shoulder, and refuse to hear the words which the Lord of hosts sends to
them by the former prophets, by Christ or his Apostles. Let them profane the
name and day of God. Let their life be with the drunkard and the unclean. Never
go to the wise, but be the companions of fools, and go in company with the
workers of iniquity, who are to be destroyed. Follow wicked counsels to
practice iniquity; cast off fear and restrain prayer before God. Say what is
the Almighty that we should serve him, and what profit shall we have if we pray
unto him? Let them, with a stiffnecked resolution, pursue their own ways, and
delight in their own abominations. Very soon will their iniquities be full, or
they will treasure up the more wrath against the day of wrath, and the
revelation of his righteous judgment.

REMARK VIII. The same Devil that tempts to sin, and helps to palliate it, and
flatters with impunity, will abandon, or rather betray them at last. Sin and
Satan may for a while screen from justice. Those words of the wise man, neither
shall wickedness deliver them that are given to it, intimate, that it may seem
to deliver, or one wickedness serve to cloak and cover another, but will not
long avail. But though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be
prolonged, yet it shall not long be well with the wicked, nor shall he prolong
his days which are as a shadow. After all the strange escapes of this -- so
arch in wickedness, it appears by his conduct after his life was forfeited,
that the Devil is no more to be trusted as a protector, than as a tempter. He
not only returned home, after his atrocious villainy, (though so well practiced
in running away) but after he was arrested by the officer and gave him the
slip, with a good horse, sillily for himself, went home and so was re-taken.
And when he broke prison, was no sooner abandoned by his companions, but he
went to a public house, where he had been acquainted, and so was re-taken, and
sent back to prison. So he was at last infatuated, to meet his deserved end.
This we view as the holy hand of God, leaving him to be at last ensnared in the
work of his own hands; and as the hand of Satan deserting him, whom he had so
often furnished with a corrupt will in wickedness, that he might the sooner
incur that ruin, to which the prince of this world had decoyed him. Thus
remarkable is the hand of God in the infatuation of Pharaoh, and his servants;
that he might make inquisition for blood, and take vengeance for the murder of
the male children of Israel. Moses is ordered to turn toward the red sea, and
encamp beside Pihahiroth; where the unarmed hosts of Israel must be hemmed in
on all sides. Pharaoh now concludes that the wilderness had shut them in. They
must fall an easy prey. He pursues them as sure of victory; yea so infatuated,
as to pursue them into the red sea, which turned and covered them; and so the
innocent blood of the male children was avenged. When Haman's face was covered,
or that of any condemned criminal, we know what is next.

REMARK IX. We may discover the cause that so many of the natives perish from
under gospel light. Contempt of the means of grace, slighting the offers and
opportunities vouchsafed to them, neglect of the great salvation, 'till God
justly leaves them, and the grand adversary ensnares them, to drunkenness and
uncleanness, and so to become insensible to all the instructions of wisdom. A
late writer has observed, that "New England rum has ruined more Indians than
the gospel has saved of them." Wherever this debauchee came among them, they
were his counselors to work wickedness; and by drunkenness and uncleanness,
with them, soon lost all the little remains of the natural sense of moral
virtue. They had better have been brought up in the wilds of Africa, or in the
remotest corners of the world, than thus to hear the joyful sound of the gospel
salvation, and receive this grace of God in vain; after all failing of the
grace of God.

REMARK X. If any are willing to be cautioned and warned, they have now an
opportunity afforded them by heaven; a Lot's wife designed for a warning to all
that live ungodly. Remember poor Arthur! and thus admonished learn
righteousness. and not to despise the Savior of the world. Discite justitiam,
monit^* et non temnere (...).
See sin in its dismal consequences, at last it biteth like a serpent, and
stingeth like an adder. It may be sweet in the mouth, but bitterness in the
belly, i. e. in the conscience. Consider his sin and infamous ruin, and shun
those abominable vices that brought him to his shocking death. He is designed
by heaven for a monument to warn us, and that all the natives, negroes, and all
people, may hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly.

What is all the shame and infamy, pain and trouble of a public trial and
execution, compared with the everlasting shame and contempt, mourning and woe in
the great day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men? Their griefs shall be
multiplied that hasten after a strange God, or strange lusts. Judgments are
prepared for scorners and stripes for the back of fools. They die in youth, and
their life is among the unclean. Here we see sin, in some measure, as it is,
and discern the hook without the bait. 'Till I went unto the sanctuary, then
saw I their end.

Good God! on what a slippery steep,
The thoughtless wretches go! --
And oh! that dreadful fiery lake,
That waits their fall below!
REMARK XI. If any are wicked counselors to children or servants, as the house
of Ahab to Ahaziah, -- his counselors to work wickedness; here is a voice from
heaven to them, in this awful providence. A voice as loud as thunder, to awaken
them to consider their ways.

What must the wicked advisers of poor Arthur one day feel in their racked
consciences? What their meeting in the other world? Children that are
corruptors, partakers of other men's sins, plotters of mischief, must one day
give an account of all the wickedness committed by their advice, or sinful
connivance. One such sinner destroys much good. They are the Devil's agents to
destroy souls, and bodies too, as in the late instance. They hunt for the
precious life. O that all our young people were so wise, as when sinners entice
them, not to consent, but consider them as enemies; yea as incarnate Devils,
engaged on Satan's side, doing his work, and to receive his wages. They that
ensnare others to go with them to the pit of misery, will find it less
tolerable than to have gone there alone.

REMARK XII. That to sin against, and after such a solemn alarm from heaven, is
to sin at a dear rate. Woe to them that are not hereby admonished, so, as to
shun those dangerous precipices, where one has so lately fallen headlong to
ruin. They that live in the like sins, are in the same way, though they may not
have proceeded so far. The way of sin is down-hill. Nemo repent fit
turpissimus.
No man is entirely abandoned to wickedness all at once. Sad and awful indeed
if the drunkard will still wallow in his vomit, if the unclean will not repent
of the fornication which they have committed, but proceed from evil to evil,
and add sin to sin, running greedily after the errors of this profligate,
notwithstanding his bitter end; if the thieves will yet watch for their
neighbors goods. Let him that stole steal no more. Sad indeed, if liars still
meditate deceit, and utter from the heart words of falsehood. Or any, by
idleness and forsaking their lawful business, yet tempt the Devil to tempt them
to the most impudent vices. Such are apace filling up their measure of sin, and
this awful instance may be brought into judgment against them. And how awful to
hear from the throne* that is as the fiery flame, as Prove. i.24, 25, and on.
But because I have called and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand and no
man regarded. But ye have set at naught all my counsels, and would none of my
reproof, etc.

REMARK XIII. Here is a voice of God to heads of families, parents and masters,
to instruct those under their care; to guide them with their eye, and endeavor
early to instill into them the principles of virtue, and to furnish the young
men with knowledge and discretion, and exhort the rising generation to be
sober-minded, and to have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness,
but rather to reprove them. How pathetical is that of Bathsheba to Solomon?
What my son? What the son of my womb? and what the son of my vows? Give not thy
strength unto women, nor thy ways to that which destroys kings.

FINALLY, Let us all unite mercy and truth, in all our moral and religious
conduct; in whatever station and relation; in families, in churches, and in all
our civil affairs. Be thankful for the civil government, that justice is
administered, and the oppressed vindicated from wrongs and violence, and
iniquity obliged to stop her mouth. If any do evil, let them be afraid of the
power of the civil magistrate; for he bears not the sword in vain, as we saw
in the week past. But who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that
which is good? Civil rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil.
Let us be thankful for that restraining grace, that has kept us from such
notorious excesses. Beg daily for grace to keep you from the foulest vices, and
take heed that no one of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an
evil-doer, or as a busy-body in other men's matters. Let your loins be girt with
truth; and be ever merciful to all, shun the dangerous paths of the destroyer,
follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, charity, and peace, with them
that call on the name of the Lord out of a pure heart. So will the Lord
preserve you, and keep you from evil, and deliver you from every evil work, and
preserve you safe unto his heavenly kingdom, to him be glory forever, Amen.

Advertisement.
WHEREAS the Rev. John Tucker of Newbury has printed some Considerations of my
Reply to his Remarks on my Sermon; which appear to me to contain no answer to
the arguments in said Reply; but serve only to show that the subject, on his
side, is exhausted, and that he is willing to have an end put to the
controversy: and as there is nothing remarkable in his said Considerations,
except a few Queries, such as may be, and often have been, started by the wit
of men, respecting some of the most important doctrines of the Gospel; and some
misrepresentations of my meaning, which are mostly so futile, that a very
little degree of good sense, may easily correct them; and as he seems, in a
good measure satisfied, respecting the chief reason of his beginning the
controversy; and add to all these, his concessions, and showing an
unwillingness, to the straining any points in debate; all these things
considered, it is apprehended, I may be very reasonably excused from taking any
further notice of the said Considerations; whereof I improve the opportunity of
a vacant page, to advertise my kind Reader.

Aaron Hutchinson.
Grafton, Jan. 16. 1769.

