The true State and Character of the Unregenerate, stripped of all
Misrepresentation and Disguise:

A REPLY, To Mr. Mills's Inquiry concerning the State of the Unregenerate under
the Gospel: Containing Remarks on Mr. Hopkins's Section on the Use of Means.

By SAMUEL HOPKINS, A. M.

NEW HAVEN: Printed by THOMAS and SAMUEL GREEN. 1769.

PREFACE.
THERE are many who have, by some means or other, such an aversion to all
controversy and disputes about matters of religion, and look on them to be so
dangerous and hurtful, that they take the utmost care to keep at the greatest
distance from every thing of this kind; and are constantly cautioning others
against it, and refusing to enter into any debate with them; unless perhaps
they will dispute a little against disputing. These cannot hear of a public
controversy, or, as many of them call it, a paper war, about any thing that
relates to religion, without great disgust, and expressing their sorrow that
there should be any such thing, especial^y between the ministers of the gospel.
And doubtless many have expressed their displeasure and grief at the
controversy which has taken place between Mr. Mills and me; and have
determined, for their part, not to concern themselves with it, so much as to
read what is wrote.

Many of these are so modest as to say they do not pretend to be competent
judges of such controverted points, which great and good men are not able to
agree in, and settle. Besides, they have no time to spend upon these thorny
disputes: They think they can be better employed in reading plain, practical
divinity.

If any of these should venture so near so large a book of controversy as is
the ensuing, as to look into the preface, they may be desired to consider the
following things.

Whether they are not neglecting that attention, and free and earnest inquiry
after the truth, without which they are like to live and die, in a great degree
of ignorance. And whether they are not depriving themselves of the benefit of
one special mean and advantage of improving in knowledge. And whether, at
bottom, this neglect does not proceed from a degree of self-sufficiency, and
from an indifference concerning matters of high importance to be known.

Whether it is not the most likely, yea, the only way they can take to know o^
how much importance any controverted point is to them, and to be able to judge
on which side the truth lies, carefully to read the whole controversy.

If any persons are not competent judges in there things, is it not their own
fault for which they have no reasonable excuse? And must they not be able to
judge for themselves concerning every truth, in order that it may be of any
benefit to them? In this view, is there any real modesty and humility in their
neglecting to take all possible pains to be able to judge for themselves, in
matters in which none can judge for them, merely because others who have had a
reputation for learning and wisdom have differed concerning them; especially
since these things which are hid from the wise and prudent, are some times
revealed unto babes?

Finally, whether the truth would not greatly suffer, and gross ignorance
universally prevail, if every one should take the same care to avoid all
disputes as they do?

When we consider of what advantage controversy has already been to truth, and
what a tendency it has, in the issue to establish it, and make it shine more
clearly than if no such controversy had arose; we shall have reason to conclude
it is GOD'S design that every important truth shall be in this way canvassed,
and disputed out, as the best way to have it established to the greatest
advantage: And that this is one end He designs to answer by suffering heresies
to arise, and almost every truth, in its turn, to be called in question and
opposed. In this view, disputes are so far from being hurtful, and matter of
grief, that when they rise high, and become very common, and gain attention of
all, there is ground of encouragement and comfort.

It is to be lamented indeed, that in many instances controversy has been so
poorly managed, by which truth has appeared very much to suffer: But even in
this case, the debate has often been not wholly useless.

The author is sorry that the side he has taken in the controversy before us,
has not a more able advocate to defend it, as he doubts not it is capable of a
much better defense than he has made. And he is particularly sensible there are
many defects in his style, which will be discerned by the reader of a critical
taste; and will call for his candor.

The author thinks he has a claim, on the part of justice, to the attention of
all those who have read Mr. Mills: especially of those who in reading him have
concluded the author has run into very great and hurtful errors. If they have
so peremptorily prejudged, as not to be willing to hear the accused speak in
his own vindication, he thinks he shall have reason to complain: Not to mention
the injury such men hereby do to themselves, and to the cause of truth.

It is needless to tell with what very good views and designs, and from what
excellent, noble motives the author has undertaken this reply; as this would be
no great evidence in his favor, if any; and it is of very little importance to
the reader: his chief concern being to know whether the author has well
vindicated the cause he has undertaken, whatever were his motives.

If the author and the reader shall be found on the right side of the question,
and to have taken the pains of writing and reading the ensuing reply, from love
to Christ, and zeal in his cause; they will be richly rewarded for all their
labor, and numbered among those who follow Christ when he rides forth
conquering and to conquer: And will soon have a happy meeting, and stand before
the throne, and before the LAMB, clothed it white robes, and palms in their
hands; where perfect agreement in sentiment, and the most exalted friendship
and union of hearts shall reign forever, to the praise of rich, sovereign
grace, and honor of the divine, infinitely worthy Redeemer. To HIM be glory
forever and ever. AMEN.

March 23, 1769.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I.
IN which the following question is considered, viz. Whether the unregenerate,
when under genuine, thorough awakenings and convictions, are more guilty and
vile in God's sight, than they were in a state of ignorance and security?

SECT. I. The question particularly stated.

SECT. II. The true state and character of the unregenerate sinner under
awakenings and convictions, considered and stated, in opposition to the
character Mr. Mills gives of such.

SECT. III. Arguments for the affirmative of the question in dispute.

SECT. IV. The way Mr. Mills takes to evade several passages of scripture,
which were referred to in support of what he opposes, examined.

SECT. V. In which several things which Mr. M. says in favor of the negative,
are examined.

SECT. VI. In which Mr. Mills's four arguments to prove the negative, are
considered and refuted.

SECT. VII. In which what Mr. M. has said on several other passages in the book
he remarks upon, is examined.

SECT. VIII. In which it is considered, whether the doctrine that the awakened,
convinced sinner is more guilty and vile in the constant and painful attendance
on the means of grace, than when he was in a state of security and open
profligacy, is an encouragement to sinners to abandon themselves to
carelessness and vice; or any matter of discouragement to attend on means?

PART II.
Wherein, it is inquired, Whether God has given any commands to unregenerate
sinners, which they do truly comply with, and may perfectly obey, while
unregenerate?

SECT. I. The question particularly stated; and arguments offered to prove the
negative

SECT. II. Mr. Mills's arguments for the affirmative examined.

SECT. III. In which several passages in Mr. Mills's book are attended to,
which have not been particularly considered in the former sections.

SECT. IV. Mr. Mills's inconsistencies with himself.

SECT. V. Showing the evil tendency of Mr. Mills's inquiry.

SECT. VI. In which Mr. Mills's speaking against metaphysical reasoning and
arguments is briefly considered.

PART I.
IN which the following question is considered, viz. Whether the unregenerate,
when under genuine, thorough awakenings and convictions, are more guilty and
vile in God's sight, than they were in a state of ignorance and security?

SECT. I.
THE question particularly stated.

Mr. MILLS has expressed what he says I have asserted, and what he undertakes
to oppose and confute; in the following proposition.

That on every rising degree of internal light, awakening, conviction and
amendment of life, found in any of the unregenerate, while such, they are
undoubtedly (on the whole) more vile, odious and abominable in God's sight,
than they would have been, had they continued at ease, going on in their sins,
under the same external means of light. D. C.


I would observe, in the first place, that this proposition seems hardly
intelligible. If by "every rising degree of amendment of life," he means every
degree of reformation of life, I see not the connection this has with "every
rising degree of internal light, awakening and conviction," as it stands in the
proposition. Amendment of life may take place, and often does, without any
internal light and conviction at all. It often does so by the alteration of a
person's external circumstances; by the removal of the temptation which led to
external wickedness; or by a persuasion that such a conduct is hurtful to his
worldly interest, etc. And there may be a degree of awakening and conviction of
conscience, without producing any reformation of life. And where amendment of
life does take place in consequence of internal light, etc. the former does not
always keep pace exactly with the latter. A small degree of internal light and
conviction of conscience, will often produce a full amendment of life; and
after this is effected, and the person is quite reformed in his external
conduct, this internal light and conviction may yet increase, and rise
immensely higher than that degree which was sufficient for the amendment of
life.

Therefore I say, in the next place, the proposition is not a true
representation of what I have advanced in my section on means. Where I speak of
the light and conviction of conscience which the awakened sinner, has
preparatory to regeneration and conversion, I no where confine it to the lowest
degree of this kind, which ever takes place in the mind of a sinner; nor to
that degree which is barely sufficient for his external reformation. This is
not the conviction of which I speak: I speak of an immensely higher and greater
degree of knowledge and conviction than that which is sufficient for this. Mr.
M. himself takes special notice of this, in the following words, which stand
not six lines from the proposition I am considering. Nor are the convictions of
awakened sinners here spoken of under any restriction or limitation, but
whatever be the degree, 'tho' under the greatest convictions of conscience, and
the most concern about their souls,' etc. The author indeed begins with what he
calls instruction, explained by speculative knowledge, and then adds what he
terms more than speculation, and finally rises to all that conviction that the
unregenerate are capable of, while such. And he expresses this yet more fully
in the following words. The author having raised the unregenerate to the
highest degree of an awakened sense of divine things, that their state, as
such, is capable of; every thing, as himself expresses it, short of discerning
the true beauty or moral excellency of divine things,' he proposes this query,
viz. If it should be asked, what good ALL this instruction and knowledge will
do the unregenerate, etc. Here it is to be noted, that it is fully conceded by
the author, that the unregenerate under consideration, have ALL degrees of
light and conviction of divine truth, that can, by a common work of the spirit,
agree to an unregenerate state. p. 54.
Here he appears to be sensible enough, that the sinners under consideration,
have all degrees of light and conviction, etc. and takes pains to show that
such are the sinners which I have in view in what I say. This is indeed very
easily proved. Had this been in his mind, when he was about forming the
proposition I am, considering, it ought to have prevented its ever coming into
existence, as it now stands.

In the paragraph from which Mr. M. quotes the most as containing the
proposition he has formed, I represent the sinner of whom I am speaking, as
having a much higher degree of knowledge and conviction, than is necessary
barely to produce an external reformation; and as sinning against the light of
his conscience in rejecting the gospel, whatever may be his external
reformations. That the reader may have it before his eyes, I will transcribe my
words. The more clearly he sees his own wretched case as a sinner, and the
dreadful consequence of dying in his sins; and the clearer conviction he has of
his need of a Savior, and of the truths of the gospel in general; the greater
is the crime of his impenitence, and continuing to reject the salvation offered
in the gospel. The awakened, convinced sinner, who has taken a great deal of
pains in the use of means, and has hereby got a great degree of instruction and
knowledge and yet continues impenitent, is in this respect much more guilty and
vile, and a greater criminal in God's sight, than if he had never attained to
this conviction and knowledge: for now he is guilty of the abuse of, and
opposition to, all this light and knowledge, which he could not be, while he
had it not p. 129.


Had Mr. M. well attended to this, he must have been sensible that the light
and conviction of which I speak, as rendering the impenitent sinner more guilty
than when in a state of ignorance and security, is not the lowest degree of
light and conviction, nor that degree which is only sufficient in some measure
to reform a person's life; and that I affirm nothing particularly of such a low
degree of conviction of conscience which may produce some degree of
reformation, or even wholly reform a person's external conduct: And therefore
that the proposition is not contained in any thing I say; but is a gross
misrepresentation.

To set this matter in a yet clearer light, if possible, I would observe; that
a person may be brought to an amendment of life by what is called; by some at
least, internal light and conviction of conscience; and yet not have that light
and conviction of which I speak. A person may have only some imaginary,
confused notions of a future state of punishment, and be alarmed and affrighted
by apprehensions of his exposedness to fall into hell, etc. so as hereby to be
led to leave off his vicious courses: and yet have no just speculative notions
of God, sin or hell. In this case, the reformation is not produced by true
light and conviction of conscience: To be sure, this is not the conviction of
which. I am speaking. -- Another person may reform his life, only under a
conviction that the course of wickedness in which he has lived, leads to hell;
without any further conviction with respect to his sin, his lost state, his
duty, etc. and by such reformation may make his conscience easy. -- Another,
under a yet further conviction, that something must be done to obtain God's
favor, not only reforms all known sins, but betakes himself to what he thinks
duty; and by this gets ease to his conscience, not imagining (...) that his
reformations and doings, will make up for his past sins, and render him
acceptable to God. Whether such an one; who from a course of sensuality and
debauchery, or any other open wickedness in which he lived; and had little or
no thought of God or a future state; but only sought the gratification of his
reigning passions and appetites, becomes serious and regular in his behavior,
and goes into a course of strict external religion, with a view to make a
righteousness of his own, and get to heaven this way: I say, whether such an
one, by thus turning from one course of wickedness to another, does, on the
whole, become less guilty and vile in God's sight, may be a question worthy to
be attended to. Mr. M. has himself answered this question, in representing the
pharisee who went up to the temple to pray as "one of the vilest sinners on
earth." (p. 80 margin) And I desire the reader to consider whether in doing
this, he has not implicitly decided the question in dispute between us, against
himself. His vileness consisted chiefly in his being ignorant of God's
righteousness, and seeking to establish his own righteousness: he did not
submit himself unto the righteousness of God, but opposed it with his whole
heart. (See Romans x. 3.) He did this in ignorance and unbelief, and perfectly
agreeable to his own judgment and conscience. Every unregenerate sinner, under
the greatest awakenings and convictions, does with his whole heart, refuse to
submit to the righteousness of God, and opposes it, and desires and attempts to
establish his own righteousness; and that in direct opposition, to the dictates
of his judgment and conscience. The difference between these two therefore
seems to lie against the latter, if sinning against the light of conscience, is
more vile than living in the same way of sinning ignorantly.
But be this (...) will, it is not a question that I am at present immediately
concerned with, as nothing which I have said about sinners under awakenings and
convictions of conscience, has any respect to such an one; or to any of the
instances which I have now mentioned.

In a word, whatever internal light and conviction of conscience is necessary
to bring a person to reform his external conduct, and goes no further than
this, and rises no higher; this is not the light and conviction of which I am
speaking. A person under the influence of such light and conviction, by thus
reforming, may be said, in a sense, to act up to the light he has, i. e. the
light of his conscience, by obeying it and coming up to the dictates of it. As
I have said nothing about such an instance, in which reformation rises in a
just proportion to the light of conscience, and keeps pace with it, it appears
that it is not true that I have asserted, "that on every rising degree of
internal light, awakening, conviction and amendment of life, the unregenerate
are undoubtedly (on the who^e) more vile, etc." I have a right therefore to
disown the proposition Mr. M. has formed for me, as containing what I have not
asserted; in which what I have said is kept quite out of sight, and entirely
misrepresented.

Let it be also observed, that in this proposition, which is said to contain
the sum of what I have advanced on this head, that which I mention as the
ground of the greater guilt and criminalness of the awakened, convinced sinner,
and that in which it really consists, is not mentioned, but kept entirely out
of view; which renders it a very partial, unfair state of the case, and tends
to give the reader, especially one who has never carefully attended to this
matter, quite a wrong view of the thing in dispute. I place his greater guilt,
not in his awakenings and internal light, nor in his amendment of life; but in
his continuing entirely obstinate and impenitent, under all this light and
conviction, and in his opposing and rejecting with his whole heart the free
offers of pardon and salvation by Jesus Christ, in direct opposition to the
clear dictates of his judgment and conscience. This therefore ought to have
been expressed in a proposition formed with a professed design to express what
I had asserted on this head. As it now stands, there is nothing expressed as
the ground of their being more vile, odious and abominable in God's sight, but
"rising degrees of internal light, awakening, conviction and amendment of
life," which surely is not a fair state of the case.

Mr. M. makes the reformation of the convinced sinner to keep pace with his
light and conviction of conscience. This he does in the proposition in which he
attempts to express what I have asserted, and every where else through his
whole book. He makes him to be one who reforms all known evils, and comes up to
all known duties. p. 7. 28.
By this he grossly misrepresents me, and the whole matter in dispute, and
raises a dust to blind the eyes of the inattentive. It is easy to see that
light and conviction does not aggravate the sins of him who immediately comp^^^
with it, and comes up to all the dictates of it perfectly. The sinner I speak
of is supposed not to comply with the light and conviction he has, but to rebel
against it (which is certainly the case of all the unregenerate under true
convictions) and in this I placed his greater sinfulness. Mr. M. in his
proposition leaves this wholly out; so, in effect, leaves all out that I had
asserted; and introduces a character about which I had not said one word, and
so makes me assert what I never did assert, nor meant to assert.

I pretend not to charge Mr. M. with thus stating my sentiment in a partial,
unfair, and wrong light knowingly and upon design. All I am concerned to make
out is, that this is in fact the case; which I trust manifestly appears to the
impartial reader: And I leave it to him to assign what reason he pleases why
Mr. M. has stated the matter as he has done. I am willing he himself should be
believed when he says he has, " to the best of his understanding, fairly
adjusted, stated, and sum'd up the sense of the author."

It may be observed that Mr. M. has not only here carefully kept the character
which I give of the unregenerate sinner under true awakenings and convictions
of conscience, out of view; but has done it through his whole performance. And
when he has occasion to quote me where I speak of "the sinner's continuing
obstinately to reject and oppose the salvation offered in the gospel," lest the
reader should be led by these expressions to look on the sinner in too bad a
light, he carefully observes that I "mean no more than merely his continuing
unregenerate," and nothing but what it consistent with his reforming every
known sin; as if these expressions of mine naturally carried in them some thing
more and worse than what is implied in being unregenerate, and therefore cannot
be properly applied to the sinner on this account only. p. 56.
And it is apparent to me, and I doubt not will be so to every discerning
reader, that if Mr. M. had not viewed the unregenerate sinner in a better and
more innocent light than I do (and, I trust, than the scripture represents him)
and had he not looked on such as little or nothing to blame for unbelief and
rejecting the gospel, the book he has wrote, would never have seen the light.
-- But of this matter I shall treat more largely hereafter.

Having shown that Mr. M's proposition is so far from "comprizing the plain
sense of the author," that it contains what he never asserted, and is a very
gross misrepresentation of the sentiment he has espoused, and a very unfair
state of the case, I will express it in my own words; and so as to give what I
think is the "plain sense" of what I have said in my section on means; and
which I yet think is the truth, and may be defended.

The unregenerate sinner, who is under genuine and thorough awakenings and
convictions of conscience respecting his own state and circumstances, and the
truths of the gospel; particularly, respecting this truth, that salvation is
freely offered to him through a Mediator, which he is obliged by the strongest
ties of duty and interest immediately to accept and embrace; being at the same
time wholly without any excuse for his neglect in not embracing it, and for the
opposition of his heart to Christ, of which he is conscious; and who yet
continues, under all this light, and contrary to the plain dictates and
pressing, painful convictions of his own conscience, obstinately to oppose and
reject Jesus Christ: such an one is, on the account of this his impenitence and
obstinacy under this clear light and conviction of conscience, more guilty,
vile and odious in God's sight, than he was before he had this light and
conviction, and was in a state of security and ignorance; whatever alteration
or reformation has taken place in him in other respects.

To prevent misunderstanding, it is needful to observe here, that in this
proposition, and in all that I have said on this head in my section on means,
nothing is affirmed of a sinner who has lost his convictions which he was under
for a while, and has returned in a great degree to security and ease, and to
the allowed commission of the gross external wickedness, which he had forsook
under the influence of the light and conviction which he had: or to that which
is more gross and vile: I say, nothing is affirmed of such an one, whether he
is now more or less guilty and vile than he was when under conviction, and when
externally reformed. All that is affirmed is, that the sinner under the
awakenings and convictions described, is more guilty than he was in a state of
ignorance and security antecedent to luck convictions, of which he never was
the subject before. Mr. M. has made this mistake, and not distinguished between
these two cases, as I shall have occasion to observe in the sequel. The sinner
I describe may be much more guilty and vile under awakenings and convictions,
than he was before; and yet may be more guilty still, on the whole, by opposing
and suppressing his convictions, and, as it were, doing violence to his
conscience, by designedly taking those measures, and going into those ways of
gross, outward wickedness, which by degrees wear off the conviction which gave
him uneasiness. This is a case to which nothing I have said has any respect.

I would not be here understood, however, to intimate, that the awakened,
convinced sinner does not always oppose his convictions; though not always in the
same sense and degree as just now mentioned. Convictions may be opposed two
ways, and in two senses. They are truly opposed when the truths of which the
sinner is convinced are disagreeable to his heart, and he refuses cordially to
submit to them, and comply with them. In this sense unregenerate sinners always
resist all their convictions, and oppose them with their whole hearts, however
desirous they may be to have their convictions continue, and whatever pains
they may take in the use of means to maintain and cherish them, because they
believe that they are necessary in order to escape hell, and be saved, and that
it is most dangerous to lose their convictions, and return to ease and
security. In this sense they may "nourish their convictions," agreeable to Mr.
M's phrase, and yet oppose all the truths they are convinced of, with their
whole hearts, and remain most obstinate enemies to Christ, and the way of
salvation by him. But sinners may also resist convictions, and often do, by
trying to get rid of them, and taking measures with a design to wear them off
from their minds: And many times they in this way still their consciences, get
ease, and return to their former courses, or to courses still worse. Of such
nothing is affirmed or denied in the proposition in dispute between Mr. M. and
me.

Let it also be noted here, that if two persons have equal degrees of light and
conviction of conscience; and one reforms his external conduct, and attends on
means under the influence of the conviction he has; and the other goes on in
his allowed external wickedness, in neglect of all means; and this ever was, or
can be the case; nothing is said of such a case in the proposition. Indeed,
nothing is said of different persons, whether one is more guilty and vile than
another ^ but what is affirmed is of the same person, who is now awakened from
a state of ease and security, and has that light and conviction conscience
which he never had before, and which is inconsistent with a state of security
and open wickedness.

It will be observed that in this proposition it is asserted that this it true
in all cases; however vicious and guilty the person was while ignorant and
stupid, and in a state of security and carnal ease; yet by continuing
impenitent under the awakenings and convictions mentioned he, becomes a greater
criminal, is guilty of more aggravated wickedness than he was before, whatever
particular ways of sinning he has forsaken, in which he before lived.

This, I am sensible, will be thought by many to be carrying the matter to a
great length, and even too far. If it had been only said, that many, if not
most unregenerate sinners, who have not been guilty of any enormous crimes and
uncommon wickedness in their lives, do become more guilty when their
consciences are thoroughly awakened and convinced, than they were in a state of
security; they perhaps think this is true, and may be easily proved. But to
carry the matter so far, even to every instance without exception, they think
is not safe, and perhaps is not true; and if it is true, it is a matter of no
great importance, and it may be difficult to prove it. And it will give those
who are disposed to oppose the real truth in this case, an advantage against
it, and an opportunity greatly to prejudice others against in, who would
probably have fallen in with it, had it not been asserted it such universal
terms.

It is certain that Mr. M. has taken all the advantage he could of this (and as
has been shown, more than he could fairly do, by misrepresenting the matter,
and carrying it further than I had done.) He has not failed to keep this in
view every where, as if it was the only point of controversy between him and
me. Whereas this is not true; for he through his whole book as much opposes the
notion of sinners in general growing worse under awakenings and convictions of
conscience, or that this is true in any instance, as he does that this is the
case in every instance: And he has said nothing to prove the latter not true,
which is not equally against the former. Therefore if I should now give up this
point, that sinners under genuine, thorough convictions are in all cases more
criminal and vile in God's sight, than they were in a state of ignorance and
security, however criminal and vile they were then; and only assert that this
is the case with unregenerate sinners in general who have lived pretty regular
lives in a state of security, Mr. M. would have as real a controversy with me
then, as he has now, as his whole book is as much against the latter as the
former. This, I trust, will fully appear before I have done.

But as I yet think this proposition is true, as I have now stated it, and may
be made evident beyond all doubt to those who will be impartial, and will
thoroughly consider the matter, I shall attempt to prove it, and leave it to
the reader to judge for himself. But if, after all, any should think it is not
proved beyond all controversy that the unregenerate in the case proposed are in
all instances more vile, etc. though it be quite evident that this is true of
sinners in general: and that it is of no importance that the proposition should
be affirmed without any exception; let it be remembered that though I think the
former to be both an evident and important truth; yet the latter is much more
important. And if Mr. M. had not opposed the latter as much as the former,
perhaps I should not have thought it worth while to make any reply.

But before I proceed to this argument, it will be necessary to consider what
is the true state and character of the unregenerate sinner under awakenings and
under the most clear convictions of conscience. This will therefore be attended
to in the next section.

SECT. II.
The true state and character of the unregenerate sinner under awakenings and
convictions considered and stated, in opposition to the character which Mr.
Mills gives of such.

THE unregenerate sinner is an enemy to God. The whole bent, and all the
exercises of his heart, are in opposition to God's true character; and no
influences on his mind, whether by the spirit of God, or any thing else,
antecedent to regeneration, or any change whatsoever, do in the least degree
remove this opposition and enmity. For he is still under the dominion of sin,
having not the least degree of right disposition, and exercise of true love to
God and man. And whatever awakenings of conscience and convictions of the truth
take place in the sinners mind; and however distressed and anxious he is about
his case, and whatever alteration there is in his conduct produced by fear or
hope; still he is as real and as great an enemy to the divine character, to the
law of God, to Jesus Christ and the gospel, as ever. Whatever are the
influences of the spirit of God on the mind of an unregenerate sinner, in
awakenings and convictions of conscience they make no alteration as to the
prevailing temper and inclination of the heart. No new disposition and
principles of heart are given, nor are the natural, corrupt principles of the
heart in the least altered for the better, so as to be more friendly, or less
opposite to God. Therefore all the exertions and exercises of the heart, under
the greatest degree of this influence, by which the conscience is enlightened
and awakened, are no more friendly to God, but as corrupt and as opposite to
him as ever.

This must be so: for the corrupt principles of the heart exercised and acted
out will always be the same, whatever light and conviction is in the judgment
and conscience. The corrupt tree will bring forth corrupt fruit; and that which
is born of the flesh is, and will be flesh. Every exercise of an entire enemy
to God, will be of the nature of enmity against him. And there is no other way
to suppress and put an end to those corrupt, sinful exercises but either to
change his heart, or to put an end to all his exercises, by casting him into a
deep sleep, by turning him into a beast, tree or rock, or by annihiliation.
Many have talked of the unregenerate sinner's forsaking sin and doing his duty,
upon mere natural principles: But what do they mean? What natural principles
are there, but corrupt principles? If they say natural conscience is a natural
principle, and not corrupt, especially when enlightened by the spirit of God; I
answer, Natural conscience, so far as it is distinguished from the heart, is no
principle of action at all. The heart is the source and seat of all moral
exercise and action; natural conscience therefore, as distinguished from this,
is neither sinful nor virtuous. they shall say fear and hope are natural
principles; I grant they are common to angels and men, saints and sinners; but
in the unregenerate have no more real goodness in them, than the same
principles in the devils themselves. Fear and hope are as much concerned in the
worst of exercises and actions, and have as much influence in them, as in the
best. And the exercises of fear and hope are just as corrupt and sinful, as is
the heart in which they are exercised. If they say self love is a natural
principle from which the unregenerate do avoid sin and in many cases perform
their duty; I answer, If by self love is meant only a desire and love of
happiness in general, and aversion to misery or evil; this is in itself neither
more nor less sinful or virtuous, but may be considered as the principle of all
exercises and actions, both good and bad, and has as much concern and influence
in the worst, as in the best. But if by a principle of self love is meant
selfishness, or a person's selfish regard and respect to himself, his own
private, separate interest and happiness, without any disinterested regard to
any other being, always seeking and pursuing that which appears to him for his
own good; being wholly influenced by this, and nothing else, in all his
exercises and conduct; this is itself sinful, and is the principle and source
of all the sin in the universe, being directly opposite to true benevolence,
which it the sum of all that is truly good; this is in its own nature enmity to
being in general; and is that by which man becomes an enemy to God and man. So
far therefore as men act from this principle, they sin; and they are sinful in
proportion to the strength and vigor with which this principle is exerted. If a
person is wholly under the government of this selfishness, loving and regarding
himself supre^^ly, and having no respect and regard to God or man, only from
selfish ends, and as the fruit and exercise of this selfishness: I say if a
person is wholly under the dominion of this selfishness, as all the
unregenerate are, all his actions are wrong and sinful, in whatever way he
seeks his own happiness; whether in a worldly interest, in pursuing the
profits, honors or pleasures of this world; or in the happiness of the future
state, earnestly pursuing it, in crossing his sensual appetites, and in the
painful exercise of what be calls devotion and religion. Opposition and enmity
to God and his law, and so to Christ and the gospel, may be as really exercised
in the latter way as the former, and in as high a degree; yea, much higher and
more immediately and directly against God. But of this more particularly
hereafter.

It hence appears that whatever influence there is on the natural principles of
the soul by the spirit of God, in awakenings, conviction of conscience, etc.
this does not at all abate the power of wickedness in the heart. Self-love, or
selfishness, into whatever channel it is turned; whether it is exercised about
present or future good, in fears of evil, or hopes of good in this world, or
the world to come, and earnest attempts to obtain the good and escape the evil:
I say this selfishness is still of the same nature, and it is in direct
opposition to all true goodness. The greatest awakenings and convictions of
conscience, and every thing that takes place in consequence of this in the
minds of the unregenerate, do not in any degree abate the exercise of this
grand principle of all sin and rebellion in the universe; so do not make the
heart in any degree better; but may be the occasion of turning the selfish
rebellious heart more directly and in a much stronger degree of exercise
against God; and perhaps always has this effect. But this is to be considered
in the next section.

I particularly observe this to show the mistake which some make in this
matter. Because awakenings and convictions of conscience are effected by the
spirit of God, they think that something good, or less sinful in the heart must
be the effect of this work of the spirit. There is no ground for such a
consequence. There is nothing done in the inlightening and conviction of the
consciences of the unregenerate, and awakening them to attend to the truth,
etc. which will not be done in a much higher degree, though not just in the same
way, in the minds of the wicked at the day of judgment, and forever afterward.
But who will say, the wicked then, under all their convictions, fears and
horrors, will not be as rebellious, impenitent and hardened, as the secure
sinner is, who neither knows nor fears any of these things?

If any should say, 'there is this grand difference, between an awakened,
convinced sinner in this world, and the convictions and horrors of the wicked
at the day of judgment, that the former is under hope, and has the offer of
mercy and salvation; but the latter will be in absolute despair: the hope of
the former leads him to dread sin and seek deliverance in the use of means,
etc.' It is granted this is true Self-love or selfishness will exercise itself
in this way in these circumstances; but still this is nothing but selfishness
under the influence of fear of evil and hope of escape, and of obtaining
happiness; the heart is no more truly pliable, obedient and penitent than ever,
does not comply in the least degree, but obstinately opposes God and the
gospel. And as he does most obstinately resist and trample under his feet the
most astonishing mercy, which is freely offered to him, and reject the Son of
God in all his amazing condescension and grace; in this view, his impenitence,
hardness of heart and obstinacy, appear in a most striking, awful light, and
much more aggravated and shocking than that of the latter.

The unregenerate sinner is therefore a hardened, impenitent rebel, who with his
whole heart opposes and hates God, and his holy law, and hates and rejects
Jesus Christ and the salvation offered by him, so far as these come into his
view, and under his notice. He is so, under all the awakenings, convictions and
reformations that he is the subject of. Whatever it done to him, and what
changes soever he passes through, his character with respect to these things is
not altered; he is yet as really under the dominion of sin, and a fixed,
impenitent, obstinate enemy to God and Jesus Christ, as ever.

The awakened sinner under all his convictions, terrors and reformations, and
most earnest attempts to escape the evil he sees himself in danger of, and
obtain salvation, has no more love and respect to God than he ever had, and is
really as much under the power of opposite principles as ever, as has been
observed; does not hate sin, at all, but is as much in love with it as ever.

Many a profligate wretch, who has long indulged himself in uncleanness and
debauchery, when he has been brought into such circumstances that his
wickedness is like to be discovered, so as to bring disgrace and contempt upon
him, and ruin him in all his worldly interests; has been filled with anxiety
and distress, so that he could find no quiet, night nor day: he has been
convinced of his folly, condemned himself, and reformed his vile practices,
being afraid to indulge himself in the least degree, as he had done, and
resolved that he would carefully avoid such conduct for time to come: and has
used unwearied attempts to escape the evil he feared. And in this time of his
fear and distress has made many prayers to God, hoping that he would interpose
in his behalf, so that he might escape the evil he feared. But when his fears
were over, and nothing was, in his view, in the way of his going into his
former practices without danger of punishment or a discovery, he has returned
to them with as much delight and eagerness as ever. In this case every one will
be sensible how little in his favor was his reformation, and that under all his
fears and terrors, and earnest endeavors to avoid evil, his heart was really
no better than it was before, and was as much in love with sin. This may in
some measure illustrate the case of the awakened sinner, with respect to what I
have just now been speaking. For there is no more virtue and goodness in
fearing evil in the future world, even the punishment of hell, than worldly
evil; and the reformation of any particular practices from such fear, is from
no better principles, and no more an evidence of real opposition of heart to
sin, than in the instance just mentioned.

The highway robber, who is apprehended and condemned to be hanged, and is
hereby thrown into great distress of mind, and most earnestly petitions the
king for mercy, and promises reformation and obedience to his laws for time to
come, will, as soon as he is set at liberty, and has no fear of being again
apprehended, dismiss all his fear, and return to the same course again. Will he
who views him in this light, in the time of his fears, reformations and
promises, look upon him to be really more penitent, or less an enemy to his
king and country, than before he was apprehended? In no better light the
unregenerate sinner ought to be viewed, under all his awakenings, and
convictions of conscience.

It hence appears that the awakened, convinced sinner does not, while
unregenerate, really yield or give up one point of controversy between him and
his Maker, but is as impenitent and obstinate as ever, being still as great a
friend to sin, and enemy to God as he was before; the principles and exercises
of his heart being not in the least abated with respect to this.

AND it is of great importance to be observed here, and well attended to, that
the unregenerate sinner is wholly to blame for all that in which his
unregeneracy consists, it being nothing but wickedness and rebellion of heart,
for which the sinner has not the least imaginable excuse. He is under no kind
or degree of impotency or difficulty, which is in the way of his repentance,
loving God, and embracing the gospel, that (...) the least excuse for not doing
it, or takes off the least degree of blame for his neglect. He is under no kind
of inability or difficulty that is in the way of his turning to God
immediately, which the open profligate is not under, as a bar in the way of his
reforming his wicked conduct immediately. In the latter case all the difficulty
lies in the corruption of his heart, and the opposition of his will to it: and
this is all the difficulty in the former. And if it is more difficult for a
sinner to turn to God through Jesus Christ with his whole heart, than it is for
him to forsake all ways of known sin in external conduct, and he is under a
greater inability to do the former than the latter, it is wholly because his
will opposes the former more than it does the latter, or rather because the
latter may be complied with consistent with the indulgence of the reigning
wickedness of the heart, and enmity against God, whereas the former cannot. The
reason why the open profligate does not reform his conduct immediately is
because he is not willing, or his heart opposes this. And the only reason why
the awakened, convinced sinner does not embrace the gospel immediately, but
remains obstinately impenitent, is because his will, even his whole heart
opposes it. All the difference is, that in the latter case the opposition of
the heart to Jesus Christ is more fixed and strong, than it is in the former
^ase to an external reformation, as an external reformation may be complied
with, consistent with the exercise and gratification of the reigning lusts of
the heart: but compliance with the gospel cannot. And is there need of saying
any thing to prove that the sinner is perfectly inexcusable and to blame for
not doing that in which there is no difficulty but what consists in the want of
a will or heart, and the opposition of the will to it? This would be the same
thing as to undertake to prove that wickedness of heart, and that in which all
sin and blame do consist, is indeed wickedness, sinful and blameworthy. And if
opposition of heart to that which is in itself right, is, in all cases, sinful,
and perfectly inexcusable and blameworthy; then the greater is the degree of
this opposition and the more strong, fixed and perfect it is, the further is
the sinner from all excuse, and the more blameworthy. So that the difficulty
and inability of loving God and embracing the gospel in the case before us, is
so far from rendering the sinner in any degree blameless or excusable, that the
more there is of this, the more blameworthy and criminal he is.

Hence it appears that the unregenerate sinner's reigning opposition and enmity
of heart against God and the gospel, is perfectly criminal and most odious and
abominable in his sight, notwithstanding all his awakenings, convictions and
external reformations; the latter do not render the former a whit the less
criminal, odious and abominable; any more than the cleansing and scouring the
outside of a cup renders the most offensive, abominable corruption and
filthiness, of which it is within full, less odious and abominable. Or (to use
another comparison) no more than the cryings of a stubborn child, in dread of
the ^od, which is held over him, and his strivings to get out of his father's
hands and escape, serve to extenuate his crime, while he obstinately refuses to
own his fault and submit to his father's will; and resolutely opposes him under
all his threatenings.

THE unregenerate sinner has no sincere desires to repent and embrace the
gospel, or of a new heart: It is the most glaring contradiction to suppose he
has; as great a one as to suppose, that wickedness is friendly to holiness.
These things are not the objects of the desires of the hearts of the
unregenerates, but of their aversion and enmity. They desire deliverance from
misery, and the enjoyment of happiness (though not true happiness and the
salvation, which the gospel offers) under a conviction that they must repent
and submit to Christ, in order to escape the one, and obtain the other: But
their hearts are as far from desiring to repent and turn to God, as ever; for
if they had a real desire to repent, etc. they would repent; for nothing is in
the way of this, but opposition of heart. And they make no sincere attempts to
turn to God and embrace the gospel; for this would suppose their hearts did not
wholly oppose these, which they do, as has been shown; and the whole difficulty
of their turning to God, and the only reason of their not doing it immediately,
lies in this enmity and opposition.

If any are disposed to look on the awakened sinner, as less to blame for his
enmity of heart against God, and fixed, obstinate opposition to Christ, because
he is externally reformed, and greatly distressed, under fears that he shall be
miserable forever; and if such appear in a great degree harmless and innocent
in their sight, they certainly judge in this case according to the outward
appearance, and not righteous judgment. In God's sight all that wickedness of
heart in which their unregeneracy consists, and in which they continue wholly
impenitent, and enemies to the divine character and the gospel, is perfectly
inexcusable and criminal, and infinitely odious; there being no difficulty in
their becoming friends to God, etc. but what lies in the voluntary wickedness
of their hearts.

MANY have made a very great and hurtful mistake here. They represent the
impotency of the unregenerate to turn to God and believe in Christ to be such
as not to be altogether blameable, if criminal in any degree. They are to
blame, wholly to blame, they allow, for not doing what they can do, as they are
won^ express it; but if they reform, and do what they can, and cry to God to
change their hearts, etc. they are poor creatures, to be pitied that they are
in such a sad case; but not much, if at all to blame, for remaining under the
dominion of sin, and not embracing the gospel, which they are desiring and
honestly attempting, but have no power to do it: so that this is rather their
calamity, than their sin.

THIS way of representing the matter has been infinitely mischievous. -- By
thus misrepresenting the doctrine of man's natural impotency, they have
rendered it ridiculous to those, who have been disposed to oppose the real
truth, and have prejudiced them against it. While they themselves have been
unable to defend the doctrine in the light, in which they set it; and so have
given occasion to the enemies of the truth to triumph. -- On the other hand, it
has proved an agreeable refuge and sweet resting place to multitudes. By this
representation they have been "sewing pillows to all arm-holes," Ezekiel. xiii. 18.
and comforting those, to whom God speaks no peace. The unregenerate sinner,
who has reformed all ways of external sin, and allows himself in no known
outward evil practices, and prays to God for a new heart, etc. which he thinks
he sincerely desires, but that it is wholly out of his power to change his own
heart: Such an one, I say, makes himself in a great measure easy in an
unregenerate state, while he thinks he does all he can. Such a sinner is not
under genuine, thorough convictions; and never will, nor possibly can be, while
he believes this representation to be just.

AND this doctrine of man's inability, as consisting in something, which does
in some measure excuse, and is consistent with a person's sincere desires of
heart to have it removed, and to do what he cannot do: This doctrine, I say, is
most sweet to many a corrupt heart. Many professing christians fly to this
refuge to hide and rest themselves, by making it an excuse for their not living
in constant and high exercises of christian holiness. They say, "We are poor
creatures, we can do nothing of ourselves; if God does not assist us and give
us strength, we can do nothing, we have no power of our own, etc." And if they
are told the truth of the matter; that they are under no inability but what
consists in their inexcusable, voluntary wickedness: that they are wholly to
blame for all their defects, etc. they will oppose it with all their might, as
what tends to take away their comfort, and rob them of their only refuge. For
this doctrine of man's inability, as consisting in some difficulty in the way
of holiness, which is independent of the will, and for which they are not
wholly to blame, is as agreeable to the corrupt heart of man, as any Arminian
or Pelagian doctrine whatsoever can be. How many of those who are called
Calvinists have fled to this refuge of lies, and here are like to perish, God
knows! -- Be this as it will, it certainly becomes all the friends of truth,
and of mankind to do all they can, effectually to expose this unscriptural,
absurd, dangerous notion; and set the truth in a clear light. This I took pains
to do in my remarks on Dr. Mayhew's sermons P. 99, etc.
Mr. M. has approved of all this and yet builds all his opposition to me on
that which is in direct contradiction to it, as will be seen in the sequel.


Mr. MILLS has, I think, unhappily fallen into this sad and dangerous mistake;
which is discovered through the whole of his performance, as that on which he
grounds all his opposition to me.

He has not said one word, that I have observed, from beginning to end, of the
convinced sinner's enmity against God, and obstinate rejection of Christ and
the gospel, being under the dominion of a hard, impenitent heart. All this is
carefully kept out of sight; unless when he was obliged to mention something of
it in his quotations from me. And in this case he always puts in a caveat,
observing that I mean no more by these hard terms than merely continuing
unregenerate. P. 3, 15, 56.
Plainly intimating that he thinks such terms do not properly belong to the
unregenerate as such, and that they represent them as worse and more criminal
than they really are. He therefore every where speaks of the unawakened sinner
as impenitent, hardened and stout-hearted, in opposition to one that is
awakened, as if this was not true of the latter, and as if the latter was of an
opposite character.

And he represents the unregenerate as not wholly to blame for their
unregeneracy, their unbelief and not embracing the gospel; but as being under
an impotence which does in some measure, if not wholly excuse. This
representation runs through his whole book, as has been just now observed, and
is laid as the foundation of all his opposition to me. This I conclude will be
quite evident to every attentive reader, before I shall have done. I shall now
cite only a few expressions of his, which seem to set the matter in this light,
especially if considered in connection with others, which I am about to
mention. He speaks of the awakened, convinced sinner as brought to "reformation
and amendment of life, to the highest degree the unregenerate are capable of by
the common influences of the holy Spirit." P. 16, 17.
He says they "regard all duty and avoid all sin, that can agree to an
unregenerate state." P. 22.
Thus the poor, trembling, convinced, reformed sinner (I mean as much as an
unregenerate sinner can be so)" P. 20, 21.
He feels his guilt and moral disorder as a desperate, incurable disease, as to
all created power, and therefore cries to God for help. P. 81. Mar.


But he goes much further than this, and represents unregenerate sinners in a
much more favorable light still. He speaks of such as having great "tenderness
of conscience," and paying such reverence and obedience to the dictates of
conscience, as has nourished the greatest degree of tenderness, P. 22, 96, 101.
One who has nourished the internal light and tenderness of his conscience. P.
30.
He is, in a great degree convinced of the evil of sin; -- trembles at the
thoughts of his past sins, and in fear, left he should offend in thought, word,
or deed; feels himself a lost, perishing creature, and that sovereign mercy
only can be his remedy. -- The poor trembling, convinced, reformed sinner,
whose wickedness, as to the actions of it, is restrained. P. 20, 34.
He is a humble sinner; brought, though on the principles of nature, to humble
himself before God, repent, reform known evils, and conscientiously attend
known duties. P. 31, 96.
He is humbled and slain, by the law, and brought to the feet of divine
sovereignty; and a sense of the justice of his condemnation by the law. P. 55,
57.
He is not utterly into, P. 81.
and "honestly attempts to do his duty." P. 120.
They seek the Lord with trembling, and reform every known sin; and with great
concern attend on all known duty. P. 7, 28, 56.
Yea, they "break off from all known sin," even "the secret pride of the
heart." P. 109.
They cry to God for mercy, as their ONLY plea; -- apply to the mercy of God,
as the only hope that remains. 79, 81 Note.
They, on the whole, desire salvation, P. 81. Note.
and earnestly look to God for the bread of life, as a hungry man desires and
seeks bread, when his life is at stake. They do all that which is represented
by the prodigal's coming to himself, and seeing that there was bread enough and
to spare in his father's house, and resolving to arise and go, and confess his
sins, and ask mercy; and his actually putting this in execution. P. 79. Note.
So that, according to Mr. M. the unregenerate have their eyes opened to see
the wonderful fullness there is in Christ for sinners; so are turned from
darkness to mavelous light; and in this view do actually go to God for the
mercy he offers in the gospel; and in a sense of their guilt and ill desert,
cast themselves at the foot of sovereign grace, placing all their hope in this,
heartily desiring to be saved in this way, and no other. They therefore do all,
and comply with every thing, that is necessary in order to share in God's
saving mercy; yea, they do that which is connected with this mercy by Christ
himself in this parable, and also through the whole bible, if there are any
promises in the bible made to any exercises at all.

Moreover, Mr. M's unregenerate sinners frame their doings to turn unto their
God. P. 70.
They seek salvation, as the greedy merchant seeks goodly pearls. They labor
not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures unto
everlasting life. They follow on to know the Lord; and seek first the kingdom
of God, and his righteousness. P. 70, 72.
In a word, they deny ungodliness and worldly lusts; and live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world. P. 84. Note, 97, 120.


This is the account Mr. M. gives of unregenerate sinners under awakening and
convictions! And he has said not only this, but much more in their favor; too
much to be transcribed here. Upon which I shall make the following remarks.

1. If this representation of the unregenerate sinner under convictions is
agreeable to the truth; then all that I have said of such in my section on
means, is wrong and groundless; and such an one is not only less vile than the
profligate; but is in a great degree innocent and blameless. He does not sin
against the light of his conscience, or abuse it in the least; for he
reverences his conscience, and lives up to the dictates of it, avoiding every
known sin and coming up to all known duty. He is not properly an impenitent
sinner; for he does really repent and humble himself before God. Nor does he
obstinately reject Jesus Christ and the gospel; for, on the whole, he desires
the salvation which is offered in the gospel, and ^^^es to sovereign mercy,
there held out to him, as his only refuge. As I placed the great guilt and
vileness of the unregenerate sinner in his sinning against the light and
convictions of his own conscience, in obstinately refusing the offers of the
gospel and rejecting Jesus Christ, which he is now convinced he is wholly to
blame for, and is the greatest sin he ever was guilty of; I own my charge is
quite groundless and very injurious if Mr. M. has given a just and true
character of the unregenerate: and I must yield the point to him.

But if all he has said on this head, is a gross misrepresentation of the
character of the unregenerate sinner, and he applies to them many things which
are found in the regenerate only; and if most of his arguments, and the
plausibleness of all he has said, are founded in this misrepresentation; then
all is built on a very slender foundation, and really comes to nothing. And I
think I have a right to call this a misrepresentation, as I cannot find that
Mr. M. has attempted to prove these things; but has taken them for granted, and
only asserted them. And I think what has been said in this section is
sufficient to show that Mr. M's account of the unregenerate is very grossly
wrong. And this will more fully appear, I trust, before I have done.

2. If Mr. M. has given a just character of the unregenerate; then what I have
said of these in my dispute with Dr. Mayhew, on which I founded all my
opposition to him, is wholly wrong. For the whole dispute turned upon this
question, Whether unregenerate sinners do, on the whole, really desire the
salvation offered in the gospel? I asserted that they do not, and undertook to
prove it, and owned that if the Dr. would prove that they do, he would gain his
point, and I was ready to yield it to him. Mr. M. has really taken the Dr's
side in this controversy, and represented the unregenerate sinner in as
blameless and fair a light as he did, and has raised him as high; yea, has said
much more in his favor.

And is it not strange, that this same Mr. M. should give me his " hearty
thanks" for what I had wrote against the Dr. and call it "a finished debate on
the point!" Preface P. 5.
Surely Mr. M. is far from understanding the debate between the Dr. and me; and
so was very unfit to pronounce any thing about it: or he is very inconsistent
with himself. Both are perhaps true.

3. What is still more strange and inconsistent, if possible, is his applying
promises to the doings of the unregenerate, or representing them as coming up
to that, to which promises are expressly made. This appears from what has been
just quoted from him. He applies the following words to the unregenerate, "Then
shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord" Hol. VI. 3.
If the unregenerate follow on to know the Lord, then they perform the
condition, to which there is an express promise, that they shall know the Lord.
But the knowledge of God is peculiar to true saints, and connected with eternal
life. And he represents the unregenerate as, on the whole, desiring salvation,
and humbly applying to God for it, as did the prodigal; and hoping and trusting
in the mere mercy of God, as exercised to sinners, and asking for it, as did
the publican Now it is certain that promises of salvation are made to all who
hope in God's mercy, and really desire the salvation offered in the gospel, and
come to Christ for it. Is not this very strange, when he had not only formerly
wrote a book to prove the contrary to all this; but in his preface to this,
acknowledges I have proved the same beyond all controversy, and heartily thanks
me for it!

4. The grand dispute between Mr. M. and me is about the true character of the
unregenerate sinner; Whether he, under the greatest awakenings and convictions
he ever is the subject of antecedent to regeneration, does not continue an
impenitent, voluntary, inexcusable, obstinate enemy to God, and the Redeemer?
If Mr. M. will grant this, he will grant the sum of what I contend for. But he
has been so far from it, that all his book is really wrote against it.

On the whole, Mr. M. has really taken up Dr. Mayhew's cause, and represents
the unregenerate sinner in much the same light in which he did, as the ground
of most or his arguments to prove that promises are made to him. Mr. M. does
not expressly say indeed that there are promises made to the unregenerate; but
the contrary. But herein he is more inconsistent with himself, than was Dr.
Mayhew: for if Mr. M. gives them a true character, the bible is full of
promises to them. And he actually applies passages of scripture to them, which
contain promises, as has been observed; and he might with as much propriety
apply all those scriptures to them which Dr. Mayhew does; yea all the promises
in the bible.

SECT. III.
ARGUMENTS for the affirmative of the question in dispute.

IN order to determine who is the greatest sinner, or what way and manner of
sinning is most criminal, or what particular sin is most aggravated, we must
first consider and determine, wherein the guilt of criminalness of sin, of all
sin, chiefly lies, or what is the greatest aggravation of all sin, which does
above every thing else render it vile and criminal.

And in this I suppose all will be agreed, who have attended to this matter,
and considered what reason and scripture dictate on this head. The vileness and
guilt of sin does chiefly and principally consist in its being committed
against GOD. GOD is so great and excellent a being the sum of all existence and
perfection, that it is infinitely more criminal not to respect and love him,
than it would be to have no love and regard for the whole creation. And it is
in infinitely greater crime to oppose and hate GOD, in any way, or in the least
degree, than it would be to hate and oppose all creatures, and turn an
implacable, eternal enemy to them, if this might be, without hating and
opposing God in any respect or degree.

If a person should turn enemy to the whole human race, and with relentless
hatred, rage and thirst for blood, should murder his own parents, and all his
relations and friends, in the most cruel manner imaginable; and should he have
it in his power, and go on to murder and destroy a whole nation: and should he
proceed and actually destroy every one of the human race on earth; yea, put an
utter end to the whole creation; and then lay violent hands on himself, and put
an end to his own life: and could this be done, and not imply any rebellion
against GOD or opposition to him, but be consistent with perfect love no him;
the crime he would be guilty of in all this would be nothing, in comparison
with the least degree of opposition and disrespect to GOD: Yea, it would be
infinitely less than the least motion of heart against GOD, or the least defect
of perfect love to him for one moment. -- It is granted there can be no such
thing as is here supposed; because all hatred and opposition exercised
immediately toward our fellow creatures, is implicitly and really opposition
to being in general, and so is against GOD; and it is also against GOD as it is
a violation of his command: and therefore the crime of injustice, murder, etc.
summarily consists in it is being against GOD; and not in the injury done to our
fellow creatures. This I conclude all with whom I am concerned in this dispute,
will readily grant. I therefore proceed to observe further,

THAT act of sin and rebellion against GOD has immensely more crime and guilt
in it, which is exercised and committed directly and immediately against Him;
than that which is done against him mediately, and more remotely or indirectly.
Or every sin is more or less aggravated and criminal, according as it is
committed more directly and immediately against GOD or not, other circumstances
being alike.

To illustrate this it may be observed, some sinful exercises and conduct are
directly and immediately against GOD; he is the immediate object against which
they are committed, and he is in them directly injured and opposed. We have an
instance of this in Pharaoh when he said "Who is the LORD, that I should obey
his voice?" And another in the people of Israel, when they said "The way of the
LORD is not equal."

There are many sins against GOD more indirectly and remotely. Such are acts of
injustice toward our fellow men. These are ultimately against GOD, as has been
observed; but they are directly and immediately against our fellow creatures.
Such are all those ways and exercises of sin, which have the creature for their
direct and immediate object, these are more remotely against GOD, as they are
not directly aimed against him but strike at him more indirectly, through the
creature.

Now all acts of sin are more or less aggravated and criminal according as they
are done more or less directly against GOD, as it has been now explained. An
act of direct enmity against GOD, and a course of direct quarrelling and
blasphemy against him is immensely more criminal, than hating and opposing a
man; though this is implicitly and more remotely, and by fair construction
against GOD.

If a man murders one of his fellow subjects, he hereby acts against his
prince; he does him an injury and breaks his laws; but his crime would be
immensely greater if he had murdered his prince. If a servant quarrels with his
fellow servants, and abuses them, though this is an injury to his lord, and a
violation of his orders; yet this is an unspeakable less crime than that which
he is guilty of, who rises up immediately against his lord in person, quarrels
with him and strikes him. These instances may serve in some measure to
illustrate the case before us: though it must be remembered there is an infinite
odds: as in these instances, there is some proportion between the crime of
murdering a fellow subject, or abusing a fellow servant, and that of the same
acts done directly against the prince or lord; whereas in the case before us
there is no proportion, the one being infinitely more criminal than the other.

LET it be still further observed, that those sins that are more immediately
and directly against GOD as well as all others, may be many ways greatly
aggravated, so as to be immensely more criminal, than the least supposable sin
of this kind. A person's obligations to love God with all his heart, etc. may
be vastly increased by GOD's goodness to him, and the great and special favors
he receives from him; by the advantages which he is put under to know GOD and
serve him, and the light and instruction which he enjoys; the great and special
motives, admonitions and reproofs set before him, and the variety of means used
with him to reclaim him. And his sin in not loving GOD, but persisting in
impenitence and rebellion against him, is criminal in proportion to the
increase of his obligations by means of these things, and others of the same
kind, that night be mentioned.

And it must be particularly observed here, that what GOD has done for the
redemption of man by Jesus Christ; and the offers of free pardon and salvation
through him, does aggravate the sinners guilt in sinning against GOD, above any
thing else; and sinning against Christ and the gospel and rejecting and
despising him, are immensely the biggest and most criminal acts of sin against
GOD, that can be.

^^d there been no redemption of lost man: had not the infinitely (...) worthy
and glorious Son of GOD became incarnate, and by his obedience and sufferings
obtained redemption and eternal life for man, who is sunk into an infinitely
guilty and miserable state by sin, even for all who shall be willing to be
saved by him: I say, had not this astonishing scene of mercy been opened by
this infinitely worthy and excellent Mediator, mankind never could have had
opportunity to sin as they do now; they could not have been in any measure
guilty of such amazingly aggravated crimes as they now are. All other sins are
small, compared with this of neglecting this great salvation with persevering
obstinacy and contempt, and rejecting and despising the glorious Savior,
offering himself to sinners in the most kind and condescending manner, and
urging them to accept of him as their complete redeemer, by the most powerful
motives and arguments imaginable. The devils have never sinned, nor can they
sin in such an aggravated manner; because they have no such offers, no such
salvation to reject; no such Redeemer to despise. What are all the sins of the
heathen world to this? They sink, as it were, into nothing, when compared with
it. What are all the sins of Sodom to this? No wonder Christ tells the
inhabitants of Capernaum, who had rejected him, when he offered himself to
them, that it would be more tolerable in the day of judgment for the most
abandoned profligates of Sodom, than for them; and tells the 70 when he sent
them to preach the gospel that the city which should not receive them, should,
for this sin only, let their conduct otherwise be as it would, receive a
heavier doom, than the Sodomites should for all their abominable, open
debauchery and wickedness, which cried to heaven, and brought terrible
vengeance on their heads. Luke X. 10, -- 12.
And this view of the case gives a very natural and easy meaning to Christ's
words, when he says "If I had not came and spoken unto them, they had not had
sin" Joh. XV. 22.
All the sins they could have committed, had not a Savior appeared and
instructed them and offered himself to them, would have been light, and as
nothing, compared with the sin of hating and rejecting him, which they were now
guilty of: And perfectly agreeable to this are the following words of his, "And
when he (i. e. the Spirit) is come, he will reprove the world of sin, --
because they believe not on me." Joh. XVI. 9.
Here not believing on Christ is represented as the greatest sin men can be
guilty of, so that it does, in a sense swallow up all other sins, as not to be
mentioned with this, this being the sum of all. This is the great sin for which
the Spirit will reprove men, when he does his work effectually, and thoroughly
convinces of sin. Hence we may certainly infer that they who submit to this
reproof, and are truly convinced of sin, see this sin to be so great that all
other sins are as nothing to it: Therefore that this is the great aggravation
of all their sins, and that in which their guilt and vileness principally
consists. All the sin men commit under the gospel; all the most abominable
uncleanness and debauchery, all the murder, profaneness and blasphemy, that men
are, or can be guilty of, under the gospel, have their chief aggravation in
this, that they are against Jesus Christ, and carry in them unbelief and
opposition to him; so that unbelief itself in all the actings and exercises of
it, is unspeakably a greater crime, than all this wickedness, considered in
itself and not as implying and expressing unbelief and rejection of Jesus
Christ: and therefore unspeakable more criminal and vile than all the sins of
Sodom, as they had no opportunity to sin against Christ, as gospel sinners do.
Or, to express it in other words, all the sins of Sodom, and all the
abominations that have been committed by the worst of men, or that men can
possibly commit, without being guilty of unbelief and rejecting Christ and the
gospel, are incomparably less criminal and vile than this sin of unbelief, or
not receiving, but rejecting Christ, when he is revealed and offered to men; so
that when the former are put in the scale with latter, they are light and as
nothing to this. Who can doubt of this, since it is so fully and necessarily
implied, in what Christ himself has declared more than once? Especially when
the reason of it is so apparent to every one who will seriously attend to the
matter. It hence appears certain, even to a demonstration, that he is the most
guilty, vile sinner who exercises the greatest degree of unbelief; or does most
directly, and in the strongest and most obstinate manner, reject Jesus Christ.
Whether the awakened, convinced sinner does this; or whether his unbelief and
opposition to Jesus Christ and the gospel is less in the strength and degree of
its exercise, I shall more particularly consider presently.

It must be observed yet further, that unbelief, or an impenitent rejecting
Jesus Christ now, under the full blaze of gospel light, and clear convictions
of conscience, is much more criminal and vile, than it was when Christ was on
earth, because they then had not so much light, such a fullness of means and
advantages, even under the preaching of Christ, and in sight of his miracles,
as we now have. This might be easily proved, was there need; but I suppose none
will dispute it. Therefore if unbelief and rejecting him, was so great a sin,
and did so far out weigh all other sins in guilt, as to be, as it were, the
only sin, and sum of all, in comparison with which all others were hardly to be
mentioned; how amazingly great must be the guilt of this sin now; especially in
them who have the greatest advantages, and the most light of every kind, and
for whom the most is done, even all that can be done short of regenerating
grace!

The scripture elsewhere sets the matter in this light, and represents the
crime of disregarding Christ and rebelling against him, when he speaks directly
and immediately unto them, as unspeakably greater, than disobedience to his
word when spoken by others, -- and so that he is not so fully and directly in
view.

To this purpose are the following words, "For if the word spoken by angels was
steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense
of rewards; how shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at
first began to be spoken by the LORD, and was confirmed unto us by them that
heard him!" Heb. II. 2, 3.
Here two things are observable,

1. The great crime spoken of, which will issue in the most awful condemnation
and punishment, is a bare NEGLECT of the salvation offered by Christ.

2. The great and peculiar aggravation of this crime is spoken of as consisting
in the direct rebellion against Jesus Christ, which this neglect carries in it,
as he has himself, in his own person, revealed and offered this salvation to
men. This being more direct and immediate rebellion against him, than was the
disobedience to a revelation made by angels.

The same thing is set in a yet stronger light in the same epistle, "He that
despised Moses's law, died without mercy. -- Of how much sorer punishment,
suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God! etc" Heb. X. 28, 29.
Despising the law of Moses was despising God; but he who despises Jesus
Christ, does more directly sin against him, and therefore sins in a higher and
more aggravated manner.

This is again set in the same light, "See that ye refuse not him that
speaks: for if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on earth, much
more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven."
Chap. XII. 25.


They who refused Moses, who spoke on earth (by whom are most probably meant
Korah, Dathan and Abiram, and those who sinned with them) did rebel against
Christ, but not immediately and directly: they had no thought of opposing
Christ; but intended their opposition directly against Moses. They who reject
the gospel ^urn away from Christ, and directly oppose and reject him, who
speaks to them from heaven. And this is here considered as an unspeakable
aggravation of the sin of the latter above that of the former. And it is to be
here observed that the sin here spoken of as the great sin, and so greatly
aggravated by this circumstance, consists wholly in refusing, or turning away
from Christ, of which, every unregenerate sinner is constantly guilty: but more
especially awakened, convinced sinners, to whom Christ speaks in a degree and
manner he does not to others, even to their consciences; and who knowingly, and
under conviction of what they are doing turn away from him, and refuse to hear
him.

From this view of things it will follow that the awakened, convinced sinner,
who persists in unbelief and rejection of Jesus Christ, is more guilty and vile
in the state and exercises of his mind than he was in a state of security, if
he more directly and immediately opposes GOD and Jesus Christ, and with as
great or greater strength of heart than he did before. And this, I think, will
appear to be true beyond all contradiction or doubt, if the following things
are well considered. --

THE secure, unawakened sinner, does not sin so directly and immediately
against GOD, as does the awakened, convinced sinner. GOD is very little in his
view and thoughts. It is with him in this respect very much as if there was no
GOD, and no Savior. His perfect selfishness, which carries in it opposition to
GOD and Jesus Christ, is exercised not directly against GOD and the gospel; but
in seeking what appears to him the greatest good, in the gratification of his
selfishness and lusts; which lead him directly to oppose and injure his fellow
creatures, in a greater or less degree. He may sin against the light of his
conscience in a degree; but then this light and these dictates are supposed to
be weak and in a low degree, else he would not be a secure, unawakened sinner;
for so far as a person's conscience is enlightened to show him his sin and real
danger, it must give him uneasiness; because selfishness itself is necessarily
averse to misery, and he must be uneasy, so far as he sees himself exposed to
it. This is the great difference between the secure and awakened, convinced
sinner; the former is not convinced of his sin and danger, in any measure as it
really is, and so as to give him any uneasiness about it; the latter is in a
greater measure convinced of both; and the light and dictates of his
conscience, showing the connection of his present state and conduct, i^
persisted in, with eternal misery, are the sole ground of all the alteration of
his conduct, his exercises and distress of mind. The secure sinner may indeed
have a sort of conviction of conscience that what he allows himself in is wrong
and contrary to God's commands, but has no clear apprehensions of his
sinfulness, and does not reallize it that he is acting against God, or that God
is angry with him, and will certainly destroy him, if he persist in his ways.
He only wants to have clear and full conviction of conscience of this, in order
to be an awakened, convinced sinner. --

On the other hand, the awakened, convinced sinner, sins more directly and
immediately against God and the Savior, and in the face of the clear dictates
of his own conscience. If a sinner's conscience is only awakened to see that
the ways of allowed external wickedness in which he lives, lead to hell, so as
to excite him to reform his life, and so comes up to the dictates of his
conscience and makes himself easy; which has been the case with thousands; this
is not the awakened, convinced sinner of which I am speaking. The conscience of
the sinner I am now attending to is so enlightened, that he sees he must perish
forever unless he willingly submits to Jesus Christ and trusts in him, to which
he is invited, and urged by the strongest motives; and to which he is under
indispensable obligations. And under this light and conviction of conscience he
feels himself going to a dreadful hell, for his impenitence and unbelief and
continuing to reject Jesus Christ and the gospel, and yet persists in his
obstinacy and most daring rebellion against God, and horrid abuse of the most
worthy, and astonishingly merciful Redeemer; for which he is convinced he has
no excuse.

He is now diverted from the pursuit of worldly pleasures in the gratification
of those lusts which urged him on in a state of security; and his attention is
turned more immediately and directly to GOD and the Redeemer; and his heart is
exercised in direct opposition and enmity to the divine character, and the
Savior, and goes into an immediate quarrel with God. It appears therefore that
in ^his respect, his exercises of opposition to GOD are immensely aggravated.

And it is to be observed that his exercises of heart, now they are turned
directly against God and the Savior, are as strong and vigorous as ever; and
he not only opposes God more directly, and against the clear light of his
conscience; but more strongly, and exercises a greater degree of hatred and
enmity against his character and ways, than he did before. He was an enemy to
GOD before, and all his exercises and conduct were a mediate and implicit
opposition to him; even while he had little or no idea of his character, and
few thoughts of God. But now the divine character and conduct are in some
measure brought into view, and the attention of his mind is held up to them;
which necessarily occasions a greater degree of the exercise of opposition,
hatred and enmity, than when the hateful object was less in view, so long as he
is no more reconciled to this character than he was, and the enmity of the
heart is not at all abated or weakened. This is the case in all instances of
opposition of heart, and fixed enmity to each other's persons and characters
among men. These enemies, while they are out of each other's view, and think
little or nothing of each other, will have no direct and possitive exertions of
hatred and enmity: But let them be brought into each other's view, and come
together, and their enmity will rise into direct and strong exercises, and
ferment to a high degree. We find it so with regard to any thing at which we
have a peculiar and fixed disgust and aversion, the nearer it is brought to us,
and the more it is in our view, the more lively and strong is our aversion to
it. And there can be no possible reason given why it should not be so in the
case before us; yea it is absolutely impossible it should be otherwise. It also
appears from another consideration that in this case the exercises of
opposition and enmity to GOD and the Redeemer must be strong in proportion to
the increase of light and conviction and the powerful motives which are
opposed; for it requires a greater exertion of opposition to resist greater
light and more powerful motives, than it does to resist less.

Thus we see the awakened, convinced sinner not only exerts himself more
directly against God and the Redeemer than he did in a state of security; but
does this in a much higher and stronger degree, on which account his wickedness
is immensely increased.

It is also to be remembered that his sinfulness is not only increased in the
greater strength and vigor of his opposition of heart to GOD and the Savior;
but these exercises are now more constant and numerous, as the mind is awakened
up to the greatest attention to these things, and is more engaged in thoughts
and exercises, perhaps, than ever it was in a state of security. And he thinks
now a thousand times more about GOD and Christ, etc. than he did; and his
exercises of heart are proportionably constant and numerous. But these
exercises are all against GOD and the gospel; therefore the more constant and
numerous they are, the more guilty and vile the sinner is.

Besides, the light and conviction of conscience the sinner has, not only
occasions more direct acts of opposition to GOD, which are also more strong,
constant and numerous, than they could be in a state of security; but the
superior light they have in the awakening and conviction of their conscience
greatly aggravates all their impenitence and opposition to GOD. GOD has not
only given them an external revelation, and put them, in common with all others
under the gospel, under advantage to know the truth and obey the gospel: but
has done much more for them. When they were going on stupid and inconsiderate
under this light, he has ordered a light to be forcibly let into their
consciences, and given them a thousand times more light than they had in a
state of security; and which they never would have had, if GOD had not
interposed. This must be considered as a great favor and advantage in itself,
by which they are unspeakably distinguished from sinners in a state of
ignorance, security and ease: Which favor and advantage they sin against and
abuse, by which all their rebellion and obstinacy in hating and opposing GOD
and rejecting the gospel, is immensely aggravated. So that this distinguished
light and conviction, being rebelled against and resisted, becomes the occasion
of an amazing increase of guilt and vileness, instead of making it less.

If this will be the condemnation of men, that light is come into the world,
and they have loved darkness, rather than light^ have hated the light, opposed
and sinner against it; surely they shall be thought worthy of the greatest
condemnation, who have persisted in sin^ and rebellion in opposition to the
clearest light set into their consciences by God's special interposition, in an
uncommon and extraordinary degree.

Let it be also observed, that the awakened, convinced sinner, under all his
conviction and external reformation, persists in the neglect of all that God
requires of him, and wholly and obstinately refuses to comply in the least
degree, as he withholds his whole heart from GOD and Jesus Christ, and neglects
and refuses to love GOD or his fellow men, or to hearken to Christ, whom he is
commanded to hear and obey by all the authority of heaven. And this neglect of
his whole duty is immensely aggravated by the light and conviction he now has,
by which he sees what is his duty, and what is his interest a thousand times
more fully and clearly than any secure, unawakened sinner does. Jesus Christ
does now, by all this light and conviction let into his conscience, "Stand at
the door and knock" in a manner and degree, in which he did not before. If this
is justly considered, it will appear that the increase of guilt by this means
only, is so great that no supposed reformation in external conduct will in any
measure balance it, even on supposition there is as much negative goodness as
any one is disposed to imagine. All the negative goodness that can be supposed
in any external reformation, is immensely over balanced by the increase of
positive guilt and vileness, which now takes place in the convinced sinner, in
the way just now mentioned.

Let it be further observed, that this reformation in his external behavior
and conduct, is not from the least degree of right principle and exercise; or
because he is at heart more friendly to GOD, or in any degree a less enemy; but
purely from self-love; even that very self love, in the exercise of which, he
now sets himself directly against GOD, and goes into a course of more immediate
opposition to him. GOD has ordered light and conviction to be given to his
conscience, and has in this way taken him and shaken him over hell, and caused
the fire of his wrath, as it were, to flash in his face. This has filled him
with terror, and has deadened his heart to all his worldly pursuits, in which
before he pleased and gratified himself. The fears of hell have put a stop to
all his former courses, and turned all his attention to his future and eternal
interest, in the exercise of the same selfishness, which in a state of security
urged him into all his overt acts of open or secret wickedness. And this
darling lust he will not give up, nor is it abated in the least degree, but he
exercises it in as high a degree as ever, yea much more strongly, in direct
opposition to GOD and the Savior, in all his exercises and attempts with
respect to the salvation he desires. He is restrained from the overt acts of
allowed sin he lived in before by nothing but the fears of hell: Take this out
of the way, and he will return to his old courses with more greediness than
ever. And if he was not afraid of GOD, but really thought he could oppose him
with impunity and success, all his fears and prayers would cease in a moment,
and he would go right into allowed, overt acts of direct rebellion and
blasphemy against him. This I observe, that we may judge more agreeable to the
truth, of the reformation of the awakened sinner: and surely if we view this
matter in a true light, we shall find nothing in the greatest reformation of
this kind, that will in any degree counter-balance the immensely greater guilt
and vileness which the awakening and conviction of conscience that he has
fallen under, is the occasion of.

His heart is in no respect better, more friendly to GOD, or less an enemy to
him. The principles and motives on which he reforms are really as bad as those,
under the influence of which he before went on in open sin! Yea, they are the
same, and now his wickedness is turned into another channel, and exercised more
directly and in a higher degree against God.

No external conduct is better or worse, or has any thing of a moral nature in
it, any further than is connected with the heart, and is considered as the
expression and effect of the voluntary exercises of that. And all the guilt and
vileness of it lies in these exercises of the heart. So that every person is
more or less guilty and vile according as the exercises of his heart are: and
he whose heart is not mended, and made better or less vile than it has been, is
not really reformed at all, whatever alteration there is in his external
conduct. If then the heart is yet as unfriendly to God, and opposes him as much
as ever, yea in a more direct and stronger manner, with what propriety can he,
upon the whole, be called a reformed sinner? Mr. M. has made great use of this
phrase, THE REFORMED SINNER, and he has constantly used it so that it tends to
blind and deceive the reader, who is not disposed to look to the bottom of this
matter.

IF these things are impartially considered, and we keep in view the high and
glorious character of the Mediator, and the astonishing grace of the gospel,
and the state and character of the sinner who continues voluntarily to hate,
oppose and reject the Mediator with all his heart, under the greatest light and
conviction of conscience, for which he has no more reason or excuse, than he
would have for any overt acts of most gross wickedness: I say, if this matter
is well and impartially considered, I believe it will appear most evident that
the awakened, convinced sinner is much more guilty and vile in the exercises of
his heart, than he could be, on any supposition in a state of security.

MANKIND do commonly judge quite wrong and contrary to truth in this matter.
They over look the great malignity of sin, and are ignorant of that wherein
it is guilt and vileness chiefly consists, and so judge according to outward
appearance, and not righteous judgment. It is common for persons to look upon
the least degree of injustice toward men in dealing with them; especially if
they themselves are directly injured by it in any degree, to be a greater crime
than the highest acts of profaneness and taking GOD's name in vain a thousand
times, and the former is unspeakably more odious and vile in their eyes, than
the latter. The reason is because GOD is very much out of their sight and
thoughts, and they have no real love and respect to him; so see not any real
injury done by the latter, or any thing very bad or shameful in it; especially
when it is very much the custom and fashion. But they are all sensibility to
their own interest; therefore are ready to hate those who oppose and injure
them, and look on them as very vile and criminal, even as deserving eternal
damnation.

There are multitudes who are governed by the prejudices of education, or
wholly by outward appearance, in their views and judgment of things of this
kind: yea, this is very common, if not most generally the case. By the force of
education, and the common sentiments and customs where persons live, many
practices appear most odious, shockingly vile and shameful, which are really
unspeakably less criminal, than other things which appear to them to be
innocent, and even commendable. Instances of this are so common and apparent,
that it is needless to illustrate it by examples. Mr. M. has, in much that he
has said on this head, applied to the imagination, and to the prejudices of
mankind with respect to these things, as will be observed by the attentive
reader: which I think, has no tendency to give light, but rather to blind and
deceive. He seems to be sensible of the advantage he has to influence his
reader by this way of treating the matter; which appears not only by his taking
this method, as has been observed, but by his guarding against a strict
examination of the matter by sound and clear reasoning and argument, calling it
"metaphysical reasoning and argument," and endeavoring to prejudice the reader
against it, as that which is not to be depended upon or regarded; as any thing,
and even contraries may be proved by it. -- But they who will not lay aside the
common prejudices that mankind are under, and a mere warm imagination, and
attend closely to the dictates of sound, accurate reasoning (which I call
"metaphysical arguments" and at present know not what else Mr. M. can mean by
this phrase) I say, they who will not do this, are like to live in darkness and
delusion; and to believe any thing, be it never so absurd and contrary to
scripture and reason.


All persons that are unawakened are wont to judge of themselves with respect
to their sinfulness, and the degree of their guilt and vileness, by their
external conduct. Therefore their first convictions of conscience most commonly
fix upon that, by which they first begin to learn their own sinfulness, God's
anger with them, and the sad state they are in. This puts them upon reformation
of their sins, omissions, and commissions, which now stare them in the face as
provoking to God and leading to destruction. By this they hope to mend their
case, and become in a great degree innocent, so as to remove the curse of GOD's
displeasure. And if they receive no further light and conviction, they will
rest in this, and think all is well. But if they go on to any good degree of
thorough conviction, they will see things in quite a different sight, and find
that in themselves which is unspeakably more criminal than any thing which they
saw before; that this vileness lies in their heart, which is not at all mended
by all their external reformations and duties.

I SAY not these things with a view to extenuate the guilt and vileness of the
open profligate, and of these open sins which are justly shocking and terrible;
or to lead any persons to look on them less vile and odious than they now do.
No, far be it! These sins are immensely more heinous and vile than the
profligate thinks them to be, or than any one else can fully conceive. The
secure, unconvinced sinner is guilty and vile beyond, far beyond, any thing he
ever imagined; his guilt and vileness exceed all thought: But yet all this,
viewed in a comparative light, may be little and as nothing, when compared with
the immensely more aggravated guilt of a sinner, persisting in rebellion,
impenitence and obstinacy in opposition to the clear light and dictates of his
conscience. Our Savior's representing the inhabitants of Capernaum as worse
than those of Sodom, is nothing in favor of the open abominations that were
practiced by the latter, nor tends to extenuate their criminalness, or
encourage such practices; but only sets the guilt of the former in a true and
striking light.

WHAT has been said on this argument may be in some measure represented by the
following similitude.

In the distant parts of the realm of a great and good prince there lived a
man, who was brought up without any true apprehensions of the character of his
prince, or any degree of true affection or regard to him, his government, or
any of his subjects, but under the influence of directly opposite principles.
When he grew up, and came to act for himself he appeared perfectly selfish,
having no regard to any one, any further than he could answer his own ends by
him: and therefore hating and opposing every one who in his view stood in the
way of his good and interest, which he greedily pursued in the gratification of
his voracious appetites and lusts. In the eager pursuit of sensual pleasures,
riches and honors, he injured many of his fellow subjects many ways, and to a
great degree. At length they opposed him so much in his pursuits, that he fell
upon them, and killed some thousands, and took their goods as a booty to
himself. He was often told that these practices were a gross violation of the
laws of his prince, and that he would one day call him to an account, and
punish him for it. But he gave very little heed to this; he never entertained a
serious thought about it, and did not really believe what was told him, though he
assented to it as truth, and never disputed it in his own mind. Indeed, it was
not often that he had a thought of his prince; though he was frequently spoken of
in his hearing, and his laws were read to him, threatening such practices as he
lived in, with the severest punishment: And when he did think of him, he could
not realize it that he was angry with him, or would ever punish him, as he did
not think he had ever done him any hurt, or was in the least unfriendly to him:
and as he always took him to be a very kind and merciful prince. Thus he went
on in ignorance, security and ease for many years.

At length the prince sent a special officer with orders to apprehend him,
confiscate all his goods and hang him in gibbets, as a monument of his
displeasure and vengeance, unless he would become a hearty friend to him,
repent of his rebellion, and submit to his laws and government as good and
excellent, and accept of a free pardon which he was ready to grant through the
interposition of his own son, who had interposed his own merit with his father
in behalf of this rebel, and became an earnest intercessor for him, having
himself undertaken to make good all the damages this wretch had done to him and
his kingdom; which pardon was now freely offered to him without money or price,
if he was willing to receive it through the interposition of this son of the
prince, and ready to depend wholly upon his merit and worthiness for it; and
give himself up to him, considered in this character, and be his friend and
faithful servant to the end of his life.

Upon his being thus apprehended, and finding what orders were given, his mind
was filled with anxiety and distress in a view of the evil case he had brought
himself into; and forsook his former co^rses immediately, not because he was at
heart any more friendly to his fellow subjects, or any better disposed toward
his prince, or less inclined to rebellion; but merely through the fears and
terrors which had seized his mind in a view of the terrible punishment he was
threatened with. He dreaded the punishment, and thought of it with horror. But
when he considered the character and government of the prince, he found himself
in no degree pleased with it, but the contrary. He found he was not willing to
accept of a pardon on such terms, and was greatly displeased with the person,
character and conduct of the son; for in all he had done to procure his pardon,
he had justified his father, and condemned the rebel to the highest possible
degree. He therefore now went into a course of direct opposition to the prince
and his son; and he was so far from being willing to accept of the pardon and
deliverance offered, that he rejected the whole with great disgust and
contempt. And the more he attended to the affair, and considered the character
of the prince and his son, and their treatment of him, the more did his heart
rise in opposition to them, and the offers made to him. The officer in whose
custody he was, often led him to the place of execution, where he saw numbers
of rebels hanging and slowly expiring in the greatest tortures; and this sight
filled his soul with the greatest distress and horror, not knowing but he
should be executed immediately, and greatly fearing it: but this did not
reconcile him in the least degree to his prince or his son, or dispose him to
accept of the pardon offered. He had as great an aversion and opposition of
heart to the latter as to the former, and this opposition was apparent, and
exerted with a degree of strength and stubbornness in proportion to his dread
of the evil threatened. And this was also the case, when he attended to the
promises made him upon his submission; the more he desired the deliverance
offered, the more strongly did his heart oppose the condition.

At the same time his heart was really no more against his former practices
than ever; he being yet as much as ever under the power of the same principles
and lusts, which led him to them, in the circumstances in which he was then.
And this was apparent from fact: for the officer gave him his liberty for a few
days, upon which all his fears and terrors ceased and he thinking the
bitterness of death was past, returned to his former courses with as much
greediness as ever; yea, vastly more.

When the officer seized him again, his former views and terrors and dread of
the prince returned. He was all attention to his case, and employed all his
thoughts to find out some way to escape. Could he have found any way to deliver
himself from the hand and power of the prince; or had it been in his power to
dethrone him and his son, he would have done it with all his heart. But as he
knew this was impossible, he applied to his prince daily with earnest petitions
that he would pity his case, and at least mitigate his punishment, offering to
suffer any thing short of death. He made his great reformation, a plea for
pardon and deliverance, and made great promises of what he would do, if he
would release him from this punishment. But when he found all this availed
nothing; but was esteemed by the prince and his son as real rebellion against
them, it being in direct opposition to what they insisted on, and the fruit of
enmity to their character and conduct; and that nothing would do or avail in
his behalf but an hearty acceptance of the pardon offered, with a heart
friendly to the prince, and ready to justify him in all his conduct toward
him; and a thankful acceptance of the mediation of his son, being heartily
willing to be his servant for life, as the greatest privilege he could think
of: I say, when he found this to be true, his mind was filled with more
dreadful apprehensions. Yet his heart did not relent and yield at all, and was
so far from becoming any more friendly to the prince, that it swelled with the
most horrid enmity against him; at the same time that he was told, and he was
convinced in his conscience, that the prince and his son had acted a becoming
part, and were amazingly kind to him, and that he was under the highest
obligations immediately to submit to them, and perfectly without any excuse for
not doing it. In this way of quarrelling directly with the prince and his son,
and obstinately refusing their kindest offers, he spent many years; 'till the
prince resolved to wait on him no longer, and ordered him to be executed.

Now, is it not easy to determine in which part of this man's life he was most
guilty and vile? Was he not unspeakably more so in the latter, than in the
former, in which he had so much more done for him, by which he was brought to
such light and conviction of conscience, and in consequence of which his heart
turned more directly and strongly against his prince, and exerted itself
against him in a much higher degree of opposition and malignity, directly in
the face of all this light and conviction, and contrary to the strong and
pressing motives set before him to a friendly submission? Would not he be
justly looked upon, as an enemy to the prince and his son, or at least to have
low thoughts of their character, and to be a friend to the rebel, and take his
part, who should so much as doubt of this? Much more so, if he should take a
great deal of pains to represent the rebel, when apprehended by the officer,
and in the circumstances and exercises that have been described, as greatly
reformed, and much better in the state of his mind, and in a great degree
innocent and blameless, compared with what he was before.

And if this is a plain case, I see not why that before us is not much more so.
-- The difference appears to me so great, and the awakened, convinced sinner to
be so much more guilty and vile than he was, or could be in a state of
security, that when the matter is justly stated, I see not how any can be at a
loss about it. And I cannot but be confident that it will be as manifest to the
attentive, impartial reader that the former is immensely more guilty and vile
than the latter, as i^ is to any one that the whole earth is bigger than the
least pebble, and vastly out weighs it: there being no more need of nice
scales, and critical metaphysical distinctions to decide in the one case, than
in the other.

However, if the unregenerate sinner, as to his absolute character, is viewed
in a just light, which I suppose is that in which he is set in this and the
foregoing sections, I have answered the great end I proposed, whether the
consequence is thought to be just, or not, with respect to his comparative
guilt and vileness. I said what I did on this head in my section on means, with
a design to oppose that very notion of an awakened, convinced sinner which Mr.
M. contends for, which is not much different, if at all, from that which Dr.
Mayhew had: and which I knew was very common even among professed Calvinists;
which I thought to be directly contrary to the truth, and of a very bad
tendency. If therefore what I have said, fully and clearly exposes and confutes
this notion of the sinner's absolute character, I have obtained what I chiefly
had in view, even though it should not be thought to be made evident beyond all
dispute that such an one is more guilty and vile than he could be, or than
sinners generally are, in a state of ignorance and security. Though I confess, I
know not how any one can have a just view of the character and exercises of the
former, and no^ pronounce him, beyond comparison, more guilty and vile than the
latter.

I considered the matter in this comparative view on purpose to set the guilt
and vileness of the awakened, convinced sinner, in a striking light. I find
Christ took this method to represent the great guilt and vileness of the
inhabitants of Capernaum, and convince them of it. He told them they were more
guilty than the inhabitants of Sodom were. This was doubtless as shocking and
offensive to thousands, as the comparison I have made, has been to Mr. M. or
any one else. And it wo^^^ be easy to show that this shocking, offensive saying
of our Savior might be most successfully opposed, in the very way, and by the
same arguments, which Mr. M. has made use of against me. This leads me to what
is to be the subject of the next section.

SECT. IV.
THE way which Mr. M. takes to evade several passages of scripture, which were
referred to in support of what he opposes, examined.

IN my section on means I entered into no labored proof of what I advanced
with respect to the increase of the guilt of the awakened, convinced sinner, I
only stated the character of such in a few words here, having done it more
largely in a former section, P. 100. etc.
and then referred to several texts of scripture, supposing they proved what I
had asserted beyond all controversy, the sinner's character being allowed to be
justly stated. In all I say on this head, I keep in view the sinner's
character, as one who does "continue obstinately to oppose light and truth, and
reject the offers of the gospel." P. 127.
Mr. M. does not expressly deny this to be true of the awakened sinner. He
indeed gives a quite different character of such, though he never once attempts
to prove that mine is wrong, or that his is right. And as he builds all his
opposition to me on this mere supposition, without any proof, it appears to me
a very sandy foundation, which is no way sufficient to support the
superstructure. He ought in the first place to have excepted against the
character I had given of the awakened sinner, and proved it not just, and then
established his own; and this would have finished the controversy; for the
whole debate between him and me, turns upon this, as it did in that between Dr.
Mayhew and me, as has been before observed. It will appear, I trust, on
examination, that what Mr. M. has said to show that the scriptures I adduced to
prove my point are not to the purpose is grounded on a supposition that the
character I have given of the convinced sinner is not true; and therefore that
the most he says here, as well as else where, is rather an unfair begging of
the question, than a confutation of what I have advanced.

The passages of scripture I mentioned are the following, "And this is the
condemnation, that light is is come into the world, and men have loved darkness
rather than light." Joh. III. 19.
"If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin." Joh. XV. 22.
And what Christ says of those cities wherein most of his mighty works were
done, and who had the most light and instruction by his preaching, and yet
continued impenitent, viz. that they were on this account more guilty than the
inhabitants of Tire and Sidon, and even Sodom itself. Mat. XI.
And St. Paul says the gospel is "a favor of death unto death, in them that
perish."

The general answer Mr. M. gives to this, is, that these scriptures say nothing
of an awakened, convinced sinner; nothing of that light which is let into the
conscience, which he calls internal light: but have respect only to what he
calls external, objective light; so are nothing to the purpose.

I thought these passages proved that opposing and rejecting the light of the
gospel, and continuing impenitent, obstinate enemies to Christ, in the face of
this light, and direct abuse of it, was unspeakably the greatest crime men can
be guilty of; that this will be the principal ground of their condemnation, as
that in which their guilt chiefly consists. And that the awakened convinced
sinner had much more of this light than others let into his conscience, which
he opposed and rejected more directly, and with greater strength and obstinacy,
than he did the small degree of light which he had before; and much more
against the dictates of his own conscience. From this state of the case, it
appeared to me a plain and undeniable consequence, that the awakened convinced
sinner is more guilty and vile in the state and exercises of his mind than when
he was ignorant and secure. And it appears in the same light to me now. If
sinning against and opposing the light of the gospel is the chief aggravation
of all sin, and that in which persons guilt under the gospel summarily
consists; then he who sins against the greatest and clearest light, and that
most directly, and with the greatest degree of opposition of heart, must be the
greatest sinner. I see not that the distinction which Mr. M. makes between
external, objective light, and internal light, a light in the judgment and
conscience, is any thing to his purpose. If two men are under the same external
revelation; but one has special pains taken with him to inculcate the truth
revealed, by which his judgment and conscience is convinced, while the other
has really no more light in his judgment and conscience, than if no revelation
had been made: if the chief of their guilt lies in opposing and rejecting the
light of this revelation, surely he who has so much the most light and
advantage, must be unspeakably the greatest sinner; while he continues wholly
to oppose and reject it all. The wickedness of the latter, his want of love to
the truth and opposition of heart to it, keeps the light which is set before
him wholly out of his mind and conscience, and this will be the chief matter of
his condemnation. The other would have continued as blind and ignorant as he,
had not light been forced into his conscience by some extraordinary means,
which he now hates and opposes in a manner and degree, which the latter has no
opportunity to do.

And now who can be at a loss which is the greatest sinner? Mr. M. represents
the secure sinner as very criminal in sinning against the light of his
conscience, and by this means, wasting his conscience, as he expresses it: and
speaks of this as the great aggravation of all crimes. P. 30.
This is as really internal light as that of the awakened, convinced sinner; it
being of the same nature and kind, and all the difference is in the degree of
light. And if sinning against the former is a great crime; yea, that in which
the guilt of the secure sinner, who goes on in open wickedness, chiefly
consists; then surely the latter is a greater sinner than the former in
proportion to the greater degree of light of conscience which he sins against.
It would be strange indeed, if sinning against, and opposing a small degree of
light of conscience, should be very criminal, even the greatest of all crimes;
but sinning against, and opposing an immensely greater degree of light of
conscience, should be quite harmless and innocent. But so it must be, if there
is any reason in this distinction which Mr. M. makes. In making this
distinction he has flatly contradicted himself, as has been observed: for he
allows that opposition to this same internal light and conviction of conscience
in the unawakened sinner is the chief aggravation of his crimes. To be
consistent with himself on this head, he must hold that light and conviction of
conscience does in no case aggravate the sins of men; but he is the greatest
sinner who has the least knowledge and understanding; and whose judgment and
conscience dictates nothing at all with respect to what is right or wrong: and
he is the least guilty, or certainly not more, who has the most understanding
and light of conscience, though he abuses and sins against it all.

Our Savior says, "That servant which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.
But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten
with few stripes." Luke XII. 47, 48.
It would be a f^rced construction of these words indeed, to say that the
meaning is not, that he who actually knows what God requires and neglects to do
it in opposition to his judgment and conscience is most guilty, and shall be
beaten with many stripes; but he who is under advantages to know, but does not
really know any thing about his Lord's will, shall be beaten with few stripes.
It is true that he who is under advantages to know the will of God, and yet
knows it not, is more guilty and worthy of a greater punishment, if he acts
contrary to his will, than he who was under no advantages, and had no
opportunity to know. Yea, the latter is not guilty at all, so does not things
worthy of any stripes; because in this case his ignorance is properly
invincible. Therefore our Savior has no reference to such a case. But by him
that knew not his Lord's will and yet did things worthy of stripes, he must
mean one who is under advantages to know at least in some degree and yet does
not know. And by him that knew his Lords will, he means one that really and
actually, knew it; that is, has internal light, conviction and sensibility of
conscience. He then who sins against this light is the greatest criminal; and
the greater is the degree of this light and knowledge, the more guilty and vile
he is.

Mr. M's distinction therefore is not only contrary to all reason and
comm^^^^se; but directly contrary to these words of our Savior. He who
actually knows his Lord's will, let his light and knowledge come how it will,
whether in a miraculous way, or by a standing external revelation; and whether
he was brought to understand this by some extraordinary providence which
awakened his attention and roused his conscience, or by the influence of the
holy Spirit: I say let his light and conviction of conscience come in either of
these ways, or in any other, if he does not act according to his knowledge, but
neglects to come up to the dictates of his conscience, this light and knowledge
unspeakably aggravates his guilt.

BUT let us hear what Mr. M. has to say to vindicate his distinction, and show
that, though external light, does greatly aggravate the guilt of sinners under
the gospel; yet internal light of an awakened conscience does not. He says,
They do essentially and specifically differ, the one is external, objectively
set before the mind; the other is internal and mental. The former is liable to
be utterly rejected with contempt, without any influence upon the conscience or
life. The latter is received into the mind, and allowed by the author in this
debate, to have great influence on both, to raise conviction, and excite
reformation and amendment of life, to the highest degree the unregenerate are
capable of by the common influence of the holy Spirit. And therefore to argue
from the one to the other, as if they were the same, the reasoning must needs
be inconclusive. P. 16, 17.


Here are two differences mentioned, which he calls "essential and specifical."
The first is, "One is external -- the other is internal and mental." How this
difference should make any odds in favor of the latter I can not imagine. To
suppose it does is contrary to all reason and common sense, and to the words of
Christ just quoted; as well as directly contrary to himself: for he allows that
sins against the light and dictates of conscience, are above all others
aggravated, as has been observed: but this light is as "internal and mental" as
any can be.

As to the other difference, if by being "received into the mind," he means any
thing inconsistent with rejecting and opposing the truth with contempt, and
opposite to this, as it is plain that he does, in that he sets the one in
opposition to the other; then instead of proving any thing, he only begs the
question in dispute, and supposes that this light reforms the sinner, so that,
on the whole, his character is really mended, and that the mind, or heart truly
conforms and submits to it in its exercises. This is the only question in
dispute; and if this must be taken for granted, the dispute is at an end. Mr.
M. has really begged the question in dispute, through his whole book, by such
representations as these, and those which are more grossly false, without ever
attempting to prove that they are just. Let his book be stripped of this
disguise, and most he says would appear in its true weakness. Let Mr. M. or any
of his adherents prove, what he here and every where supposes and takes for
granted, and the debate will be finished; for this is really the only thing in
dispute. Mr. M. here says, I allow what he calls "internal light," to have
great influence. It is true; but the influence I allow, is directly contrary to
that which he speaks of; viz. That it is the occasion of exciting direct
opposition and enmity against God and Christ, and of a person's acting more
against the light and dictates of his own conscience, in neglecting and
obstinately refusing to do his Lord's will, of which he has a thousand times
more clear and extensive knowledge, than the ignorant, secure sinner. What Mr.
M. means, by internal light having "great influence on the conscience, I am at
a loss. He does not mean that it inlightens the conscience; for this would be
only saying that light in the conscience, is light in the conscience; for
internal light, is the conscience enlightened. This therefore would be only
saying nothing; or if it is saying something, it is nothing to his purpose. If
by "influence upon the conscience," he means any influence by which the heart,
or will does in any degree become pliable and submit to the truth, and obey it;
I am sure I do not, nor ever did "allow" this. Nor had he any right to take it
for granted.

From this difference which he makes, he infers, "that to argue from the one to
the other, as if they were the same, the reasoning must needs be inconclusive."
It is granted they are not the same: There is a difference: I do not "argue
from the one to the other, as if they were the same: But the argument is from
the less to the greater If this is the condemnation, if this is the great crime
for which persons under the gospel will be condemned, that light is come into
the world in an external revelation, and they have hated and opposed it; then
they into whose minds and consciences this light is made to shine, so that they
have a thousand times more knowledge of the revealed truth than others; and
hate and oppose it more in proportion; are sinners above all others; and their
condemnation will be proportionably greater. But after all, I would observe
that if what Mr. M. says in this argument was well grounded, and the
distinction he makes between sinning against and abusing external light, and
internal and mental, had any reason in it, and was to the purpose, (which I
think appears to be far otherwise) yet before he has done he demolishes all he
has said here by declaring that they to whom our Savior spoke were awakened,
reformed sinners. P. 34, 35.
by this he has given up the whole of this pretended argument, having flatly
contradicted what he so much insisted upon here, and in this he has the history
of the evangelists on his side too. But of this more hereafter.


HAVING considered his general answer to show that these scriptures are not to
my purpose, which he often repeats; I shall take notice of some other things
which he says with respect to each of these passages, in order to evade the
force of them.

He says of the first, "This is the condemnation, etc." Not a word of an
awakened, reformed sinner in the text and context, nothing of internal light,
or sensibility of conscience, or any of the effects that might imply it. Nay,
the character here given of those spoken of, is quite the reverse of an
awakened, reformed sinner. They are said to practice evil, i. e. so as the
reformed sinner does not, and to shun the light, lest their evil deed should be
reproved, and they called to part with them. P. 9.


I have just now shown that the strength of my argument from this text does not
depend upon its having a direct and immediate reference to an awakened sinner;
but on supposition an unawakened sinner only is meant, the argument from such
an one, to an awakened sinner, is very strong, if the latter hates and opposes
the light he has, as much, and more than the former. That he does not Mr. M.
here takes for granted; so that he begs the question again here, as he does
from beginning to end.

But let us see how he proves that these words have no reference to an awakened
sinner. He says "the character here given of those spoken of is quite the
reverse of the awakened, reformed sinner, they are said to practice evil, i. e.
so as the reformed sinner does not." But of this he has not given the least
proof unless it be in the repetition of the words REFORMED SINNER, which is a
very ambiguous phrase, as Mr. M. has used it here, and every where else. There
is indeed no such reformed, unregenerate sinner as he here supposes, who cannot
be said to do evil, and hate the light, and whose character is directly the
reverse of this. There is no such unregenerate sinner mentioned in the bible
from beginning to end; such a character is the invention of Mr. M. and a
thousand others, in direct contradiction to the whole of divine revelation. It
is directly contrary to this passage now under consideration. Our Savior
speaks of two sorts of persons, of distinct and directly opposite characters,
viz. They who do evil and hate the light; and they who love and practice the
truth, whose deeds are wrought in God. And he so speaks of these, as to exclude
any middle character between these two extremes; and his words strongly imply
that there can be no such person. With what face then can Mr. M. dress up an
awakened sinner, so as not to belong to either of these characters in which
Christ evidently includes all mankind!

Besides, Christ is here speaking expressly of the condemnation that shall come
on all unbelievers; so on all who do not know and love the truth; which appears
from the foregoing words with which these are connected. "He that believes
not, is condemned already. And this is the condemnation." etc. Mr. M. it seems,
has found a set of persons who, though they do not believe on Christ, yet are
dressed in such fine colors, that they will not fall under this condemnation!
They are certainly a sort of creatures which he who spoke these words knew
nothing of. -- And it is most certain the bible knows nothing about these poor,
harmless, penitent, reformed, humble, obedient, unregenerate sinners, who do
not hate the truth, nor do evil. Nor do any such exist in nature, as such a
character is the most perfect contradiction, and necessarily destroys itself.
They are the creatures of the imagination of a set of men in the christian
world, with which they have done infinite mischief to the cause of truth and
religion. --

I PROCEED to examine what he says on the next scripture mentioned; "If I had
not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin." I suppose our Savior in
these words represents the sin the Jews were guilty of in hating and rejecting
him, when he had come and spoken to them, and exhibited his character and the
evidence of his divine mission in a clear and striking light, to be unspeakably
greater than all their other sins could be, had he not thus come and spoken to
them. This sin was so amazingly aggravated, that their other sins, however
great in themselves, were light and as nothing, and not to be mentioned in
comparison with this. I thought it hence followed with undeniable evidence that
the awakened, convinced sinner, who, under the full blaze of light let into his
mind and conscience, continued to hate and reject Jesus Christ, is unspeakably
more guilty and vile than he was in a state of ignorance and blindness when he
did not see, and so could not hate and oppose Christ as he does now.

To this Mr. M. objects two things. One is, that the light here spoken of as
resisted is "merely external, and has no necessary relation to, or connection
with an awakened, reformed sinner."

This has been just now considered, as his general objection to all the
passages of scripture now under consideration. And I hope it has been
sufficiently shown, how weak and groundless this is.

Another thing he says to show this text is not to my purpose is, that
according to our Savior's own account, the Jews of whom these words are
spoken, "were in a state and temper of their minds, previous to their rejecting
the gospel, more wicked than the inhabitants of Tire and Sidon, or even Sodom
itself." P. 10.
This he thinks is evident in that he says, the latter "would have repented by
the same means, which the former rejected. Hence he infers that if they were
more wicked than the inhabitants of Sodom, antecedent to their rejecting
Christ, this their wickedness could not with any propriety be said to be little
or nothing, compared with what they were now guilty of. Therefore that this
cannot be the meaning of our Savior.

To this I answer in the first place, that it is by no means evident that when
Christ speaks of these cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, as
more guilty than Sodom, he has respect to the sins they were guilty of
antecedent to his coming and preaching to them, etc. but the contrary is most
evident. Therefore his consequence, has no foundation; so comes to nothing. But
of this I shall have occasion to speak more particularly presently.

In the next place, I say, if what he supposes were true, his consequence does
by no means follow. Though the Jews were worse than Sodom, antecedent to Christ's
coming and preaching to them, it does not follow that they were not immensely
more guilty, in consequence of the visit Christ made them, than they were
before, though very guilty then. Their guilt might be vastly greater than that of
Sodom; and yet they might be put into such circumstances, and have so much
greater light, etc. as to increase their guilt amazingly; so as that in the
comparison, their former guilt, sinks, as it were into nothing, as not to be
mentioned with the latter. This is the very light in which this same thing is
set in other passages of scripture. "For if the word spoken by angels was
steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense
of reward; how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, which at
first began to be spoken by the Lord!" Heb. II. 2, 3.
Here we see the sin of rejecting Christ when he had come, is represented as
beyond expression greater than any disobedience under the Mosaic dispensation,
or before Christ came. The words How shall we escape, if we neglect so great
salvation! are very emphatical, and strongly express the unparallel guilt which
they contract, above all others, who reject Christ, and the salvation offered
by him: And are full as strong an expression as the words of Christ under
consideration, taken in the sense I have put upon them. But this is expressed
more strongly yet, if possible. "See that ye refuse not him that speaks: for
if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we
escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven." Chap. XII. 25.


St. Paul, in order to set forth the excellence and glory of the gospel, as far
exceeding the glory of the legal dispensation under Moses, says, "For even that
which was made glorious, had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory
that excels." 2 Cor. III. 10.
This expression is exactly parallel with the words of Christ under
consideration, taken in the sense I put upon them. And it is to be observed,
that if the dispensation opened by Christ so much exceeded the former
dispensation in glory, that it may be said to have no glory, in comparison with
this; then it may be with as great propriety affirmed of the sins under these
different dispensations, that sins under the former, are no sins, have no guilt
and criminalness, in comparison with sins under the latter. For despising and
rebelling against the latter, is more criminal than despising the former, in
proportion to the greater glory of the latter.

The husbandmen to whom the householder let out his vineyard, were very criminal
in abusing the servants he sent to them to receive his due of the fruit; and
proceeding to kill some of them. But how much more criminal and guilty were
they in seizing and putting to death his only son, when he was sent to them!
This as it were, swallowed up all their former crimes, so that they are hardly
to be mentioned in comparison with this. In what words could the greatness of
this crime be better represented, than by such an expression as this, "If he
had not sent his only son, they had not had sin; their guilt would have been
little or nothing compared with what it is now: For now they have seen, and
murdered his only son." It is common to represent the greatness of a crime, by
saying, Such or such a sin is nothing to this. Or all the wickedness he was
guilty of before is nothing to this. And is not Christ's expression exactly
parallel to this? How then can we be at a loss about the meaning of it?

This does indeed set Jesus Christ in a very grand light; that all the sins in
the world should be nothing to that of rejecting and hating him, when he comes
in person, and speaks and offers himself. It is impossible that they who have
as low and mean notions of him, and as high ones of themselves as the Jews had,
should understand them. No wonder then if all such join with Mr. M. and say,
"Since this cannot be the meaning, another must be sought."

When we consider the high and grand character of Jesus Christ the SON OF GOD;
his amazing condescension and grace in becoming incarnate and living among the
Jews -- Their high expectations and desires of the coming of the Messiah -- the
excellence and amiableness of his character -- how abundant, clear and plain
his public instructions were -- and what full, bright and awakening evidence he
gave, by his stupendous works, that he was indeed the SON OF GOD: I say, when
we well consider all this, and much more that might be mentioned, the crime of
hating and rejecting him, in those circumstances, will I am confident rise so
high in our view, that there will appear no difficulty in understanding the
words under consideration in the sense I have put upon them; and it will, I
doubt not, appear that to say that this crime does not rise so high above all
others, as to justify such an expression, thus understood; and on this ground
to seek another meaning, is very dishonorable to Jesus Christ.

In this light therefore I think I have good ground to look on what Mr. M. has
said here; especially if we consider, what is the meaning which he has
"sought," and found. This I will give in his own words. And since this cannot be
the meaning (i. e. the meaning I had put upon the words) another must be
sought. Which is plainly this, viz. They had not had that sin of rejecting the
clear light of the evidence of the divine mission of Christ, and so of the
truth of the gospel. P. 10.
That is, if Christ had not come and given them opportunity to reject him, they
would not have been guilty of rejecting him. This is much the same as if he had
said, ^if they had not been guilty of this sin, they would not in fact have
been guilty of it. Who can think that our divine teacher, who never spoke a
word but to some good purpose, took pains repeatedly to inculcate this, which
every one knew, without his mentioning it; and if they did not, it is a matter
of no importance; so that to assert it is but mere trifling: Who, I say, can
imagine this? If Mr. M. will find another such instance in the whole bible, or
in any author of tolerable sense, he may be excused. He was surely driven to a
hard shift that when he sought a meaning to these words, he could find no
better, if he rejected that which I had given.

BUT he goes on to say, They indeed did it in their hearts; but it lay
concealed, hid under the cloak of high pretensions to sanc^ity: But when they
acted it out, the cloak fell off, and their wickedness appeared to all the
world. This acting out the wickedness of their hearts, we readily grant, was an
aggravation of their sin. But how comes it to pass, that all their sinfulness
of heart and life (i. e. of the inhabitants of Chorazin, etc.) whereby they
were more vile than the idolatrous heathen, and most abominable Sodomites, is
little or nothing, compared with acting it out in this particular? Is the
fountain nothing to the streams? The cause nothing to the effect? Is not this
to invert the known and established rules of reasoning.

Here he speaks of these Jews, as covering all their wickedness under the cloak
of high pretensions to sanctity; and in the next breath speaks of their
wickedness of life. So here are a set of men, who are guilty of great
sinfulness of life, i. e. outward, open wickedness; and yet at the same time
hide all their wickedness of heart under high pretensions to sanctity. A
strange sort of people indeed! It is to be also remembered that he else where
speaks of these very persons is " reformed sinners, who were awakened, brought
to consider, and in a measure to amend their lives." P. 34, 35.
What then does he here mean by sinfulness of life? But if they were never so
sinful in their lives, to what purpose is it mentioned here, when he is
speaking only of sinfulness of heart, of the "fountain" not of the "streams?"
Is sinfulness of life the fountain, not the streams; the cause, and not the
effect?

As to his two questions here, the first has been answered already. Let these
be as sinful in heart and life as Mr. M. supposes, so that "they were more vile
than the most abominable Sodomites, antecedent to their having opportunity to
sin against, hate and reject Christ: Yet their acting out the wickedness of
their hearts in this particular way, had unspeakably more guilt and vileness in
it, than all their other sins put together. To say the contrary, is to speak
dishonorably of Christ, and contrary to what he has said not only here, but
elsewhere, and to other passages of scripture, as has been shown.

As to the other question, "Is the fountain nothing to the streams," etc. I
answer, I see not what relation this question has to that which is now in
dispute. What Christ speaks of in the words before us are the exercises and
exertions of wickedness in hating and rejecting him; and these he says are so
greatly aggravated, that all the exercises and acts of wickedness which they
would, or could be guilty of, had he not come and spoken to them, had been
light, and as nothing, compared with these: So that what it here said has no
relation to wickedness of heart, considered as distinct from all exercises of
every kind, and antecedent to such; if there is indeed any such wickedness of
heart in nature. In a word, if by the "fountain," he means that sinfulness of
heart and life whereby the Jews were more vile than the idolatrous heathen;
then by fountain and streams, cause and effect he means the same thing; or
rather has no meaning at all Their sinfulness of heart and life by which they
hated and opposed Christ, was no more the streams from the fountain, than that
wickedness of heart and life by which they were more vile than the idolatrous
heathen; and the former was as much the fountain and cause as the latter. But
if by fountain and cause here Mr. M. means the wickedness of the heart distinct
from all exercises, and antecedent to them, his question is quite foreign to
the matter under consideration; as the words of Christ have no relation to
this; but to sinful exercises of heart in hating the Father and him. This he
says was such a high degree of wickedness that all sins they could have been
guilty of were as nothing to this.

His next words are, But what increases my surprise is, that in the passages
above quoted from the author, he seems to argue that the sinner's being
restrained from acting out the wickedness of the heart in overt acts, is as
nothing; but what he is in his heart, is all. Whatever particular ways of sin
he has forsaken, etc. yet on the whole he is more vile, etc. And now, all the
wickedness of the heart, whereby the sinner is disposed to the act, if occasion
offers, is little or nothing, if the overt act is restrained. Does the tables
being turned, really change the nature of things?

REPLY, Mr. M. here puts the charge upon himself, and is the sole cause of
increasing his own surprise, and of the contradiction he would fasten upon me,
by using the words overt acts, in an indeterminate, confused manner, and so as
to mean one thing in one sentence, and quite another in the next I^ by overt
acts are meant external acts of sin, in distinction from the voluntary
exercises of the heart, I have said that whatever overt acts the sinner is
restrained from, he may notwithstanding be more guilty and vile in acting out
the wickedness of his heart, in hating and opposing Christ, under great light
and conviction of conscience, than he was when guilty of these overt acts, in a
state of ignorance and security. In this sense Mr. M. uses these words in the
first sentence, unless he abuses me, and himself too. But where is the
inconsistence with this, in representing the great sin of the Jews as
consisting in hating and opposing Jesus Christ; so that all their overt acts of
sin, that they had been guilty of, or could be, without this, were as nothing
to it: Is not this perfectly consistent? Every reader who has sense and
attention enough to read two plain sentences, must know it is. But Mr M. has
used the words overt act in the last sentence, in quite another sense, as
meaning all the exercises of the mind whatever, in distinction from the dormant
principles of the heart, antecedent to all thought, motion or exercise,
"whereby the sinner is disposed to act, if occasion offers." Now I have said
nothing about this, through the whole section he is remarking upon. I speak of no
wickedness of heart, but what consists in thought and voluntary exercise; or
the neglect of proper exercise, when occasion offers: And therefore make no
comparison between the one and the other. It is Mr. M. therefore that has
"turned the tables" and confused and surprised himself and his leader, with his
own mistake and inaccuracy.

Before I leave this passage, I would observe that Mr. M. by representing the
streams as nothing to the fountain, meaning by streams overt acts of sin, has
in a great measure spoiled his reformed sinner, about whom he says so much,
laying a mighty stress upon his external reformation, as being sufficient to
counterbalance all the greater guilt he contracts by his opposition of heart to
immensely more light and conviction than he had. This external reformation now
dwindles into little or nothing compared with the fountain of corruption that
remains as great, and with as much strength as ever. If he had kept this in
view every where, we should not have heard so much of his poor, trembling,
reformed sinner; nor so much said in his favor, how opposite soever is his
heart to Jesus Christ and the gospel.

I COME now to consider the other passage of scripture, which I referred to in
support of what I had advanced. It is this, "Then began he to upbraid the
cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not.
Woe unto thee, Chorazin, Woe unto thee, Bethsaida; for if the mighty works which
were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented
long ago in sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable
for Tire and Sidon at the day of judgment, than for you. And thou Capernaum,
which art exalted unto heaven, shall be brought down to hell: for if the mighty
works which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have
remained until this day. But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable
for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee."

Mr. M says, Christ has respect here only to the wickedness and hardness of
heart the inhabitants of these cities were found guilty of antecedent to his
preaching and working miracles among them; by which they had rendered
themselves harder and more unimpressible by these powerful means, than the
inhabitants of Tire and Sidon were. This he thinks to be certain from Christ's
telling them, that, if the same means had been used with the latter, they would
have repented. And he hence concludes also, that the repentance here spoken of,
for the neglect of which he upbraids these cities, and which he says the
Tyrians and Sidonians would have been brought to by these means, was not true
repentance, or a repentance which implies any real love to God and hatred of
sin, and turning of the heart from it; but what he calls "a legal repentance,
or repentance on natural principles." He thinks this is certain, "seeing our
blessed Savior well knew, that neither these means, which they enjoyed, nor
any other means, could ever bring them to a saving repentance, without an
almighty power exerted in giving a new heart," P. 12.
He therefore gives the sense of this passage in the following words. As if
Christ had said, You have by your own wickedness wasted natural conscience,
sinned away your moral sense, and rendered yourselves more unimpressible by the
same motives and arguments to repentance, set in the same advantageous light,
than the idolatrous Tyrians and Sidonians and therefore on that single account,
your state is more wicked than theirs, and you are justly exposed to a more
aggravated condemnation in the day of judgment than they. P. 12, 13.


Upon this, I take leave to observe the following things, 1 It is strange and
unaccountable indeed, if Christ here sharply reproves tho inhabitants of these
cities, for not repenting with a legal repentance, which implies in it no true
regard to his character or opposition of heart to sin; and says not a word to
them for their not coming to that repentance which John Baptist, his harbinger
and he himself, from the beginning of his ministry, had been inculcating, and
calling them to. John Baptist had sounded an alarm among them all, and loudly
preached "repentance for the remission of sins." This was certainly saving
repentance. And when John was put in prison, "Jesus came into Galilee (to these
very cities) preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God, and saying, The time
is fulfiled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe gospel."
Mark I. 14, 15.
Christ had been calling and urging them to true repentance in all his
teaching, and by all his miracles. And it is perfectly unaccountable and
astonishing, if he now drops this demand, and says not a word to them by way of
reproof for not hearkening to his calls and demands, and to what was the
language of all his mighty works; but reproves and upbraids them severely for
something else, which he never expressly mentioned before, or called them to,
but only as it is implied in true repentance; and which implies in it no true
regard and obedience to him, and leaves them as really in a state of misery and
ruin as ever.

2. The reason which Mr. M. gives why our Savior cannot mean saving
repentance, is really as much of a reason why he cannot mean legal repentance;
for he holds that this is not effected merely by means, but the influences of
the Spirit of God, are as necessary to bring men to legal repentance, as they
are to bring them to saving repentance. And he represents that a very dangerous
and hurtful doctrine, that teaches that legal repentance is not produced by the
Spirit of God. Mr. M. must either espouse this new divinity, or his argument
will prove that Christ did not mean legal repentance, for according to his own
doctrine, "Our blessed Savior infinitely well knew, that neither these means
they enjoyed, nor any other means could ever bring them to" legal repentance,
"without an almighty power exerted" by the common influences of the Spirit of
God, in a work of awakening and conviction. His argument therefore is good for
nothing, or rather much worse than nothing; because it proves too much: and he
is guilty of gross self contradiction in using it as he does.

3. The whole of what he says here is in direct contradiction to the truth of
the case, according to the history the evangelists give; and contrary to what
he asserts elsewhere, P. 34, 35.
He speaking of what Christ says of the unclean spirit, which is cast out, and
afterward returns and finds the house swept and garnished, etc. Matt. XII. 43.
-- 45.
observes, By the house empty, swept and garnished, is represented the state of
an awakened, reformed sinner, when wickedness as to the actings of it is
restrained, the unclean spirit gone out. -- This is applied to the Jewish
nation, Even so shall it be also with this wicked generation, i. e. they who
were awakened, brought to consider, and in a measure amend their lives by the
preaching of John Baptist, Christ and his apostles, and by the mighty works
done among them. Here you see these very persons are awakened and reformed, and
brought to a legal repentance by the preaching of John Baptist, Christ and his
apostles, and by the mighty works done among them, who he says in the passage
under consideration, were not awakened, and did not reform by all this
preaching, and these mighty works: and that this is the very thing of which
Christ upbraids them, as that in which they appeared to be worse than the
inhabitants of Tire and Sidon. What is now become of his argument to prove that
the Jews were worse than the Sodomites "on this single account" that they were
not brought to legal repentance by Christ's preaching, etc? He has quite
confuted it himself, by declaring this was not true of them; but that they did
in fact repent. And in this he is supported by the history the evangelists give
of the matter.

He therefore has not hit on the true meaning of this passage; and "another
must be sought." -- But I proceed to observe,

4. If the sense which he has put upon this passage should be allowed to be
true, however inconsistent it is with the evangelists, and with himself; yet it
stands full to the purpose for which I quoted it, viz. to prove that they are
the most guilty and vile who enjoy the most light, and rebel against it. For if
these Jews were worse than Sodom antecedent to Christ coming among them, their
greater guilt did not consist in their open profligacy and wickedness; for in
this Sodom doubtless exceeded them: but in their abuse of greater light and
advantages, and by this means bringing themselves into a more guilty, hardened
state.

But as the case stands, and as Mr. M. says it in fact was, it is exactly to my
purpose. Here is an instance of sinners "who were awakened, brought to consider
and to amend their lives" who are declared by Christ himself to be more guilty
and vile than the abandoned profligates of Sodom, purely because they remained
impenitent and rejected him, under all their awakenings, convictions and
external reformations.

The inhabitants of these cities had been for a long time thoroughly reformed
from idolatry, to which their fathers were so much given; and were punctual and
zealous in attending the instituted duties of worship and religion. They did
not practice the abominable vices of Sodom. And they had been greatly alarmed
and awakened and reformed in their external conduct by the preaching of John.
They flocked to him in crowds, and were baptized, confessing their sins, and
earnestly asking the important question "What shall we do?" And when Christ
came to preach among them, they flocked to him from all quarters, and heard
with great attention, admiration and applause; "And Jesus returned in the ^^ver
of the Spirit into Galilee, and there went (...) fame of him through all the
region round about. And he taught in their synagogues, being glorified of ALL."
Luke IV. 14, 15.


(...) notwithstanding all this, they did with one consent reject the message
that Christ brought to them, and refused to repent and believe the gospel. And
for this impenitence and unbelief, persisted in, under all this light,
awakening, conviction and reformation, and while these mighty works were
wrought in their sight; for this, I say, Christ upbraids them, and tells them
that "on this single account" notwithstanding all their convictions, fears and
reformations, and attending on his preaching with affection, admiration and
applause, they were worse, more guilty and vile than open gross idolaters, or
even Sodom itself: And not that they had by their own wickedness, wasted
natural conscience, sinned away their moral sense, and rendered themselves more
unimpressible by the same motives and arguments to repentance, set in the same
advantageous light, than the idolatrous Tyrians and Sidonians.

This saying of our Lord was doubtless very shocking, offensive and provoking
to the inhabitants of these cities; nothing could be more so; especially to the
Scribes and Pharisees, and to every one who had as favorable an opinion of the
"awakened reformed sinner" who yet persists in impenitence, and obstinately
rejects Jesus Christ, as Mr. M. has. And no wonder if on this occasion they
mentioned all the dreadful absurdities of this principle, and uttered all the
exclamations, that are found in Mr. M's book, or something like them. "Strange
absurdity this! Strange divinity indeed! Nor is it in our power to doubt, that
the grand enemy of the Messiah and precious souls, put his hearty AMEN to it.
Thrice amazing"!!!

After all, I cannot think the inhabitants of Capernaum, etc. came up to the
character of the awakened, convinced sinner of which I spoke. They had not that
degree of light, and were not so fully convinced in their consciences that
Jesus was the Christ; nor did they so clearly see their inexcusableness in
rejecting him, and the dreadful consequences to them, etc. as the awakened
sinner does, of whom I speak. But as such a sinner is as really an impenitent,
as they were, and does as fully reject Jesus Christ as they did; and that under
immensely greater light and conviction of conscience than they had; how much
more guilty is he than the Sodomites; or even than the inhabitants of
Capernaum, who were themselves so much worse than those of Sodom!

WHEN our Savior says to Chorazin and Bethsaida, "If the mighty works which
have been done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have
repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes;" I suppose we are not to understand
him as asserting that this would certainly have been the effect of such means
being used with the inhabitants of these cities, as if he spoke in the
character of the omniscient God, as certainly knowing what in all cases would
be. But he is here to be considered as speaking as a man, (and he was no more
than a man in their view to whom he spoke) and after the manner of men; viewing
and judging of this matter according to human appearance and probability. As if
he had said, "Who could have thought that you would not repent and believe the
gospel, before whose eyes such mighty works have been done for your conviction.
If such things had been done among men of the worst character, even the
inhabitants of Tire and Sidon, surely they would have repented immediately. It
would be natural to expect, and be confident that this would be the effect." If
the words are understood in this sense, they will be very agreeable to some
other passages in the bible "For he said, surely they are my people, children
that will not lie: so he was their Savior." Isai. LXIII. 8.
Here God is represented as putting confidence in his people, that they would
be faithful to him, according to their profession, vows and engagements; and so
is represented as speaking only after the manner of men; for as the omniscient
God, he knew they did lie, and would break all their promises. The following
passage, I think is exactly parallel to this under consideration. -- "For thou
art not sent to a people of a strange speech and of an hard language, but to
the house of Israel: not to many people of a strange speech, and an hard
language, whose words thou can not understand: surely, had I sent thee to
them, they would have hearkened unto thee." Ezekiel. III. 5, 6.


Christ's design was to represent to them their folly and obstinacy in a way
that was suited to their conviction, and to stop their mouths. And what was
better suited to do it, than to observe to them, the confidence any one would
have, before the trial, that those, who in their view were the worst of men,
and whom they held in the highest contempt and abhorrence, would have been
brought to the deepest repentance, by the same means under which they had
continued obstinately impenitent^

Before I leave this passage, I would observe, that our Savior does not ground
his assertion that it should be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the day of
judgment, than for the inhabitants of these Jewish cities, upon this, that the
former would have repented, had the mighty works been done in them, which were
done among the latter. This Mr. M. takes for granted in all he says; but I
think without any reason. If this had been the case, the word would have been "
Therefore I say unto you it shall be more tolerable, etc." and not " But I say
unto you, etc." Christ tells them that if the same means had been used with
these wicked cities, which these Jews did most ab^minate and condemn, that had
been used with them, any one would be confident they would have repented; as
best suited to strike conviction into their minds, and make them reflect on
their own amazing unreasonableness and obstinacy. And then goes on to say, "But
I say unto you, etc." As if he had said, "But, be this as it will, whether they
would have repented or not. I have one thing to say to you which you may depend
upon, as infallibly certain, However abominably vile and wicked you think these
cities to be, you are much more guilty than they, and they shall have a lighter
punishment than you, when every thing shall be adjusted according to the truth.

But let it be remembered that whether I have given the true sense or not, it
does not affect the matter in dispute between Mr. M. and me^ for be this as it
will, it is certain the sense he has given, in order to oppose me, cannot be
the right, which I conclude has been sufficiently proved.

THE last text mentioned must now be attended to. "The gospel is a favor of
death unto death, in them that perish"

I referred to this scripture to prove that all means used with sinners, all
light and advantages they have had, and therefore, all light and conviction of
conscience, if they continue impenitent and perish, will turn against them and
aggravate their condemnation: and said, consequently the more light and
conviction men have, the more their attention is awakened to the things of the
gospel, and the more means they attend upon, and are used with them, while they
continue obstinately to oppose light and truth and reject the offers of the
gospel; the more guilty and vile, and the greater criminals are they in God's
sight. Before I proceed, I beg leave to take notice, that Mr. M. when he quotes
these words, having transcribed the following, "While they continue obstinately
to oppose light and truth, and reject the offers of the gospel," stops here,
and adds " i. e. while they continue unregenerate, as the author explains
himself." This he seems to add out of his great tenderness to the awakened,
unregenerate sinner, to qualify my words, as if they set the sinner in too bad
a light, and as if to be barely unregenerate, was a more innocent, harmless
character than these words represented. He puts in this softening expression;
as he seems to think it, whenever he has occasion to quote the words in which I
represent the state and exercises of the unregenerate, even under the highest
awakenings and convictions. A plain evidence this; among an hundred others,
that he does not think the awakened, unregenerate sinner does obstinately
reject the offers of the gospel. But why then did he not speak this out
plainly, and expressly oppose me on this foot, which is really the turning
point, and the only dispute between us? He might then perhaps have been more
consistent with himself whether he had gained his point, or no.

But let us attend to what he observes upon this passage of scripture, to show
that it is not my purpose. This is in the following words, Were it never so
fully conceded, that those that perish from under the external light of the
gospel, do thereby fall under a more aggravated condemnation; yet this would be
nothing to the author's purpose; because this may be the case with multitudes,
that they reject the external light of the evidence of the truth of the gospel
with scorn and derision, without ever being awakened or reformed by it; so the
gospel may be a savor of death unto death, unto thousands that never were one
of them a proper subject of this debate: because never awakened to reformation
and amendment of life.

This passage is somewhat dark to me, I own: But if I have understood it, the
meaning is this, Though it is granted that the gospel becomes a savor of death
unto them that perish from under it, yet it does not follow that it is so to
them who are awakened and reformed; because this may be true of thousands under
the gospel, who do reject it with scorn. If any thing is proved by this, I
think it is, that the awakened and reformed do not any of them perish, so these
words have no relation to them; but only to those who reject the gospel with
scorn. They, indeed perish, and the gospel is a means of aggravating their
condemnation. If any of the awakened and reformed perish, then the gospel is a
savor of death unto death unto them; for it is so to all that perish, be they
awakened and reformed or not.

Indeed I do not wonder if Mr. M. thinks the awakened, humbled, reformed,
unregenerate sinner, who honestly attempts to be obedient, and lies at the foot
of sovereign mercy as his only hope, does never perish; though he allows there
are no promises made to such. -- Our Savior divides all under the gospel into
those who do evil and hate the light; and consequently shall fall under an
aggravated condemnation: and those who love and obey the truth; and so shall be
saved. Mr. M. insists upon it that his awakened, reformed sinner does not
belong to the former class, as has been observed; therefore will not be
condemned. What he says here is of the same tenor. St. Paul divides all into
them that shall perish, and those who shall be saved, and Mr. M. says tho
awakened, reformed sinner is not to be ranked among the former, therefore shall
be saved.

I SHALL finish this section, when I have taken notice of one passage more
under this head. Mr. M. says, P. 17.
"Another mistaken way is which the author argues his point, as it appears to
me, is determining the degree of man's wickedness, merely from the degree of
light sinned against, without any regard had to the degree of the strength of
his bias to sin."

I cannot say how this happened to appear to Mr. M. However, I think it did not
"appear to him" from any thing that I have said. To illustrate this remark, he
supposes two persons with different degrees of bias to sin, under the same
degree of light; and concludes that he, who has the strongest bias, or
inclination to sin, is the greatest sinner. This is granted: but I have said
nothing that relates to such a case. I am speaking of the same sinner, having
different degrees of light at different times; in which there is no room for
the supposition of different degrees of bias; unless we suppose that his bias
to sin increases, as the light of his conscience does. And this supposition is
so far from rendering my argument inconclusive, that it greatly strengthens it.
And if I any where speak of two sinners, representing him as the greatest, who
has the most light, it is supposed that their natural powers, advantages, and
bias to sin, are in all other respects equal.

SECT. V.
IN which several things which Mr. Mills says in favor of the negative, are
examined.

MR. MILLS has mentioned several things which he intends as arguments against
what I have advanced, though they are not formally, proposed as such; which as
they are perhaps as weighty as any he has offered, and will probably have more
influence on the minds of many of his readers to prejudice them against me and
the doctrine I have advanced, than all he has said in his book besides; it
seems necessary in the first place to consider them.

ONE argument of this kind, which he holds up to view, and harps upon
abundantly from the beginning to the end of his piece, is, that the doctrine I
advance is NEW. He makes his first attack upon me with this weapon. In his
first sentence, after he has in his own words stated the doctrine he means to
oppose, he has these words. P. 5.
I must say the divinity here exhibited, appears to me strange and new; never
before advanced in the christian world, by any divine of tolerable sense and
reputation, so far as my acquaintance reaches. And as he thus begins, he holds
up the cry of NEW DIVINITY, to the end of his book.

This has indeed been often objected to doctrines that have been advanced, and
many are so weak and foolish, as to be ready to reject any thing that is
proposed, which is to them strange and new; because NEW, erroneous and wrong,
are with them synonymous words. This was objected against Christ and his
apostles. This was a grand objection against the reformation from popery. And
it is now a sufficient objection against any doctrine advanced by any divine in
the church of Rome, that it is NEW never before advanced, by any of the
fathers. And this has always been the cry, whenever there has been any attempt
to bring on a reformation in doctrine or manners; "These are new things,
therefore wrong and not to be received." Mr. M. himself has not forgot, I
conclude, that he has been often in a way of reproach, called a NEW light. And
as he has had so much to teach him what influence this now has with too many,
and must be sensible that it is quite sufficient to set them against a man and
his doctrine, to tell them he has published strange and new divinity: his
making use of it as he has done, is not only very weak, but is quite
unjustifiable and wrong. For this is in a high degree imposing on such, and
confirming them in a prejudice, which every public teacher ought to guard
against, and endeavor to eradicate to the utmost of his power; as it can never
do any real good, and has proved infinitely mischievous in ten thousand
instances; and will always be improved against the discovery of new truth, and
the increase of light and knowledge in the church of Christ, which is so much
predicted in scripture, and is so greatly to be desired. And Mr. M. is yet more
inexcusable and culpable, if he has raised and kept up this cry of NEW
DIVINITY, with a design to avail himself of this too common prejudice among
mankind, the more effectually to run down and raise the popular cry against the
man and the doctrine which he had undertaken to oppose.

Mr. M perhaps thinks he has given sufficient caution on this head, in that
when he speaks of my doctrine as "quite new" he adds, And therefore requires
the greater caution, not to admit of other than clear and demonstrative
scripture evidence and proof for the confirmation of it. P. 7, 8.
But what he has asserted here is directly contrary to truth and all reason. We
ought always to exercise so much caution as never to admit any doctrine as
true, without good evidence: and all doctrines proposed to us as true, whether
old or new, are to be carefully examined and tried in the light of scripture,
and not to be received unless we judge them supported by that unerring rule:
and in this enquiry and examination, their being old or new, ought not to come
into consideration, so as to have the least weight with us, on one side or the
other. It is no argument at all that a doctrine is true, because it has been
long received as such, nor is it the least evidence that a doctrine is not
agreeable to scripture, that it is "quite new, and never before advanced." And
therefore both old and new are to be examined with equal caution, and the
latter to be as readily admitted as the former, if it be equally agreeable to
scripture. And if any one uses greater caution in examining and admitting one
or the other, either because it is new, or because it is old, he so far is
governed by unseasonable prejudice. The word NEW ought not to be mentioned in
such an enquiry. Therefore Mr. M. cannot be justified in any thing he has said
on this head; but is, answerable for all the prejudice he has by this means
excited in the minds of any against the author and doctrine he opposes, and for
all the odium this outcry has raised.

The church has yet been in its infant state as to knowledge. The bible is in
no measure understood, as it will be, when it shall be properly and thoroughly
attended to. Many things which have been held for truth by long prescription,
will be exploded, and new truths will rise into view. "Many shall run to and
from and knowledge shall be increased." "Every scribe which is instructed into
the kingdom of heaven, is like a man that is an householder, which brings
forth out of his treasure things new and old." And shall any one of these
professed scribes, raise a cry against another merely because he brings forth
new divinity!

But this charge and outcry will appear worse, and more injurious still, if
the fact is not true, and the doctrine I have advanced is indeed not new
divinity, but has been often taught, though not just in my words, or in so
express and particular a manner as I have done, by many old and noted divines.
They have all asserted it in effect, who have taught that the sum of all sin
lies in the exercises of the heart, and that unbelief, or rejection of Jesus
Christ is beyond comparison the greatest sin that men can be guilty of; and
that the awakened convinced sinner does reject Christ with as great strength
and obstinacy of heart, as ever, under all his light and conviction, which does
amazingly aggravate his sin. Was it a matter of importance enough to call for
it, a volume of collections to this purpose from many eminent divines, that
have been long dead, might be published. But this would be labor in vain, as it
would not be the least evidence that the doctrine I have published is true, or
afford the least degree of reason why it should be received with less caution,
than if it was in direct opposition to all the divines that ever lived.
However, for Mr. M's satisfaction, and to calm his mind which has been so
greatly agitated and troubled about this "strange, new divinity," which
appeared to him "too strange to be true," I will make a quotation or two from
one who, I trust he will own was a "divine of tolerable sense and reputation.
It is no less or later a divine than Doct. Owen.

He, speaking of awakened, convinced, reformed sinners, under a work of the
law, says, The spring of sin is not dried up, only the streams of it are turned
another way. It may be the man is fallen upon other more secret, or more
spiritual sins; or if he be bea^ off from them also, the whole strength of lust
and sin will take up its residence in self-righteousness, and pour out thereby
as filthy streams as in any other way whatever. Nature, etc. of indwelling sin.
P. 292.
Again, speaking of endeavors of the unregenerate to mortify sin, by prayers,
fasting, etc. he says, "sin is not mortified; no, nor the power of it weakened;
but what it loses in sensual, in carnal pleasures it takes up with great
advantage, in blindness, darkness, superstition, self-righteousness, soul
pride, contempt of the gospel, and the righteousness of it, and reigns no less,
than in the most profligate sinners in the world." P. 297.


To this may be added the opinion of some later divines. President Edwards
says, It Is very manifest by scripture and reason, that for men to live in enmity
against God and Christ, and in wilful unbelief and rejection of Christ (as the
scriptures teach is the case with all unsanctified men under the gospel) is to
live in some of the most heinous kinds of wickedness; as is allowed by all
calvinistic divines in general, and by Mr. St^ddard in particular, who says,
Safety etc P. 224.
You cannot anger God more by any thing, than by continuing in the neglect of
Christ. This is the great controversy God has with sinners; not that they have
been guilty of these and those particular transgressions, but that they abide
in the rejection of the gospel. And again he says, P. 249.
The great sin that God is angry with you for is unbelief. Despising the gospel
is the great, provoking sin. Reply to Mr. Williams, P. 73, 74.
President Edwards says moreover, The truth is, that as long as men reject
Christ, and don't savingly believe on him, however they may be awakened; and
however strict, and conscientious, and laborious they may be in religion, they
have the wrath of God abiding on them, and they are his enemies, and the
children of the devil: And they are then ESPECIALLY PROVOKING TO GOD, under
those terrors, that they stand it out against Christ, and will not accept of an
offered Savior; though they see so much need of him. Some thoughts on the Revi.
of Rel. P. 157, 158.


Here are not only two of the most noted divines in New England, not against
me, but expressly on my side of the question; but calvinistic divines in
general, so far as President Edwards's judgment is to be relied upon with
respect to this fact. I have transcribed this partly to enlarge Mr. M's
acquaintance, that he may no longer be able to say, the divinity I have
exhibited was never before advanced in the christian world by any divine of
tolerable sense and reputation, so far as my acquaintance reaches

After what I have said above, it will perhaps be needless to observe, that I
do not make these quotations because I would not be thought to have published
any thing NEW. I now declare I had much rather publish NEW DIVINITY than any
other. And the more of this, the better, if it be but true. Nor do I think any
doctrine can be "too strange to be true." I should think it hardly worth while
to write, if I had no thing new to say. And if I am so unhappy as to live in an
age in which I must be condemned merely because I bring certain strange things
to their ears, I will appeal from them, and from Mr. M. in particular, to the
happy people who shall live in the last days, who will be thankful to everyone
who has cast in his mite toward the overthrow of error, however long
established, and the discovery of truth, however new and overlooked by all
generations before: And will look on him as an enemy to the church and to
mankind, who has used his influence to stifle and suppress every or any new
truth, because he had never heard or thought of it before.

ANOTHER argument against me is, that the doctrine I have advanced is not only
new, but directly contrary to the opinion of many eminent fathers and divines;
and among the rest, "the late president Edwards, who will," (says Mr. M.)
"serve, I suppose, instead of many with our author."

ANSWER. This argument appears to me of no more weight than former. The opinion
of no man or body of men, however great and renouned in their day, ought to
have the least weight with us in our inqui^ies after the truths of the gospel.
He who pays the least regard to this, or is in any degree influenced by it,
gives himself up to a very uncertain, fallible guide. And if he is not lead
wrong, but believes what is real truth, merely upon the credit and testimony of
others, it will be of no more saving advantage to him, than if it was not true:
for such implicit faith is no better than no faith at all. Besides, it is a
great abuse of any divine who is dead, to rely upon him, or quote him as an
authority, who knew himself to be fallible, and would be very sorry to have his
mistakes received as truth, merely because he was so unhappy as to publish them.

He therefore may be justly censured who quotes any father, or number of
fathers, as an authority, or of the least weight to support what he holds, or
run down what he opposes. It is much worse than childish trifling; it is an
abuse of the public, and tends to uphold people in that which they are very
prone to, and has proved pernicious to thousands, viz. Relying on the opinion
of others, especially those who have had the character of sound and great
divines, without examining for themselves. But,

2. It does not appear evident to me that the divines Mr. M. has quoted against
me, do say any thing really contrary to what I have advanced. If it is an abuse
to quote an author, as an authority to support or oppose any doctrine; it is
yet much more injurious to misunderstand them, and produce them to oppose a
doctrine which they never meant to oppose. Therefore, though the matter in
dispute between Mr. M. and me is not in the least degree to be determined by
them, and it is really no matter, in this view, on which side of the question
they are; yet it is but a piece of justice to them, to remove the
misrepresentation, when their words are quoted in a sense which they never
meant.

Mr. M's quotation from the Westminster and Savoy confessions, is in the
following words, Works done by unregenerate men, although, for the matter of
them, they may be things which GOD commands, and of good use both to themselves
and others; yet, because they proceed not from an heart purified by faith, nor
are done in a right manner, according to the word, nor to a right end, the
glory of GOD; they are therefore sinful, and cannot please GOD, or make man
meet to receive grace from God. And yet their neglect of them is more sinful
and displeasing to GOD.

Mr. M. says, "This last clause, taken in a compound sense is denied by Mr.
Hopkins." I confess I know not what sense that is which he here calls a
compound sense, unless it be a sense compounded of the author's sense and Mr.
M's. It does not appear, I think, that this clause, taken according to common
sense, has ever been denied by me.

All they say is, that the practice of these things which are externally right,
is less sinful than the neglect of them would be, other things being equal. And
I say nothing contrary to this. They do not say that he is the least sinner,
less guilty and vile in all cases, and in every instance, who attends on those
external things, than he might be, in the neglect of them. Nor is this true. A
person may put on all external sobriety and religion, out of enmity to
christianity, and with a design to put himself under advantage thereby to
overthrow it more effectually. In this case I suppose all will grant, he is as
sinful and vile as if he had lived in the neglect of these things. If a person
believes in his conscience it is wrong and very sinful for him to attend the
externals of religion, and that GOD forbids him to do it, his doing these
things in this case, would be more sinful in him, than the neglect of them. The
passage under consideration (Mr. M. will grant) has no respect to such
instances as these; so affirms nothing about them. But it has as much respect
to these, as to the case I have stated in my section on means. I state a
particular case, in which I say the unregenerate sinner is more guilty and
vile, even though he reforms all external ways of sin, and performs all external
duty, than he was when he did not so; at the same time I expressly assert that
his greater sinfulness does not consist in his reformation of external sins,
etc. but in something else, quite independent of this. Is this to assert
attendance on these externals is not in itself considered, other things being
equal, less sinful? surely no: nor any thing like it. Therefore I do not
contradict what the assembly of divines here assert. I do not say that the
awakened, convinced sinner, would not be more guilty in continuing in external
wickedness, and the neglect of external religion than he is in his external
reformations, etc. but that he is now more guilty and vile, all things
considered, than he was in a state of ignorance and security, whatever
alteration there is in his external conduct. How Mr. M. came to think I had
denied what is asserted in the passage quoted, I cannot tell. Perhaps he will
unfold the matter, when he comes to explain his compound sense, until this
shall be done, I must say, "no consequence, and wait for light."

Before I leave this passage, I would just observe, that though it contains
nothing in opposition to what I have asserted, Mr. M. has advanced things in
his book, which I think, are directly contrary to it. Here it is said, "They,"
(i. e. works done by unregenerate men) are sinful, and cannot please GOD. But
Mr. M. speaking of Ahab, says the Lord took a favorable notice of his doings.
P. 31.
And he speaks of GOD'S express approbation of Jehu, and the congregation of
Israel in the wilderness, for what they did, while unregenerate. P. 32.
Surely to say that the doings and works of the unregenerate cannot please GOD,
and to say that GOD takes a favorable notice of them, and approves of them,
are as contrary and opposite propositions as any can be. To say that God
approves of that, with which he is not, and cannot be pleased, is a flat
contradiction; and is just the same as to say God cannot be pleased with that,
with which he actually is pleased.

In this passage it is also said, that the works and seize of the
unregenerate, do not make a man meet to receive grace from GOD. Mr. M. in
direct opposition to this, has labored through several pages to prove that the
unregenerate do by their exercises and works get nearer to true grace or
holiness; or in the state of their mind nearer to that of good men. See P. 24
-- 28.


I do not mention Mr. M's opposition to "the testimony of so many calvinistic
divines," as any evidence that he is not right. That he has herein grossly
erred from the truth, I trust will appear evident enough before I have done;
though his contradicting these divines is no evidence against him at all. I
observe this only to show his self-contradiction, in that he with high
approbation quotes a passage, as being directly against me, and then repeatedly
contradicts it himself; so that when the matter comes to be examined, it stands
not at all against me; but directly against himself.

WE will now attend to what he has quoted from President Edwards. He says, "He
is so express to the point as if he had wrote on purpose to confute the
doctrine I am opposing." His words are, The exercise of natural conscience is
such and such degrees, wherein appears such a measure of awakening or
sensibility of conscience, though it be not of the nature of real positive
virtue, or true moral goodness, yet has a negative moral goodness; because in
the present state of things, it is an evidence of the absence of that higher
degree of wickedness, which causes great insensibility, or stupidity of
conscience.

That the author in these words has no respect to the doctrine Mr. M. is
opposing; and much less says any thing on purpose to confute it, will be
evident, if the following things are well considered.

1. He is not here speaking of that light and conviction of conscience, which
the unregenerate sinner has in a work preparatory to regeneration and
conversion; but of that sensibility, and those dictates of conscience which
most men have in a greater or less degree, even heathen, as well as those that
are under the light of the gospel, which suggest to them in general what they
owe to GOD, and to their neighbors, and the reasonableness of GOD'S law, which
may be called the law of nature. He is here dealing with those men who insist
upon it that these dictates of natural conscience are true virtue, and hence
infer that all men are naturally virtuous in some degree. He is here giving the
reason why these dictates of conscience have been mistaken for true virtue.
They with whom he is concerned here, never speak of that peculiar kind and
degree of awakening and conviction of conscience which sinners under genuine
conviction have. They are so far from mistaking such conviction for true
virtue, that they rather look upon it to be gross delusion, grounded on quite
wrong and false notions of things. President Edwards therefore has not this
awakening and conviction in view, nor has any respect to it in these words.
Therefore his words do not confute any thing which I have said concerning that,
to which they have no reference.

2. President Edwards is here speaking of those dictates of conscience which
are regarded and obeyed, in a great measure at least, in the view and
apprehension of him who is the subject of them. Surely he does not mean to
assert that however the dictates of conscience, are disregarded, opposed and
sinned against; yet this conviction is an evidence that he who has them is not
so great a sinner, as he who commits the same sins in ignorance, and not
against his conscience. If he does, these words are as much against Mr. M. and
almost every body else, as they are against me. But I am speaking of an
awakening and sensibility of conscience, which is perfectly opposed and sinned
against. It is therefore certain, that he has no reference to the convinced
sinner of whom I speak. And what makes this more certain, if possible, is, that
when he is expressly speaking of such an awakened, convinced sinner, he
represents him as guilty of the most heinous kinds of wickedness, and
ESPECIALLY provoking to God, as has been shown.

In one word, he here speaks of different persons, under the same degree of
light and advantages every way. This light makes impressions on one, and not on
the other. In this case it is an evidence that the former is not so much
blinded and hardened by sin as the latter: so is an evidence of an higher
degree of sin in the latter than in the former. But what is this to the
awakening and convictions of conscience which are brought on not by the mere
force of external means; but by extraordinary influences on the mind,
counteracting and repelling the influence of that wickedness of heart which had
before held the mind in blindness and security? Not a word is said about such a
case as this, therefore nothing to the purpose for which Mr. M. has made the
quotation.

3. Let it be observed that the words here quoted, taken in the sense in which
Mr. M. understands them, are directly against himself. He speaks of this
awakening and sensibility of conscience as taking place in an ordinary and
common way, and as common to all in whom it is not weakened and suppressed, by
a course of opposition to it. Therefore it is not brought on the mind, and
wrought in it, by any influences of the spirit of GOD. If therefore he is here
speaking of that awakening and conviction which is preparatory to conversion,
he supposes no special agency of the spirit of God in this, and implicitly
denies it; which Mr. M. repeatedly speaks of as a dangerous error. Mr. M.
therefore by quoting these words, in the sense he puts upon them, and with
approbation, is guilty of self-contradiction, as he was in the former instance.

I COME now to the last argument of this kind, which Mr. M. maker use of
against me It is in one word this, That I have joined with SANDEMAN: so far at
least, as to be on his side of the question, and favor what he has advanced,
in what Mr. M. undertakes to oppose. Of this he takes care to remind the reader
in the first sentence, after he has stated what he says I have asserted. I must
say the divinity here exhibited appears to me strange and new, never before
advanced in the christian world by any divine of tolerable sense and
reputation, so far as my acquaintance reaches; unless something of a like
complexion is to be sound in the letters on Thereon and Aspasio, ascribed to
Sandeman, who has well nigh condemned all other divines; to establish himself
and his party as the only true church of Christ upon earth, which, it is said,
has for many ages been concealed in the wilderness, but now lately has
appeared in them, agreeable to other enthusiastic visionaries.

Sad indeed, to be guilty of saying that which looks like any thing "which has
been published by such a man! He has endeavored to keep this in view to the end
of his book; and in his concluding paragraph says, I have not been able to
persuade myself, but that some things have by him (the author he is opposing)
been carried too far in favor of what is commonly called the Sandemanean error.
Thus I am ranked with Sandeman in front and rear. I cannot persuade myself that
Mr. M. thought this ought to have the weight of a feather in determining,
whether what I have asserted is right or wrong. This argument, however will
have more influence on the minds of many of his readers than all that he has
said besides. Mr. M. could not be insensible of this; and if he has taken this
method, and said these things with this view, and on purpose to raise an odium,
and gain any advantage to his cause by this means, he cannot be excused. But of
this the reader will judge.

I know not what foundation or good reason Mr. M. had to mention Sandeman's
name in this controversy. Mr. S. says not one word, that I have observed,
relating to this point, in any of his writings: Nor is there any reason to
conclude that what I have asserted is more agreeable to him, than to Mr. M. I
claim no alliance to him, nor he to me, that I know of. I have thought, and
still think, that the faith and holiness which he teaches are not the faith and
holiness which are inculcated in the new testament; but essentially defective,
and even opposite to the whole of divine revelation: so quite subversive of
true christianity. He has however, said many things very well, and some by
which many public teachers stand justly corrected. And if he must be branded
with holding the Sandemanean error, who agrees with Sandeman in any point, or
says any thing "of a like complexion" with something which he has wrote, who
then shall escape?

By all I can learn, my section on means is no more agreeable to Sandeman and
his followers, than to Mr. M. Mr. M. approves of the nine first sections; but
finds great fault with the tenth; and so does Mr. Sandeman. Herein they agree.
And it would not be a difficult task to show that Mr. M. agrees with him in
many more points than I do; and there is evidence enough that he has a much
better opinion of the man and the religion he teaches than I have: and that Mr.
S. is much more friendly to him, than to me, and rather takes his side in the
controversy between us. What reason then had Mr. M. to raise such an outcry
through all the country, and insinuate to the world that I held the Sandemanean
error? Was it because he knew that this would make many stare at me, as some
dreadful monster?

When I have attended to this method Mr. M. has taken in his dispute with me,
and the way in which he has managed it, which seems almost peculiar to himself;
and how he has not only tacked Sandeman upon my back, and took care to keep him
fast there, and held him up in sight from beginning to end; but has also ranked
me with Arminians P. 45.
and Quakers, P. 107.
yea, with the Devil himself: P. 21. Speaking of may books he says, Nor is it
in my power to doubt, that the grand enemy of Christ's cause and precious souls
puts his hearty Amen to it.
I say, when I have attended to this, it has brought to my mind the method the
Roman catholics have often taken with Protestant martyrs, who were condemned to
be put to death: That is to place a large cap on their head, on which are
painted a number of hideous monsters and ugly devils, on purpose to raise the
indignation of the crowd against them. It is to be observed however, that they
do this to those only who, they really think, deserve such treatment, they
being in their view as bad, at least, as the devil himself: Whereas Mr. M. has
done all this to his "DEAR BROTHER, and worthy author, and one whom he highly
esteems."

SECT. VI.
IN which Mr. Mills's four arguments to prove the negative, are considered and
refuted.

MR. MILLS has reduced his arguments against what I have advanced to four
general heads; which I shall consider in the order in which he has placed them.

His first argument is founded on the absurdities which he says will follow
from what I have asserted; three of which he particularly mentions.

The first he states in the following words, If the principle advanced be true,
there is no possibility of the profligate sinner's becoming less vicious in the
state of his mind, whatever be the wickedness he lives in the practice of, by
any reformation of life while unregenerate; because reforming in any instance
supposes the increase of internal light and sensibility of conscience; and
then, according to this new principle, he is undoubtedly, on the whole, more
vile, odious and abominable in God's sight, than he would have been, had he
continued secure and at ease, going on in his sins. P. 18.


It appears from what I have said already that this is not a just consequence
from that which I have asserted. For, every instance of reformation of life,
does not suppose an increase of internal light. The profligate may reform his
life from worldly motives, or by the removal of the temptation and opportunity,
etc. without having any more light and conviction of conscience than he had
before. Or he may have light and conviction of conscience enough to lead him to
reform his life; and yet not be the convinced sinner of whom I speak, as has
been observed before. This therefore is not an absurdity (if it is one) that is
contained in the doctrine I have advanced but is wholly grounded in the
misrepresentation he has made of it.

I have indeed asserted that the awakened, convinced sinner which I describe is
more guilty and vile in the exercises of his mind, than he was in a state of
ignorance and security, whatever is his external reformation. This is the
principle itself which I hold. And what Mr. M. mentions as an absurdity no more
follows from this proposition, than it does from any other that ever was
thought of. If there is any absurdity in the case, it lies in the proposition
itself: If there is no absurdity in this, no absurd consequence can be drawn
from it; unless the absurdity consists in it is being a forced and unjust
consequence. In this sense, I acknowledge, Mr. M. has made out a very strange
and monstrous absurdity indeed. But as it is one entirely of his own make, I
choose he should have all the credit of it.

Is there any absurdity in saying, that a profligate may reform his external
conduct in such circumstances and with such views and exercises of heart, as on
the whole to be more guilty and vile, than he was before? If not, then there is
no absurdity in what I have advanced on this head. I assert that it is
impossible for a sinner not to grow more guilty and vile than he was before,
whatever alteration takes place in his external conduct, if he goes into a
course of stronger and more direct acts of opposition to Jesus Christ, contrary
to much higher degrees of light and conviction of conscience, than before.
This, I think, has been fully proved: And am sure it leads to no absurdity
whatsoever. If it is impossible that a profligate should reform in any
instance, without bringing himself into these circumstances; then all persons
unregenerate do become more guilty and vile in every instance of reformation.
But where is the absurdity of this? Is there any absurdity in supposing that
the abuse of light and sinning against it, is in all cases criminal in
proportion to the degree of that light; and that the unregenerate do always
abuse all the light they have; and that the awakened, convinced sinner is
guilty of a much higher abuse of light than any other person can be?

But before I leave the passage now quoted I would particularly remark upon two
expressions in it. He says, "there is no possibility of the profligate sinner's
becoming less vicious in the state of his mind, -- by any reformation of life."
This supposes that reformation of life has some influence on the state of the
mind to render the latter less vicious: the former preceding as the cause, and
the latter following as the effect. This is certainly an absurdity. All vice
lies in the state or exercises of the mind; and no external conduct is virtuous
or vicious, less or more, nor has any relation to the state of the mind, any
further than it is the fruit and effect of that. But, passing this absurdity,
what he asserts here is only this: The profligate is nor less vicious in the
state of his mind by any reformations of life, so long as the state of his mind
is not less vicious. "Strange absurdity this, indeed!

The other expression I would take notice of, is this, "sensibility of
conscience." This is a very ambiguous expression. By it sometimes is meant
tenderness of conscience, and so denotes something good and right in the heart.
It sometimes means only conviction of conscience. This is consistent with the
most perfect and highest degrees of wickedness of heart. It is never true of
the unregenerate that they have any sensibility of conscience in the former
sense; in which sense Mr. M. seems to use it; and the reader who is not well on
his guard will take it in this sense, and so be insensibly led aside by it.
This expression he often uses, and always so as tends to blind and mislead. Not
with such a design I believe; for I conclude he first imposed on himself, by
putting a sense on these words which is not compatible with the unregenerate,
and then imposed on his reader.

I am inclined here to transcribe the following words, in which Mr. M.
endeavors to represent the absurdity he fathers on me in a very striking
light, especially as they are a specimen of much of the same kind scattered
through his book. -- "I appeal to the common sense of mankind, Is not this
strange divinity? What! is there no possibility that the drunkard, the thief,
the liar, the profane swearer, the adulterer, the murderer and blasphemer
should become, on the whole, less vicious in GOD'S sight while unregenerate, by
reforming all this atrocious wickedness, though on no higher principle than that
of natural conscience, awakened by the common influences of the spirit, than he
would be, continuing in the practice of all this wickedness? Strange absurdity
this!

Here is a loud outcry indeed! But is there any reason in it? Is it not rather
only an application to the imagination, prejudices and passions of the ignorant
and unguarded; and the whole of it a gross misrepresentation? It is an easy
matter thus to harangue, and cry out, O strange! Strange absurdity this! He has
pronounced this an absurdity repeatedly in very strong terms: But if it really
is one, he has not offered the least reason to prove it to be so, nor so much
as attempted it. Mr. M. professes to remove as far as possible from all
abstruse, metaphysical reasoning. P. 30.
By this means, or some other, he seems to be got far enough from reasoning of
every kind. I suppose I have said enough in the foregoing sections to show that
this is so far from being an absurdity with respect to the convinced,
unregenerate sinner, that it is a most evident and important truth. Let the
calm, thoughtful reader stop and judge.

THE next absurdity is expressed in the following words, Another absurdity
arising from this new principle is, that the more stupid, careless and
unconcerned men are, under the gospel, about what sins they commit, and what
duties they neglect, the less vile, odious and abominable they are on the whole
in GOD'S sight.

If Mr. M. had said, that the more blind and ignorant men are under the gospel,
about sin, and duty, the less vile they are in committing those sins, and
omiting the duties; this would indeed not have been a consequence from what he
is arguing against; but really the very principle itself. And this surely is so
far from being an absurdity, that it is a self-evident proposition. Whatsoever
is contained in the words now quoted more than this, is a misrepresentation. In
these words, and what follows for the illustration of them, it is represented
as if it followed from what I have advanced that the more conscientious men
are, or the more inclined and disposed they are to act agreeable to their
consciences, and come up to them, the more vile and odious they are. But I have
been so far from asserting this, or any thing from whence it will follow; that
I place the greater guilt and vileness of the convinced sinner in his opposing
and acting against the clear light and dictates of his own conscience, however
sensible he is of the dreadful consequence of this to him. The reader needs
only to keep this in view to see how groundless all that Mr. M. says on this
head, is, and that the whole is only a gross misrepresentation.

But what if sinners are in such a situation, that so long as they continue
perfect enemies to GOD, and the Savior, and are disposed to abuse all light
and advantages, and all means used with them to bring them to repentance, all
means used with them, and all light and conviction of conscience, render their
obstinacy and impenitence more vile and odious? What absurdity is there in
this? Mr. M. has not attempted to show where the absurdity lies. He has only
dressed the matter up in such words and phrases as to keep the truth of the
case out of view, and mislead the inattentive reader, and then cries out,
"strange absurdity this!"

I COME now to the last absurdity which Mr. M. mentions. Another absurdity that
arises from this principle is, that in an exact proportion as any (...) under
the gospel is, in the language of the author, more likely to be saved, and in
the phrase of our Savior, 'nearer the kingdom of God,' he is on the whole more
vile and odious in God's sight. P. 21, 22.


But where is the absurdity of this? Mr. M. does not attempt to show wherein
the absurdity lies. It seems he thought his calling it an absurdity was
sufficient to make it pass for one. It may perhaps with the unthinking reader
who takes Mr. M's advice, and follows his example, in "removing as far as
possible from all abstruse, metaphysical reasoning," that is, as I take it,
from all that close, sound reasoning, which requires exactness of thought, and
fixed attention of mind. It will also pass for the greatest absurdity with all
those who think that GOD is more inclined to show mercy to a less sinner than
to a greater; and that the least guilty and vile are more likely to be saved
than others; and are founding their hopes of their own salvation very much in
this, that they are "not as other men," not so great sinners, so guilty and
vile in God's sight as the ignorant, secure profligate. M. M's whole book is
suited to please persons of this stamp as he not only goes on this supposition
here, but every where else.

I particularly observed in my section on means, P. 143, 144.
that there is no foundation for such a notion in scripture; to which Mr. M.
has not said a word. He ought to have showed that what I had asserted there was
groundless and contrary to scripture, and not to have taken for granted, what I
thought I had proved from scripture not to be true, and then to build so much
upon it. Indeed it is a notion so shockingly dishonorable to the sovereign
grace of God, and contrary to the whole gospel, and has such a direct tendency
to exclude every one from all hope, and throw him into absolute despair, who
does not with the proud pharisee, think himself a less sinner than others in
general area that I wonder not at all that Mr. M. chose rather to keep it, as
it were, behind the curtain, than to bring it out to open view, and avow it
expressly.

But to attend more particularly to this absurdity. If there is any in the
case, it lies in this proposition, viz. That a greater sinner, one who is on
the whole more vile and odious in God's sight than another, may be more likely
to be saved, than that other, and then he himself was, when he was not so
guilty and vile, as he now is: But this is so far from containing any absurdity
in it, that all, and even Mr. M. himself, will grant it to be true beyond all
dispute. For instance, those who live under the gospel are more likely to be
saved, than those who live in heathenish darkness, as all allow. And yet it
will be as readily granted that gospel sinners are, in general at least, much
more guilty and odious in the sight of God, than the heathen.

As Mr. M. goes on to illustrate this absurdity by instancing in two persons,
brought up under the same external light and advantages; one is a secure
profligate, the other is under great awakenings and convictions of conscience.
The latter he says, according to me, is most likely to be saved; and yet is by
far the most guilty and odious of the two. Well, what then? There is nothing
shocking or absurd in this, more than there is in the case just now mentioned;
unless it be in what arises from his dressing up the latter in an innocent
favorable light, and setting out the former in most monstrous colors; and
then supposing him to be much more vile and odious than the other: yea, "the
most vile, odious and abominable sinner on the face of the whole earth." He
represents the latter in the following words, From early childhood he has
constantly paid such reverence and obedience to the dictates of conscience, as
has nourished the greatest degrees of tenderness to regard all duty, and avoid
all sin that can agree to an unregenerate state. In this way of stating the
matter, Mr. M. has been guilty of two things.

1. He has entirely misrepresented the matter in dispute between us, by
dressing up the awakened, convinced sinner unregenerate in such fine colors,
as do not belong to him: for such an one instead of reverencing and obeying his
conscience, lives in the greatest sin, in opposition to the dictates of his
conscience, and a thousand times as much light as others have; and instead of
paying any "regard to all duty" he has no true regard to any duty at all, as
such, but really refuses to do the whole that God commands. This
misrepresentation, as has been observed, runs through the whole of Mr. M. books.
I mention this as a specimen.

2. He has hereby really gone off from the point he was professedly attending
to, viz. That they who are most likely to be saved, are proportionably more
guilty and vile in God's sight than they were; and has lead the attention of
his reader to quite another thing, viz. The absurdity of supposing the
convinced sinner, so much more vile and odious than the other. I think this is
indeed to "remove as far as possible from all REASONING, abstruse,
metaphysical" or any other.

And thus having quite forgot the argument he was upon, he leads his reader a
jaunt into the heathen world to show him who is the vilest among them, upon my
principles. I say, he quite forgot the argument he was upon; for among the
heathen one is not more likely to be saved than another, which was the only
point he was now professedly attending to. But to pass this, if we particularly
follow him in his ramble, we shall find him here guilty of a very gross
absurdity (I leave it to the reader, whether it does not weigh down all that he
attempted to fasten upon me) it is this, he finds a heathen, who "comes up
nearest to the dictates of conscience," and yet "in failing to come up to his
duty he sins against the greatest light." How he sins against the greatest
light, in not coming up to his duty, who "comes up nearest to the dictates of
his conscience" it is difficult to say.

In the close of this argument, Mr. M. adds, It is needless to observe here,
that these things never did agree to the common sense of mankind; or of the
christian world: and to my weak understanding, I must say, they sound too
strange to be true. I agree with Mr. M. that this observation was quite
needless, seeing all the appearance of absurdities is owing to his departing
from the dictates of common sense, to raise a scarecrow to fright the unwary
reader. And whether his taking such pains to frame such absurdities as these,
is to be attributed to his weak understanding, of which he so often boasts, or
to a misimprovement of what he has, I leave the reader to judge.

Mr. MILL'S second argument is from two passages of scripture.

The first is in there words, "The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with
this generation, and shall condemn it; because they repented at the preaching
of Jonas; and behold a greater than Jonas is here." Mat. XII. 41.


He forms an argument from these words in the following manner. The repentance
of the Ninevites, upon the preaching of Jonas, shall condemn the Jews for not
repenting as the Ninevites did, though they were under the preaching of Christ.
Now the repentance of the Ninevites was only a legal repentance, by which they
were brought to the state of awakened, convinced sinners. It hence follows that
the awakened, convinced sinner is not more vile in God's sight than the
unawakened, secure sinner: for then the Ninevites coming to this state, in
which they on the whole become more vile, than they were before, even in a
state of security and open wickedness, could not condemn the Jews for not
repenting as the Ninevites did. P. 23, 24.


ANS. 1. The Ninevites were not awakened, convinced sinners in the sense in
which I speak of such; so no argument can be formed from them in this case. Mr.
M. himself says, in a marginal note under this argument, They were in the depth
of heathenish darkness, and for any thing we know, had not so much as the name
of a mediator, to be believed on among them. If this was their case they were
not capable of that sin, in which I constantly place the greater guilt and
vileness of awakened, convinced sinners under the gospel, viz. in their
persisting in an impenitent rejecting and hating of Jesus Christ, in opposition
to the light of their own consciences. The Ninevites, according to Mr. M. had
no degree of this light and conviction; therefore were not in a capacity to sin
against it, and so become more guilty and vile, in consequence of their
awakening and conviction. The Ninevites, if Mr. M's account of them is right,
acted fully up to the light and conviction of their consciences, and did all
that they knew was required of them, and that was necessary in order to their
escaping the divine judgments threatened. Mr. M. was surely quite inattentive
to the case before him, and wholly overlooked the character of the awakened,
convinced, unregenerate sinner under the gospel, or he would have known that
the case of the Ninevites was very far from being any thing to his purpose; and
that the argument he has formed from them, is extremely weak, and altogether
inconclusive.

ANS. 2d. All that Jonah said to the Ninevites was, "Yet forty days and Nineveh
shall be overthrown." This was all the light and instruction he gave them. They
believed him, that they should be destroyed, unless they reformed these open
sins, by which their consciences told them they had provoked God. These they
reformed immediately: and thus they hearkened to Jonah, as they understood him;
they believed his words, and they were influenced by them, according to the
light and dictates of their consciences. Christ, a greater than Jonah, came to
the Jews, with much greater and more striking evidence that he was sent of God,
than Jonah had; but the Jews did not believe him and comply with his
instructions, invitations and warnings. They did not come to that repentance
which Christ called them to; but persisted in rejecting him. With great
propriety then did Christ address the Jews in these words, "The men of Nineveh
shall rise in judgment with this generation and shall condemn it, etc. As if he
had said, "The men of Nineveh shall be an instance by which this generation
shall be condemned in the day of judgment; for they hearkened to Jonah and
regarded him, when he was sent to them, as they understood him; but this
generation refuse to hearken to me, and continue impenitent under all my
instructions and warnings."

ANS. 3d. In these words our Savior has no reference to the real, internal
character of the men of Nineveh whether they were sinners in their repentance
or not, whether they were, on the whole, more guilty and vile, or less than
they were before Jonah came among them. All that was to his purpose is, that
the men of Nineveh hearkened to the preaching of Jonah, and repented visibly;
whereas the Jews did not hearken to Christ, but visibly opposed and rejected
him. Christ speaks of nothing but their external appearance and conduct,
without determining what they were at heart. This is evident from the words
immediately following with respect to the queen of the south. We cannot infer
that she came to hear the wisdom of Solomon from any pious and good end, or
that she was on the whole less vile than if she had not seen Solomon and heard
his wisdom, because Christ says her coming to hear the wisdom of Solomon shall
condemn the Jews, who despised and rejected one so much greater than Solomon.
She in fact paid more regard to Solomon, than the Jews did to Christ, and this
was fully to his purpose, let her act from what principles she would, and what
ever was the consequence to her; he having regard only to that which was
visible in her, from the history of her, and not to that of which we have no
account. And in the same manner he speaks of the Ninevites.

THE other passage of scripture Mr. M. mentions under this argument* is what
Christ says to the scribe in consequence of his answering the question which he
was then attending to, "discreetly," i. e. understandingly, "Thou art not far
from the kingdom of God." Mr. M. insists upon it, that these words must mean
that though he was not a good man; yet he was less sinful in the state of his
mind, and so nearer the state of a good man, on account of the seize he
had arrived to, than those who were destitute of these, or than he would have
been in their absence. Hence he (...), "that all awakened, reformed sinners
under the gospel a^^ no^, on the whole, more vile in God's sight, than when
secure and at (...), going on in their sins under the same external means of
light. P. 24 -- 28.


His argument to prove that by his being not far from the kingdom of God
consisted in his being less sinful in the state of his mind, and in this
respect, not far from the state of a good man, is, that he could not be said to
be so in any other sense. He particularly says, by this cannot be meant, That
he was merely more likely to be converted, without respect had to any of those
things, by which; considered in themselves, he was less sinful, since it is
evident from the express letter of the sacred text, that in what is said of the
scribe's being nigh or not far from the kingdom of God, respect is had to those
things, and those only, by which, considered in themselves, he was less sinful.

On this it may be observed in the first place, that in this he only begs the
question, and proves nothing. The question is, in what sense the scribe was not
far from the kingdom of God, and what Christ has respect to in these words? Mr.
M. says, he had respect to those things, and those only, by which, considered
in themselves, he was less sinful; and that "this is evident from the express
letter of the sacred text." But this is the very thing in dispute. Christ has
respect to the words of the scribe, in which he discovered his sentiments to be
right with respect to a very important truth, and which, if followed in all its
just consequences, would lead him to the most important doctrines of
christianity. But that this orthodoxy in speculation implied any thing with
respect to the state of his mind, as being more or less sinful, Mr. M. has not
proved, but takes wholly for granted, and founds his argument upon it.

I had said that orthodoxy or right speculative knowledge brings a man nearer
to the kingdom of God, or renders him more likely to be saved than if he had it
not, let the state of his mind, his heart, be more or less sinful. And here is
an instance to my purpose, if Mr. M. rightly understands the phrase, "thou art
not far from the kingdom of God." Here is a person of whom Christ says this
merely upon his appearing to be right in his speculations in an important
point, and the text says not a word of any thing else. But Mr. M. must bring
into the account something good in his heart, or at least less sinful, because
he could not, upon his plan be nearer the kingdom of God than others without
this. But this is to beg the question, as I have observed. Mr. M. had observed,
P. 22.
that to be in my language "more likely to be saved," was in the phrase of our
Savior, to be "nearer the kingdom of God." Had he kept this in view he might
easily have seen in what sense the scribe might be nearer the kingdom of God,
by the degree of speculative knowledge he appeared to have, without concerning
himself with the state of his heart, and contriving to make that less sinful,
from a text which says not a word about it. At least, he should have proved
that he could not be nearer the kingdom of heaven in that sense, instead of
passing it over in silence, as if there could be no such sense put upon the
words.

But Mr. M. seems to take it for granted (for he has not said a word to prove
it) that the speculative knowledge which the scribe appeared to have, implied
something good, or less bad and sinful in the state and temper of his mind. But
this is contrary to all reason, and to known fact. If he will prove this to be
true, that men's hearts are less sinful and come nearer to the temper and
exercises of good men, in proportion as their judgment and consciences are
convinced, and they advance in right speculative notions of the truths of
divine revelation: I say, if he will prove this, he will gain his point, and
entirely overthrow what he has undertaken to dispute against; Yea, he will
confute what St. Paul himself has asserted. For if men unregenerate in all
cases grow less sinful, as light and conviction of conscience increases, then
certainly they are not more guilty and vile: Nor can any one "hold the truth in
unrighteousness," as St. Paul says many did. Romans I. 18.


It appears therefore in every view that Mr. M. has here only begged the whole
of the question in dispute between us.

And he has done more than this; he has grossly contradicted himself, and that
two ways. He has said, P. 61.
It is evident and certain that every degree of knowledge, etc. attained by the
unregenerate, that is necessary, in order to a state of grace and salvation,
brings them in state one degree nearer to it. But here he takes it for granted
a person cannot be said to be nearer the kingdom of heaven, on account of his
knowledge. Again, he else where finds fault with me that I speak of speculative
knowledge only, and not of any reformation of the sinner, as rendering him more
likely to be saved; P. 58.
where he supposes there is no connection between any speculative knowledge of
the unregenerate, and any degree of reformation, and that the latter is no ways
implied in the former: But here he takes it for granted that speculative
knowledge, or light in the understanding does imply something good in heart, or
a less degree of sinfulness, and that it necessarily brings a person to a state
of mind, nearer to that of a good man. Yea, that this is one of those things,
by which, considered in itself, a man is less sinful; for he says Christ has
respect to such things only. Men who will make such suppositions, and suppose
and take for granted the whole matter in dispute, and ground an argument on
that, and at the same time contradict themselves so many ways, as it were in
the same ^^e^th, will, in their way prove any thing they please.

I observe, in the next place, upon the passage quoted, that he says, "'it is
evident, that in what is said of the scribe's being nigh, or not far from the
kingdom of God, respect is had to those things, and those things only, by which
considered in themselves, he was less sinful." The scribe might appear to have
many things which, considered in themselves, might be less sinful than
something else, and yet, on the whole, be more sinful and vile than if he had
them not. So that what Mr. M here takes for granted, if allowed him as he has
expressed it, makes nothing to his purpose. The scribe might notwithstanding
all this, be, on the whole, more sinful in the state of his mind, than others,
who had not those things, by which, considered in themselves they would be less
sinful. Suppose for instance, the speculative knowledge which the scribe had
was one thing by which, considered in itself, he was less sinful; yet if he
hated and rejected Jesus Christ, with all this light and knowledge (which he
did, if he was still an unregenerate man) he was, on the whole, a greater
sinner than they who had not this knowledge. I therefore stand ready to prove
that if the scribe was not really a good man, and did not love God, and believe
in Jesus Christ, he was on the whole much more sinful and vile in the state and
exercises of his mind, than those who were without this speculative knowledge.
And I presume it is impossible that any one should find any thing in this text
contrary to this.

Mr. M. in order to make these words of Christ answer his purpose, supposes the
scribe to be unregenerate, and yet not prejudiced against Christ, but in an
awakened reformed state; and that in this state his heart was less sinful, and
not far from a state of grace; and concludes that the kingdom of God means a
state of grace. All these things he lays as the foundation to build his
conclusion upon. All of which have not the least evidence to support them.
Surely that must be a very weak, flimsy argument which is built wholly on such
a number of precarious, uncertain suppositions. And he must be at a great loss
for scriptures to argue from, who can find none more to his purpose than this.

By the kingdom of God here may be meant the gospel dispensation; or the
visible kingdom which Christ was setting up, as this is very commonly the
meaning of this phrase. And the scribe might be a man of true piety on the
Jewish plan; but had not yet been under advantage to satisfy himself about the
character of Christ and his doctrines. If it should be objected to this, that
St. Matthew says this very scribe, asked Christ this question, tempting him. I
answer, this may be understood not in a bad sense; it may only mean, that he
asked this question to try him, and see what his opinion was on this point,
that he might be the better able to form a judgment of him. If these words are
not understood in this sense, they are not consistent with his being near the
state of a good man, as Mr. M. supposes him to be. In short, there is as much
evidence that he was quite a pious, good man, as there is that he was so near
to this as Mr. M. says he was, and he has been perfectly arbitrary in bringing
him so near the state of a good man, and yet not allowing him to be really
good. If he was a good man, the meaning of Christ's words to him is, "I find
you have so much light and knowledge, that you want only to be a little more
acquainted with me and my doctrines, in order to be one of my disciples, a
professed member of that kingdom, which the Messiah is now about to set up."

But, after all, it is my opinion, that as we know nothing of the character of
this scribe but what appears in his putting a question to Christ, and approving
of his answer, and making an observation upon it; and it is expressly said that
the reply of our Lord was grounded entirely on his answer, Christ has reference
to this only, and declares that this important sentiment, in which he appeared
to be so full and clear, comprehended so much, and was in such a degree the
foundation of all he taught; that he was hereby in a great measure prepared to
understand all the doctrines necessary to be known and believed, in order to be
a member of his kingdom; and in this respect was not far from the kingdom of
God.

But if this is not the true meaning of these words, and they must intend a
nearness to a state of grace and salvation, there is not the least evidence
that this consisted in any good, or less sinful disposition of mind by which he
was not far from the temper and exercises of a good man, and more disposed
heartily to embrace the gospel, than any other unregenerate man, as has been
observed.

Mr. M. and others have taken it for granted, that a person, in order to be
more likely to be saved than others; or to be in any true sense not far from
the kingdom of God, must be in some degree well disposed, or less inclined to
sin, and less opposite to God and holiness, and so a much less sinner than
others: Hence when they read this text, and find one pronounced not far from
the kingdom of God, by Christ, they conclude he was a man of a good
disposition, almost disposed to embrace the gospel, though not one word is said
about it in the text.

On this plan he has the least ground to hope for salvation, who views himself
to be a greater sinner than others: Yea he cannot reasonably have any hope
until he has a better opinion of himself, and thinks himself better than any
who shall finally perish. And every one who is under the government of the same
spirit, which Christ points out in the Pharisee, who went up to the temple to
pray, may have high hopes of salvation, and swell in his confidence that he is
not so bad as other men. But this notion, so far as it is received, will strike
death to all the hopes, of every person, who is of a different and opposite
spirit.

And indeed, if the scribe by his speculations and the right notions which he
appeared to have, was become less sinful and opposite to God and the gospel,
and not far from a state of grace, or true holiness in the state and exercises
of his heart, which must imply, at least, that he was got much above half way
to it; no reason can be given why he might not soon arrive to the state and
exercises of a good man, by making a little more progress in his present course
and advancing in the same kind of light and knowledge, and disposition of mind,
which he now had in such a considerable degree. If he had got so near to real
holiness, as not to be far from it, the greatest difficulty was over, and a few
steps more in the same course in which he had hitherto proceeded, would have
brought him completely into the kingdom of God.

Mr. MILLS'S third argument, P. 28, 29, 30.
consists in stating the matter in dispute between us, as he says, "in a fair
light," and then "appealing to the judicious reader" to judge, who is on the
right side of the question. This, I confess, appears to me to be somewhat of an
odd argument, and to be expressed in a very round-about, intricate way: However
we must make the best of it that we can.

I agree with him that the only point to be determined, as that on which the
whole controversy turns, is, Whether the sin and guilt, which the awakened,
convinced, unregenerate sinner exercises and contracts in consequence of the
light and conviction that he has, and which he was not chargeable with in a
state of ignorance and security, are so great as to over balance all his
external reformations, be they as great as they will, so that on the whole he
is now more guilty and vile, than he was before, even in the practice of all
that external wickedness, which he has now forsaken? Mr. M. has not stated the
point in these words; but I conclude this is his meaning.

I have particularly and largely considered this matter in some of the
foregoing sections: And I am willing to join issue with Mr. M. here, and appeal
to the judicious reader, who has carefully attended to what has been said.

But I must beg leave to observe that what Mr. M. calls "setting this matter in
a fair light," is really a gross misrepresentation of it. Of this the
"judicious reader" will be sensible, without my saying a word upon it: but he
who is not so, will be in danger of being deceived by it. For the sake of such
therefore, I would say a few things, to prevent the influence which it might
otherwise have on them.

1. He has not set the aggravated sin and guilt of the awakened convinced
sinner in a true light; or rather has not brought it into view at all, in the
whole that he has said. He indeed speaks of "the additional sin, arising merely
from that sensibility of conscience, whereby the awakened sinner reforms ALL
known sin." But there can be no "additional sin" in this state of the case; for
the sinner is supposed to act up to the sensibility and light of his
conscience, in reforming all known sin. Such an one is either not an awakened
convinced sinner, because he does not know that unbelief and rejecting, having
and opposing Jesus Christ, is a sin, and by far the greatest of which he can be
guilty; or he does embrace the gospel, and so is not unregenerate. The
awakened, convinced sinner is so far from reforming all known sin, that he is
constantly guilty of a thousand times more known sin, than he was, or could be,
before he was thus awakened and convinced, and the actual hardness and
rebellion of his heart is immensely increased. This is kept wholly out of view
by Mr. M. Yea, his representation is in direct opposition to this; and so most
contrary to the truth. This he has done through his whole book, as has been
before observed. And he here, and every where else, puts "sensibility of
conscience" in opposition to "hardness of heart," and a "hardened state," which
is contrary to the truth, and only tends to mislead the unwary reader; The
awakened, convinced sinner has as much hardness of heart, and is as really in a
hard^^^d state, as the secure sinner, if by hard heart is meant a rebellious,
ob^^^^te heart, which is the meaning of the word in scripture: yea, his heart^
harder, than it was in a state of security, as much greater degrees of light
and conviction are now let into his mind.

2. He has not set the state of the unawakened, secure sinner in a just light.
This appears in what has been just observed of his representing him, as having
hardness of heart, and being in an hardened state, as differing herein from the
awakened, convinced sinner. The secure sinner is indeed in a hardened state,
but not more so, nor so much, as the awakened convinced sinner. The former
would be as much awakened, and concerned about himself as the latter, had he as
much light in his mind and conscience, but this would not remove the least
degree of hardness of heart, but be the occasion of increasing it.

Again, he represents the secure sinner as committing all his open wickedness
"presumptuously, not only against the light of God's word, but against the
clear dictates of natural conscience." It is doubtless true in general, of
secure profligates, under the gospel, that they sin more or less against the
dictates of their conscience. But the light and dictates of their consciences
are very weak and faint; and they seldom attend to this matter, or think any
thing about it, and are not convinced that there is really much harm in what
they do. They have no reallizing apprehension, that they shall be called to an
account for what they are doing, and be punished for it. This must be supposed;
for in proportion as their consciences dictate this, they will be awakened and
concerned. They cannot therefore be properly said to sin against the clear
dictates of natural conscience. To be sure they cannot be said to do so in
distinction from the convinced sinner: for, as has been observed, the latter
sins a thousand times as much against his conscience as the former, and against
immensely clearer light and dictates of conscience, both with respect to what
is sin, and what are the just consequences of it.

As to what he says, P. 30.
that he has " clearly showed that the degree of wickedness in Chorazian and
Bethsaida, above Tire and Sidon, consisted in a greater degree of stupidity and
hardness of heart in the former, whereby they were more unimpressible than the
latter, the same external means and advantages to repent being supposed:" I
trust the reader who has attended to what I have already said upon this case,
will not think he has given the least evidence of it.

MR. MILLS'S fourth argument consists in showing, Of what account these
characters are with the blessed God, and how he treats them in his word and
providence, viz. That of the awakened sinner, brought, though on principles of
nature, to humble himself before God, repent, reform known evils, and
conscientiously attend known duties; and that of the stout hearted, bold,
daring, hardened sinner, that obstinately persists in all manner of vicious and
immoral pactices, under the same external means of light, and against the clear
dictates of his conscience.

The reader will observe in what colors these different characters are set;
and will be sensible, I trust, that there are no such different characters of
the unregenerate; which I have endeavored to show heretofore. The awakened
sinner never does humble himself before God, but is quite as far from this as
the secure profligate: Yea, the pride and stubbornness of the former, is
exercised in a higher degree, and more directly against God, than that of the
latter. And he does not conscientiously attend known duties: for under true
convictions, he knows that he really does no duty at all, has never done any
thing that God commands, or paid the least obedience to him in one instance:
And his conscience tells him of a thousand times more duty to God, which he
with obstinacy, and knowingly refuses to do, than the secure sinner ever
thought of. And the former appears to be a more stout-hearted, bold, daring,
hardened sinner, than the latter, as he "obstinately persists" in the highest
crimes, the most heaven daring sin that men can be guilty of; and voluntarily
goes on in the way to destruction, with his eyes, as it were, wide open, and
under all the awakenings and terrors of his conscience, in a view of the awful
consequence of his rebellion, and in the sight of an angry God, and dreadful
hell.

But let us attend to the argument. He goes on to say, If we can find clearly
of what account these characters are with the omniscient God, we shall find
what they really are, and a more sure ground to form our judgment concerning
them, than all our weak reasonings can otherwise furnish us with. I shall
therefore touch on a few instances of each kind, as exhibited in the holy
scriptures.

I suppose I have already sufficiently showed from the scripture, how these
characters stand in God's sight. However we will attend to Mr. M's instances;
for I doubt not we shall get some light hereby.

HE first undertakes to produce instances "of awakened, humbled, reformed
sinners. He instances in Ahab, Jehu, the Ninevites, and the children of Israel
at Mount-Sinai. Of Ahab he observes, that when he rent his clothes, etc. in
consequence of the terrible message delivered to him by the prophet; the Lord
took this favorable notice of it, and deferred the evil threatened; "see thou
how Ahab humbles himself before me? Because he humbles himself before me, I
will not bring the evil in his days." 1 Kings XXI. 25, 29.
He appeals to all, whether it can be supposed that Ahab was not less sinful
and vile, when he thus humbled himself, since God takes such favorable notice
of it, and out of respect to this, defers the evil threatened* He also observes
concerning Jehu, that it is evident from God's express approbation, and the
bestowment of so great, though outward favor, because he had done well, that in
God's account, his obedience, though but the matter of duty, upon principles of
nature, was less wicked than a total disregard to GOD'S command would have
been. And his argument is to the same purpose from the case of the Ninevites,
whom God spared, and granted them a great salvation, out of respect to their
repentance, which he concludes was not a gracious repentance

Upon this the following things may be observed.

1. If God granted favors to Ahab and Jehu, and a great deliverance and
salvation to the Ninevites purely out of respect to their repentance and good
deeds, while they were impenitent, unbelievers, and enemies to God and his Son
the Mediator; then he may and does show favor to sinners out of respect to what
they are in themselves, their exercises and doings, and without any relation
and respect to Christ the Mediator. Therefore if there was no such Mediator he
might show favors to sinners, take a favorable notice of their doings, and
express and manifest his approbation of them, and purely out of respect to this
suspend his punishments, and grant them pardon and salvation. For if he grants
a less good, a less deliverance and salvation, out of respect to their
character and doings, because they have done well, or have become less sinful,
than they were; he may as well grant a greater good, even pardon of all sin and
eternal salvation, out of respect to this; especially if they should become
really virtuous and obedient, from the highest and best principles. If Ahab,
for instance, obtained the divine approbation, and God's favorable notice, so
as to have the awful judgments threatened, suspended, and removed from him, only
by becoming in some degree less sinful, in being filled with fears of temporal
evil, while he remained yet an enemy to God; how much higher must he have risen
in God's favor, had he truly repented and humbled himself before God and
returned to obedience from the noblest principles, loving God with all his
heart and soul! Surely, if what he did, was sufficient to abate God's anger
toward him, and obtain his approbation and favor so far as to remove the heavy
judgment from him which was threatened; had he made advances in his goodness,
so as to become perfectly friendly and obedient to God, it would have been
sufficient; quite to remove God's anger, and atone for all his past sins, and
procure God's highest approbation and favor. The same observation is just when
applied to Jehu and the Ninevites.

If Ahab abated the divine displeasure against him, and obtained God's
approbation and favor in any degree, by the alteration of his character and
conduct, and purely on this account; Then this did so far atone for his sins,
and render his person, and character, the whole taken together, less
displeasing, and more acceptable to God. What need then did Ahab stand in of
the atonement and merit of a Mediator, in order to obtain the acceptance of his
person, and pardon of his sins, and the favor of God? He had obtained this in
some degree purely by his own reformations and doings; and nothing could be in
the way of his obtaining it in as high a degree as he needed, if he went on in
his reformation and obedience to higher degrees. Therefore no sinner wants any
other atonement and righteousness in order to obtain pardon and stand complete
in God's favor, but what is contained in his own reformations and obedience.

Thus Mr M. in his zeal in the cause of his awakened, reformed, humbled sinner,
has quite sapped the foundation of the doctrine of atonement by a mediator; and
so has overthrown the whole gospel, and represented Christ as dying in vain! He
has done this, I believe, without design, not really knowing what he was about,
as many others have done before him: but he, and every one else, may be
challenged to show the need, the propriety and wisdom of the atonement which
Christ has made, if sinners out of Christ, wholly unconnected with him and his
enemies, may abate the divine displeasure, and obtain God's approbation and
favor purely by their own reformations and doings and wholly out of respect to
them.

This is what the awakened sinner is at heart desiring and seeking after;
nothing would please him better, than to obtain God's approbation and favor by
his own reformation and doings. He always will be of this disposition as long
as he views himself in the light Mr. M. sets Ahab, and till he despairs of
becoming any better or less sinful in this way. And never was one reconciled to
the way of salvation by Christ, till he was not only convinced in his judgment,
and conscience, that what Mr: M. has here advanced is not true, but hates and
detests such a notion, in his heart.

I therefore scruple not to say, that Mr. M. has in the passages I am
considering, exalted the sinner, and espoused his cause, at the expense of the
honor and glory of the Mediator and savior of sinners. Yea, that if what he
has here advanced is true, Christ is dead in vain, and sinners are in an
infinitely less guilty, miserable state, than the preaching of the cross of
Christ, and the atonement by him supposes them to be. Mr. M. having observed
concerning the Ninevites, that though their repentance did not "proceed from a
principle of saving grace, yet a great salvation is bestowed out of respect to
it, and their repentance was made the only condition of their great salvation,"
adds the following words, And can it agree to the purity of God's nature, to
make a greater degree of wickedness, on the whole, the condition of bestowing a
great salvation, though of an outward nature? Sure it cannot, since this would be
to manifest some regard to sin, and encourage men to practice it with boldness.
I think it may be also with as much propriety asked, can it agree to the purity
of God's nature to make a less degree of wickedness the condition, etc.? If
wickedness is made the condition, it seems to be no great matter, whether it be
greater or less. Surely to make any degree of wickedness the condition, "would
be to manifest some regard to sin and so far encourage men to practice it."
But, what is infinitely worse, to make the reformations and doings of the
sinner the only condition, of any salvation, and to grant it out of respect to
these, and without any respect to Christ, his merit and righteousness, is to
set aside and destroy all law and moral government, and to manifest infinitely
less hatred of sin, and to favor it and the sinner infinitely more, than
becomes the majesty of heaven; and nothing could tend more to encourage men to
practice it with boldness. I therefore proceed to observe,

2. A very natural and easy meaning can be put upon these passages,
consistently with the doctrine of atonement, and the glory of the Mediator, and
as consistently with the principle, in opposition to which Mr. M. has attempted
to set them. God in his conduct toward these persons, and in what he says of
them, has respect only to what was visible, to their external appearance and
conduct: So nothing can be inferred from this with respect to their hearts,
whether they were more or less sinful.

Ahab humbled himself before God in his appearance and visible conduct, and put
on the external appearance and profession of a true penitent; and God who acted
not as the searcher of hearts and final Judge, in his treatment of the church
and people of Israel, out as their visible head and civil governor, and treated
them according to their external appearance and profession: I say, God in this
character, speaks of Ahab and treats him according to his external appearance
and conduct, i. e. as if he had been a true penitent, whether he was really so
or not, or whether he was sincere or only played the hypocrite. God treated
Ahab in this case, as he did Josiah afterward on the appearance and profession
he made of repentance and reformation, and renouncing the sin of his fathers.
God uses much the same language to him on this occasion, by Huldah the
prophetess, as he does to Ahab; "Because thine heart was tender, and thou did
humble thyself before God, when thou heardst his words against this place, and
against the inhabitants thereof, and humbledst thyself before me, and did
rend thy clothes, and weep before me; I have heard the also, says the Lord.
Behold I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shall be gathered to thy
grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the evil that I will bring
upon this place." 2 Chronicles. XXXIV. 27, 28.
God treated Ahab as he has obliged professing christians to treat one another.
If one falls into gross external sin, and afterward, upon their dealing
faithfully with him, returns and says he repents, i. e. puts on this appearance
and profession, they are to forgive him, and treat him as a true penitent,
whatever his heart may be, and though he may wickedly dissemble in the whole, and
his pretensions to repentance be really more criminal than the conduct of which
he professes to repent.

Thus God dealt with the church and people of Israel. When they in profession
and appearance gave themselves up to God, and solemnly promised, "all that the
Lord has said, we will do and be obedient." He is represented as relying on
their promise, and treated them as if they were sincere and hearty in this
profession and appearance. "He said, surely they are my people, children that
will not lie: So he was their Savior;" Isai. LXIII. 8.
even when, as the omniscient God, he knew that they did flatter him with their
mouth, and lied unto him with their tongues. Psalm. LXXVIII, 36.


And thus he treated the Ninevites in his providence, according to their
outward appearance and profession, agreeable to the general rule of his conduct
toward nations and bodies of people, which he had revealed. "At what instant I
shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to
pull down, and destroy it: if that nation against whom I have pronounced, turn
from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them."
Jer. XVIII. 7, 8.


And when God says to Jehu, "Because thou have done well in executing that
which is right in mine eyes," 2 Kings X. 30.
he has reference only to his external conduct, speaking to him, and treating
him, as if he was as sincere and friendly to God in what he did, as he
professed to be. These words are therefore consistent with his being the
greatest sinner, in the nation at that very time; and most odious and
abominable in God's sight, in all he did, it being all taken together, nothing
but a piece of high-handed wickedness. This was doubtless the real truth of the
case; for at bottom he was no more of a friend to Jehovah than to Baal: and
while he was pulling down Baal, and destroying his worshippers, and executing
vengeance on the house of Ahab, he was setting himself up, and regarding only
himself, in opposition to Jehovah; and all his pretenses of "zeal for the LORD"
were nothing, but gross hypocrisy. Who then can think that Jehu was less sinful
and vile in God's sight now, than before, as Mr. M. represents him to be? And
when GOD says of the children of Israel at Mount-Siani, "They have well said
all that they have spoken," Deuteronomy. V. 28.
he has reference to their words and profession only, and nothing is said about
any thing else. They had indeed spoken well, they had promised obedience and
said to Moses "Speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto
thee, and we will hear it and do it." But they had no heart answerable to their
words. In these good words "they did flatter him with their mouth, and lied
unto him with their tongues." This is intimated in what God says to Moses on
this occasion, "O that there were such an heart in them, that they would keep
all my commandments always." It is therefore so far from being true, that the
people of Israel were less vile and sinful in God's sight when they said these
words; and that on this account they had his "express approbation, which Mr. M.
asserts, that it is certain they were more vile and odious in God's sight, than
if they had said nothing; if gross and solemn lying and hypocrisy is more
sinful, than to make no profession, and tell no lie. These two last mentioned
instances are therefore very ill chosen ones to answer Mr. M's purpose,
whatever are the rest.

But if we set aside what has been said in the foregoing observations, and
allow that the persons here mentioned were not so guilty and vile in God's
sight as they had been, and that this is expressly asserted of them all; yet
this does not afford the least shadow of an argument to prove that an awakened
convinced sinner, such an one as I describe, is not more guilty and vile in
God's sight, than when in a state of ignorance and security. For, I have to
observe,

3. It does not appear that any of these were the awakened, convinced sinners
of which I speak, but the contrary is most evident. Let Mr. M. produce as many
instances as he will of persons becoming less sinful, and growing so much
better, as on this account to abate and remove God's anger toward them, and
attain his approbation and favor; yet this will be nothing in favor of the
cause he has espoused; unless these are instances of these awakened, convinced
sinners, about whom is the dispute.

Jehu has not the least appearance of any awakening and conviction, or
humiliation, or so much as external reformation. I therefore a little wonder
how Mr. M. happened to think of him for an instance of an "awakened, humbled
reformed sinner."

The case of the Ninevites has been before considered; and it appears by the
account which Mr. M. gives of them, that they were very far from the
conviction, of which I speak, being "in the depth of heathenish darkness, and
not knowing so much as the name of a Mediator."

The Israelites were terrified and affected by the extraordinary, dreadful
appearances at Mount-Sinai; but that they had much light and conviction let
into their consciences, there is no evidence; but the contrary is most evident.
They had no real conviction of conscience, of the sinfulness and perverseness of
their own hearts; but thought they were disposed and ready to do all that God
commanded. Instead of having any true light and conviction of conscience, they
were vastly ignorant and stupid in this respect, while they were only alarmed
and frighted by the external appearances of Mount-Sinai. Just as many persons
now are affrighted by some imaginary suggestions and apprehensions, and so
imagine themselves to be under the awakenings and conviction of sin, which are
preparatory to conversion, and are thought to be so by many others; while they
have really no true sight and conviction of their sin and danger, and know not
what is their real state and character. Indeed the Israelites were neither
truly "awakened, convinced, humbled, nor reformed; for they directly upon this
fell into the grossest acts of idolatry; they made and worshipped a golden
calf, and in their idolatrous revel "they sat down to eat and to drink, and
rose up to play."

Ahab put on the appearance of a true penitent: "He put sackcloth upon his
flesh, and fasted and lay in sackcloth, and went softly." And thus he did, in
his external appearance, humble himself before God. But there is not the least
evidence that he was under what is called legal conviction, or was in any
degree troubled, or tho'tful about a future state; or that he had any right
speculative notions of his guilty, lost, miserable state, as a sinner, and of
the way in which he might obtain pardon and salvation. He believed the prophet,
that God was angry with him for what he had done in the affair of Naboth's
vineyard, and he was afraid of the temporal, worldly evils which were
threatened, and put on this appearance of penitence in hopes that hereby the
judgments might be averted. He is not therefore an instance of an awakened,
convinced sinner: so is not in any degree applicable to the case before us, on
supposition it was certain that he, by what he did, became less sinful. But
whether he was a convinced sinner or not, as it appears by his after conduct,
that he was not a true penitent, we may be very sure that his heart was not
answerable to the external appearance he put on, but was directy opposite
thereto; and therefore that he was guilty of gross hypocrisy, and was more vile
and hateful in God's sight, than he was before he had this special admonition,
and put on this hypocritical appearance. How far then is this instance from
being to Mr. M's purpose!

BUT Mr. M. has more instances under this head, to which I will now attend. He
says the point he contends for is evident from the representation our Savior
makes of this matter in the following words. When the unclean spirit is gone
out of a man, he walks through dry places, seeking rest, and finds none.
Then he says, I will return to my house, from whence I came out; and when he
is come, he finds it empty swept and garnished. Then goes he, and takes
with him seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in, and
dwell there: and the last state of that man is worse than the first. Mat. XII.
43 -- 45.
He observes upon these words, that, by the house empty swept and garnished, is
represented the state of an awakened, reformed sinner. By his return with seven
other spirits more wicked than himself, entering in, and dwelling there, is
represented the more desperate, wicked state, to which he is reduced on the
abatement of his convictions, returning with further degrees of contracted
hardness of heart, to the unrestrained practice of more desperate degrees of
wickedness. Now it is expressly affirmed that the last state of that man is
WORSE than the first. He then goes on to observe that this is applied to the
Jewish nation, who had been awakened and reformed by the preaching of John,
etc. P. 34, 35.


It has been before observed, that in arguing from this instance, Mr. M. has
expressly contradicted what he had advanced in a former argument. Since
therefore he has introduced this at such an expense, it would be very wrong not
to allow it its full weight. The reader will judge for himself, when he has
attended to the following particulars.

1. I allow that the going out of the unclean spirit intends external
reformation of gross, open sins; which took place in a considerable degree
among the Jews, upon the appearance and preaching of John Baptist, and
continued for some time. But,

2. I think Mr. M. has mistaken the meaning of the 'house empty, swept and
garnished.' This does not intend external reformation, or any reformation at
all: But denotes a habitation suited and prepared for the reception of such a
guest or inhabitant as is an evil spirit; every thing being ready for his
admittance, and suited to invite him to dwell there, and give him all desirable
advantage. In one word, it denotes a heart not made better or less sinful in
any degree, but fit and prepared for the entrance and abode of a devil, only in
a different shape; and that he might dwell there with greater power and
advantage. This indeed represents the state of an awakened, convinced sinner.
The unclean devil which reigned in him in a state of ignorance, security and
external vice, now enters him in another shape, for which his heart is now
prepared in a manner it was not before, and becomes seven ^old more wicked and
vile, in the exercises of a self-righteous, proud spirit, and in more direct
and stronger opposition to Christ and the gospel. Mr. M. has therefore led me
to a passage very much to my purpose, and directly against himself.

This also represents the state of the Jews when they were in some measure
awakened and externally reformed. They only forsook one way of wickedness for
another, which was much greater, and every way worse. They trusted in
themselves that they were righteous, and hated and rejected Jesus Christ.
Instead of the unclean devil in obedience to whom they had wallowed in external
filthiness, a self-righteous, proud, unbelieving devil entered them: and they
became seven fold more wicked and the children of hell, than the publicans and
open sinners, in their hatred of Jesus Christ, and direct, and violent
opposition to him.

3. By first and last state are meant, not their reformed state, and external
wickedness afterward returned to; but the state they were in, before the
unclean spirit went out, and the state in which, under the influence of seven
worse devils, they hated the divine character; and rejected and opposed Jesus
Christ, by which they became worse, more guilty and vile than the unclean
Sodomites, and the inhabitants of Tire and Sidon, and were going on to a more
dreadful damnation, notwithstanding all their external reformations and
professions, in which they cleansed only the outside, while the most abominable
wickedness reigned within, and were 'like whited sepulchers, which indeed
appeared beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all
uncleanness. Mat. XXIII. 27.


Thus, the true import of this parable being attended to, it appears to be so
far from containing an argument in favor of what Mr. M. has espoused, that it
is directly against him, and represents the Jews, notwithstanding all their
awakenings and reformations, more than seven fold worse than they were before,
while they hated the divine character clearly set before them in the incarnate
Son of God, and obstinately rejected and opposed him.

But if this most natural and plain sense of the words is given up, and the
interpretation Mr. M. has given is admitted, they will afford no argument in
his favor; for,

4. According to him, the Jews became worse, more guilty and vile, because
under all their awakenings, reformations, light and advantages, they did not
embrace the gospel; but hardened their hearts, and rejected the clearest light
and evidence of the truth, and thereby ripened themselves for a more aggravated
condemnation. It was then the abuse of the light and advantages they had, in
their awakened, reformed state, that ripened them for a more aggravated
condemnation, which is the very thing which I assert, and which Mr. M. opposes.
And if it is allowed, that they, finally hardened their hearts, and rejected
the clearest light and evidence of the truth; and thereby ripened themselves
for a more aggravated condemnation, not in their awakened, reformed state,
under the preaching of John Baptist, Christ and his apostles: but, as Mr. M.
supposes, after all this, by returning to their former or greater external
wickedness; this instance will be nothing to the case before us: For though it be
granted that if a person who has been under great awakenings and convictions,
does not only abuse all his light and conviction by continuing to reject Christ
and the gospel; but in opposition to all this goes into an allowed course of
open wickedness, does hereby become more guilty and vile, and contracts greater
hardness of heart, than while he was externally reformed under the influence of
his convictions of conscience; yet it does not follow that he was so, when in a
state of ignorance and security before he had this light and conviction: In
this case the light and conviction he has had is the reason and ground of his
greater sinfulness; which serves to show how such light and conviction
aggravates all his sins: and therefore that he could not have been so guilty
and vile, had he never been the subject of them: and so is an argument in favor
of what I have advanced: but if it was not, it is nothing against it; for it
has no relation to the case of a sinner before he falls under awakenings and
conviction; but only to those, who after awakenings and convictions fall into
gross open wickedness; to which what I assert has no respect at all. In a word,
in order to prove that a sinner is more guilty and vile before he falls under
awakenings and convictions, than he is when thus awakened, Mr. M. brings an
instance to prove that he who runs into open wickedness after he has these
convictions, is on this account more guilty and vile; which surely is a very
inconclusive way of arguing.

The next instance Mr. M. produces is that of "the young man, on whose
declaration of his having observed the commandments from his youth, it is said,
Christ beholding him, loved him." Mar. X. 21.


Mr. M. observes upon this, that "whatever dispute may be raised on the words,"
he supposes it will be allowed by all, that he was a person of an externally
moral and amiable conversation, and that on that account Christ showed him
respect, at least as being less vile than if he had under his religious
advantages continued in greater degrees of stupidity, and lived in the open
violation of all God's commandments. P. 35.


Here I take leave to observe the following things.

1. Mr. M. seems here quite to have forgot what he was about, or had undertaken
to do; which was to produce instances of "awakened, humbled, reformed sinners:
for surely he could not have the least though it that this young man was such an
instance. He was not reformed; for had never been guilty of any course of
external sins. He was not a humbled sinner; for he did not charge himself with
the least sin; and was stupid and proud enough to think of obtaining eternal
life by doing some good thing. It hence appears also that he had not the least
degree of true light and conviction of conscience. Mr. M. says, "Christ showed
him respect, as being less vile, than if he had continued in greater degrees of
stupidity. I wonder that he mentioned this; for he manifested the most shocking
degree of stupidity of conscience, by saying that he had kept all the commands,
which Christ mentioned to him, from his youth. One would hope there was not
another such ignorant, stupid wretch among all the Jews.

2. I do not allow, what Mr. M. supposes will be allowed by all "that Christ
showed him respect" and loved him, on the account of his good character, "at
least as being less vile, etc."

If Christ loved him merely because he was less vile than he might have been,
he had the same reason to love every one that he saw; for we have no reason to
think that any one of them was as vile and sinful as he could possibly be, on
any supposition. Besides, this would be a very odd sort of love indeed, which
is wholly grounded on his being less sinful and odious than he might have been,
or than others were. It is indeed a love which consists in not hating him so
much, as if he had been more odious. In this sense we may be said to love all
who are not so bad as the devil, or the most odious creatures in the universe.

Nor is there any reason to think that Christ loved him on account of any thing
amiable and excellent in his character. His saying "all these have I observed
from my youth," was much more of an expression of the most odious ignorance,
stupidity and wickedness of mind, than of any thing else. Mr. M. often speaks
of the pharisee who went up to the temple to pray at "a proud, stupid,
self-justifying sinner." And says, "he was, in some respects, if not on the
whole the vilest of all sinners." P. 80, 81.
I see not what great difference there is in the characters of these two. The
young man was not an extortioner, unjust or adulterer: and was doubtless as
exact in his observance of the first table of the law, as of the second. And he
certainly trusted in this as a righteousness to recommend him to God. He did
not think that he wanted any thing more, unless it was to make further progress
in his good deeds, and do some good thing, further to recommend him to God,
which he had not yet done. Surely Mr. M. had no reason to set one of these
pharisees in so bad a light, as the greatest sinner on earth; and represent the
other as a small sinner, and so amiable as to attract Christ's respect and
complacency.
He must have been destitute of all true benevolence, vastly proud, and a
perfect enemy to God, else he could not have been so ignorant of himself, and
the divine law: And Christ saw all this in the clearest light. He "beholding
him," looking on him as a poor, ignorant, stupid, proud enemy to God, and in a
most wretched condition, this excited in him the love of pity and benevolence
toward him; and under the influence of this he went on to use means suited to
instruct and relieve him. This, I suppose is all that is meant by his loving
him. We have no need to look for something amiable and excellent in this young
man, in order to account for Christ's loving him, with a love of pity and
benevolence. Misery and wretchedness, without any thing amiable, is the proper
object of this love. Thus God is said to love the world of mankind, when they
were his enemies, Joh. III. 16.
and we are commanded to love our worst enemies, not with a love of
complacency, but of benevolence and kindness, how ever odious their character
may justly be to us. But if it were granted, that Christ loved him out of
respect to his decent, amiable, external behavior, (as some have supposed)
this is very consistent with his being the greatest sinner in the nation, his
whole character being considered, as comprehending the state and exercises of
his heart. -- But more than enough has perhaps been said to show with what
little reason Mr. M. has produced this instance in support of his cause.

HE goes on to say, Again, the same truth is clearly held forth by the apostle
Peter, where he tells us, 'If after they have escaped the pollutions of the
world, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are
again entangled therein, and overcome; the latter end is worse with them than
the beginning Upon this he asks the following question, Is it not plainly
implied in these words, that while he is not again entangled, and overcome with
the pollutions of the world, i. e. continues to escape them, he is less vile?
Answer. If this is granted, it is nothing to the purpose: for according to
this, there is reference only to their abuse of that light and knowledge, which
they had, after they had been awakened and reformed. The point in controversy
has no relation to such a case as this. The question between us is not, Whether
a person that has reformed his external conduct under the influence of light
and conviction of conscience, may not grow worse by returning to his former
ways of sinning? But whether a convinced sinner, how much soever he is reformed
in his external conduct, is not on the whole worse, more guilty and vile than
he was before he had this light and conviction? But this has been repeatedly
observed before. It seems a little strange and odd, that Mr. M. when he is
hunting up arguments to support that side which he has taken of the question in
debate, should so often quite forget the point in dispute, and argue against
something else.

But I have here to observe Mr. M. has not given the true sense of the words.
When St. Peter says, "the latter end is worse with them than the beginning,"
(or as the same words are rendered Mat. XII. 45.
the last state is worse with them, than the first) he means, that they who
have once, under the influence of their knowledge and conviction of the truths
of christianity, externally submitted to the laws of that holy religion; and
after that turn apostates, and fall into their former ways of external sin, are
in a worse state, than they were before they had the knowledge of christianity.
Their beginning, or first state, is the state they were in before they had
escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of Christ. This is as
evident as can be by the words immediately following: "For it had been better
for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than after they had known
it, to turn from the holy commandment." To prove that the latter end is worse
with them than the beginning, he says it had been better for them, to have
remained as they were in the beginning, i. e. in ignorance of the gospel, than
to renounce it after they had known it Mr. M. has therefore quite mistaken the
force and meaning of this text. As it stands, it is rather a conformation of
the point which he opposes: For their being in a worse state is wholly
grounded, not in their greater external wickedness; for they are supposed only
to return to their former ways in which they lived in the beginning: but on
their returning to their old ways of sinning when they had so much knowledge
and conviction of the truth. So that their sinning against the internal light
and conviction which they had, is represented as the chief aggravation of their
sins: which is the very thing which I assert, and which Mr. M. opposes.

Mr. M. concludes his argument from these instances with the following
question. Are not these as clear indications as can well be given by words,
that the account the blessed God makes of these different characters of men,
under the means of grace is in favor of the negative part of the question? I
leave the reader now to answer this question himself.

MR. M. proceeds, On the other hand to inquire, of what account with the
blessed God the character of the secure, bold, presumptuous, hardened sinner
is, who obstinately persists in vicious and immoral practices. This he proposes
to do by considering the threatenings uttered by God against such in
particular. And "the execution of his judgments and wrath, in the way of his
providence, correspondent with the threatenings of his word," on those of this
character, when this is expressly assigned as the ground of these judgments. P.
36. -- 40.


The threatenings he mentions are contained in the scriptures referred to in
the margin. Prove. XXIX. 1. Numb. XV. 30. Amos VI. 1. 1 Thessalonians. V. 3. Psalm.
LXVIII. 21. Deuteronomy. XXIX. 19.
The instances of God's judgments which he produces, are the destruction of the
old world -- God's sending fire and brimstone on Sodom -- The judgments
executed on Pharaoh -- and on the people of Israel, first and last.

Upon this I shall only make the following brief remarks.

1. Mr. M. suppose and allows that these are only threats and executions of
"outward judgments," i. e. of temporal evils and calamities. And is it not easy
to see why open, visible sins should be punished visibly and openly in this
state, rather than those which are invisible and secret: and therefore why
those sins should be threatened with these judgments? It cannot be hence
inferred, that these are always most guilty and the greatest sinners in God's
sight. God has no where in his word intimated that in his providence he treats
men according to their true character, inflicting the greatest outward
judgments on the greatest sinners, and showing the greatest favors to the least
guilty and vile: So far from this, that directly the contrary is abundantly
revealed. Therefore nothing can be determined about the question in dispute,
who is on the whole the greatest sinner, by all the threatenings and executions
of God's judgments in this world. It cannot be inferred that the man of God who
was sent to cry against the altar at Bethel was a greater sinner than Jeroboam
or the old prophet, because he was so severely threatened, and slain by a lion,
while they were spared. 1 King. XIII.
But this inferrence is as well grounded as Mr. M's. Nor is it any evidence
that the man who refused to smite the prophet, was in this a greater criminal
than any of his neighbors, because he was for this act of disobedience to the
prophet threatened, and slain by a Lion. 1 King. XX. 35, 36.

Our Savior expressly opposes and censures such a conclusion as Mr. M. makes
from these instances, in the followings words: (Suppose ye that these Galileans
were sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered such things? I tell
you, Nay." God's bringing outward temporal calamities on some for their visible
open sins, as a manifestation of his displeasure and anger, is no evidence that
their external wickedness is greater, and more provoking to God, than the
outward wickedness of many others, whom the spares and smiles on in his
providence; much less is it any evidence that they are in all respects, and on
the whole, greater sinners than others who escape these judgments.

It is enough that they, on whom these judgments are brought, deserve them, and
infinitely more, and that it is wife and proper, all things considered, for God
in this way to manifest his displeasure at them, though at the same time others
who escape these judgments, are more guilty and vile in God's fight; and will
have a much more intolerable condemnation in the day of judgment. Of this we
have an instance which cannot be disputed, in the inhabitants of Sodom, and
those of Capernaum, etc. The former were burnt up in fire and brimstone from
heaven; the latter, the most of them, at least, we have all reason to think
died a natural death, with no extraordinary marks of the divine vengeance: And
yet the latter were more guilty and vile than the former, our Savior being
judge, and will appear so at the day of judgment. It might be also observed
that most who had an actual hand in crucifying the Lord of glory, died quietly
in their beds; and a peculiar vengeance fell on those, who came upon the stage
after this; for the evils that come on the nation of the Jews, were suspended
till 40 years after this fact; in which time most of that generation, died off,
and others rose up in their room. And I suppose all will allow that the former
were more guilty than the latter.

2. Some of the threats Mr. M. has here quoted have no particular reference to
external sins of the unawakened secure sinner, or to any temporal, outward
judgments; but are as applicable to the awakened, convinced sinner as to any
other, and much more so. "He that being often reproved, herdeneth his neck,
shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy," is peculiarly applicable
to an awakened, convinced sinner. Such an one is reproved by the light and
convictions of his conscience much more and oftener than any other: and he
hardens his neck, more than others in proportion as his reproofs are stronger
and more constant. And his continuing to harden his neck will issue in sudden
and remediless destruction. -- And when it is said, "God shall wound the head
of his enemies: and the hairy scalp of such an one as goes on still in his
trespasses;" a secure profligate is no more pointed out, than an awakened,
convinced sinner; for the latter is really as much an enemy to God, as the
former, and "goes on still in his trespasses." Mr. M. might as well have
quoted any other text in the bible as these. And his mentioning these, only
shows that he either little though it what he was about, or quite misunderstood the
character of the awakened, convinced sinner while unregenerate. The latter is
doubtless the truth, since he appears to carry this mistake through the whole of
his book, and builds all his opposition to me upon it, as has been before
observed.

But be this as it may, whether the texts Mr. M. has quoted are all to his
purpose, or not; let it be remembered that however many threats of outward
judgments for open wickedness there are in the bible; and though there are many
instances of God's bringing judgments on men for such sins; yet this affords
not the least argument, that these were, all things considered, and on the
whole, greater sinners than any others who have escaped these judgments, nor is
any such thing implied or intimated in all this, as has been showed in the
first remark. This argument therefore of Mr. M's comes to nothing, and may well
be numbered with all the rest, which have been considered.

AND now the reader is to judge of the weight of all Mr. M. has said in
opposition to the point in debate, and whether he has overthrown, or so much as
shaken, what I have advanced in my section on means; and have endeavored to
vindicate in the preceding pages.

SECT. VII.
IN which what Mr. M. has said upon several other passages in my enquiry, is
examined.

AFTER Mr. M. has finished what he had to say upon the proposition he set up to
dispute against, he has filled up above two thirds of his book upon another
point of doctrine, which he owns I have neither expressly affirmed nor denied.
He does not however, quite forget the former dispute, but often brings it into
view under this head, and seems to think himself disputing against me. What I
am more especially concerned with here is what he says under his fifth general
head, in which he proposes to touch briefly on some particular passages, which
to him appear liable to exception, as not being clear from the holy scriptures.

THE first he mentions of this sort, is my construction of those words of
Christ, "Strive to enter in at the strait gate." I had said that some by the
strait gate here, understand "the entrance into heaven, or eternal life." And
striving to enter in at this gate must then intend, a keeping the commandments
of God, or the holy exercises of true saints, by which they walk in the way to
heaven; fight the good fight of faith, and so lay hold on eternal life.
Enquiry, P. 1, 2.
And proceeded to offer some things in favor of this interpretation, without
expressly declaring my own opinion. Mr. M. has taken an alarm at this, as if
all orthodoxy, and even religion itself was given up by such an interpretation
of these words. But let us consider what he has to say against it.

He first says, this is the Arminians sense of this text, which some think is a
short summary of their whole scheme. For this tends to deliver them from the
invisible influences of the holy Spirit in grown persons, and sensible
experiences and exercises in conversion, etc. And he goes on to ask, Is not
advancing this gloss on the text, the most effectual method that could be taken
unobservedly to overthrow Calvinism in this point, and promote Arminianism?

ANSWER. I am sorry if Calvinism, or any one peculiar doctrine of it, depends
so much upon the meaning of this single text, that it must stand or fall,
according as this is understood. I think such a supposition is more favorable
to Arminianism, than any interpretation that can be put upon this text.
Calvinists are poorly off indeed, if they have no text but this to prove "the
invincible influences of the holy Spirit, and sensible experiences and
exercises in conversion;" which does indeed say nothing about them. Many
Calvinists have greatly hurt themselves and their cause, by pressing into their
service texts of scripture which have no relation to the point which they would
support by them. And they need not be afraid of joining with Arminians, when
they are so lucky as to give the right sense of a text. And they who think the
sense of this text which I have mentioned "is a short summary of the whole
Arminian scheme," or tends to support it in one article, a^e, I imagine, quite
confused and in the dark with respect to any scheme of doctrines whatever.

Mr. M. goes on to say, However, as this interpretation of the text made by
Arminians, was to me obscure and unintelligible, as not holding forth the true
sense of the text; so it equally is now, when made by a Calvinist. But whether
this is owing to the misinterpretation of the text, or to my age and dullness,
I shall not determine, but leave to the impartial public, when the following
things are considered P. 45, 46.


Let us then consider what he has said.

He observes that I explain the strait gate as meaning the entrance into heaven
or eternal life; and says If I mean entering into heaven strictly without a
metaphor, this is not till death; and then it should seem that striving to
enter in by this gate would be endeavoring to die, which makes a very uncouth
sense. Uncouth indeed! But we must thank him for this sense: for I believe no
mortal else would ever have thought of it. I should have thought that on my
interpretation, striving to enter this gate, was striving to obtain eternal
life, in going in the way that leads to it, the way of holiness; or to be of
that character, which alone will be admitted into heaven: or that it was to
fight the good fight of faith, so as to lay hold on eternal life. This is the
sense I had given of striving. He therefore proceeds to say But taking striving
as he has explained it, yet it is still unintelligible, how they can walk in
the narrow way that leads to heaven, since they are supposed by his exposition,
to have entered there by passing through the gate. I leave the reader to make the
best he can of this.

He first says that according to my interpretation, striving to enter in at the
strait gate, means striving to die. In the next sentence he says my exposition
supposes they who strive to enter in at the strait gate, have entered into
heaven already; and he cannot see how, after this, they can be said to walk the
narrow way that leads to heaven. He then asks "If by the entrance into heaven,
I mean the entering into a state of grace, or conversion, how I have opposed
the sense of the text, which I endeavor to overthrow? But he presently forgets
all this, and supposes that I make the gate and the way to mean one and the
same thing: and that according to my construction, living a holy life and
actually entering into heaven are the same. P. 46, 47, 48.
And upon these suppositions, he argues against me, in his own imagination,
very strongly, till he thinks he has "restored the true and genuine sense of
the text." But in the midst of all this he takes notice that I have not
attempted to explain what is meant by the narrow way; nor showed the propriety
of our Lord's placing this gate before the way in his representation; both
which, I apprehend, (says he) necessary to be done, in order to set the sense
of this important text in a true and consistent light.

Answer. The words narrow way are not found in the text, nor is the gate placed
before the way. And what need there was of explaining or saying any thing about
that which is not found in the text, I cannot conceive. I did indeed say, that
striving to enter in at the strait gate according to the sense I mentioned, did
intend walking in the way of holiness; and this I supposed was the narrow way.
Mr. M. repeatedly tells of my speaking of the way, and what my exposition makes
it to mean: but he has just at this instant forgot all this which was in his
mind immediately before, and just after, and says, "He has not attempted to
explain what is meant by the narrow way!"

And now the reader is to determine whether all this is owing to Mr. M's age
and dullness, or to something else, For my part, I cannot help determining that
he was quite confused and lost here, whatever was the cause of it; and that he
has done nothing toward restoring any sense of the text at all.

I OBSERVED that the word in the original translated strive, in the text, when
used in other places in the new testament denoted not any exercises and doings
before conversion, but the exertions and labors of true christians in their
way to heaven, which might perhaps be a good reason for understanding it in the
same sense in this place. To support this observation I produced a number of
instances. Three of these Mr. M. examines, and thinks they turn out rather
against, than for me. The two first are the words of St. Paul, spoken of
himself, and of Timothy. "I have fa^ght the good fight. Fight the good fight of
faith." Mr. M. observes that in both these instances, that which limits the
word fight or strive to the exercises of true christians, is rather the good
fight, with which it is connected. Whereas if Mr. Hopkins's sense of the word
strive were certain, there had been no need at all for the apostle to have
added, the good strife or fight, since it could mean nothing else, but a good
and holy striving. It would have been a wild assertion indeed if I had said,
this word always necessarily carried this sense and could not signify any thing
else. Words, I know are in themselves quite arbitrary signs, and no more
signify one thing than another, till some meaning is affixed to them. All I
attempted was to show in what sense the inspired writers used it, when applied
to religious exercises. It was to Mr. M's purpose to show that they did not use
it in the sense which I had said they did: but this he has not attempted.

I know, and particularly observed, that the word was originally used among the
Greeks, to denote, the strifes in the olympic and other public games. The
apostle considers these strifes as an emblem of the christian race and strife,
in which men run and fight for eternal life; and therefore takes the word they
used for the former, and applies it to the latter. He calls the latter the good
fight, to distinguish it from that fight or agony which the word originally
signified, and to which he has reference; and not to distinguish it from the
exercises and doings of the unregenerate, Mr. M. says, This seems to imply
there might be a fighting and striving, that was not thus strictly good and
successful. I grant that it implies there was a striving in the olimpic games,
in distinction from which the christian's labor and strife, is a good fight;
but not that there was any other proper religious striving distinct from this.

The other instance I mentioned, which Mr. M. excepts against, is in the
following words, And every one that striveth for the mastery, is temperate in
all things: Now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown, but we an
incorruptible. Upon this he says, Here the apostle speaks of striving for the
mastery, and for a corruptible crown. Were these gracious exercises? Wonderful
question!

Answer. These exercises are an emblem of the gracious exercises of true
christians, in which they strive for an incorruptible crown, which is here
asserted of them. The reader shall judge with how good a grace, and what
propriety Mr. M. adds, This text which he has produced, seems to confute the
interpretation he has advanced, instead of establishing it. He who can think
this a confutation of the interpretation I have advanced, can easily confute
every interpretation that ever was, or can be advanced on any text in the bible.

I quoted Dr. Doddridge, and Pool's Synopsis to prove that some suppose that by
the strait gate is meant the entrance into heaven or eternal life. Mr. M. has
been at some pains to show that no such interpretation of this text is found in
these authors. In order to this he jumbles together part of what Dr. Doddridge
says upon this and another text, taking part of a sentence from one, and
joining it to a piece of a sentence on the other; carefully leaving out the
words, which are apparently contrary to the sense he tries to make him speak.
The critical reader who has Dr. Doddridge and Mr. M. before him, will, by
examining and comparing, have a more clear and striking idea of what Mr. Mr.
has done in this matter, than can be given any other way. And I am confident he
will be convinced that my reference to the Dr. was on good grounds; especially
if he observes, that in his note on this text, in order to show the sense of
the original word, here translated strive, he refers to those texts which have
been mentioned, 1 Cor. IX. 25. Col. I. 29. 1 Timothy VI. 12. 2 Timothy IV. 7.
in which the exercises of christian faith and holiness are spoken of.

Mr. M. says, 'Such is my weakness, that I cannot devise why this author
referred to Dr. Doddridge, as an authority for his new sense of this text. On
this I would observe the following things.

I did not refer to the doctor as an authority for this sense of the text. I
hope I never shall be guilty of referring to any uninspired man as an author^^^
When I mentioned a sense which others put upon this text, I referred to the
doctor as one of them, not as any evidence that this was right sense: but that
it was in fact so understood by some, as I asserted.

Why does Mr. M. here call this a new sense of this text, when he had so often
said it was a sense, which arminians put upon it; unless it be that he may add
to the number of his many self contradictions! Besides, it appears that this
was Mr. M's sense of the text, above 20 years ago. So that he has by calling it
a new sense now, contradicted himself in another sense, and yet higher degree.
In his letter to Dr. Johnson, called a A vindication of gospel truth, he says
P. 17.
The scripture no where puts mankind upon seeking their everlasting happiness
in any other way than that of well doing, truly such in the account of God, i.
e. doing his commandments. Certainly then when Christ puts mankind upon seeking
their eternal happiness, by telling them to strive to enter in at the strait
gate, he means doing the commandments of God, as I have explained it.
Perhaps however, he means to set NEW, in opposition to orthodox. If so, this
will account for his calling every thing he does not approve new divinity.

How far Mr. M's weakness appears in this, or in any thing else to be found in
his book, is a matter of no great importance, and is left entirely to the
judgment of the reader. All that I am concerned to make out is, the weakness of
what he says in support of the cause he has espoused.

He also endeavors to show that I have made a mistake in refering to Pool's
Synopsis for this sense of the text.

As this is a matter of no great importance, I will not trouble the reader with
the defense of myself, which I think I am able to make, and a particular
confutation of what Mr. M. has said; but I leave it entirely with the learned,
who will be at the pains of consulting the synopsis. However, I will just
mention three mistaks which Mr. M. has made, in what he has said on this head.

First, He takes whatever he finds in the synopsis to be Mr. Pool's, as his
opinion, and what he asserts; whereas Mr. Pool was only the collector and
transcriber of what former expositors had wrote. Therefore he produces the
different and opposite sentiments of expositors and constantly refers to them
in the margin. Mr. M's quotation in the margin is what Mr. Pool collected from
two expositors, the latter of which has been reckoned in some sense the father
of all Arminians. Mr. M. pretends to give a translation, or paraphrase of it,
(though I think it is neither) and represents it as what Mr. Pool asserts. Mr.
Pool never though it himself answerable for all the opinions of expositors he
quotes in his synopsis.

Secondly. Mr. M. here again supposes I quote Pool's synopsis as an authority
to support that sense of the text which I had mentioned. Whereas I referred to
this only to support my assertion, that this sense has been put on the text;
and not as the least evidence that it was the right one, as I have before
observed. However, while Mr. M. runs into this mistake and that just mentioned,
he is right, in rejecting all human authority in the following words, But
suppose Mr. Pool was of opinion, etc. as we are to call no man father on earth,
I would enquire, etc.

Thirdly. Mr. M. here supposes that whatever the unregenerate are directed or
commanded to do, they are to do, or may do it, while unregenerate; and so that
they are directions or commands to unregenerate doings. This is manifest in
what he pretends to take from Pool's Synopsis, just mentioned, in the following
words, Christ invites or requires all, the unregenerate not excepted, to take
in hand, or enter upon the way of holiness. And that they strive in this matter
with all their powers. Though all the unregenerate are required immediately to
enter upon the way of holiness, and to strive in this matter, etc. this does
not certainly enjoin unregenerate strivings, unless whatever the unregenerate
are commanded to do, they are to do as such, or while unregenerate. But what
Mr. M. here supposes is by no means true. The unregenerate are commanded to
love God, and to strive in this matter, and exert all their powers. But it does
not follow from this that unregenerate men do thus love God, or ever will while
unregenerate. But this matter will be more particularly considered in another
section. -- I return to the text under consideration.

IT was my prevailing opinion, when I wrote my enquiry that the strait gate in
this text does not mean the entrance on a religious life, or conversion from
sin to God; but the entrance into eternal life, to which a life of holiness or
the good fight of faith is the way; and therefore is the striving here
commanded, which includes the beginning in the first act of faith and
repentance, etc. as well as progress in this way unto the end of life. And I
have not been lead to alter my opinion, by any thing that Mr. M. has said, or
that I have learned from any other quarter. Something I then said in support of
the interpretation in question. And I must now ask the patience of the reader,
while I mention several other things which appear to me to be in favor of this
sense of the text.

1. The words immediately following these seem to be in favor of this
construction. V. 25 -- 30.
'When once the master of the house is risen up, and has shut to the door, and
ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open
unto us, etc. -- There shall be weeping, etc. when ye shall see Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, etc." These words
are evidently introduced with reference to what is said in the text, and to
explain and enforce it. And we are hereby led to understand this same thing by
the strait gate in the text, and the door in the next sentence. The way to
eternal life, or the kingdom of God, the gate or door by which persons enter
thither, and by which the patriarchs and prophets have gone into this kingdom,
now stands open to all; and all are invited to enter in: and all that is
nessary in order to this, is to strive to enter in, or to go in the way which
leads to eternal life. And all are urged now so to run for eternal life, not as
uncertainly; so to strive and fight the good fight of faith, as to lay hold on
eternal life, from this awakening consideration, that many shall seek to enter
in, shall cry for admittance when it is too late, and the door is forever shut.
From this view of the matter, I think it is very evident, that the seeking to
enter in, which is distinguished from striving, and is set in opposition to it,
intends the crying for admittance in at the door, after it is shut, represented
in the words immediately following. And if so, it will follow, that the strait
gate, and the door mean the same thing: For Christ says, many shall seek to
enter in, i. e. at the strait gate; and shall not be able, and then goes on to
illustrate this, by telling how they shall knock and cry for admittance at this
gate or door, after it is shut. And is it not equally evident, that by striving
Christ means that which shall be effectual, and shall certainly bring a person
to "enter in through the gates into heaven," since it is put in opposition to
that which shall be ineffectual, and is consistent with being forever excluded?
Thus I think, if we attend to Christ's own explanation of these words, I think
we cannot be at a loss about their meaning.

2. The passage just now alluded to, Rev. XXII. 14.
seems to be in some measure parellel to this under consideration, 'Blessed are
they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life,
and may enter in through the gates into the holy city." Here is a gate, or
gates mentioned, as the entrance into heaven, and the way to enter is to do his
commandments. This therefore striving to enter in at these gates. They
therefore who do strive to enter in at this gate, do observe the commandment of
Christ, and shall certainly be successful. If striving is Christ's command,
they who strive, do his commandment, and so shall enter into eternal life,
through the gate. This leads me to observe further.

3. It seems to me very dishonorable to Christ, and contrary to his wisdom,
faithfulness and goodness, to suppose that he has given any direction and
command to sinners, in order to their salvation, which they may punctually
observe and do, and yet miss of salvation. If they may do so; what safety is
there in relying upon his advice and direction: for according to this, he does
not always advise and direct to the way that leads to heaven; but to that which
a man may follow, and yet be going in the way to hell. Christ says, 'Blessed is
the man that hears me.' Prove. VIII. 24.
He that strives to enter in at the strate gate, hears Christ; for this is
his counsel and advice to men; and therefore is safe and blessed. It is implied
in these words, that he who striveth shall be able to enter in, or shall
certainly enter in, in distinction from those who shall seek to enter in, and
shall not be able. And who can now think, that men may faithfully and
punctually take the advice, and follow the command of him who came to teach men
the way to life, and yet not be able to enter in, but perish at last?

In this view, they who take the striving here commanded, to be the doings of
the unregenerate, and at the same time hold that there are promises made to
such strivings, are more consistent; and in this respect, do not, I think,
reflect so much dishonor on Christ, as they who hold the former and deny the
latter. And hence it is, perhaps; that it is so common for the latter to
contradict themselves, and implicitly hold that there are promises to the
doings of the unregenerate, or which amounts to the same thing, while they are
expressly denying it.

Mr. M. is an instance of this, not the least remarkable; for, as has been
observed, he in the book under consideration, applies scriptures to the
unregenerate, which carry a promise in them to those who comply with the
direction and command. And when he had formerly wrote a book to prove there are
no promises to the doings of the unregenerate, he concludes the whole with the
following declaration, On the whole, I would just make this one remark, and be
it remembered: though I deny any promise, by virtue of which the special grace
of God can possibly become due to the prayers and endeavors of the
unregenerate, while such; yet, however, I am persuaded, that it is the duty of
sinners to be seeking and striving after it; and that not a single instance
will be found of any sinner in the day of judgment, able to stand forth, and
plead in truth, Lord, I did my best endeavor to the very last, that I might
obtain the salvation which is by Jesus Christ, and looked diligently lest I
should fail of the grace of God; but after all, was denied. Vindi. of Gos.
Truth. P. 76, 77.
How did Mr. M. come to be thus persuaded, unless it was from the nature and
perfections of God? But if these, or any thing else, are the proper ground of
such a persuasion, then they are as good a security to the sinner as ten
thousand promises would be. And on the same ground we may be persuaded that he
who strives to enter in at the strait gate, according to the advice of our kind
Savior, shall not miss of salvation, as this may be argued from the character
and perfection of Christ, whether he has made any express promise or not. And
now, by the way, we may see the force of the following words, of Mr. M. when
speaking of this performance, he says, Pref. P. 4.
Which, according to my weak ability, was attempted in such a manner as might
guard against this its opposite extreme, by leaving proper, scriptural
encouragement to a diligent attendance on means. I see not how there can be any
thing worth disputing about between those who hold that there are promises made
to the doings of the unregenerate, and those who hold to this encouragement.
And it is worthy of particular remark here, that in these words he gives the
unregenerate sinner a character, which never yet belonged to such, and sets him
in a light, in which he is rather to be pitied than blamed, doing his best
endeavor to the very last, and looking diligently lest he should fail of the
grace of God. He that does his best, does unspeakably more than ever an
unregenerate man did, or any other mere man in this world; for he is perfectly
innocent and holy. And he who diligently seeks, shall find. He has a divine
promise to rely upon, which is much better, than Mr. M's persuasion. He who has
so good an opinion of the unregenerate, can never consistently think they shall
fail of salvation, upon their thus doing their best, and has no reason to
quarrel with him who asserts that there are promises to such.

4. It appears to me that a person does never truly strive for that, which he
opposes with all his heart, and to obtain which nothing is wanting but the
least degree of inclination of heart toward it, and sincere desire of it. But
this is true of unregenerate sinners, in the case before us. They have not the
least inclination to enter the strait gate, or to embrace the gospel. Their
want of this, and fixed opposition of heart to it, is the only thing in the way
of their entering, or that keeps them out. And to suppose they do strive to
enter in at this gate, while they remain so, is, I think, very absurd. They may
strive indeed, and have great motions and strong exertions of mind, relating to
their future state and eternal salvation: But this will be so far from striving
to enter in at this gate, that all their striving, every exertion and voluntary
exercise of their heart will be a refusal to enter, and opposition to it. Now
who can think Christ exhorted to such exercises as these, under the notion of
their being strivings to enter in at the strait gate? This is to use language
quite otherwise, and in a manner directly opposite to what mankind do in the
common affairs of life.

This may be illustrated thus; The son of a certain and worthy father has
stolen a thousand pounds from his father, and run off; and the father pursues
and overtakes him, and kindly invites him to return home, and promises to
forgive him, and to make him heir of all that he has, if he will turn about and
resolutely see his face homeward being willing to strive, to exert all his
strength in overcoming the difficulties of the way to his father's house. But
if he finds him obstinately set in his way, and without the least inclination
to return, or so much as to turn his face about, he will not exhort him to
strive to turn about, under the notion of his doing this, while his heart is
wholly opposite to it; because this is a contradiction. And if he should say to
him, "Strive to turn about and get into the road which leads home," it would be
understood as an exhortation to exercise some inclination that way, at least;
and not that he should strive for this, not only without any inclination to it,
but in direct opposition to his whole will. And if it was taken in the latter
sense, it would be thought the most absurd proposal that ever was made. Surely
he must strive without any heart or will, who strives to do that which is in
direct opposition to his whole heart and will, and the doing of which is
nothing but willing and choosing it. And this is a strange sort of striving
indeed! I am bold to say no man ever yet had an idea of it; because it is in
itself a most perfect contradiction. --

For these reasons, and others that might be mentioned, I think this text is to
be understood as it has been explained, and that by striving here Christ does
not mean any thing which impenitent unbelievers ever do, while such. Nor do I
see any bad consequences of understanding the text in this sense. Mr. M.
observes this is the Arminian sense of the text; and contrary to that which
Calvinists put upon it. And says, It seems somewhat strange, that when this
author undertook the cause of orthodoxy, he should give up and reject their
sense of the text, which was so greatly in dispute.

Answer. It would seem as strange at least, if every one who undertakes in the
cause of orthodoxy, should be obliged to understand every text of scripture
exactly in the same sense in which it has been taken by those who have been on
the same side of the question. This would be to renounce orthodoxy in many
instances, I doubt not. And what point of orthodoxy is given up or the least
weakened by the sense I have given of the text, I cannot imagine. Whereas by
espousing the sense which I am opposing an important point of orthodoxy is, I
think, implicitly given up (which indeed is given up by Mr. M. through his whole
book;) viz. that unregenerate sinners do not with their whole hearts oppose
Jesus Christ and the way of salvation by him. In this view, an attempt to
restore this text to the true sense, is to espouse the cause of orthodoxy. And
it does not fright me at all to be told that Arminians understand this text as
I do. For who would not much rather join with the grossest Arminians so far as
they are right, than with the most orthodox Calvinists, wherein they are wrong?

Mr. M. asks, If this text does not respect the unconverted, and enjoin duties
upon them, where can there be any passage found in the bible that has any
reference to them?

Answer. If this is the only text in the bible that enjoins unregenerate duties
and doings, I think the doctrine of duties enjoined on the unregenerate, to be
done by them while such, which Mr. M. has so zealously espoused, stands on a
very weak and precarious foundation -- But it seems Mr. M. is not in earnest
here: but only makes this outcry, and asks this question to answer a
particular end: For before he has done, he thinks he finds scripture enough
besides this, which enjoins duties upon the unconverted, to be done by them
while such, P. 70.
and says that "these performances of the sinner are encouraged by God throughout
the scriputres." P. 82.
But this will be more particularly considered hereafter.

Mr. M. as many others have, takes this text in Luke, to be parallel with that
in Matthew, Chap. VII. 13, 14.
"Enter ye in at the strait gate; because strait is the gate, and narrow is the
way which leads unto life."

There is perhaps no good reason for this. The former says nothing about the
narrow way; but speaks of a gate only, which, as has been observed, is in the
following words called the door which shall be shut, when this life is at an
end. But if it is granted that these two texts are parallel, meaning the same
thing, Mr. M. will gain nothing by it in favor of unregenerate strivings and
doings: for upon this supposition striving to enter in, and actually entering
in are the same thing. But to enter in at the strait gate is certainly not any
thing that unregenerate men do.

Mr. M. has indeed attempted to prove that striving to enter the strait gate
intends, something previous to actual entrance: and his argument is so
remarkable, that I will transcribe every word of it. Strive to enter in at the
strait gate, i. e. strive to enter upon the christian life, as explained above.
And is not this attempt to enter, previous to actual entrance, since the former
sometimes exists without the latter? For many I say unto you will seek to enter
in, and shall not be able. P. 70.
Here, in order to form his argument, he makes striving to enter, and seeking
to enter to mean one and the same thing: for he proves the former is not
connected with entering in, from Christ's declaring the latter is not. This
makes the text to run thus, "Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for verily
I say unto you, this striving shall in many instances be to no purpose, and you
may strive as much as you will and yet never enter! This I believe is quite a
new sense of the text, and is peculiar to Mr. M. and I hope and trust will
remain so.

But let us hear "the true and genuine sense of the text" from Mr. M. in the
following words. Were I allowed to speak freely my humble sense of the text, to
me it appears, that by entering the strait gate, is meant active conversion to
God, or a compliance with the covenant of grace, in the way of faith, etc. --
This is the gate we must enter upon pain of eternal damnation. What! And not
required (...) strive in this matter! Thrice amazing! P. 48, 49.


This is a violent discharge or fervent zeal by way of ex^^mation, as all will
perceive: but the humble sense as well as the argument seem to be quite lost by
the means; at least, are not so easily perceived. Since Mr. M. has had so long
a time to cool, calm down, and (...) at such a distance from him I will
venture, to say, if entering the strait gate means active conversion, in the
way of faith, then striving to enter is doing that by which men enter, or
actually converting to God, and believing, or that which is done with a good
will to this, which is the same. And all that striving which is in opposition
to converting and believing, etc. (as are all the strivings of the
unregenerate) is not striving to enter the strait gate; but striving to do
something else; or rather striving in direct opposition to it.

ANOTHER sentence which Mr. M. finds great fault with is in the following
words, It has been observed that the end of using or attending on the means of
grace is instruction. He thinks it is very wrong indeed, and of a bad tendency
to say the end of the use of means is instruction: And undertakes to show "that
the end of attending on the means of grace, is grace, the fruits of holiness."
P. 51, 52.


In order to see how groundless Mr. M's objection is, and how very wrong and
injurious is his representation of this matter, nothing more is needful than to
refer the reader to the whole passage from which he takes these words: P. 121,
etc.
Yea, all he says upon this is sufficiently refuted in the paragraph from which
he takes them, which is contained in less than ten lines.

Having taken notice in the words which Mr. M. quotes, that it had been
observed that the end of using or attending on the means of grace is
instruction, I proceed to say, The question now is, What end this instruction
answers; Of what advantage is it to have the truth set before the mind, and to
have the attention of the mind fixed upon it? From this it sufficiently
appears, had I not said another word, that I did not consider instruction or
knowledge as the ultimate end of means; because the very inquiry I am upon is,
"What end this instruction answers?" But Mr. M. goes on and harangues away for
a page or two, against my making instruction the ultimate end of means; in
distinction from grace or holiness and salvation. If Mr. M. did not read the
whole of this passage, especially the whole paragraph and even sentence from
which he quotes, he is doubtless very much to blame: but if he did, it will be
difficult to conceive how he could ignorantly make such a gross mistake and
very injurious misrepresentation. The first and immediate end which is answered
by the use of means is instruction, or, (as I further express it) to lead the
mind to the knowledge of that truth, of which it was before ignorant, or to
renew the attention to truth already known, and fix the mind upon it. And then
I go on to tell what end this answers, and particularly show that it prepares
the mind in which there is a right taste, or whenever it shall be brought to
this, to exercise holiness. And then go on to show how important and necessary
it is that the unregenerate should be all attention in the constant use of
means, as the only way in which they may hope for salvation. Mr. M. not only
asserts from this, that I make the only end of the use of means to be
instruction; but goes on to mention some dangerous consequences that will
follow from it. But as they are consequences of his own inventing, and are
taken from what I never asserted, and in direct contradiction to what I say, I
shall not further trouble myself, or the reader with them.

BUT Mr. M. goes on, I think, from bad to worse, and suffers his imagination,
or something else, to run quite away with him; for he proceeds to remark on
another exceptionable passage of mine, which is in the following words. If it
should be asked, What good all this instruction and knowledge will do the
unregenerate, who are under the dominion of an hard and impenitent heart, and
will continue so until a new heart is given in regeneration? If this knowledge
will be of no service to them, and really do them no good, and they are yet as
far from salvation as ever; then there is no encouragement for them to attend
on the means of grace, in order to obtain it, and keep up a view and sense of
the truths of christianity in their minds.

I having shown the necessity of instruction and knowledge, and the mind's
attending to the truth, in order to the exercises of faith and repentance, etc.
In these words proceed to propose a query and objection, which I supposed would
naturally arise in the mind of the reader; that by answering these I might more
fully clear up this matter, and show what end instruction answers, and the good
this will do the unregenerate; and in what sense they who thus attend are not
so far from salvation as others. And this I proceed to do, as an Answer to this
query and objection. Now Mr. M. takes this query and objection, which I
introduce in order to answer, to be certain assertations of my own, viz. that
this instruction and knowledge will in fact do no good, is of no service to the
unregenerate; and leaves them as far from salvation as ever. And upon such a
gross mistake and misrepresentation, he harangues away for near seven pages.
And what is not the least remarkable here is, that he makes use of what I had
said in answer to this objection, and to show that the suppositions made in it
are not true, to confute me, and to prove the same thing, as he imagined,
against me: I say, as he imagined, but it requires a great stretch of charity,
I confess, to suppose him in earnest here; and not rather trying how much he
could misrepresent me, and impose on his reader. But here we must call in for
our assistance his old age, dullness and weakness, of which he so often reminds
the reader.

In answer to this query and objection, I endeavor to show what is not the end
which is answered by the sinner's attendance on means, while impenitent; and
what good the instruction and knowledge he gets does not do, while he opposes,
and lives in the abuse of it. Under this head the passages are found, which
have given the chief offense to Mr. M. and which have been particularly
attended to in the foregoing sections. I then proceed to say what end and
purpose this does answer, and what encouragement there is, in this view, to
attend on means with engagedness and perseverance to which Mr. M. has made no
objection. This I have the more largely considered in what I have since
published, which the reader may consult, if he pleases. See sermon on
regeneration, P. 54, -- 59.


As all he says for so many pages from P. 51, to P. 61.
is founded on the gross misrepresentations I have mentioned; nothing more need
be said by way of answer. However, I will take leave briefly to remark upon
several things contained in these pages, before I leave them.

Mr. M. here represents me as not including external reformation of open, gross
sins in what is preparatory to conversion, or saying a word that implies it.
Speaking of me and my tenth section, he says, Through this whole section he has
not so much as once mentioned the sinner's breaking off from his sins, as that
whereby he is more in the way of God's mercy, than going on in them. All that
belongs to the unregenerate, as means, with the anthor, it seems, terminates in
instruction and speculative knowledge; as though it was not as much out of
God's wonted way, to bestow saving grace on the sinner, abandoned to all kind
of wickedness, while such, as on the grossly ignorant.

In these words are three contradictions, viz. to truth and fact -- to his own
repeated declaration: And to the words themselves.

They are contrary to fact. I say, Enq. P. 120, 122.
To use or attend the means of grace, is to make use of all the means of
instruction in the things that relate to God's moral kingdom; to go into that
conduct and practice, and do all those things, which tend to lead us into the
knowledge and the truths of divine revelation, and to keep up the attention of
the mind to them; and carefully to avoid whatever has a contrary tendency. Here
I speak of "the sinner's breaking off from his sin, as that whereby he is more
in the way of mercy, if he who does so is in the way of using the best means of
instruction, which I suppose none will question. And I expressly say that I
mean that "knowledge which no openly vicious, or careless sinner ever obtains."
P. 183.
How then could Mr. M say, He has not so much as once mentioned the sinner's
breaking off from his sins, as that whereby he is more in the way of mercy,
etc.?

In this assertion he has contradicted himself, as he has repeatedly declared
the contrary, and through his whole book supposes that I am speaking of the
reformed sinner, and no other. Thus he says P. 54.
Here let it be noted, that it is fully conceeded by the author, that the
unregenerate, under consideration, have all degrees of light and conviction of
divine truth, that can agree to an unregenerate state: -- all that there is in
a common work of the Spirit of God, preparatory to saving faith, the
inlightening of natural conscience, putting the sinner upon reformation of
life, etc. It ^eems that what he here desires may be noted, had entirely
slipped his mind before he had got four pages; for he then utterly denies that
the author had conceded, or so much as once mentioned any such thing!

But, to say no more of these contradictions, it is to be observed that the
words I am considering are contradictory to themselves. His word are, As though
it was not as much out of God's wonted way, to bestow saving grace on the
sinner, abandoned to all kind of wickedness, while such, as on the grossly
ignorant. These words suppose that a sinner who is abandoned to all kind of
wickedness, may not be grossly ignorant and destitute of that knowledge, of
which I speak in my tenth section; which is an absurdity and contradiction in
itself. For security in sin, implies gross ignorance with respect to the
knowledge of which I speak; even ignorance of the most essential and important
things, necessary to be known, in order to exercise faith, repentance, etc:
There is an absurdity in supposing such an one to have any tolerable degree of
the instruction and knowledge of which I speak, this being peculiar to the
awakened, convinced sinner of whom I am speaking, and is as inconsistent with a
course of open profligacy and wickedness, as light is with darkness.

I would also remark upon the following words. Upon this principle, all the
seize of the unregenerate, such as awakening, conviction, reformation,
legal humiliation, and whatsoever is preparatory to a saving faith, are no
grounds at all of thankfulness to God. If they are really such worthless
things, what are of no service to the unregenerate, can do them no good, and on
the account of which, considered in themselves, they are not less wicked than
they would be without them, abandoning themselves to all manner of wickedness;
in this case to give thanks to God for them, would be no less than to mock God,
giving thanks for a thing of naught. P. 58, 59.


These words are predicated upon my saying, as Mr. M. has sagaciously
understood me, that all this conviction, etc. of the unregenerate are of no
service to them, and answer no end, because I introduced a querist asking, what
good these things did, that the matter might be explained in my answer; which
has been before observed. Put at Mr. M. goes further than all this here, and
represents, that I had said, that on the account of these things, considered in
themselves, the unregenerate are not less wicked, than they would be without
them, abandoning themselves to all manner of wickedness. I am sure I have not
said or intimated any such thing. All I say of the convinced sinner's not being
less wicked, but more so, is consistent with these things being less sinful
considered in themselves; for I expressly place their greater sinfulness, not
in these things, but in something else. Why then did Mr. M. put in these words,
considered in themselves, unless it was on purpose to add to his other
misrepresentations; or because he could not answer his purpose without them?

As for grounds of thankfulness for awakening, conviction, etc. where is the
difficulty, on supposition they are attended not with less, but greater
sinfulness? The greater sinfulness consists (...) the abuse of those things,
which are considered in themselves, great advantages and favors. There is no
ground of thankfulness indeed for this greater wickedness, of which these
things are the occasion: But is there therefore no reason of thankfulness for a
favor, because, by abusing it all the benefit of it is lost, and it by this
means becomes the occasion of greater guilt and more dreadful ruin, than could
have took place in any other way? This must be true, else what Mr. M. says here
is less than nothing to his purpose; even directly contrary to an important
truth.

ANOTHER passage of mine which Mr. M. has seen fit to remark upon, is the
similitude of a father and two sons. The sons run off, determining to leave
their father's house and service. The father calls after them, advises and
commands them to return. One stops and attends to what his father has to say to
him: the other pays no regard to what his father says, but runs on till he gets
out of hearing. I observed upon this that he who stopped and attended to what
his father had to say, cannot properly be said to obey his father's command,
if, after all, he refuses to return; and may by the light and conviction laid
before him by his father, in consequence of his stopping and attending, be more
guilty in refusing to submit to him, than the other that has been out of
hearing.

This last sentence Mr. M. chiefly objects against. And first he says "This
similitude does by no means fully represent the state of the case." P. 62.


ANS. This similitude was not made with any particular reference to the general
state of the case between Mr. M. and me; but to illustrate my answer to a
particular objection which I was then considering. See Enq. P. 140, 141.
If it answers the particular case as it is put in the objection, which it was
designed to illustrate; it answers the end proposed.

However, let us see wherein it fails. Mr. M. says, Here is nothing of the
awakened, reformed sinner, save only his making a pause, stopping his career,
when running away, and attending to what his father had to say. I ask, What
more takes place in such a sinner, that is not here represented? Mr. M. has not
told. However, he proceeds to "propose a query or two, lame and defective as it
is."

He asks What was the true cause why A (the son who run-off) stopped his ears,
run off, etc. -- when B (the other son) hearkened so far as to stop his wicked
course, etc.? -- What can be the true cause of this difference, but a more
wicked state of mind in A?

ANS. The true cause of this might be some suggestions made to B's mind, of the
dreadful consequence of thus leaving his father, etc. which, were conveyed to
him by or together with his father's words, and not to A. This, I own, must be
supposed in order to make the case in this respect represent that of an
awakened sinner. The awakened, reformed sinner, is brought to this state by
influences on his mind and conscience, by which he is made to see, and, in a
sense, feel the sad and dangerous state he is in, which will immediately stop
him in his career of open wickedness: I say this is the effect of influences on
his mind and conscience which A has not: Therefore it is not in the least owing
to the less wicked state of mind of B, that there is this difference. I wonder
Mr. M. should ask this question, since he so zealously holds to the influences
of the Spirit of God in awakening the consciences of sinners. If I had asked
such a question, Mr. M. would have had more reason to suspect and insinuate
that I had an inclination to favor the NEW DIVINITY, that entirely denies any
preparatory work, in order to saving faith, by the common influences of the
Spirit, than he had from any thing that I have said. See P. 55.
Mr. M. surely does not suppose that in order to sinners being awakened by the
Spirit of God, they must first become less sinful in the state of their minds
than they were, or be less sinful than others. We see then the true reason why
one sinner is awakened, and another is not, can easily be given, without
supposing a more wicked state of mind in the latter. And it is a little strange
Mr. M. could not think of it, in this case.

Mr. M. goes on to ask, Will any one in this view of the case say, that B is
more wicked than A? What! Because B is less bold, daring and fixed in his
rebellion, and in casting the utmost contempt on his father's authority?

ANS. It does not appear that "B is less bold, daring and fixed in his
rebellion, etc." But the contrary appears to be true. B's conscience is
awakened to see the dreadful ruin that is before him, if he does not return
home to his father, and he trembles at the thought of it. He is convinced in
his conscience it is his duty and highest interest to return home; that there
is no other way to escape the evil he dreads; and that in this way he shall
certainly escape, and be made completely happy. Yet under all this light and
conviction of conscience, his heart rises against his father in a more direct
and stronger manner than ever it did before, in the most horrid exercises of
hatred, enmity, and fixed opposition to his father's person, character and
government; while he has not the least inclination in his heart to submit, or
take one step homeward, but persists in an obstinate refusal. A, it is true, is
a rebel, and is wholly to blame for running off as he did; but he is not in
those circumstances, in which he can be so "bold and daring, and appear so
obstinately fixed in his rebellion as A. He has never had any reallizing
apprehensions of the dreadful ruin which he is bringing on himself, but thinks
all is well, and that he is pursuing his own happiness in leaving his father's
house. And he has very few thoughts and exercises about his father's government
and family. B knows a thousand times more about them, and about his duty and
interest; and has ten thousand times more thoughts and exercises about this
matter; and they are all in the most direct opposition to his father.

We are therefore now prepared to answer Mr. M's question. "Will any one in
this view of the case say, that B is more wicked than A?" Yes, every one will
say so, who will hearken to the dictates of common sense. And he who says the
contrary justifies the wicked, even in the height of wickedness, and
reproaches, and casts a high degree of contempt on the father.

Mr. M. goes on to say, Should it be pleaded that B is more wicked than A,
because B discovers a greater degree of tenderness and sensibility of
conscience sinned against, than A in non-submission. I answer, that to argue
thus, would be preposterous and absurd to the last degree. For, upon this
principle, the most abandoned sinner under the gospel, having wasted his
conscience, and sinned away his moral sense, so that he is past feeling, as the
scripture expresses it, may commit the most atrocious wickedness, and yet be
innocent, because past feeling. Whereas the truth in this case is just the
reverse; he, of the two under the same light and advantages, that can with the
greatest boldness and freedom commit the most enormous wickedness, without
remorse or feeling of conscience, is the more desperately wicked.

Here Mr. M. again forgets himself, and speaks of one who has by a course of
sinning against his conscience got rid of his awakening and conviction; whereas
A is not such an one; Nor am I speaking of such. But what he says here in the
last sentence, I think cannot be true. The sinner who is most blind and
ignorant with respect to his duty and true interest, and knows not that he is
acting against either; so does not sin at all against his conscience, cannot be
so great a sinner as he, who has the greatest light and conviction of
conscience relating to his duty and interest, and yet goes on in sin, in direct
opposition to this Yet this Mr. M. asserts here, but is it not most shockingly
absurd! It is also directly, contrary to what he says elsewhere, as he often
speaks of sins against the light and dictates of conscience as peculiarly
aggravated. And this he supposes in this very paragraph; for he speaks of
wasting conscience, as the great crime of the abandoned sinner. These two
sentences therefore stand in direct contradiction one to the other. The first
asserts him to be the greatest sinner, who has most opposed his conscience for
his having wasted his conscience, and sinned away his moral sense, as that
wherein his great sinfulness lies. The last asserts him to be the greatest
sinner, who never had, and now has not any light and conviction of conscience;
and so has never had opportunity to waste his conscience, or sin against it;
for here his great sinfulness consists in sinning without remorse or feeling of
conscience, i. e. without any light and conviction of conscience. I leave it to
the reader, whether "to argue thus" is not more than "preposterous and absurd
to the last degree."

Mr. M. adds, But perhaps the grand plea in reserve, to evince that B is more
faulty than A (if different from what has already been said) is, that B has a
higher degree of internal light and conviction, that it is his duty to submit to
his father, than A had, therefore more guilty.

This I think is not really "different from what has already been said;" as
tenderness and sensibility of conscience must be the same thing with light and
conviction of conscience in the unregenerate. He has therefore made no advance,
the plea is exactly the same with that which he mentioned and answered before.
But perhaps he has a better answer now. It is this: If A has not so much light
and conviction as B, it is altogether A's fault that he has not. And if it be
entirely and merely A's fault, shall not A be dealt with, as if he had that
light and conviction in his conscience, which only, and merely his own fault,
wilfully stopping his ears, impeded his hearing?

This answer is quite different from the former, and even in direct
contradiction to that. Whether it is better, is now to be inquired. I say it is
a contradiction to the foregoing, because there he places the great crime of
the sinner, not in sinning against the light of his conscience; but in sinning
without any light and conviction. But here he has shifted the crime, and places
it in sinning against that light, which though the sinner has not actually, yet
he has virtually, because it is wholly his own fault that he has it not: so is
looked upon and treated by God as actually "sinning against all that light,
which he wilfully refused."

It is granted that A is answerable for not having, and rejecting that light
and conviction, which by his own fault he has not. But it will not be granted
that he is answerable for actually sinning against that light which he never
had; and that he will be looked upon and dealt with by God, as if he actually
had this light, and actually sinned against it; for this would be to look upon
him, and treat him contrary to the truth. There is a real and great difference
between him, who actually has light and conviction in his conscience, and him,
who has it not, whatever may be the cause of this difference. And to look upon
them and treat them, as if there was no difference, is certainly to contradict
the truth of fact.

If Mr. M's position is true, the most stupid, blind and ignorant person under
the gospel is as guilty, as great a sinner, in not embracing the gospel, as he
who has the greatest degree of light and conviction of conscience, and yet
persists in the highest exercises of enmity against Christ, and opposition to
all the light he has. And he who is guilty of stopping his ears, and putting
himself out of the way and beyond the reach of all means of light and
instruction, by one act, is as great a sinner as he who spends a whole life in
the most horrid acts of rebellion and enmity against God, contrary to the
clearest light of his conscience: so that one single act which occasions
ignorance in refusing to admit the light that is offered, is as great a crime,
and carries as much guilt in it, as all the actions of high rebellion and
enmity against God, in opposition to the clearest light and conviction of
conscience, through a whole eternity. This must be so, if A is accountable for
sinning against all that light which he wilfully refused, and so had not; and
is as guilty as B, who actually had it, and yet sinned against it. A heathen,
for instance, who was once invited and had a fair opportunity to come into a
christian country, and enjoy the light of the gospel, and refused; and so lives
and dies in heathenish darkness, is as guilty as he who has lived all his days
under the light of the gospel, and had great and clear light and conviction of
conscience and has constantly abused and rebelled against it all, in ten
thousands acts of the most horrid enmity against God, which the heathen never
was guilty of, it being impossible he should in his circumstances. And
according to this, the most ignorant creature under the gospel will be reckoned
and dealt with by God as having abused all the light which he might have had,
had he been perfectly holy from his childhood to the end of his life; and will
be found as guilty, as if he actually had all this light, and had all his days
abused, and sinned against it all. And Paul, who did many things against Christ
and his church in ignorance and unbelief, was as guilty as if he had all the
light and conviction that Peter, or any of the apostles had, and must have been
dealt with accordingly, had he not obtained forgiveness.

I may here say in Mr. M's word?, "I appeal to the impartial reader, Whether
these be not absurdities by no means to be admitted in divinity? And whether it
is possible to avoid them, the principle advanced being admitted?" P. 23.


The only argument Mr. M. produces to support this contradictory assertion is,
the words of Christ with respect to the Jews: "But now have they both seen, and
hated, both me and my father." Joh. XV. 24.
He says Christ treats them here as if they actually saw his divinity, though it
does not appear that they actually saw it; but were blinded through the exceeding
wickedness and prejudices of their hearts, and were not, at least many of them,
convinced that he was the Messiah. "And so were reckoned with by God, as if
they had seen it; because nothing but their own mere faultiness prevented it."

ANS. The divine character was clearly set before them, in the person and
character of Christ; and this they disapproved and hated; and that whether they
were convinced in their judgment and consciences that this was indeed the
divine character or not. In this sense they did see and hate both the Son and
the Father; of this they were actually guilty, and were treated, and will be
reckoned with accordingly. But it does not follow from this that they who were
convinced in their consciences that he was the Christ, and yet rejected him;
and they who verily thought he was an impostor, were equally guilty, and that
the latter will be reckoned and dealt with, as if they actually had the light
and conviction of the former, which they had not. Thanks be to God! No such
absurdity is contained in this passage of scripture, or any other.

BUT Mr. M. has not done with A and B yet. He observes that I have said nothing
of the present state of B under conviction, as being more guilty than A, who
stopped his ears, and run off. He does not "attribute it to any want of
ingenuity in the author," that he avoided this, being sensible that to assert B
to be more guilty than A, at present, "would be even shocking to common sense.
He then goes on to ask What moment of future time may be fixed upon, when B, as
represented in the similitude above, will be more guilty than A? P. 64, 65.


ANS. It was not owing, I believe, to the want of ingeunity of the author, that
he said nothing about this, as the matter to be illustrated did not require it.
However, he is now ready to answer the knotty question. When B was in the
circumstances which represent an awakened, convinced sinner, he was more guilty
than A. He was so, when he had shocking apprehensions of the dreadful
consequence to him of slighting and disobeying his father, and was convinced of
the safety and happiness he should enjoy by hearkening to his father, and
returning home, and that this was his indispensable duty, without any delay,
for which he had no excuse; and yet his whole heart rose against it and opposed
it; and when the more his father discovered his goodness to him, in making him
the highest offers, and urging him by all imaginable motives to return and his
mind was all attention to these matters, the more he hated him, and the
stronger was the opposition of his heart to his taking one step toward his
father's house: when B was in these circumstances, as the awakened, convinced
is, then he was more guilty than. A.

MR. M. goes on to ask another question. But an answer to this will be made in
the next section, as it will more properly come in there. I now proceed to
examine his remarks on another passage.

IN answering the objection from the convinced sinner's growing worse, more
sinful in the attendance on means, that this was matter of discouragement, and
a good reason why they should not attend; I observed, that their greater
sinfulness did not consist in their attendance on means, but in their
impenitency, etc. and therefore this could be no reason, why they should
neglect the proper means of salvation; And then proceeded to illustrate this in
the following manner, If the plowing of the wicked is sin, shall they therefore
not plow? shall they not desire food for themselves and their families, and
take the most likely method to obtain it? Their sin does not consist merely in
their plowing, so that it would be a less sin not to plow, than to do it; but
in the wrong views and exercises of mind with which they plow, and in the want
of right ones. Enq. P. 142.


Mr. M. quotes only this one sentence, "If the plowing of the wicked is sin,
shall they therefore not plow?" And says "that a part only is here put for the
whole state of the case and therefore can be no illustration of the point." And
then goes on to state it in his own way; and represents it as if the man's sin
consisted in his plowing and providing for his family, so that his greater
sinfulness consists in this, which gives all the plausibleness there is in his
state of the case: whereas I had expressly observed that the sinfulness did not
consist in this, but something else, and for this end brought this instance to
illustrate this particular truth, and not to illustrate the whole of my answer
to the objection which I was considering.

Mr. M. concludes what he says on this passage in the following words, And now
let the reader judge, the case being fairly stated, whether he shall plow in
this case; and whether the case only in part put, as at above, can at all serve
to illustrate the author's point. The reader is now to judge, whether the case
as I put it, does not fully illustrate the point I was upon? And whether Mr. M.
had any right to say he had fairly stated the case or had not rather grossly
mis-stated it, and done violence to the passage which was then before his eyes?

SECT. VIII.
IN which it is considered, whether the doctrine that the awakened, convinced
sinner is more guilty and vile in the constant and painful attendance on the
means of grace, than when he was in a state of security and open profligacy, is
an encouragement to sinners to abandon themselves to carelessness and vice, or
any matter of discouragement to an attendance on means?

MR. M. has represented the matter in this light, through his whole book. He
supposes that awakened, convinced sinners growing less sinful in the use of
means, is matter of encouragement to attend; and that the contrary doctrine
tends greatly to discourage them. And this he has particularly pressed in the
following passage. P. 122.
These things, to the best of my small discernment, naturally tend either to
quiet secure sinners in the careless neglect of means, going on in their sins;
or to damp and retard those that are seriously inclined to exert themselves, in
a painful attendance on means and amendment of life: Since every step they take
this way, while unregenerate, they are on the whole involved in greater guilt,
than they would have been had they continued in the wilful, careless neglect of
means, obstinately persisting in the grossest wickedness, as above, under the
same gospel. And in the next page he says that to deny that the awakened,
convinced sinner may be less sinful, than in a state of security and open
wickedness, is to lay a stumbling block in sinners way, and to rob them of a
precious branch of encouragement allowed them from the word of God, to strive
and run for eternal life, in all painful endeavors in the use of means, And
again he says, P. 88.
While we attempt to scare men from trusting in their duties, care must be had
that we don't scare them from their duties, either by insinuating that they are
more vile in that attendance they are capable of, while unregenerate, than in
the neglect of it; and he puts the following question to me; whether this way
of reasoning in favor of A, as though he might expect some notable abatement of
his guilt, by stopping his ears and going out of hearing, don't carry in it too
much encouragement to the sinners A represents, who abandon themselves to
wickedness, and neglect the means of grace: Since they are sufficiently
inclined in themselves, without the help of others, to devise pleas in their
own favor. P. 65.


Mr. M. has not mentioned this as one of his arguments against the doctrine he
sets himself to oppose, where he undertakes to produce arguments against it;
but as is evident, he designs it as an argument not of the least weight, and it
will probably have more influence with some, than any thing else that he has
offered. I therefore propose particularly to consider it in this section.

In order to determine whether there is any truth in this, we must consider
what are the motives which will induce the unregenerate to act or forbear
acting in any case; or what is the principle they act upon, or the end which
they always have in view. If we can find what these are, we may easily
determine what tends to discourage, or to encourage them in all cases; for this
will be just according to the motives by which they are influenced. And here I
suppose all will allow that the unregenerate are always influenced in all they
do by what may be called selfish motives. They are always seeking and pursuing
that which is in their view, or seems to them to be for their own interest, and
never act from any higher motive. The secure sinner, whether he is an open
profligate, or not, is pusuing some good in this world as his happiness,
because it seems to him his own highest good in this state. The sinner whose
conscience is awakened in some measure to reallize a judgment to come, and
future state, and the dreadful end to which the sinner is exposed to come every
moment, at once loses his keen appetite for the pleasures of time and sense,
and all his pleasing worldly prospects, and schemes drop and die, and he begins
to feel that his whole interest lies in another world; and that he shall be
happy or miserable forever, according as he escapes hell and obtains heaven, or
not. This excites in him the grand and important inquiry," What must I do to be
saved?" And he is willing to take any method, and use any means, consistent
with his continuing a perfect enemy to God, and holiness, or his duty, which
shall be prescribed to him, as the most likely way to escape the evil which he
dreads, and obtain the good which he desires; or in other words, that shall
appear most likely to promote his eternal interest.

He is by the supposition, no more a friend to God and holiness now, or an
enemy to sin, than he was before. And really cares not how much God is
dishonored, and whether he is a greater or less sinner, if he may but answer
his own ends. He does not fear and dread sin, for its own sake, or in itself
considered: but purely because of the consequence to him, which he now dreads.
He is not afraid of sin, or desires to avoid it, from any true respect he has
to God, and merely because it is against him, and dishonorable and offensive to
him; but purely from his fear of eternal punishment. This being the case, it is
easy to see it would be in vain to tell him that he will be less guilty and
vile in God's sight, in consequence of his attending on means, etc. For this in
itself would not be the least encouragement and motive to him to attend. And
just as much in vain would it be to tell him, in order to dissuade him from
attendance on means, that if he continued impenitent, he would be more guilty
and vile, than the careless sinner; for this will not be the least
discouragement to him, so long as he views this the most likely way to be saved.

If therefore the sinner can be persuaded, that the probability of his being
saved or lost does not depend upon his being a greater sinner or a less; but he
is the most likely to be saved, who attends most constantly and earnestly on
the means of grace, in the clearest view and sense of the important truths
revealed in the bible, and constant attention to them; and that this is the
only hopeful way: I say, if he can be convinced of this, it will be a
sufficient motive and encouragement to him to attend, and will influence him,
in proportion to his belief, and sense of a future state, and of the sad and
miserable case in which he now is. And no other motive can be thought of, that
will have the least influence on him, to encourage him to attend on means, or
as matter of discouragement. In a word, the unregenerate sinner dreads sin only
as connected with misery; therefore he dreads that sin most, which, in his
view, most exposes him to destruction, and is most likely to ruin him forever;
but these are the sins committed in a state of security, or in the neglect of
means, and not those committed under awakenings and convictions, and in a
constant attendance on means; however more heinous and vile the latter are than
the former. Therefore the sinner only needs to be well instructed, in order to
have all the encouragement he is capable of to attend on means. Let him be
convinced that this is the most likely course he can take to be saved, and that
there is no other likely way, however great may be the guilt he contracts while
he continues impenitent, and it will be a strong and prevalent motive with him
to take it, in proportion to his dread of eternal destruction, and desire of
future happiness.

Mr. M. does therefore in the passages above cited go upon a supposition, which
is directly contrary to the truth, viz. That the unregenerate do fear and dread
sin on its own account, without any consideration of its consequence; and have
some true respect to God and holiness; drop this supposition, and they appear
to be without any foundation at all. If the sinner fears and hates sin, for its
own sake, and from respect to God, why then does he go on in sin? Let him
forsake it, and all is well. If therefore he does neglect means, and live in
known ways of open sin, under a pretense that he is afraid of that greater sin
he shall be guilty of, if he attends on means and becomes a convinced sinner;
it is certain it is but pretense in which there is no truth: for if he is
afraid of greater sinfulness, why not of less; why does he go on in known sin?
If he hates sin; and hence sincerely desires to be delivered from it, why does
he not leave off sinning and fly to Christ the only deliverer?

If a sinner objects against attempting to pray, and says he is afraid to do
it, because the prayer of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord. He may be
asked what he is afraid of? If he is indeed afraid of sin; and so avoids prayer
that he may avoid sin, why is he not equally concerned to avoid all sin, or sin
in any other way? If he is willing to do this, he may pray without sinning; and
so the objection cease^ But if he is not willing to leave off sinning, but is
determined to go on, then there is no sincerity or weight in the objection, for
he really cares not how much sin he commits, and he is indifferent whether he
sins in one way or another. Besides, if he is afraid of sinning in prayer, left
he should be damned for it; why does he not fear sinning in any other way, for
the same reason; for the sins men commit in praying, are no more likely to
prove fatal to them, than any other way of sinning: Yea this is the only likely
way to escape destruction, and obtain salvation.

It will be laid, perhaps, though the attendance on means, etc. is the only
likely way to obtain salvation, however guilty and vile the sinner may be in
this way; yet, if he finally miscarries and fails of salvation, he will be more
miserable than if he had neglected all means and abandoned himself to the sins
of a state of security; and the secure sinner will be hence induced to continue
in his old way, and it will be a discouragement with all in the way of
attendance on means. I answer. If any one should neglect the means of grace on
this pretense, he would be self-condemned. For there is no person who is not
almost constantly running ventures in hopes of obtaining his end, when he knows
that if he fails of the end proposed, he shall lose all his pains and cost, and
will be, on the whole, a great loser, so that he had better not have been at
the pains and expense, than to do this, and yet fail of the end in view. And
the more interesting and important the affair is, in a person's view, the
greater venture will he run as a means to obtain it, and the greater will be
his care and attention in the matter. While men are conducting thus in their
temporal affairs, and are pretending the unreasonableness of doing so in
concerns of infinitely greater moment, and hence refusing to run any venture in
the latter case, we may be sure there is no sincerity, and that this is not the
bottom of the matter. Besides, this objection may be as well made by a heathen,
to whom it is proposed to go and live in a country where the gospel is
preached, or by any others, against taking pains to put themselves under
greater religious advantages than they now enjoy. For if they should enjoy
these advantages, and abuse them, as the most do who have them, their
condemnation will be greater, and they be more miserable forever, than if they
had never enjoyed them. -- If it should be said, that if they become awakened,
convinced, reformed sinners, they will be less sinful, and not quilty, or
miserable, though they perish, as if they had not enjoyed those superior
advantages: I say, if this should be said, and granted; yet it must be observed
that they are altogether uncertain that they ever shall be such: or that they
shall not abuse all their advantages so as to become much more guilty and vile,
than if they never had enjoyed them. Therefore they know not, but every step
they take to obtain any religious advantage, will be worse than lost, and
become the occasion of their greater guilt, and more awful condemnation.

In short, if the doctrine of awakened convinced sinners growing worse, more
guilty and vile, is any just ground of discouragement, to take use of means,
then there is just ground of discouragement: to take any pains to enjoy any
religious means and advantages whatsoever, or to use any with others, by
preaching the gospel to them, etc. For unless God prevents it by his sovereign
grace, all this will be but the occasion of their greater sinfulness, and more
aggravated destruction.

Mr. M and every one else may therefore be sure that the doctrine of the
sinner's growing more vile in the use of means, if his eyes are fully opened,
does not give the least encouragement to any, "to abandon themselves to
wickedness, and neglect the means of grace;" and never was, nor can be
reasonably improved so by any. Nor does it tend in the least degree to "damp
and retard those that are seriously inclined to exert themselves in a painful
attendance on means and amendment of life." So far from this, that it is the
only doctrine that can give proper and consistent encouragement to those who
are under clear and genuine convictions; and the contrary tends directly to
drive such into discouragement and despair.

This I particularly observed, and endeavored to make quite clear and evident
in the conclusion of my section on means, in the following words, P. 144, 145.
If sinners were to take their only encouragement to hope for salvation in the
use of means, from their being less sinners than others, or not so bad as they
once were, this would tend to take all encouragement from those, who are under
genuine convictions, and have any true view of their own sinfulness, and leave
them in absolute despair. For all such, as they have a more clear and full
fight of their own sins than they can have of others, are naturally led to view
themselves as the greatest sinners. And as by attendance on means, they get
more and more acquainted with their own hearts, their own sinfulness increases
in their view, they are so far from looking on themselves as less sinners than
they were, that they naturally view themselves in a contrary light.

The only proper way therefore to encourage the sinner, who is under any great
degree of genuine conviction of sin, and concern about his eternal interest, to
attend on means with hope, is not to lead him to expect hereby to become less
sinful; but to teach him the true end and design of means. He will then know
that the great wickedness of his heart, exercised in all he does, and his
appearing to himself to grow worse rather than better, which is commonly the
chief ground of discouragement to such, is really no reason why he should
neglect means; but rather an encouragement constantly to attend.

Mr. M instead of taking any notice of my argument here, wholly overlooks what
I had in view, viz. To show that the doctrine I had advanced could be no
discouragement to the sinner under proper awakenings and convictions; because
he always views himself in the very light in which this doctrine sets him, i.
e. as constantly growing worse, more wicked and vile: and that the contrary
doctrine, viz. That sinners under conviction grow less sinful than they were
before, and must do so in order to be saved, was so far from giving
encouragement to such, that it tended to drive them to despare: I say, Mr. M
instead of taking notice of this, and attempting to oppose and refuse it,
remarks only upon the last sentence, accusing me, with altering my expressions
and lowering down from the point I had asserted, to something else, which he
allows to be true, not choosing he concludes to close my discourse with that
which would be so startling to a common reader, etc. His words are, -- And in
the close of his discourse he comes down wonderfully; in these words, 'His
appearing to himself to grow wor^ -- as really no reason why he should neglect
means; but rather an encouragement constantly to attend.' FULLY ORTHODOX THIS.
But why this abatement? If the principle advanced in the former pages is true,
why not through the whole? If it was of importance to be set up; why not to be
kept up, especially in the close? Which if it had, would have stood thus, viz.
The awakened sinner's really growing worse, on the whole, in attendance on
means, as conviction of sin arises, whatever be his reformation, amendment of
life, etc than he would have been continuing secure, and going on in the
practice of all manner of most enormous wickedness, -- is really no reason why
he should neglect means, etc. P. 66, 67.


I am ready to ask here, what does Mr. M. mean! I do keep the principle I had
advanced fully in view, and am showing that upon this principle the sinner's
appearing to himself to grow wor^e, is really no matter of discouragement; but
the contrary: whereas it must be matter of the greatest discouragement on any
other plan. And might I not, in this view, once mention the sinner's appearing
to himself to grow worse, when the argument I was upon required it; and when
instead of this to have spoken of the sinner's really growing worse, would have
been quite nonsense, without being accused with going off from my point, coming
down wonderfully, etc. as it I was afraid in the close to assert what I had
before advanced, and endeavored to establish?

There are two leading principles that run through Mr. M's book, which I had in
view, and endeavored to confute in the three last pages of my section on
means. One is, that the only way for a person to be more likely to be saved, or
not far from the kingdom of God, is to become less sinful and so nearer the
state of a good man, God being more ready and disposed to show mercy to a less
sinner, than to a greater. The whole he says on the sinner's being not far from
the kingdom of God sets the matter in this light. And from this he infers in
the following words, There is such a thing among the unregenerate under the
gospel, as being in state nigh to or not far from the kingdom of God." And that
their nearness in state to the kingdom of God, or which is the same, to that of
a good man, consists in those seize whereby they are, on the whole, in
the state of their minds less vicious than either themselves or others would be
in the absence of those things. P. 26, 27.
And again, he speaks of the seize of the unregenerate, such as
awakening, conviction, reformation, etc. as that whereby they are less wicked,
and, in a true sense of scripture, in state brought nearer to the kingdom of
God, to a state of grace, etc. P. 59.
And in another place he represents the sinner who is less displeasing to God,
to be more in the way of mercy, so more likely to be saved. Speaking of the
awakened, convinced sinner, and the careless and secure, he says the scripture
gives a sort of preference to the former, at least, as less displeasing to God,
and more in the way in which God's sovereign mercy is will not to be displayed. P.
96.


The other principle I have reference to is grounded upon this, viz; That if a
person grows, not less sinful, but more guilty and vile in the use of means,
this is matter of great discouragement and that sinners cannot be encouraged to
attend on means in any other view, but that they may hereby become less sinful
and vil^.

Had Mr. M. attended to these pages, and taken what I think is the plain
meaning of them; instead of making the gross blunder and misrepresentation he
has done, he must have been sensible, that what I here said, was in opposition
to these two principles, and found himself concerned to answer it. But he has
been so far from this, that he has, in effect, conceded to it all, and very
emphatically pronounced it orthodox.

The reader will here particularly observe what he has pronounced orthodox.
"His appearing to himself to grow worse, is really no reason why he should
neglect means, but rather an encouragement constantly to attend. "Fully
orthodox this!" And he allows that this generally or always is the case with
sinners under deep and genuine conviction, in the beginning of his book, where
he says, Divines of the best character and greatest note, have allowed that
sinners under deep and genuine convictions, conversing more sensibly with the
wickedness of their own hearts and lives, have been ready to look on themselves
as greater sinners than heretofore; yea, perhaps as growing daily worse, and
more hard hearted. P. 7.


Upon this, the following things are observable.

1. If the sinner's appearing to himself to grow worse more guilty an1d vile,
in the use of means, is no reason why he should neglect means; than his really
growing worse is no matter of discouragement. For what appears to be true to
the sinner, must have just as much influence as if it was really so, until the
appearance is removed, and the sinner is convinced he was mistaken. Therefore
if this appearance is no discouragement, or reason why he should neglect means;
It Is being really so is no discouragement. This is therefore at least
implicitly asserted in these words: and consequently Mr. M. has asserted it in
the strongest manner, by pronouncing them orthodox, in the terms he has. What
then becomes of all that he has said, representing this as a discouraging
doctrine, tending to damp and retard those that are sincerely inclined to exert
themselves, etc. and laying a stumbling block in sinners way, and robbing them
of a precious branch of encouragement, etc? He has here given all this up, as
contrary to reason and truth; so has once more run into gross
self-contradiction.

It hence appears also, how unreasonable Mr. M. is in representing me as not
daring to bring this principle out, and says here, The awakened sinner's really
growing worse in attendance on means, etc -- more vile than he would have been,
continuing secure, etc. -- is really no reason why he should neglect means. For
it is really brought out and asserted in the words I have used, as has been
just observed: and Mr. M. has given his sanction to it also in the strongest
terms, however "startling to the common reader" he may think it will be.

2. If the sinner under genuine and thorough convictions appears to himself to
be much worse than he was in a state of security; then the doctrine that the
sinner under true convictions does grow less sinful and vile, and that this is
the only way in which he may hope to be saved, will do him no good; but will be
the most discouraging doctrine that can be preached to him, and drive him to
despair, if he believes it.

It cannot do him any good, or be any encouragement to him to be told that he
is now less sinful and vile than he was; for by the supposition he will not
believe it, but is confident that the contrary is true. But if he is taught,
and he believes it, that this must be true of him, in order to his being in a
likely way to be saved; this will be so far from encouraging him to go on, that
he will conclude himself to be in a very bad way indeed, that his attendance on
means has done him hurt rather than good; and so will give out, concluding that
there is no hope for him in this way. Mr. M. has therefore, I think, by his own
acknowledgement, in effect given up the whole book he has wrote, as quite
useless, and to no purpose. For the doctrine he contends for can never be
inculcated on the unregenerate, so as to be of any service to them; but must be
carefully kept out of their hearing, lest it prove very mischievous.

Let us see how the doctrine of Mr. M's book must be applied to the
unregenerate. He will tell the secure profligate that he must reform, and
earnestly attend on all means of grace: and for his encouragement will assure
him, that in this way he will grow better, less sinful and vile; and so get
into a more likely way to be saved, and more in the way of God's mercy; in
which he has no reason to expect to share so long as he is so guilty and vile
as he is at present. And the more he will reform, and the less sinful he shall
become; the nearer he will come to saving conversion, and the more likely will
he be to obtain it. If the sinner believes what he says, and from this
encouragement reforms all ways of known external sin; and begins to attend on
means; he may go on with good courage, and in his own view have a great degree
of tenderness of conscience, and carefully avoid all known sin, and come up to
all known duty. And if he is not led into the knowledge of his own heart, and
has no genuine conviction of sin, and is not convinced of the great sin of not
loving God and believing on Christ, he will have high hopes from his imagined
comparative goodness, or his becoming less sinful than he was, by his
reformations and duties, and be confident that God is not so angry with him
now; but takes a favorable notice of his doings and looks on him with
approbation. He will now drink in Mr. M's doctrine with greediness, and it will
be sweet and comfortable to his soul. But alas! Whither will it lead him? To
the same place, no doubt to which the proud pharisee went.

But if by the divine influences he falls under genuine, thorough convictions,
he will begin to appear to himself to be growing more guilty and vile than he
was in a state of security, instead of becoming less sinful, as he was
encouraged to expect. This sinks his heart, all his hopes fail him; and he runs
to Mr. M. to know what he shall do. What will Mr. M. say to him? Will he tell
him, this is no matter of discouragement; he has as much encouragement to go on
as ever, although he continues to grow worse and worse? If he tells him this,
which he has in effect declared to be fully orthodox; he will now retract and
directly contradict all he had preached to him before, and which is the
fundamental doctrine of his whole book, as what he had better never have
published; for it is not true, and has done no good, but hurt.

If he persists in his former doctrine, and tells the sinner that though he
appears to himself to be more sinful; yet this is not his true state; if it was
he would be in a bad and hopeless way indeed: But he is really growing much
better, less sinful and vile than he was, so that God's anger is in a measure
abated: He has reformed many gross sins, and done many duties, of all which God
graciously approves, and takes a favorable notice: And if he holds on, he will
undoubtedly become in this way so much less sinful than others, or than he once
was, that God will bestow salvation upon him, rather than upon those who are
more guilty and vile, having never reformed, and humbled themselves at the feet
of sovereign mercy as he has done, nor nourished such tenderness of conscience,
etc. I say, if he should preach this, or, which is much the same, read over his
book to him; the sinner will either believe it, or he will not. If he believes
it, and is brought to view himself not as growing worse, but less sinful, his
convictions are at an end, he is no longer under genuine thorough convictions;
for such appear to themselves at least, to grow more sinful and vile. Therefore
in order to believe Mr. M's doctrine he must lose his convictions; and they
never can take place again, until he gives this doctrine up, and so
perseverance in the belief of this doctrine will infallibly carry him to hell,
unless a sinner may be converted without a proper work of conviction.

If he does not believe it, and it is to be desired in mercy to his soul he way
not; for we, and Mr. M. too are sure that he cannot as long at his convictions
continue: I say, if he does not believe it, he will escape the mischief, and
all the pains taken to inculcate it will be in vain.

If he believes it in part, viz. that sinners under genuine convictions do
become less sinful, as the only hopeful way to be saved; and yet by the force
of his own convictions appears to himself to be growing more sinful; this will
have a very bad, discouraging tendency indeed, as has been observed, and drive
him into despair, as being too great a sinner ever to hope for God's mercy. In
order to relieve this sinner Mr. M. must give up his great doctrine, which he
wrote his book to defend; he must do it for a while at least, as he has indeed
done by the passage under consideration, and tell him, that he may grow worse,
more wicked and vile, and yet be in a hopeful way, and have all possible
encouragement to attend; for the end of the use of means to the unregenerate is
not to make them less sinful, but to lead them to that knowledge and sense of
their true state and character which the unregenerate may have. Thus the sinner
must believe the doctrine which I have advanced, as long as his convictions
continue and increase, or fall into despair; and can receive no other
encouragement, but what is consistent with this doctrine, of the sinners
growing worse under convictions ^ and what is directly contrary to that of Mr.
M.

Mr. M. concludes this general head in the following words, Now if in the
author's view, it appeared too startling to a common reader to close his
discourse with this plain representation of the state of the case in debate; it
had been a great favor, in my humble opinion, if he had been under the same
restraint when he advanced it. To be sure it had prevented me these my poor
labors on the subject. And I think I may say with good assurance, it had
prevented grief to many worthy fathers in the ministry, whose praise is in the
gospel through the churches; and who are not so far superannuated, but that with
good old Eli, they tremble for fear of the ark, when they see it in danger of a
wrong touch, from the vigor and sprightliness of younger years.

It has been observed, and clearly showed, I presume, that I am quite clear of
the charge which Mr. M. has brought against me, upon which, the words now
transcribed are grounded; that I could not have expressed myself in the words
which he prescribes for me, without forgetting the argument I was upon, and
being guilty of as great an oversight nearly as he has in making this charge.
-- And that what he says I ought to have said, is implied in my words; and so
implicitly asserted. And that he has fully assented to it, and pronounced it
orthodox, in the same breath, in which he attempts to represent it so gross and
shocking an error, as to startle a common reader.

I confess I am not ashamed of this doctrine; nor am I afraid to assert it, in
its full length and breadth on all proper occasions. Nor do I repent my
publishing it; but think I have reason to bless God that I have been under no
restraint that has prevented it, even although it has occasioned "These POOR
labors of Mr. M on the subject:" Yea, whatever else I may suffer by it.
Whether he had any call thus to exert himself; and whether these labors ought
to be called poor, or by a better, or a worse name, every reader will judge for
himself. They have, however, I think, given me opportunity further to explain
and vindicate an important truth, which tends to exalt the character of the
adorable Jesus, and abase the sinner.

Who these worthy, aged, trembling fathers are I know not, and have no
inclination to detract from their praise. But I think I have a right to say
they fear, where no fear is; and if they tremble, and handle the ark as Mr. M.
has done, no thanks are due to them, that it has not been completely overset
long ago.

PART II.
WHEREIN it is enquired, Whether God has given any commands to unregenerate
sinners, which they do truly comply with and may perfectly obey, while
unregenerate?

SECTION I.
THE question particularly stated; and arguments offered to prove the negative.

THE question is not, Whether any commands are given to the unregenerate? Or
whether any thing is required of them, which it is their duty to comply with
and perform? The unregenerate, it is granted, are under law, as much as the
regenerate, and the former are required to be perfectly holy, as much as the
latter, and are forbidden everything which is contrary to this. In a word, no
duty is required of the regenerate, which the unregenerate are not also
commanded to do. This may be true consistently with their doing no part of
their duty, and living in perfect rebellion against every command, while
unregenerate. And indeed, they who take the positive side of this question,
allow that the unregenerate never do in any degree comply with those commands
which require holiness; for they grant there is no true holiness in any thing
which they do. This Mr. M. constantly allows.

The question therefore is, Whether there are any commands given to the
unregenerate, which do not require any thing truly holy; but only require such
exercises and doings which they may and do comply with, and truly perform,
according to the true meaning and intent of the commands, while they are
perfect enemies to all true holiness?

Mr. M. has zealously espoused the affirmative side of this question; and great
part of his book is taken up in attempting to prove that God requires duties of
the unregenerate, which they are to do, and may and do perform while in an
unregenerate state. He owns that I have not expressly denied that there are any
such duties required of the unregenerate; but he has taken considerable pains
to show why there is reason to suspect and even conclude that I held to no such
duties. I am ready to own the charge; and shall proceed to produce the
arguments I have for the negative.

I. ACCORDING to our Savior's account of the divine law or commandment, it
requires nothing but love to God and our neighbor. Mat. XXII. 37 -- 39.
And he expressly says that "on these two commandments hang all the law and the
prophets." v. 40.
That is, all that is required in the law and in the prophets, every injunction
and command to be found in divine revelation, really requires nothing but love
to God and our neighbor; l^^e exercised and expressed in all proper ways. No
other natural and (...) sense can be put upon these words of Christ. But would
they bear another sense, what St. Paul says on the same subject fixes the
meaning; of them. He says "He that loves another, has fulfilled the law." And
again, "Love is the fulfilling of the law." Romans XIII. 8, 10.
Love could not be the fulfilling of the law, if the law required any thing
more than love, acted out to a perfect degree, and in a proper manner. Love is
therefore the whole duty of man. Nothing more nor less is required. God has not
given one precept to man in the law or the prophets, in the old testament or
new, but what requires love to God, or man, or both, and is to be obeyed in the
exercise of love, and no other way, or by nothing else. There is therefore no
obedience but what consists in love; and where there is nothing of this, there
is no duty done; nothing that is required, and is due, is given. This, I
conclude is a plain, incontestible truth, as demonstrably evident as any truth
contained in divine revelation; and must approve itself to the reason of every
one who will exercise his reason, and not confuse and bewilder himself with a
set of words without a meaning. The unregenerate have no true love to God or
their neighbor; for in this, and in the consequent exercises of enmity, their
unregeneracy consists. Therefore they do no duty, obey not one command in the
law or the prophets, in the old testament or new.

IT will be said doubtless, they do obey and do duty in some sense, or at least
some part of duty: They do external duties; or that which is the matter of
duty. These things, such as prayer, reading the bible, acts of justice and
mercy, etc. are commanded duties; and they who do these things, so far obey the
command, and do their duty.

ANS. Nothing is either duty or sin, if considered without any respect to the
heart, and as not implying any exercises of that: Therefore there is not really
any external duty or sin, which is not considered in connection with exercises
of heart, and as the fruit and expression of these. If a statue is formed so as
by the motion of certain springs to speak distinct words and pronounce a well
composed prayer, none will imagine there is any duty done, or any part of duty,
any more than in the noise of a cataract or in the whistling of the wind. Such
a statue is not a subject of command, and is not capable of any part of duty.
And man is not the subject of command, or capable of any duty or sin in any
other view, but in that of a voluntary agent: and all the external motions, and
effects produced by him, which are not in any degree voluntary, are no more
duty nor sin, and no more any part of either, than if there was no such thing
as duty or sin in nature. If a man kills another by a motion or stroke, in
which he had no design, and is perfectly involuntary, there is no more sin in
this than there is in the falling of a tree on a man that kills him. And in
this case to say, that the man, or the tree is guilty of external sin, or has
done the matter of sin, and so has really sinned, and done what was forbidden,
would justly be reckoned a high degree of absurdity and nonsense. But this
would be as proper language, as to speak of a person's doing external duty or
the matter of his duty, as though some duty was really done without taking into
view the exercises of his will in the affair, and not considering him as a
voluntary agent. But if he is considered as a voluntary agent, and the whole of
the duty lies in the exercises of the heart or will; then what is done is
either duty or sin, according as these are. If one man kills another by a
voluntary execution or motion, in which he had a prudent design and desire to
save his life, the action is so far from being sin or murder, that it is an act
of kindness and mercy. The man committed no sin, but did his duty. If a man
pronounces the words of a prayer, without one thought or voluntary exercise
about it, he does no more duty than the statue just mentioned, or the tree that
bows before the moving air. But if he does this voluntarily, with though it and
design, and his will and design herein is perfectly bad, and the same with his,
who curses and blasphemes the name of God, such voluntariness, such exercises
and design surely do not render external action duty, which would not be so in
itself considered. If the external action was neither duty nor sin, considered
as unconnected with any design or will, it does not become duty by being
considered in connection with sinful volitions, and as the fruit of them, but
on the contrary, the whole taken together, is sin, and nothing but sin.

If it is well attended to, it will appear I conclude, that there is a great
impropriety and gross absurdity in speaking of a man's doing any part of his
duty in his external conduct, when this conduct is not considered as the fruit
and expression of his heart, or any way connected with it; but more especially
when it is considered as the fruit of wrong and sinful exercises of heart. And
to use such language in this case, and talk of doing duty in part and some
degree in external conduct, by separating it from all views and exercises of
the mind, is using words with at any consistent ideas, and only tends to blind
and confuse the minds of those who suffer themselves to be imposed upon by such
expressions. The externals of devotion and religion are the proper and
appointed ways of our acting out and expressing our love to God: and in this
view may be called the external part, or matter of duty; hence they have
obtained the name of duties: But when there is really no love to God exercised
and expressed in these externals, there is no duty in them; they cease to be
any part of duty. And if these externals are attended upon in the exercise of
perfect enmity against God, and as the fruit and expression of that, it is
something far worse. But because the former have obtained the name of duties,
being the proper and appointed ways of acting out and expressing respect and
love to God, many have bewildered themselves by the word duty, and have been
led to think and speak of these externals as duties, considered in themselves,
and the attendance on them as doing duty, and have in this way imposed on
themselves and others. These things are not required, for their own sakes, or
in themselves considered, but only as proper ways of exercising and expressing
love to God. Love to God is therefore the thing required, the whole of the duty
(...) in this, and where this is wanting the externals are as to duty an empty
nothing, not the thing required; and in doing them, no duty is done.

In this view of the matter we may see the true meaning of what God says to the
people or Israel, "When ye come to appear before me, who has required this at
your hand to tread my courts?" Isai. I. 12.
These things were required, but not for their own sake, but only as an
expression of their respect and love to God. Therefore when this ceased to be
exercised and expressed, and they appeared not to have the love of God, but the
contrary, their attendance on these externals, was not doing any thing that was
required of them. There things were not required of them, as they performed
them: Therefore in their attendance on them they really did nothing that was
required of them, and so did not the least part of their duty. To the same
purpose is what God says by Jeremiah, "I spoke not to your fathers, nor
commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt,
concerning burnt offerings and sacrifices: But this thing commanded I them,
saying, Obey my voice," Jer. VII. 22, 23.
Burnt offerings and sacrifices and all other externals were not required
merely as such, or considered by themselves as mere externals; as such God did
not command them; but as the expression of love and obedience. Therefore when
these were attended upon, without the exercise of love and obedience, the thing
which God respected in his command and even the whole that was commanded, was
neglected, and no duty done.

None will suppose, I presume, that the devils did any duty when they cried out
saying "Thou a^t Christ the Son of God." Luke IV. 41.
Or when the chief devil in the possessed man prayed to Christ in the name of
the rest, in the most earnest manner, "I beseech thee torment me not." Luke
VIII. 28.
But the defect was not in externals, but in the want of love to Christ, and
the exercise of enmity against him. And will any one imagine that men who have
no more love or true respect to God than the devils, and are as real and entire
enemies to him as they, which is the character of all the unregenerate; that
such, I say, do any more duty in their external words and actions, than the
devils did in the instances mentioned? What do such men do, which the devils
did not? If the want of love to Christ and enmity against him in the latter
rendered all they did in openly confessing Christ to be the Son of God, and
praying to him, not duty, but sin; why is not this as true of the former?

If a man does justice in his dealings, without any design or desire to do
justice he does no more duty than the just balance which gives to every one his
due. And if one gives to the poor without design, and good will, he does no
more of the duty of showing mercy, than the fruitful tree from which the poor
is fed. And whatever external acts of kindness and charity he does, if he means
not so, and has not the least degree of love and good will to his fellow men in
his heart, he certainly pays no true regard and obedience to the command to
show mercy, and does no part of this duty. And if, contrary to this, his heart
it full of malevolence and ill will to his neighbors, and he intends some evil
to them by his external appearance of love and kindness, he is so far from
doing any duty, that these external acts, considered at his acts (and they are
no acts at all in any other view) are as really a violation of his duty, and
acts of melevolence and sin, as are stealing from his neighbor, and attempting
to cut his throat.

To him, who will well consider these things, I think, it must appear, that to
talk of doing the external and material part of duty, under the notion that
this is really doing any duty and obeying God's commands, without any regard
had to the mind, or while that is supp^ed to be directly contrary to all duty,
is very absurd, and tends to confuse and deceive all those, who will be
confused and deceived by a set of unmeaning words and phrases; and that where
there is no love to God or men exercised, there is no duty done, whatever is
the external appearance and conduct.

IT is still said by some that though it is granted, as it must be, that external
words and actions cannot be considered as any part of duty, or as having any
thing of the nature of duty, unless they are viewed as the voluntary exercises
of a moral agent, by which he acts out and expresses his heart; and therefore
if the principles and exercises of his heart are all wrong and sinful, no duty
is done, but all is sin; yet it does not follow that the unregenerate do no
duty: They may obey the divine command, from the natural principles which they
have, such as natural conscience and self-love. These, though they are not the
best principles, yet are good, or at least not sinful; and God requires the
unregenerate to improve these, and act from such principles as they have; and
when they do so, this is real obedience, and they do their duty, even what God
commands.

ANS. 1. There is no love to God or our neighbor in the exercise of these
natural principles, or while men act from them only: it therefore follows from
what has been already proved, that there is no obedience in this, because all
obedience consists in love to God and our neighbor. At least it must be
allowed to be proved, till it can be shown wherein the argument fails.

ANS. 2. But if this argument is laid aside, and what is here advanced is
attended to, it may be proved to be groundless, and very absurd. These natural
principles are not principles of obedience; nor is there any obedience merely
in acting from them. If the dictates of natural conscience are not according to
the truth, but directly contrary to what is truth and duty, none will think, I
conclude, that a man does his duty in acting according to such dictates: for
this is the same as to say that a man does his duty in acting directly contrary
to his duty. Will any one say, that Saul did his duty, and obeyed Christ in
persecuting the church, because he acted according to the dictates of his
conscience, and ^^^ily thought he ought to do it? If so, the more stupid and
blind men are to duty, and the more contrary their hearts are to it, as the
ground and reason of their stupidity and blindness, the more obedient and
dutiful they are. If the dictates of conscience are according to the truth, and
point out what is duty, they declare that this consists in love to God and our
neighbor: That this is their immediate duty and all that is required. If
therefore, they continue not to love God and their neighbor, they are so far
from obeying the dictates of conscience, that they go in direct opposition to
these, and so are very far from doing their duty. But, to say the truth,
natural conscience it neither a principle of obedience, nor of disobedience, as
has been before observed. There is but one principle of obedience, which is
love, or disinterested respect or regard to God, and our neighbor. Whatever
regard is paid to the dictates of conscience from any other principle, there is
no obedience in it; and the greatest enemy to God and his neighbor, may
exercise as much of this sort of obedience as any other man.

And as to self-love: If by it is meant only a love and desire of happiness;
this is the principle of all actions in general, whether they be rebellion
against God, or obedience. It is essential to all voluntary agents, and is the
principle of all the sin in the universe, as much as of holiness and obedience.
If by self-love is meant selfishness, or a person's having respect to himself
only, and to nothing else, either God or his neighbor; placing his happiness
in his own private interest, as distinct from all other beings, desiring and
pursuing this happiness and nothing else; this is so far from being a principle
of obedience, that it is the principle of all the disobedience and sin, that
ever was, or will be in the creation; and in direct and most perfect opposition
to love to God and our neighbor. How absurd then is it to talk of obeying God,
and doing duty from a principle of self love!

OBJ. But a well regulated self-love is reasonable and right. Persons ought to
seek their own happiness, if it be true happiness, and if they seek it where it
is to had, and place it in right and proper objects, and with a proper
subordination to the glory of God and the general good. How then can this be
sin and rebellion? If it is right and reasonable, men ought to exercise it, and
this is their duty, and the contrary is sin.

ANS. 1. There is no such thing as a well regulated self-love, if by self-love
be meant, what has been just described. Selfishness ought not to take place in
the least degree; it is in every degree unreasonable and rebellion against God.
A well regulated self love is quite a different thing from selfishness, and in
direct opposition to it. It consists in placing our happiness in the glory of
God and the good of our neighbor, and regarding our interest only as included
in the interest of the whole, or the greatest good of being in general, and not
something distinct and separate from it; which is so far from selfishness,
that, it is directly opposite to it, even disinterested benevolence to being
general.

ANS. 2. No person under the influence of that self-love which has respect to
himself wholly, and to no other being, is seeking after true happiness, or
places it where he ought. True happiness consists in the enjoyment of God in
the exercise of love to being in general; but by the supposition the selfish
man does not seek this happiness, for he has no true respect to God, or any
other being but himself. And there is no more obedience in seeking future
happiness in a selfish way, or without any respect and regard to the interest
of any other being, than there is in seeking happiness in this present world,
in any way, and in any objects whatever.

ANS. 3. It is most absurd and a gross contradiction, to talk of self love or
selfishness subordinated to the glory of God, and the general good: for
self-love has no regard to God or any other being but self; and is so far from
being subordinated to the glory of God, and the general good, that it is an
enemy to the general good; and in its own nature enmity itself against being in
general. The man under the influence and dominion of self-love, regards and
seeks himself only; and the language of his heart is, "I care not what becomes
of the glory of God and the general good, if my own ends may be answered." And
how can this principle be subordinated to the general good? Will it submit and
subordinate itself to this? That is to suppose that it will change its own
nature, and no longer seek self wholly, but the general good more than self,
and as the highest and best end. And what can be more self-contradictory and
absurd than this!

II. THOUGH the short and plain argument that has been considered, is quite
sufficient, I think, to end the dispute, and prove that there are no commanded
duties which the unregenerate fulfill, or comply with in the least degree; yet
it may be proper to mention some other arguments, which prove the same thing,
as they may serve to strengthen the former, with some at least, and set the
a^^^^d^ty of the contrary doctrine, if possible, in yet a clearer and more
striking light.

Therefore I proceed to say,

All God's commands to his creatures are an expression of his will or heart,
which is the same with their being a transcript of his moral perfection, as the
common phrase is. But God's moral perfection is his holiness: and his will is
holy. Therefore whatever command is an expression of his will, must require
holiness. That which requires any thing else, is no expression of his moral
perfection; therefore cannot be the expression of the will of God, and so
cannot be his command.

III. DUTY to God always supposes and implies something given to God, and done
for him, out of regard and respect to him. But where there is no true love to
God, there is no true respect paid to him; nothing is offered to him or done
for him in the intention and design of the doer. Therefore there is really no
duty done. Nothing that is due to God is given; and so no command that he can
give is obeyed.

IV. If God should command the unregenerate to do any thing, as such, and which
they may do consistently with their having no love to him, and being under the
power of perfect and reigning enmity against him; this is in some degree, if
not wholly giving up his demands on them which require them to love him, to
repent, and embrace the gospel. Such a notion seems to ca^^y (...) it and
suppose, that there higher demands are hard and severe, and not suitable to be
made on the unregenerate, God therefore does not insist on them, but comes
down, and conforms to their (...) and inclination, and tells then, if they are
not inclined to respect and embrace the gospel, he will point out something for
them to do, which is agreeable to their hearts, and which they may be inclined
to do while perfect enemies to him. And is not this coming down, and conforming
to the will and perfectly wicked inclination of the sinner in a manner
infinitely unbecoming the most high God?

Mr. M. very justly observes "that God don't make the d^pra^^d will of the
creature the rule of his duty." P. 52.
This, I think is giving up the point entirely. If God does (...) accomodate
his laws and commands to the depraved will of the creature, he has appointed no
duties to be done, which imply no respect to him, because their wills (...)
depraved, that they have no respect and love; but are perfect enemies to him.
If man's will was perfectly right, there would certainly be no occasion or
reason for any such commands. Therefore if God gives such it is purely out of
regard to their depraved will, as the sole rule and reason of the command. Were
they disposed to love God with all their heart, he would not give any command
that could be obeyed without love to him: But since they have no love to him,
he love's his demand, and appoints a rule of duty, suited to their hearts or
wills, which have no love, but are perfectly opposite to him. And is not this
to make the depraved will of the creature the rule of his duty? And is not such
a notion very dishonorable to God; and in effect to give up all moral
government, by making the will of the creature, and not the will and law of the
creator, the guide and rule?

If a prince should treat his rebellious subjects so, who refused to lay down
their arms and submit to him, and pay him any respect; would he not act a
dishonorable part, and give up his own character and government, in a measure
at least in favor of his avowed enemies and rebellious subjects? Should he, for
instance, when he came among them, and called upon them to return immediately
to their allegiance and submit to him; and found that they were so far from
obeying, that this demand roused them all to arms, and they stood with drawn
swords pointed directly at him, obstinately refusing to yield one point to him,
or submit in the least degree: Should he, I say, instead of insisting on his
former demand, tell them that he found they were obstinately fixed in rebellion
against him; he would therefore propose something to them and require it of
them, which they might do and yet continue rebels, and oppose and fight against
him and his government as much as ever, viz. to draw up a petition to him th^^
he would pardon them and deliver them from the misaries that their rebellion
had brought upon them; which they might make and read over every day,
consistently with continuing in a state of rebellion, and without making any
pretenses to the contrary; or if they did, they would be only pretense and
profession directly contrary to the truth: And that if they would do this he
would look upon them as in some measure loyal, dutiful subjects, or as doing
some part of their duty: would not this be giving up his first demand, at least
in some degree; and be implicitly granting that they were not wholly to blame
for not immediately submitting to him?

If a prince should conduct so, all who were friends to his character and
government would be grieved, and view him as injuring both; and in a degree
giving them up in favor of rebels. I suppose this will be a clear case to all.
And I see not why the case before us is not as clear; ye much more so, in
proportion to the greater dignity and worthiness of the most high God, and the
proportionable inexcusable wickedness of the sinner. And the only reason, I
conceive, why any have run into this notion of God's appointing duties to the
unregenerate, to be done by them while such, and have not been rather shocked
at it, is that they look on them as in some measure at least excusable for not
loving God and embracing the gospel, this being above their power, and what
they cannot do while unregenerate; although (poor creatures!) they are quite
willing and desirous to do what they can.

V. IF God commands the unregenerate to do that which they may do in a state of
rebellion, and while they are with all their hearts opposing him, and in the
exercise of perfect enmity against him, I see not why this is not commanding
sin and rebellion, and making this their duty. It must be so, if all they do is
sin and rebellion, which, I think is certain to a demonstration; for in the
exercises of a moral agent there is, there can be, no medium between holiness
and sin. It will be said here, that God does not command the sin, but the duty.
I answer, take away the sin, and separate it from every thing else, and there
remains nothing in which there is any moral agency, and so nothing in which
there is either sin or duty; and therefore nothing which can be the subject of
command. Consequently if the sin is not commanded, nothing is commanded.

Mr. M. has made several attempts to answer this argument, which may most
properly be considered here. He says, The mistake on which this objection is
founded, is a supposition that there is a natural connection between requiring
the unregenerate to pray, and requiring them to sin: Whereas the connection is
entirely of a moral nature, and arises merely from a moral cause, the
creature's want of moral ability, or which is the same, his want of disposition
of heart, and inclination of will sincerely to comply with the command, which
is merely the creature's fault. And shall this fault of the creature be
attributed to God's command, requiring what is strictly the creature's duty? P.
94.


Upon this the following things may be observed.

l. There is indeed a natural connection between requring the unregenerate to
pray as such, as wholly wicked and opposite to God in all the exercises of
their hearts that respect him, and requiring them to sin; for these are
precisely one and the same thing, and the distinction between moral and natural
here, is quite unintelligible and to no purpose. If the prayers of the wicked
are an abomination to the Lord, i. e. wholly sinful, then to require them to
make such prayers, is for God to require them to do what is an abomination to
him, and wholly sinful. And this is the same, I think, as to command them to
sin. If God requires the wicked to pray, as such, in the exercise of their
wicked inclination of heart, and without any other or better inclination, what
he requires is sin; and its being wholly their own fault that they are thus
inclined, and do sin, as they are commanded, is so far from rendering the thing
commanded no sin, that it is the only reason why it is sin; for if it was not
their fault, it would not be sin.

2. If Mr. M. had constantly kept this mind, that it is wholly man's fault that
he is not holy, and really believed it in all its length and breadth, he would
never have thought of their being commanded to do unholy duties: for if it is
their immediate and indispensible duty to be holy and embrace the gospel, no
reason can be given why this should not be required of them immediately; or why
any thing less or lower than this, even unholy duties, should be required at
all. Mr. M. through a great part of his book goes on the supposition that the
unregenerate are not wholly to blame for not embracing the gospel, and doing
holy duties: had he not supposed this, we never should have heard of his
unregenerate duties, and of their honest attempts, and doing their utmost in
the exercise of such principles as they have, etc.

3. Mr. M. does fully yield the point to the objector in what he says here.
According to his own concession, God's command has no respect to the fault of
the creature; but requires what is strictly his duty. Surely then he requires
holiness; for this is "strictly his duty;" and every thing short of this is the
creature's fault. If God commands men to do duties, without any regard to their
moral deficiency, which is wholly their own fault, or making any allowance for
it; then in his commands he makes no allowance for their unregeneracy; for this
is a moral defect, and wholly their own fault: and therefore does not require
unregenerate, unholy duties. It appears therefore that Mr. M. had no other way
to answer the objection, but by giving up what was objected against, and
granting that no unregenerate duties, nothing unholy and impure is required,
but real holiness, which is in all cases "strictly the creature's duty."

But let us attend to the similitude he brings to illustrate this matter. To
make this mistake plain to the meanest capacity, suppose a father correcting
his son for disobedient rebellious behavior, should in the close, require him
to bow his head, in token of reverence and submission to his parental
authority: the son, through unsubdued perverseness of temper, bows in hypocrisy.
Does the father by commanding the duty, command the sin? Far be it. And much
less in the present case.

I think he has by this similitude "made it plain to the meanest capacity" that
he has entirely given up his cause, and expressly asserts the contrary, viz,
that God does not require what sinners do while under the dominion of
"unsubdued perverseness." If the father requires the son to bow his head, "in
token of reverence and submission to his parental authority," and in no other
way; the son does not obey this command in the least degree; therefore does no
duty, nothing that the father commands: but his bowing his head in hypocrisy in
the exercise of unsubdued perverseness is so far from being an act of
obedience, that it is an exercise and act of high rebellion, and only serves to
offend and provoke the father; as it is a daring attempt to impose upon him and
mock him. Does Mr M. think, and will he say, that acts of gross hypocrisy, in
the exercise of "unsubdued perverseness," are the creatures duty, and acts of
obedience, and that God commands these? And that these are less sinful and more
acceptable in God's fight than the neglect of them? This is a very ill chosen
similitude for Mr. M. and will, I doubt not, make it "plain to the meanest
capacity," that his notion of unregenerate duties is very absurd, and that he
here asserts that such are not required; but that God in all cases requires
submission to him, and proper tokens and expressions of this, and nothing else.

And by the way, I desire it may be considered, whether the son who under the
father's correction and reproofs, continues in the exercise of "unsubdued
perverseness," and bows his head in hypocrisy, is not more guilty and vile than
he was before his father took him in hand. lf so, which I conclude Mr. M.
himself will allow; then he has by bringing this instance to represent the case
of the unregenerate, not only given up the point he brought it to support; but
also must allow that they do not become less sinful; but more guilty and vile
in the use of means, while they persist in their "unsubdued perverseness,"
under all the light and conviction they have: and so has here really given up
the whole which he undertook to support. Had Mr. M. constantly viewed the
unregenerate in the light in which he sets them here, my section on means.
could not have given him such great offense.

BUT let us see if he has succeeded any better in his other attempt to answer
this objection. He says the sin the unregenerate are guilty of in what they do,
is no part of the duty, as required by God, don't belong to its essence; but
arises from man's deficiency. God has a right to require of his people good
duties. When he puts them under gospel advantages, etc. he requires gospel
holiness. A prevalent indisposition of heart, and disinclination of will to do
right, makes no abatement in God's demands of us: or in the duty we owe to God.
P. 115.
Here again he expressly gives up the whole, and asserts that what God requires
is good duties, gospel holiness; and not unregenerate duties. Thus he shifts,
gives up his cause, and turns against himself. He labors abundantly, to prove
that God requires of the unregenerate something which is not holiness but those
doings which they may perform with "unsubdued perverseness" of heart. And when
he is told that that is to require that which is sin; he turns about and says
God requires nothing but "good duties, gospel holiness;" and so gets rid of the
objection by unsaying all he had so often and zealously asserted before,
against which the objection yet remains in its full force.

But he goes on, Thus stands the case; God puts his covenant people under
advantages to bring forth good fruits, and then he has a just right, expects
and demands them. God requires good duties of his people; both the performance
and the goodness or the duty is absolutely required: And therefore God will
have the duties or performances, though through their badness they come marred out
of their hands. Does God in requiring these duties, require their being marred?
Far be it, since he absolutely required their being good. Here he is in the
same strain yet: God requires nothing but "good fruits, good duties," and
therefore not the marred, sinful duties of the unregenerate; exercises and
fruits of "unsubdued perverseness;" they never do the duty which God' requires
of them. When he says, Both the performance and the goodness of the duty is
absolutely required: And therefore God will have the duties or performances,
though through their badness they come marred out of their hands, I think he is
quite unintelligible, or at least supposes something which is very absurd and
self-contradictory. The distinction between the performance of duty, and the
goodness of it, is, I suppose, quite new, and so nice that I question whether
it can be understood. There is no other duty that I can conceive of, but good
duty: The goodness of the duty comes into performance, and is indeed one and
the same thing; the performance is doing the good duty; and where there is no
goodness exercised there is no performance of duty. Therefore when he says,
"God will have the duties or performances though ma^'d by them," it is to me the
same as if he had said, God will have the duties, whether he has them or not;
or though they are wholly withheld.

If by the performance as distinguished from the goodness, he means only the
external action, without any relation or regard to the exercises of the heart,
I suppose enough has been said to show the absurdity of such a way of talking.

SECT. II.
Mr. MILLS'S Arguments for the Affirmative examined.

MR. MILLS'S arguments are quite miscellaneous; they are interspersed through
near an hundred pages, without any particular order, in which he does not
attend constantly to this subject, but often goes off to other matters, and
then returns again to this, and repeats the things he had said before, over and
over again. I shall pick them out as well as I can, as they lie scattered
through this part of his performance.

1. Mr. M. attempts to prove this by a number of texts of scripture, which he
thinks expressly enjoin duty on the unregenerate to be done by them while under
the dominion of sin, being enemies to God, and to all holiness. P. 69 -- 72.
He observes, Our Savior expressly enjoins sinners, to search the scripture,
as a means in order to come to the knowledge of him as Mediator. Joh. V. 39.
To seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness. Mat. VI. 33.
To labor for the meat that endures to everlasting life. John VI. 2^.
And to strive to enter in at the strait gate. Luke XIII. 24.


ANS. 1. Our Savior does not direct the Jews to search the scriptures with all
their prejudices, and in the exercise of enmity against him; and with a desire
and design to prove from them that he was an impostor. This I trust neither Mr.
M. nor any one else will assert, or allow. But there is just as much evidence
that he directed them to search the scriptures thus, as there is that he
directed them to do it, as enemies to his character and doctrines. They ought
to have searched the scriptures with a heart ready to embrace and practice the
truth, whatever they found it to be; and therefore our Savior doubtless
injoins this on them; which he knew they would not do so long as they continued
to hate both him and the Father that sent him. Christ told them that, "If any
man will do his will (i. e. is disposed and inclined to do the will of God) he
shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of
myself." Joh. VII. 17.
And when he tells them to search the scripture in order to determine this, he
directs them to do it with such an inclination; and not with a disposition
directly opposite to that which was necessary in order to answer the end
proposed.

Mr. M. observes that Christ directs them to search the scriptures, "as a means
in order to come to the knowledge of him as Mediator." This is granted: but it
does not follow that he enjoins them to do this with a wicked heart; but with a
right temper and disposition of mind: for the latter was necessary in order to
come to the true knowledge of Christ as Mediator. And, as has been observed, it
was their indispensible duty, as well as interest to search the scriptures with
such a disposition of mind.

ANS. 2. The word in the original, translated search, in the imperative mood,
may be as well rendered ye do search. It is thus translated by most of the
noted critics on the orginal. Vid. Pol. Syn. in locum.
And this translation is thought to be confirmed by the following verse; the
sense of the two verses being this, "Ye take much pains to search the
scriptures, because ye think ye have eternal life in them. This is very true,
and I am the life here revealed; and yet so perverse and blind are you, that
while ye are paying such great regard to the scriptures, ye reject me, and will
not come to me that ye may have the life there revealed."

ANS. 3. When Christ directs and commands to seek first the kingdom of God,
etc. and labor for the meat that endures to everlasting life, he doubtless
directs to that seeking and labor by which men will certainly obtain what they
seek and labor after. There is certainly not the least evidence that he does
not; or that by seeking and loboring he means any exercises and doings of men
unregenerate. I see not why Mr. M. might not with as much propriety and reason
have quoted every direction and command of our Savior that is recorded, as
requiring unregenerate doings, and nothing but such.

And it is to be particularly observed that there is an express promise made to
them who seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, "All these things
shall be added unto you." This is beyond all question a promise of the covenant
of grace, to that godliness which has the promise of the life that now is, and
of that which is to come. 1 Timothy IV. 8.
As to the words, "strive to enter in at the strait gate;" these have been
particularly considered before, and also the remarkable argument which Mr. M.
here uses to prove that they mean the strivings of the unregenerate; to which
the reader is referred. P. 86. etc.


Mr. M. proceeds, "And is not the sinner that finds the pearl, plainly
represented as being a seeker, previous to his finding it?" Mat. XIII. 45, 46.


ANS. 1. If it is granted that the unregenerate sinner seeks after Christ and
salvation, this is not to the purpose; for he may do this, and yet obey no
command, nor do any duty. How then came Mr. M. to think that this was in the
least to the point he was upon?

ANS. 2. The merchant seeking goodly pearls is not designed to represent a man
unregenerate but one who is as much prepared in the temper of his mind, as much
disposed to embrace Jesus Christ as his only Savior and Portion, as the greedy
merchant is to prize and purchase a precious pearl. And who can this be but a
person regenerate? All that Christ means to represent by this similitude is,
the temper and exercises with which men embrace him and become members of his
kingdom, or, in his language, receive the kingdom of God. They love and prize
him so as to forsake all for him. On the whole then, Mr. M. has proved nothing
by producing this text, unless it be, that he looks on the unregenerate, not as
enemies to Christ, but as being as much disposed to embrace Christ and part
with all for him, as is the merchant, who is in pursuit of pearls, to part with
his whole estate to purchase a pearl of great price: a notion which he has kept
in view through his whole book, and on which it is in a measure all built, as has
been observed, however contrary to the whole tenor of scripture.

THE next passage of scripture Mr. M. produces in the following words, And does
not God complain of his people, that they will not frame their doings to turn
unto their God? Mos. V. 4.
Sure this must be something previous to a saving repentance, and something
that God required; otherwise they had not been blamed for the neglect of it;
for where there is no law, there is no transgression.

ANS. 1. The Hebrew word here translated frame properly signifies to give or
grant, and is often translated to suffer or permit. And these words may be
rendered thus, Their pursuits, or their evil ways, will not suffer them to turn
to the Lord. That is, the sins in which they live are in the way of their
turning to the Lord, and do with the greatest strength and obstinacy oppose it.
This sense agrees well with the following words; "For the spirit of whoredoms
is in the midst of them, and they have not known the Lord." The words set forth
their great degree of corruption, by which they were at the greatest distance
from turning to the Lord.

ANS. 2d. The words as they stand in our translation, express much the same
thing. The meaning or them is, that they were so far gone in wickedness, that
they had not the least disposition or inclination to turn to the Lord, which is
true of every unregenerate person. And the words do not suppose that while men
continue perfectly wicked, and obstinate enemies to God, they in any true
sense, from their doings to turn to the Lord; because this is a gross
contradiction, which Mr. M. and all who join with him have run into, by putting
such a sense upon them. Mr. M. therefore had no warrant to say, "Sure this must
be something previous to a saving repentance." On this assertion all the weight
of his argument from these words rests; which he has not said one word to
support. And indeed it could not be supported by him, had he attempted it; for
it surely rests on a sandy foundation.

Mr. M. goes on, And does not St Paul clearly point out attendance on the word
preached as a means in order to faith? So then faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the word preached, Romans X. 17.
(by the word of God it should be.)

ANS. All that is asserted here is, that it is impossible that men should
believe that of which they never heard: that the truths to be believed by men
in order to salvation are contained in divine revelation, and that none can
believe these, unless he hears them. It follows from this that hearing or
attending to the truths of divine revelation, is necessary in order to faith in
Christ. But how are they to hear? Not with a disposition to hate Christ and all
divine truth, as soon as it comes to their notice; but as Cornelius heard St.
Peter, with a disposition and readiness of mind to receive the truth in love,
and believe it. This is never done by the unregenerate. No unregenerate duties
therefore can be inferred from these words.

Mr. M. adds, And does not the apostle Peter expressly exhort Simon, being
unregenerate to pray? Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray to God,
if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee. Act. VII. P. 22.


Answer. Repentance is often spoken of in the new testament and old, and
persons are often called upon to repent. And when spoken of as connected with
forgiveness of sins, and the condition of this, it always has one determinate
precise meaning, even a turning from sin to God through Jesus Christ. St. Peter
received orders from his master at the last interview he had with him to preach
repentance and remission of sins in his name. Luke XXIV 47
And we find him obeying his orders and saying to a large auditory when waiting
on him to know what they had to do, "Repent and be baptized, every one of you,
in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins. Act. II. 38.
And to another, 'Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out." Acts. III. 19.
And we have no account of his, or of any of the rest of the apostles directing
any one to do any thing short of repentance and conversion; or speaking of
forgiveness of sins in any other connection but with true repentance and
conversion. It would therefore be very strange and quite unaccountable if when
St. Peter directs Simon to repent of his wickedness; and that with a view to
obtain forgiveness, he uses the word repent in a different and opposite sense
from that in which his Lord and master had expressly commanded him to use it,
and different from that in which he had used it before on like occasions, and
as it never is used in another instance in all the new testament. If therefore
these words of St. Peter; can, without doing manifest violence to them, be
understood consistent with the orders which he had received from Christ, and
with his way of addressing men on such occasions in all other instances, we may
be certain we have the true sense of them; and may with confidence reject any
other sense that any have devised.

I therefore observe, Simon is not directed to pray as an impenitent sinner,
but as a penitent. " Repent of this thy wickedness, and pray to God." Is not
the meaning of these words as plain, as these are when this same apostle says,
"Repent and be converted; Repent, and be baptized"? These words have been long
quoted as an incontestable proof that unregenerate men are commanded to pray as
impenitent and unregenerate; and many have done it without ever observing that
the word repent was to be found in the text. Whereas directly the contrary is
most evidently true. As well might we overlook the word repent in the other
passages mentioned, and say St. Peter commanded his hearers to be baptized:
yea, to be converted as impenitent, unregenerate sinners; and hence infer that
to be baptized and converted are duties that the unregenerate are to do while
such. With good reason therefore, I think, Dr. Doddridge says, in his note on
this text, One would think that none could be so wild as to imagine faith in
Christ was not included in that repentance and prayer, which an apostle
preaches to a baptized person as the way of obtaining forgiveness.

The only difficulty in the words is that St. Peter does not here speak of
forgiveness of sin, as certainly connected with the repentance and prayer to
which he exhorts Simon, which he does in the other instances mentioned: and it
is certain that he who prays as a true penitent shall be forgiven: Whereas it
is here said, "IF PERHAPS the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee." Mr.
M. and others have insisted upon this as an argument that the prayer not of a
true penitent, but of an impenitent, unregenerate sinner is here exhorted to.

Upon this it may be observed, that the words, if perhaps, are not designed to
express the uncertainty of his obtaining forgiveness if he should repent of his
wickedness and pray to God, as he was exhorted to do; but the doubtfulness and
uncertainty whether there was forgiveness for this his sin; and so whether he
would repent and pray. Simon had been guilty of a sin which it was to be feared
was the sin against the Holy Ghost, for which there was no forgiveness, or at
least was bordering upon it: and it is in this view that St. Peter puts in the
words if perhaps. As if he had said "If there is room left for repentance and
pardon in this case, which perhaps there is not." Thus the peculiar
circumstances of Simon's case, rendering it doubtful whether there was any
forgiveness for his sin, are the only reason why the apostle puts in these
words if perhaps, which we find he did not in other cases.

Dr. Doddridge understands the words in this sense, and gives the reason of it
in the following words. The dubious manner in which he speaks of his being
forgiven intimates, not that his sincere repentance might possibly fail of
acceptance, for that is contrary to the whole tenor of the gospel, but that
after the commission of a sin, so nearly approaching blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost, there was little reason to hope he would ever be brought truly to
repent. And though I do not quote the Dr. as an authority; yet I may be allowed
perhaps to quote another author as such, at least as one of sufficient
authority with Mr. M as it is no less an one than Mr. Mills himself. He says,
This perhaps, as here used, imports indeed only a suspicion of the truth of the
man's repentance, and not any doubt of God's forgiveness in case his repentance
were sincere. Vind. of gospel truth, etc. P. 76.
This he wrote above twenty years ago, and I think it is a pity he has in his
old age, given this up, and espoused a sense which is attended with insuperable
difficulties.

But if this sense should not be satisfying to all, there is another which some
have espoused, that I will mention. The words in the original translated if
perhaps, do not appear to have this signification and denote doubtfulness or a
perhaps, at least not always; but are used only as expletives, without any
particular meaning, taken by themselves; or else are used to make the assertion
more strong and emphatical. According to this, the words should have been
translated, "Repent, etc. -- that the thought of thine heart may be forgiven
thee," or, "may indeed be forgiven." The same words in the original are used in
the first v. of the preceding chap. by the high priest in his question to
Stephen, translated "Are these things so?" Where it would at best make a poor
sense, to translate them as they are here, If perhaps, are these things so?"
And it is to be observed that these same particles are found in the septuagint
in 58. Psalm, 1. v. which in our translation stands thus, "Do ye indeed seek
righteousness," etc.

And now I leave it to the reader, whether either of these senses is not much
more easy and natural than that which Mr. M. has put upon the words, which
involves us in the inextricable difficulties, which have been mentioned? I am
confident that it will appear to all who well attend to this matter, that this
text is by no means a sufficient foundation to build a doctrine upon, which has
no shadow of support from any other passage of scripture; and which indeed is
repugnant to the whole run of scripture; and most apparently contrary to the
express assertions of Christ and St. Paul, as has been shown: especially, if
what has been observed be kept in view, that to put this sense upon the text is
to make the apostle speak a language which he never uses before or after, or
any of the other apostles, and is directly contrary to the orders which Christ
gave them; and that when another sense, free of all these difficulties, offers
itself.

If they who now hold that the impenitent enemies of God and the gospel are
commanded to do many impenitent unregenerate duties, would be as silent about
it, as were the apostles, we should not hear much of this doctrine, if at all,
and it would do very little hurt, and to be sure, as little good.

MR. M. says something else, which perhaps he intends as an argument for the
sense of the text which he contends for, and therefore must not be neglected.
His words are, It is evident therefore, that as the apostle knew he was a
sinner, so he expected from him the prayer of a sinner. If there is any thing
in this argument, it takes its force from this supposition, viz. that
whatsoever is said to an impenitent, unregenerate sinner by way of exhortation
or command, can require or propose nothing but what he may do and yet continue
impenitent and unregenerate. Therefore every exhortation and command in the
bible directed to such, requires nothing but impenitent, unregenerate doings.
And because this supposition is taken to be an undeniable maxim, and is built
upon as such, not only by Mr. M. but others, I will take leave particularly to
consider it here, and observe these following things.

I. If this maxim is true, then another is as true, viz. That it is not the
duty of the impenitent, unregenerate to repent and believe the gospel: nothing
is to be required of them but what they may do under the influence of the
disposition and principles by which they are now governed. For if any thing
more than this is their duty, more is certainly required of them, and they may
and must be commanded and exhorted to do more, even to repent and embrace the
gospel. According to this therefore, the unregenerate, and impenitent are not
to blame in the least for being so, or for not loving God and embracing the
gospel, but only for neglecting to do unregenerate duties; or those which they
may do consistent with being enemies to Christ and continuing in impenitence
and unbelief -- If the unregenerate are commanded to repent and love God, for
instance; these commands, as they respect them, only require the attempts and
endeavors to repent and love God, which the impenitent enemies of God may
exert, and yet continue in their impenitence and enmity against God. Thus, if
St. Peter's knowing that Simon was an impenitent sinner, was a good reason why
he should not exhort him to repent and pray to God as an impenitent never does,
it must be because it was not his duty thus repent and pray and so he could not
be exhorted and commanded to do it. This appears to be Mr. M's notion of the
matter by the tenor of of his book; and by the sense he puts on the words of
St. Peter to Simon, as will be seen under the next argument; though there are a
few expressions in it, contrary to this. He seems to think the duty of the
unregenerate lies wholly in unregenerate doings, and not in loving God, etc.
Therefore all the commands and exhortations to them, are to strive to love God,
etc. or to make those attempts which persons unregenerate may do while such:
And he takes for granted that if they are not required to do unregenerate
duties, nothing is required of them. He is not alone in this: many preachers
and writers, have represented the matter in the same light; yet I trust neither
Mr. M. nor any of them will expressly undertake a vindication of this notion.


II. It also follows from this, that sinners may not be exhorted and commanded
to do any thing from higher and better views, disposition or principles than
those which they now actually have. The only reason why the impenitent enemies
to God may not be exhorted to repent and love God, if there is any reason for
this, is, that this requires higher principles than those which they now act
from; or, in other words, they have no heart, disposition, or inclination to
repent and love God, but their hearts are inclined to that which is directly
the reverse of this, as what they choose and prefer. And for the same reason,
no person may be exhorted and commanded to do any thing which his heart is now
set against, and is not in the least inclined to do; which therefore he will
not do till he has a different disposition and turn of mind, and views things
in a different and better light than he now does. If it was not proper for St.
Peter to exhort Simon truly to repent and become a friend to Christ, and pray
as such, because he knew he was an impenitent enemy of Christ; and if we may
hence safely infer that he did not exhort him to this; we may for the same
reason infer that he did not exhort him to repent and pray from any higher
views and motives than merely worldly ones, for he had as much evidence that he
was wholly under the influence of worldly motives, as he had that he was an
impenitent sinner.

And when Christ exhorted the Jews to labor for the meat which endures unto
everlasting life; if their being unholy and perfectly disinclined to any thing
truly good, is any reason and evidence that he does not exhort them to any
thing inconsistent, with this perverse, prevailing temper and disposition of
their hearts (and such an argument has been gravely offered to the public, by
those who would not choose to have their talent at clear reasoning called in
question;) I say, if this is so; then since they were so low and sordid in
their views and aims, as to be influenced to follow him, purely that they might
get their fill of bread, we may safely infer, that Christ did not in these
words exhort them to any thing that they might not do under the influence of
such low carnal views and motives; and that he does not really exhort them to
seek any other bread but that with which they might fill their bellies, however
his words may seem, at first view, to imply something more.

III. Yea, it hence follows, that men are never to be commanded or exhorted to
any thing which is contrary to their present prevailing will and inclination;
for, if their prevailing inclination in one case, is a good reason why they may
not be exhorted and commanded to that which is contrary to it, it is as good a
reason in any other case of this kind whatsoever. Therefore, according to this
principle, if we knew what were the precise inclinations of Simon's heart when
St. Peter spoke those words to him, we may determine what he did, and what he
did not exhort him to; as well as we can know that he did not exhort him to any
thing contrary to the inclination and heart of an impenitent, unregenerate
sinner. And we may be sure Simon was fully inclined to repent of his
wickedness, and pray to God, in the sense in which the apostle directed him to
do it, and actually complied with the exhortation, else he would not have
exhorted him to it.

According to this, no man can be directed and commanded to do that which is
contrary to his inclination and heart, or which he is not willing to do. Which
is the same as to say, no man can be under any law at all but his own
inclination and will, which in all cases must be the law and rule of his
conduct; and so long as he does as he pleases, he transgresses no law, and so
commits no sin. The consequence is there can be no such thing in nature as sin
and blame; for all men always do as they please, or act according to the
inclination of their own hearts. All these absurdities, I think, are evidently
contained in the maxim under consideration. which Mr. M. and others seem to
take for granted, and build much upon.

Mr. M. goes on to produce two other texts; but seems here to have shifted his
point, and instead of attempting to prove by them that there are duties
enjoined on the impenitent, to be done by them while they remain so, he seeks
only to prove that there are encouragements to such to use means, etc. One of
these is in the following words, "Then shall we know, if we follow on to know
the Lord. Hos VI. 3.
He says, How, as the body of the people, by far the greater number
comprehended in the pronoun we, were undoubtedly sinners, destitute of the true
knowledge of God, as the words plainly hold forth; can any thing less be
understood by these expressions, "if we follow on to know," than that the only
encouragement sinners destitute of the saving knowledge of God have of
attaining to it, is a persevering attendance on all God's appointed means, as
sinners, until by grace they become successful? P. 73, 74.
Upon this it may be observed,

I. This text rises much higher than encouragement; it contains an express
promise to them that follow on to know. So that if following on to know means
the doings of the unregenerate, as Mr. M. says it does, these are promises to
the doings of the unregenerate. I wonder he did not observe this: Did he forget
that he had wrote a book to prove the contrary: and had rendered his public
thanks to me, for finishing this debate? He may now thank himself, for giving
this point up; for he has certainly contradicted all this, by saying the
unregenerate follow on to know the Lord, and that these words are spoken of
such. He has now got on the other side of the question, and found an express
promise to unregenerate doings, and might as well have applied all the promises
in the bible to them. What reason, what right had he to lower down this
promise, and call it only an encouragement?

2. There is not the least evidence that the persons into whose mouths these
words are put, have the character of impenitent, unregenerate sinners; but the
contrary is most evident. The whole from the first verse to this is the
language of God's people, submitting and returning to him, under his
corrections, and represents that temper of mind, and those exercises, which
ought to take place, and do actually take place in the truly penitent, and
which are connected with deliverance and divine favor.

The other text which he mentions here is this, I will yet for this be enquired
of by the house of Israel to do it for them. Ezekiel. XXXVI. 37
He quotes this here not as commanding a duty, but only as an encouragement to
the unregenerate. He expressly says, the words are spoken in the way of a
prediction or prophecy, and showed them what God had absolutely, not
conditionally, determined to accomplish for his people. P. 83
What God does reveal as a promise of what he will do, cannot be considered as
a command. Whether the enquiry here spoken of points out the prayers and
seeking of the unregenerate, I particularly considered, in my remarks on Doct.
Mayhew's sermons, and suppose I produced evidence that it does not. Mr. M. has
a large note on this text to prove that I have misunderstood it, as well as the
Doctor. But to this I shall have something to say in another place.

II. Mr. M. forms another argument from the encouragement which is given in the
word of God to sinners to attend on means, etc. P. 78, -- 82.
He argues that from the encouragement set before Simon to repent and pray, i.
e. to attempt the performance of those duties, though on no higher principles
than that of natural conscience -- which encouragement stands good to all the
unregenerate, under the external light and advantages of the gospel, it is
evident that God does some way require these essays of the unregenerate:
otherwise he encourages them to that in his worship, which he no way, in any
sense requires in his word. Would no: this be for the Almighty to encourage his
creatures to practice will worship, and the inventions of men; which God every
where condemns in his word, as utterly sinful. And can (...) to the purity of
his nature, to encourage his creatures to that which is utterly sinful? Sure it
cannot. It must therefore hence clearly follow, that the unregenerate, under
the light and advantages of the gospel, are someway required to make these
essays, to repent, pray, etc. On these words I observe,

1. If the words of St. Peter to Simon are not a command to him to repent and
pray in an unregenerate manner, or as an impenitent enemy to God, which Mr. M.
has insisted they are; then they are not a command to do any thing, as an
impenitent. Mr. M. has remarkably lowered down here, and considers these words
not as an express command or exhortation to do any thing; but only as an
encouragement set before Simon to attempt to repent and pray; not a command
really to do them. He might just as reasonably construe away all the commands
in the bible, and represent them to be nothing but encouragements to attempt to
do something.

2. The sinner who is utterly impenitent, never does truly attempt to repent,
and pray as a penitent. He never has the least motion of heart or will this
way: for his whole heart is, by the supposition, in direct opposition to this;
therefore the more he exercises himself about it, or the more exercises he has,
the more he opposes it. We may therefore be sure that the scripture no where
says any thing to encourage such attempts to repent, etc. which are consistent
with perfect impenitence, and enmity against God; because there are not in
nature any such attempts; (...) such a supposition involves the most gross
contradiction; such a (...) never existed, except in the minds of those who
suppose that the unregenerate are penitent and friendly to God and the gospel
in a degree; or of those who are absurd enough to hold that the perfectly
impenitent and enemies to God, are inclined to repent and disposed to be
friendly to him. Mr. M. is to be ranked among both these, for he supposes each
of these in their turns.

3. It is difficult, I think, to know what Mr. M. means by "will worship, and
the inventions of men," as applied to the case before us. If by this he means
something external, ways of worship and conduct which men invent and practice,
to express their devotion and respect to God, which I suppose is the sense in
which these phrases are commonly used, they are not applicable to this case;
for it is not pretended by any one that the unregenerate or any other are urged
to any such thing. If he means any motions and exercises of the heart that are
neither right nor wrong, in themselves, neither sinful nor holy, these are
indeed "the inventions of men," of Mr. M. at least; for there are in reality no
such, which are not holy, and yet not utterly sinful,"

All the seeming force and plausibleness in what Mr. M. says here, if there
seems to be any, lies in the ambiguity of the word encouragement, which may be
taken, in different senses, and is often used so.

To encourage, sometimes means to invite, urge, and exhort a person to
something, urging him to it by good reasons and motives. In this sense God's
encouragements and commands cannot be distinguished; for where there is such
encouragement, there is a command, implied or expressed.

Sometimes encouragement means that which gives a hope and prospect of success
in any business and pursuit. And when we say a person has encouragement to do
this or the other thing, we mean that this is the most likely way to obtain hi^
end which he is pursuing. And to encourage him to any particular way of
conduct, is to let him know that this is the most hopeful way to miss of the
evil he dreads, and obtain what he sets up, as the object of his pursuit, be
that what it will.

In the first sense of encouragement mentioned, God encourages men to holiness,
and nothing else. In the last sense, he encourages men, let their hearts be as
sinful and opposite to him as they will, to attend on the means of grace. He
has so ordered things that this is the most likely way to escape the greatest
evil, and be happy forever; so that when they come to view things in any
measure as they are, and are above all things afraid of eternal destruction,
and desirous of future happiness, they will be induced from a principle of
self-love, or selfishness, even that very principle which sets their hearts
against God, and leads them into all the wickedness they practice, with great
care and anxiety to attend on these means. The whole encouragement, as laid
before them, lies in its being the most hopeful and likely way to promote their
interest, and answer the end which they are pursuing. God has so contrived and
ordered things, that whenever the sinner's conscience is thoroughly awakened
and convinced, and he comes to a sense of the wretchedness of his case, and
attends to what is contained in divine revelation, and labors under no
particular delusion; he will forsake those ways in which secure sinners live,
and pursue the most likely way to obtain deliverance, and eternal salvation,
however vile his heart is, and though he is a greater enemy to God, and all that
is good now, than he was before. And thus there is encouragement to all this,
and this is the encouragement God sets before the sinner. And a person may be
"utterly sinful;" that is, inclined to nothing else but sin; yea may be growing
more and more guilty and vile continually, and yet take this encouragement, and
act upon it.

He who will consider these things, must be sensible, I think, that the
encouragement sinners have to attend on means, etc. is consistent with their
obeying no command, and doing no duty, while they act under the influence of
this encouragement; and that God may, and does consistently with the purity of
his nature, encourage his creatures to that, in doing which they are utterly
sinful: And that Mr. M. has confused himself by using the word encouragement in
an indeterminate or wrong sense, as many others have done. Yea, I think it will
be evident to such a reader, that the passage I am considering is so far from
proving any thing, that it is quite unintelligible, and contains in it, as many
absurdities, at least, as there are sentences.

Before I leave this head about encouragement, I would observe, that when Mr.
M. undertakes to show what encoueagement there is to sinners, on his plan of
commands to do unregenerate duties, he seems to have a right notion of
encouragement; but finds no more than they do who teach the unregenerate that
they do no duty while they continue so, and places it upon the same bottom they
do, in the words following, To all who with earnest concern, thus attend on
God's appointed means, the language scripture encouragement is, may be God will
be gracious, who can tell, (...) perhaps sovereign grace may be displayed for
your help, in this way. It implies in it that God is a God of infinite
goodness, can exercise his mercy toward them through Christ in this way,
consistent with the honor of all his other perfections; and that they are in
some measure in the way in which he is wont to bestow mercy on perishing
sinners whenever he does bestow it; the way in which millions have found mercy;
and the way out of which he has determined, in the ordinary dispensation of his
grace, not to bestow it. P. 72.
I have endeavored particularly to show that the sinner has all this
encouragement in the use of means, in my tenth section. -- And when he again
undertakes to show "the usefulness and importance" of the truth he contends
for, P. 82. notes.
he mentions nothing but what is consistent with the doctrine he is opposing.

III. ANOTHER of Mr. M's arguments is in the following words, Again, it is
further evident, that the unregenerate are otherwise required to attend on the
means of grace, than merely by being called upon to repent and believe, in a
gospel sense: Because if they are not, then none of the unregenerate would be
required to attend on the means of grace, until they had attained to a
competency of speculative knowledge, in order to saving faith; since till then
they are under a natural impossibility of believing; and so of being
immediately required to believe. And since the gospel does not require any
natural impossibility, as the condition of life, it must thence clearly follow
upon this principle, they are not required to attend on means at all. I would
here just observe, that I believe Mr. M. will not be able to prove one thing
which he here asserts, viz. that there is a natural impossibility in requiring
men to do, what is naturally impossible to them. There is no more natural
impossibility in doing this, than there is in requiring any thing else, however
unreasonable it may be. I know not why Mr. M. asserted this, since, if it was
true, it is nothing to his purpose.

P. 83, 84, 85.




ANSWER. The word of God requires sinners to be always so friendly to him at
heart, as to be disposed and ready to believe every truth which he reveals and
proposes to them, and to have exercises answerable to that truth; or to receive
the love of the truth. They are under no natural impossibility of doing this.
If they do this they will not attend on means, as do the impenitent and
unregenerate; therefore they are not required to attend on means in any one
instance as such, or with an impenitent unbelieving heart. Mr. M. says, very
agreeable to truth, God don't make the depraved will of the creature the rule
of his duty: but requires him to reach the appointed end. Make you a new heart
and a new spirit, for why will ye die? Turn yourselves and live ye? P. 52.
And he allows that all under the gospel are required to pray, and do all other
duties in a gracious manner; which, he will not deny, implies faith. P. 97.
How came he, just now, in direct contradiction to this, to say all are not
immediately required to believe? God does not require men to believe any truth
which never has been proposed to them, and which they have had no opportunity
to understand: but he requires them to attend to every truth set before them,
and receive it with a penitent heart, and in the exercise of love to him.

It is true, there are many under the gospel who have not that speculative
knowledge necessary in order to their exercising faith in Christ; but this is
wholly their own fault, owing entirely to their depraved wills. Were their
hearts as they ought to be, they would understand and receive every truth as
soon as proposed to them: and this is required of them, and nothing less. If
they did so, they would in no instance attend on means as do impenitent
unbelievers. Though God will not give them a new heart, and bring them to a
right temper and disposition of mind, while they are inattentive and ignorant;
yet he always requires that disposition of mind which is inconsistent with,
their inattention and ignorance: for as he does not make the depraved will of
sinners the rule of their duty; so he does not make the rule of their duty the
rule of his conduct, in giving or not giving a new heart. Mr. M. says If there
be some under the gospel that are destitute of it (i. e. of a competency of
speculative knowledge, in order to faith) as not having opportunity and
advantages for acquiring of it, they are not required to attend on means of
grace at all. (that is, on my plan) P. 87-88.
I answer, there is no such instance. All under the gospel have this
opportunity and advantage, and their ignorance, impenitence, and unbelief is
their own fault. Were they, in any measure, as God requires them to be, they
would have understood the truth when first proposed, that is, as soon as they
became moral agents, in the exercise of love, repentance and faith.

If persons under the gospel were not required to attend on means until, with
all their depravity, stupidity and dullness, they had obtained a good degree of
speculative knowledge; and could not be required to repent and believe, till in
a long course of the use of means they had attained to this, how can we account
for our Savior's calling upon men, when he first began to preach to them, to
"repent and believe the gospel?" And why did the apostles direct men
immediately to repent and be converted, and believe on Jesus Christ? If they
might preach so to persons who had much less opportunity and advantage to get
speculative knowledge, than all under the gospel now have, surely this may be
required of all now. And this is a pattern which all preachers of the gospel
ought to follow, and not to devise another way of preaching and addressing
sinners; calling upon them to do a set of duties short of repentance and faith,
under the notion that the latter are not yet their duty. The truths of the
gospel ought to be clearly preached and set before sinners, and one truth is,
that they are required to repent and believe the gospel as soon as proposed;
and that he that believes not, shall be damned.

IV. MR. M. undertakes to prove that the unregenerate are required to do duty
in an ungracious manner; or, as he expresses it, "though they fail and come
short of a gracious manner," by asserting and attempting to prove that the
regenerate, or children of God, are required to do duties in this manner. P. 97.


The argument stands thus. Duties are required of the regenerate, or true
Christian, which they must, and often do conscientiously perform, though they
have no gracious or holy exercises, but come wholly short of the least degree
of love to God or man. Therefore the same duties are required of the
unregenerate, as they may do them without any grace, as well as the regenerate,
and as no truly good and holy exercises of heart are necessary or required in
order to perform them.

I suppose this argument is quite new, and that Mr. M. in advancing it, is
perfectly an original. And therefore that I shall be the first that ever
attempted to answer it. Indeed, it appears to me to want no great matter of an
answer.

In this argument Mr. M. supposes, not only that a principle of grace may be
perfectly dormant and unactive in the true Christian; so that in this respect
he may not differ at all from him who is ignorant of Jesus Christ, and
perfectly impenitent, and obstinately hates his whole character: but that such
may and actually do conscientiously attend on the duties of the first and
second table, and use conscientious and painful endeavors, and their utmost
efforts to do them in a gracious manner, or in the exercise of true love to God
and man: and yet not have the least degree of such exercise, but fall wholly
short of it in all they do, having nothing better in their heart, or more like
true Christian holiness, than the impenitent unbeliever may have: and that when
this is the case they do that duty, which God requires of them! Such
suppositions as these, I conclude, will appear not only weak and absurd, but
very whimsical and ridiculous to the judicious reader; and more so as they are
represented in Mr. M's book P. 97, -- 101.
than in this abridgement.

I have often heard them tell of dead Christians; by which I suppose they mean,
Christians who have no exercises of grace at some seasons. But such must be
very dead indeed; I should think "twice dead, and plucked up by the roots,"
who, when they strain so hard, conscientiously take so much pains, and exert
their repeated and utmost endeavor, to call up and put forth the exercise of
grace, are not able to produce the least spark or motion of this kind. Mr. M.
puts his Christian to as hard a task, as Elijah did the prophets of Baal: he
may "cry aloud," be in the greatest earnest, and put forth his utmost
endeavors and efforts to wake up, or recall his grace; but it is either too
fast asleep to be awaked, or is gone on a journey, and so cannot be recalled.
However he gives him more consolation than those prophets had; for if the
Christian utterly fails in his conscientious attempt, and remains as graceless
as he who has no grace, he will not lose his pains: seeing he, after all, does
his duty.

But what are these conscientious endeavors to exercise grace, or to perform
duties in a gracious manner? Do they imply any inclination of heart toward
holiness, or any actual idea, or liking of that in which holiness consists? No:
for this is the exercise of grace. They must therefore consist in exercises of
heart directly opposite to holiness, or in exercises and endeavors which are
neutral, neither inclined nor tending to the exercise of grace; nor to that
which is unfriendly and contrary to it. The former cannot be meant I conclude.
Nor can they consist in the latter, for two reasons. First, there are in nature
no such exercises and conscientious endeavors, which are perfectly and equally
indifferent toward holiness and sin, and imply no inclination to one or the
other. Secondly, If there could be any such, they would be no more endeavors
to do duty in a gracious manner, than in an ungracious and sinful manner;
because, by the supposition, there is no more of an inclination or tendency to
the former than to the latter.

The scripture gives us a quite different idea of the Christian from this which
Mr. M. has set before us. According to that, the Christian is wholly made up of
flesh and spirit, two different and opposite principles, and the latter is as
constantly exercised as the former, and is no more dead or asleep than the
former, though it may be exercised in a weak and low degree. "The flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary
one to the other." Gal. V. 17.
. The spirit is never said to be dead; but on the contrary the Christian has "
crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts," v. 24.
and "the law of the spirit of life has made him free from the law of sin and
death." Romans VIII. 2.
And there is not one word said in the bible about these graceless duties of
Christians; not one exhortation to them, or the least hint about them in all
the New Testament, where there are such a number of letters wrote to
Christians, and so many directions and precepts given to them. I am confident,
and every one else will be so, I trust, that Mr. M.'s regenerate, dead,
graceless Christian, has no existence in the New Testament, nor in nature. The
character he gives of such an one being quite unscriptural, and in itself a
contradiction.

Mr. M.'s representation of this matter, is not only unscriptural, but a fatal
resting place for many nominal Christians; a refuge of lies, in which many have
doubtless perished. They think they are not to blame for not acting, and doing
duties in "a gracious manner." Grace is from God, and they can exercise no
degree of this without the spirit of God, which is not at their disposal, but
is given or withheld as God pleases. They therefore rest in their good desires
and endeavors, and what they call conscientious performance of duty, as all
that is required of them; not considering that they are commanded to be "filled
with the spirit," and always to live and walk in the spirit, and bring forth
the fruits of the spirit; and that not to do so, is to oppose and quench the
spirit, and to live after the flesh. Mr. M. expressly says, that if Christians,
as well as the unregenerate, are not required to do duty not in "a gracious
manner," or without the exercise of holiness, then no christian duty is
required of us, but as we are moved by the spirit, since this cannot be done but
as moved and assisted by the spirit. P. 107.
What can be the meaning of this, but that Christians are under no obligation
to do duty, in a gracious manner, unless when actually moved and influenced
thereto by the spirit of God; which not being always the case, they are not at
all to blame for not acting in "a gracious manner;" but have only to wait till
God shall move them by his spirit? Sweet doctrine to many graceless Christians,
and tends to fix them on the fatal rock, on which multitudes are perishing!

THE reason Mr. M. gives why these graceless, unregenerate duties are equally
required of the regenerate and unregenerate is remarkable, and worthy of
particular notice here. He says God don't require these things, because they
have in them any positive virtue, or true moral goodness; but because of a
negative moral goodness they have in them; i. e. the absence of a greater
degree of true moral evil, than there would be in the careless neglect of them.
P. 98, 99.
And again he says, the reason of the requirement of these performances is not
because they are holy; but because they are less unholy. There is a less degree
of true moral evil in the conscientious performance of them, than in the
contemptuous neglect of them, and therefore are they required. P. 101.
On this I have two things to observe.

1. Mr. M. has here reduced his commands to mere prohibitions in which God only
forbids sin. And the duty he contends for is nothing but abstinence from sin,
or not committing it: or rather committing a less sin instead of a greater.
Undoubtedly God forbids all sin of every degree and kind, but this, I conceive,
is quite different from commanding duty. Nor is every instance or degree of
abstinence from sin, or of the non-commission of sin, doing duty, as Mr. M.
here supposes. A tree or horse commits no sin; but none will say they do any
duty. But a tree does as much duty as any man does in merely not committing
sin; and a rock has as much "negative moral goodness" as the best man on earth,
and much more; and so more of Mr. M.'s negative duty, as there is less moral
evil; yea, the absence of every degree of moral evil.

I think Mr. M. has run into all this confusion and absurdity by confounding
prohibitions with commands, and not distinguishing doing duty, from merely not
committing sin.

2. If every instance of abstaining, from any sin, or greater degree of sin,
that might be committed, is doing duty, as it is according to Mr. M. then all
men do some duty, something that God requires; for none commit all the sin that
in nature is possible, and the sins of most are much less than those of the
greatest sinner that ever lived: all these have therefore a great degree of
"negative moral goodness," or the absence of a great degree of true moral evil.
And the greatest sinner of all, has a considerable degree of this sort of moral
goodness; for it cannot be supposed that he is as great a sinner as is
possible. Yea, will it not follow that most of mankind have much more moral
goodness, and do much more duty, than sin? No individual commits half the sin
that in nature is possible; and there are millions of sins actually committed,
of which he is not guilty. All his sins put together, are as nothing to the
sins of the whole world of mankind, and of all the fallen angels. Now if his
not committing all this is negative moral goodness, and duty, his sin hardly
bears any proportion to his goodness and duty.

And according to Mr. M. every less sin, every sin except the greatest of all
that ever was committed, or can be, is in some sense required of God, viz. as
having a degree of negative moral goodness in it, or not being so bad and
sinful as something else, which might take place in its room. Consequently God
requires and commands every sin in the universe, except it be the greatest of
all; and even that too, if there is less moral evil in it, than might have
been, on any supposition. All these I say must be commanded for the same reason
which Mr. M. gives for graceless duties being required; for "there is a less
degree of true moral evil in them," than in the greatest possible sin, "and
THEREFORE they are required." I leave it to the reader, whether these
consequences are not fairly deduced from Mr. M's principles, and way of
reasoning on this head.

V. MR. M. forms another argument thus. It is a sin to disobey and counteract
the dictates of natural conscience; to be without natural gratitude to God and
our benefactors among men, from a principle of self-love: And to be without
natural affection, such as the affection of parents to children, etc. All these
appear from scripture and reason to be sinful, and even a high degree of
wickedness. It hence follows that, acting agreeable to the dictates of
conscience; the exercise of gratitude merely from a principle of self-love, and
natural affection between parents and children, etc. which are found with the
unregenerate, as well as others, are duties and required of God: for if they
are not required, "the absence of them would be no sin: Because "where there is
no law, there is no transgression."

Mr. M. introduces this argument P. 101. And then resumes it again, and dwells
long upon it from P. 109. to P. 113. I have not stated it exactly in his words,
as this would take up too much room; but suppose it is here set in as strong
and advantageous a light, as it stands in his book. The reader who has access
to that may satisfy himself. And he will be ready to judge whether there is any
weight in this argument, when he has attended to the following particulars.

1. Acting contrary to the dictates of conscience is in all cases a sin;
because this is acting contrary to love to God. It does not follow as a
consequence, that acting agreeable to the dictates of conscience is virtue or
duty; but only that love to God is so. In this case, the sin of acting contrary
to the dictates of conscience does not stand in opposition to acting according
to the dictates of it; but to obedience to God's law, which requires love to
him. Both of the former may be sin. It is always contrary to God's law, and is
sin to disregard the dictates of conscience, and that may be, and often is a
sin, and directly contrary to God's law, which is agreeable to the dictates of
conscience. These are, in this respect, not in opposition to each other, but
both are in opposition to the divine law. The pharisee who went up to the
temple to pray, had lived in obedience to his conscience, and acted up to the
dictates of it; and did so in the address he made to God; Yet I suppose none
will say he was doing his duty, and obeying God's commands; or that God
required him to do as he did, when he stood praying. To be (...) Mr. M. will
not; for he represents him as guilty of high-handed wickedness in making this
prayer, and even one of the vilest sinners on earth. In obeying his conscience,
he disobeyed God, instead of obeying him, or being friendly to him in the least
degree. Acting against the dictates of conscience is sinful, because this is in
all cases acting against God: Therefore acting agreeable to the dictates of
conscience is sin, when persons doing thus act against God, which is the case
always when they are enemies to him, as are all the unregenerate.

2. It does not appear that want of gratitude to benefactors, from a principle
of self-love only, is any where spoken against or condemned in the bible.
Christ represents the worst of men as acting from such a principle. Mat. V. 46,
47.
When St. Paul says of the Gentiles "Neither were they thankful;" it does not
appear that he speaks of thankfulness, from natural principles as Mr. M.
expresses it, or a principle of self-love; but of that thankfulness which God's
law requires, and consists in true love to God. It is altogether without
foundation, or the least evidence that Mr. M. supposes that when St. Paul
speaks of the Gentiles not glorifying God as God, and not being thankful, he
means glorifying God, and rendering gratitude to him upon natural principles,
or from self-love. They were bound by the highest obligations to glorify God
and express their gratitude to him from the highest and best principles even
true love to him, and had no excuse for not doing it: and it would be perfectly
unaccountable if St. Paul quite overlooked this the greatest of all their
crimes, when he was setting forth the greatness of their wickedness, and speaks
only of that which was immensely less criminal, and is really no crime, any
further that it is contrary to true love to God. I can account for Mr. M's
running into this notion no other way but by concluding he supposed that the
Gentiles and all men unregenerate are not obliged to act from any higher
principles, than those he calls natural; ^ notion which he seems to carry with
him through his book, though he sometimes contradicts it.

What is called natural affection cannot be suppressed and rooted out but by
the prevalence of a high degree of sinfulness. Therefore to be without natural
affection is an argument and evidence of the prevalence of a great degree of
wickedness. It was therefore to the apostle's purpose to mention this, in order
to show the bad character of the persons he was describing. This is consistent
with there being no command requiring the mere exercise of natural affection,
or prohibition, forbidding the want of it. The strong and confirmed exercise of
pride and sensuality (to use president Edwards's words quoted by Mr. M. P. 113.
) "tend to overbear and greatly diminish the exercises of "those useful and
necessary principles of nature." And nothing else will do it. Therefore where
natural affection is overborn and diminished, it is a certain evidence of a
very bad, vile character. To be without natural affection, and to be
monstrously wicked is the same thing. Yet natural affection is not a virtue,
nor is it in any sense required as a duty. They who exercise it in the highest
degree, are herein no more obedient, and do no more duty than the brutes, is
whom it takes place as well as in men; as Mr. M. observes, to be without
natural affection, is falling below even the brutal nature, that is wont to
retain that instinct of fondness to their young. P. 113.


4. By being without natural affection, is intended something more than what is
merely negative, or not being influenced by this principle. It intends that
exercise and conduct which is directly contrary to it, which shows that it is
overborn and suppressed. Thus the Heathen, in many instances, were without
natural affection, i. e. acted directly contrary to it, when they burnt their
children to death, as a sacrifice to their Gods. The son is said to be without
natural affection, when he puts an end to his aged father's life, that he may
inherit his estate. The father is said to be without natural affection when he
acts a cruel part to his child, and sells it into the hands of barbarous men,
to get money to enable him to pursue his intemperance and lewdness. In this
case that wickedness, which leads a man to counteract natural affection, and
suppress it, is censured and condemned; and not merely the absence of natural
affection. Therefore it does by no means follow from such an expression that
the exercise of natural affection is required, and is a duty.

VI. Another argument which Mr. M. offers in favor of commands to the
unregenerate duties is, that if there are no such commands and they have no
duty to do while impenitent enemies to God, then nothing is required of them,
they are left without any law or restraint, to indulge their lusts as they
please, without any motive or encouragement to the contrary, and to attend on
the means of grace. This leaves sinners at liberty, and they have nothing to
do. He says, that upon the principle he is opposing, the unregenerate while
such, are not required to pray at all; and by parity of reason, not required to
attend any other duty, since they can no more perform them in a gracious manner
than they can prayer. And therefore, according to this principle, are in no
sense required to perform them. P. 107.


And again he says, it takes off all restraint from the unregenerate, and opens
a floodgate to all manner of iniquity. P. 117, 118.


I would observe here, that when he says, the unregenerate, while such, are not
required to pray at all, and are in no sense required to perform any duty, he
cannot mean that they are not required to pray (...) impenitents, and do
unregenerate duties; for this would be (...) nothing at all. The principle he
is opposing is, that nothing is required of men at duty which they do while
unregenerate. And if this is all he means to assert in these words, they are no
more than to say, If unregenerate duties are not required, then unregenerate
duties are not required; which is to say nothing. What he here says, he infers
as a consequence from the principle, that no unregenerate duties are required,
as an argument against it. But the principle itself is no consequence from
itself, or argument against it; for this is only to say, if the principle is
true, it is indeed true. Just as if I should undertake to prove I am not now
writing against Mr. M. in opposition to some one who had said I was, by saying,
this cannot be true, for from this principle it will follow, that I am writing
against Mr. M. -- Besides, Mr. M. here says, that according to this principle
they are in no sense required to do any duty; which denies that they are under
any command to do any duty, if not required to do unregenerate duty.

Mr. M. says things to the same purpose in many other places of his book; I
will mention but one; which is in the following words, And if this perversion,
which, is here given of this text, strive to enter, etc. should be received for
truth, I cannot but think it would have a very bad tendency to increase
security and negligence about religion, and open profaneness among the
unregenerate. If this text does not respect the unconverted, and enjoin duties
upon them, where can there be any passage found in the bible that has any
reference to them? Let this author produce some divine law, requiring the
duties, endeavors and exercises of the unregenerate, or say plainly, there is
nothing required of them in this state. P. 50, 51.
Here we see he supposes that if any text does not require unregenerate duties,
and enjoin something to be done by man while impenitent, it has no respect to
the unconverted, nor enjoins any duty upon them: And that there is no medium
with him between their being required to do unregenerate duties, and nothing
being required of them: And that in this view to deny that unregenerate duties
are required, has a very bad tendency to increase security and negligence about
religion, and open profaneness among the unregenerate. Here I would observe,

1. It is not true that if nothing is required of the unregenerate, which they
will do while in that state, then nothing is required of them in any sense. It
has been before observed, that they are as much under law as the regenerate,
and required to practice godliness and humanity, in the exercise of love to God
and their neighbor. They cannot be excused from this, and m^st be wholly to
blame for every instance, and each degree of (...), and every thing in them
that opposes it; unless a person's having no inclination to that which is most
reasonable, and a strong, fixed opposition of bea^^ to it, removes all
obligation, and takes off all blame in neglecting and opposing it. And if so,
(then there is no such thing as blame in the universe; nor any such thing as
law and moral government. For according to this, no person can be obliged to
any thing which (...) not inclined to do. Therefore he can be under no law but
his own inclination and will; nor in the least to blame while he follows this,
which every one always does.

Mr. M. does repeatedly assert that the unregenerate are required to be holy,
and to do duty in a right and holy manner. But he seems in these passages
mentioned, and others, to forget all this, and take it for granted that the
contrary is true, else he never could have expressed himself as he has. And I
appeal to the judicious reader to judge, whether his whole book does not owe
its existence, to his latent maxim in favor of the unregenerate, viz. That they
cannot be required to do any thing which they may not do in a state of
unregeneracy, so are to blame only for the neglect of such duties, and for
walking in those ways that are contrary to them; this being the maxim he builds
all upon, though he has sometimes asserted the contrary.

2. This being the case, every thing being required of the unregenerate that is
in itself desirable, good and excellent, and urged with promises of the
greatest good, even of eternal life, if they hearken and comply with the least
degree of sincerity; and with the most awful threatenings of eternal
destruction, if they obstinately persist in impenitence and rebellion; nothing
can be more suited to awaken and alarm them, to deter them from sin, and excite
them to duty. Never did a person believe and realize this, and yet continue in
open profaneness or security. And if these truths are kept out of view, nothing
remains by which the sinner can be convinced of his true state, and thoroughly
awakened. How then could Mr. M. imagine that to preach this to the
unregenerate, with all that is implied in it, and nothing else, "would have a
very bad tendency to increase security and negligence in religion, and open
profaneness among the unregenerate?" It is most certain that if this is left
out of view, and nothing but unregenerate duties are preached up, not one
sinner will be awakened and convinced. And if they are preached up, as they
often are, and as Mr. M. does, (at least in his book) as being that in which
the duty of the unregenerate principally, if not wholly consists, and that
their sin chiefly lies in the neglect of them, they being not much if at all to
blame for not loving God and not embracing the gospel; it has the greatest
tendency to keep sinners in ignorance, security ease; and if it does not make
them negligent of all religion, it tends to lead them to neglect and oppose all
true religion.

Mr. M. and they who join with him, are wiser than John the Baptist; and if he
was wise and right in his way of preaching, they are not so. He said not a word
of unregenerate duties, but preached and inculcated nothing short of
repentance, true repentance, -- that repentance with which the remission of sin
was connected, Luke III. 3.
that repentance which implied a preparedness of heart to receive and believe
on Christ, when he should be revealed. Act. XIX. 4.
He required of all his hearers good fruit, fruits meet for repentance, on pain
of eternal damnation, Luke III. 8, 9, 17.
and said not a word to them of any doings short of this, even repentance and
faith on him who should come after him. Indeed, when he was asked by persons
what they should do in order to conduct as penitents^ what fruits they ought to
bring forth, which were meet for repentance, and a proper manifestation of it?
he told them what external conduct they must go into, in order to this, Luke
III. 10, -- 14.
But this was not directing them to impenitent unregenerate doings, but
pointing out the exercise and fruits of that repentance, which he required.

And had this preaching any tendency to security and open profaneness? Did this
"take off all restraint from the unregenerate, and open a flood-gate to all
manner of iniquity?" No; quite the reverse. By such preaching a secure, wicked
generation was awakened and externally reformed, and many of the children of
Israel he turned to the Lord their God. Luke I. 16.


IF Mr. M.'s servant should desert his service and run from him, and he should
send a messenger after him to persuade him to return, with offers of pardon
upon his submission, and threatenings of death if he refused: if when the
person he sent should overtake him, and the servant should refuse to return one
step back, and draw his sword upon him to oppose him; he should, instead of
persisting in requiring him to return, direct and persuade him to do something
agreeable to his inclination, and consistent with his hating his master and
obstinately refusing to return: Would Mr. M. think he was faithful to his
trust, or that this had more of a tendency to awaken the servant to a sense of
the evil case he was in, or promote his return? Would it not be the most
proper, and likeliest way to rouse the attention of the servant, and prevent
his going off yet further, to keep up the master's demand, and show the
unreasonableness and crime of refusing to comply; -- the happy consequences of
his returning, and the dreadful evil that a refusal would bring upon him, etc.?
Certainly the servant would have no heart to make himself merry in his supposed
liberty, or be disposed to go out of the hearing of these things, so long as he
had any realizing belief of them, and thought there was any hope in his case,
while he attended, however unwilling he should be to obey his master's orders,
and return.

3. If the sinner did his duty while he continued a perfectly impenitent enemy
to God and the Savior in attending on means, etc. and he is told that God
commands him to do these things with such a heart as he has, seeing he is
unwilling to repent and return to God, and obstinately opposes it; and he
should be urged to do them from this consideration; it would not have the least
influence upon him, or be any motive to him to comply. The sinner has no regard
to duty, as such, and is not inclined to do any thing merely because it is
duty: this will never be a motive with him to take one step, or to exert
himself so much as to lift up a finger. So far as he is influenced by this
consideration, he is not an impenitent; but has true respect and love to God,
and is disposed to return to him and embrace the gospel. He is, by the
supposition, only seeking his own interest, and cares nothing about God or duty
to him, in themselves considered, and for their own sake; if he does, the point
is gained, and it will be enough to tell him, it is his duty to repent and
believe on Christ, and there will be no need to devise a lower set of duties
for him which he may do merely from a principle of self-love, and as an enemy
to God, could there be any such duty: for this is at bottom to urge him to do
duty, not because it is his duty, and without any regard to it as such. There
is therefore a plain contradiction and absurdity, in the very proposal. The
person is supposed, and known to have no regard to his duty, and to care
nothing about it, as such; if he had, it would be enough to tell him, it is his
indispensable duty to love God and embrace the gospel. But while he has no
regard to this, he will be influenced and governed by some other motive in all
he does, and not at all by this. Nothing but a principle of self-love can be
applied to in this case, which has no regard to duty, as such; but his own
interest. If he can be thoroughly and feelingly convinced that it is for his
own interest to avoid one thing and do another, this will be a forcible and
sufficient motive to induce him to do it. But if not, and it seems to him to be
for his own interest to act contrary to duty, he will pay no regard at all to
the command, how much soever it is urged upon him; it is quite equal with him
whether he does his duty, or not. He can no more be influenced or bound by
obligation and duty, than the man possessed with devils could be restrained and
confined with fetters and chains. He will break all these bands; however great
and strong they are, he will esteem them as straw and rotten-wood.

As the unregenerate are wholly under the influence of self-love, and seek
their own interest only, they regard duty only as it does, in their view, tend
to their own interest. And in this view they may have a sort of desire to do
their duty, as the most likely way to escape evil, and obtain the good they
want. But however high their regard to duty in this sense rises, they yet have
no regard to it for its own sake, or considered merely as duty; but purely for
their own sakes, as they consider their own interest to be connected with it.
If therefore it is for the highest interest of the unregenerate to avoid all
open vice, and diligently attend on the means of grace, it being the only
likely way to escape eternal destruction, and attain endless happiness, and
they can be thoroughly convinced of this, it will be the greatest, and only
motive that can be set before them to induce them to this, and will certainly
and effectually influence them: And the consideration that this is their duty,
if it was so, would not add the least grain to the motive. It is a matter of
perfect indifference with them whether it is duty, or sin, if they may answer
their own ends by it, and promote their own interest.

God knew this to be the state of the sinner, and has so contrived and suited
things to this, in the revelation he has given, without saying a word to them
of doing any duty while they continue impenitent, that as soon as their
consciences are awakened, and they begin to see in what a state they are, they
will forsake the courses of the secure profligate, and attend on the means of
grace.

Mr. M. and others have in their great wisdom devised another method of
treating with sinners, by trying to persuade them to do their duty while
perfect enemies to God, if they had a true regard for their duty, and desire to
do it for its own sake; when their unregeneracy and all their sinfulness
consists, in the want of such regard to duty, and opposition of heart to it. In
this they are therefore guilty of the absurdity of supposing sinners have some
true respect to God, that is, some true love to him, and his law, while they
are obstinate and perfect enemies to him, and have never had the least degree
of repentance of any of their rebellion. And this way of treating sinners, is
so far from having any tendency to their good, that it tends to keep them in
ignorance and security, and always has this effect where there is nothing to
prevent its genuine influence.

BEFORE I end this section, I would observe the phrase, conscientious
performance of duty, which Mr. M. uses so often with respect to the
unregenerate, and the regenerate, when they have no grace, or are not in the
exercise of it, is very ambiguous, and tends to give a wrong idea of the case.
I think the natural and proper import of the phrase is, a performance of duty
in sincerity and out of true respect to the duty as commanded. If he who is
only an eye servant, and has no true respect to his master, but hates him and
his service, behaves obediently in his master's presence, merely because he is
in his master's hands, and fears his displeasure and the red; no one perhaps
will think this may be properly called, a conscientious performance of duty.
But this is as properly and as much so, as the best performances of the
unregenerate, or of the regenerate whose grace wholly fails them, if any such
there are. If Mr. M. intends any more by this phrase, which I conclude he does,
he has only imposed on himself and his reader. Men may act agreeable to their
consciences, i.e. not know that what they do is contrary to the command, but
think they are doing what is right, as Saul did when he persecuted the church;
and yet not come up to the conscientious performance of duty, any more than the
servant just mentioned, if they act from the same principles.

SECT. III.
IN which several passages in Mr. M's book are attended to, which have not been
particularly considered in the former sections.

I TOOK some pains to prove in my remarks on Dr. Mayhew's sermons, that the
words, "I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for
them," Ezekiel. XXXVI. 37.
do not mean the prayers of the unregenerate for a new heart. See Enq. P. 61,
-- 70.
And Mr. M. has taken as much or more pains to prove the contrary, in a long
marginal note. P. 72, -- 85.
I shall not trouble myself or the reader so much as to take notice of all he
says, on this argument. It may suffice to say that he has not attempted to
answer what I have said to establish my sense, unless it be grossly to
misrepresent it; which he ought in all reason to have done, since he undertook
to oppose me. I shall therefore conclude I have a right to think my sense of
the text, and arguments to support it stand good, notwithstanding all he has
said, till Mr. M. or some one else, shall show wherein their weakness lies. The
misrepresentation I speak of is this, he represents my sense of the text in the
following words, I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel, i.
e. by the godly few; to do it for them, i. e. to bestow on these godly few a
new heart. Or the construction must run thus, to do it for them, i. e. not for
them, but for others that were unregenerate. P. 75, 76.
Whereas I give no such sense of the text, or any thing like it. I undertook to
prove, by many parallel places that the thing which God would be enquired of to
do it for them, was deliverance from their captivity, and resettlement in their
own land in peace and prosperity; and said not a word of a new heart as the
thing to be asked for. Nor do I say that by the house of Israel are meant "the
godly few." It may mean the godly many, notwithstanding any thing I say. Mr. M.
supposes that a great number of Israelites were bro't to true repentance, and
the body of that people were reformed. P. 76.
He indeed seems to suppose this took place after their return to their own
land. The truth of the case is, this took place in a degree, and in many
instances before any of them returned. And after great numbers had returned,
they were in their own land in a state of great affliction and distress for
many years, in which time they humbled themselves before God, and earnestly
sought deliverance, and confessed and put away the sins that had been found
among them, and entered into Solemn covenant to renounce all ways of sin, and
cleave to God and serve him. They appeared to have a new heart, humble,
penitent, obedient heart, while they confessed their sins and earnestly
enquired and sought of God the deliverance they wanted. There were propably
many, even great numbers of true penitents; these with the rest of the people,
who were reformed and in profession true penitents, were the house of Israel,
who enquired of God, and earnestly and solemnly besought him (the godly with
true sincerity, and the rest only in appearance) to return their captivity,
deliver them from their distresses, etc. This leads me to observe another gross
mistake Mr. M. has made here. He says I deny that by the house of Israel in the
text are meant the same people who under this phrase are spoken of in the
preceding context. P. 76, 77.
For this assertion he had not the least reason, as I am sure it is not true;
as any one may be, who will read what I have wrote on that argument.

BEFORE I leave this long note, I shall remark upon a number of other passages
in it: not pretending however, to mention every one that appears to me very
exceptionable.

He supposes the prayers and seeking of the unregenerate are spoken of in the
following words, "I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus. Thou have
chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke. Turn
thou me, and I shall be turned." Jer. XXXI. 18.
He says, "It Is evident that while unconverted he thus bemoans himself,
confessing the justice of God's chastisement, his own stubbornness and
un^eachableness, and under conviction of the necessity of this change of his
own impotency, and the insufficiency of all means, he cries to God to work it
in him. P. 78.


1. I observe Mr. M. here represents the unregenerate sinner as being converted
already; he is became submissive, pliable and ^eachable, so as truly to bemoan
his own past stubbornness and un^eachableness, and acknowledge the justice of
God in his eternal damnation. And being quite reconciled to turning to God, and
having a very good will in the matter, he cries to God to do that for him,
which he cannot do himself, however well disposed he is toward it. This is the
light in which many set the unregenerate who are awakened to a concern about
their eternal interest, and in which multitudes view themselves, and imagine
they are doing their utmost and crying to God, to do that for them, which they
are quite willing, and would be glad with all their hearts to do, but it is
utterly beyond their power. It is impossible that the sinner who has this
notion of himself, should feel himself wholly to blame for not turning to God,
and be sensible that not embracing the gospel is the greatest of all sins, or
that he deserves to be damned for it

The unregenerate sinner is so far from being of this character, that he is
properly represented by the foregoing words, "Thou have chastised me, and I was
chastised as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke." The unregenerate sinner is
always like a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, who will not submit to the hand
of his master, but is perfectly untoward and opposite, and only attempts to get
out of his hands. But as soon as he comes to a better mind, and has a new
heart, he condemns and bemoans himself, and sensible of his perverseness, and
the opposition of his heart to God, he heartily cries, "Turn thou me, and I
shall be turned." This is the prayer of a regenerate sinner, submitting to God,
after a course of obstinate rebellion, and feeling his own perverseness, and
dependence on God for all moral good, as no unregenerate sinner ever did.

If it should be said, the regenerate are turned already, why should they pray
to God to turn them? I answer, they are turned in a low and imperfect degree,
and now see unspeakably more of the perverseness and obstinacy of their hearts
than ever an unregenerate person did. They need the continuance of the
influence which has changed their hearts in some degree, and to be turned more
and more. Thus David prays, long after he was a good man, "Create in me a clean
heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me." Psalm. LI. 10.
The christian needs to be turned, as really as any other man, and sees his
need of it more, and heartily desires it. Why then should he not pray for it?
Would Mr. M. or any other man, think it improper and strange, if he should hear
a number of professed christians use this expression in prayer, "Turn us, and
we shall be turned"? Has he not used it, or expressions of the same import,
times without number?

Mr. M. says, He is represented as converted, while he stands praying for it,
as is incontestibly clear from the following words, For thou art the Lord my
God, surely after that I was turned I repented, and after I was instructed, I
smote upon my thigh, etc. The whole that Ephraim is represented as saying here
appears to be one continued address to God, which may be distinctly read over
in less than half a minute. It is but two sentences; the petition "turn thou
me" is urged by this argument. "For thou art the Lord my God." Surely this is
not the language of the unregenerate. He then proceeds to speak of the change
that had passed upon him, since he was as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke,
and was the ground of his coming to God with this humble petition as he now
does, and is a representation of the temper of mind with which he now addressed
God. He, crying to God with this temper of mind, as a friend to his character,
and a penitent, returning sinner, is accepted and obtains favor: God
immediately says, "I will surely have mercy upon him." Mr. M. in order to make
it incontestibly clear that he was converted while he stood praying, takes part
of the first sentence, which is the reason and argument with which the petition
is urged, "For thou art the Lord my God," and adds it to the next sentence;
because it would not do to put these words into the mouth of an unregenerate
sinner: by which he has broken and spoiled the sense of the whole. If he "is
represented as converted while he stands praying for it," he was converted in
the middle of a sentence. He said "Turn thou me, and I shall be turned." And
then stopped, because he could go no further while unconverted; and when he got
converted, he finishes the sentence he had began, and urges the petition he had
made in an unconverted state, by an argument be could not use while
unconverted; which petition was granted before he mentioned the argument. He
therefore used the argument when there was no need of it or of so much as
making the petition; for he had already got what he asked for. If he could not
make this petition after he was converted, how could he after this back it up,
and plead to have it granted, even immediately upon its being granted? -- I was
agoing to say what I think is incontestibly clear -- But I forbear, and leave
it to the reader.

I WOULD make a brief remark upon what he says on the prodigal. He supposes his
coming to himself, and consequently seeing that there was bread enough and to
spare in his father's house, and resolving to go and confess his sins to his
father and ask admission into his house; and his actually doing this, is
designed to represent the unregenerate under convictions. His words are, He now
began to be in want, felt himself in a famishing condition for want of bread:
this put him in earnest upon thinking what he had done; and as all hope of
relief that now remained was from his father; he earnestly looked out for help
in this way, and found relief. All this is a lively representation of the
sinner's being brought to a feeling sense of his perishing want of the bread of
life, and that God only has it in his power to bestow: and therefore will grant
earnestness to look to God for it, as one that seeks bread, when life is at
stake. P. 79.


Here he makes the unregenerate sinner, who is under the dominion of his lusts,
an enemy to God and the Savior, and so blind that the gospel is hid from him:
he makes such an one, I say, to have his eyes opened to see the wonderful
fullness there is in Christ for sinners, and to desire and long for a share in
it, as a hungry man longs for bread; to look to God, and actually go to him for
it; loathing himself for his sins, and earnestly longing to be God's servant,
and dwell in his family. In short, he makes the unregenerate sinner come up to
every thing which is necessary in order to his finding mercy, according to
Christ's representation of the matter by the prodigal; and all that to which
the promises of God's favor are every where made in the gospel. And Mr. M. may
be challenged to tell what more ever takes place in a sinner, in order to his
finding mercy, than he here says the unregenerate come to. We therefore here
see again what little reason Mr. M. had to thank me for proving that there are
no promises to the doings of the unregenerate; and that all I said to prove
this, is, as it consistent with his notion of the character and doings of such
as it is with Dr. Mayhew's; and as is any thing contained in my section on
means. No such thing can be proved consistently with what he says here, and in
many other places: But the contrary is the undeniable consequence.

The prodigal in all he did alter he began to be in want, till he came to
himself, represents an unregenerate sinner, under awakenings and convictions of
conscience. In this state he took methods to help himself, which were vain and
wholly failed him: But had not the least inclination of returning to his
father's house. This blinded him to the fullness of it, and the desirableness
of dwelling there. This is a short but true and striking representation of the
state of the unregenerate, whatever awakenings and convictions they are under.
They begin to be in want; they feel themselves in a miserable, perishing state;
and this is the sole ground of all their uneasiness and exercises. They arise
and exert themselves, but spend their money for that which is not bread, and
their labor for that which satisfies not. Isai. LV. 2.
They see not their true sinfulness and unworthiness; so do not confess. They
have not the least inclination to return home to God, however pinched they may
be on every side with a sense of their own want. But as soon as they have a new
heart, their eyes are opened, and they come to themselves; they see what fools
they have been: what guilty wretches they are; what full and rich provision is
made for the most wretched and vile in Christ the Mediator, and in these views,
return home to God, and as humble penitents fly for refuge to sovereign mercy.

It is plain therefore that our Savior intended to represent the unregenerate
sinner by the prodigal, when he came to himself, etc. And we have reason to
admire the precision and clearness of the representation he here makes. None
but a teacher sent from God could have spoken these words. But they never were
understood nor can be, by those who differ from this divine teacher in their
notions of the character of the unregenerate as much as Mr. M. appears to do.
And, by the way, if Mr. M. had no better notion of the unregenerate, convinced
sinner, than is given in this parable, by the prodigal before he came to
himself, he would never have thought of his growing so much better, or less
sinful; nor been so much offended at his being set in so bad a light in my
section on means.

But Mr. M. has made more sad work yet, I think, in what he says on the parable
of the pharisee and publican. Luke XVIII. 9, -- 14.
He says our Savior in the publican meant to give the character of an
awakened, convinced, unconverted sinner, in distinction from a proud, stupid,
self-righteous sinner; and takes considerable pains to prove it. P. 79, -- 82.


Our divine teacher in this short parable exhibits two different and opposite
characters, in which the exercises and character of the true Christian are in a
very clear and striking manner expressed, in opposition to all other religious
exercises and characters on earth. In the publican we have the character which
is represented through the Old Testament, as the distinguishing character of
the godly, to whom promises of the divine favor are constantly made.
Confession of sin is represented as peculiar to those who find mercy. Prove.
XXVIII. 13. Psalm. XXXII. 5.
The true servants of God, who share in his mercy, and are the objects of his
peculiar favor, are the humble, those of a broken heart and contrite spirit.
Psalm. XXXIV. 18. LI. 17. Isai. LVII. 15.
And promises are constantly made to them who hope and trust in God's mercy,
and make that their only refuge: and this is represented as the character of
God's people. Psalm. XXXIII. 18. LII, 8. CXLVII. 11.
All this is expressed in the publican's prayer, "God be merciful to me a
sinner." It is not possible for a man to say these words, considered in their
proper sense and latitude, understandingly and heartily, unless he is a true
penitent, and in a true sense of what sin is, and what it deserves, with a
humble, broken, contrite heart, flies to the sovereign mercy of God, as
revealed and offered to sinners in divine revelation, and makes this his only
hope and refuge. And in this are summarily comprehended all the exercises of
true Christian piety. What is expressed in these words "God be merciful to me,
a sinner," is the very soul and spirit of the fifty-first Psalm, in which not
an unregenerate sinner, but DAVID, an eminent saint, expresses the humble,
penitent, pious sentiments of his heart. This psalm is, as it were, epitomized,
with so much judgment and precision, and the very spirit of true piety, as
revealed through the whole of the Old Testament, is so comprehensively summed
up in this short sentence, which Christ puts into the mouth of the publican,
that it is one standing evidence, among ten thousand others, that he was a
divine teacher. No man, unless divinely inspired, would ever have though it of thus
distinguishing all true piety from that which is not so.

But so great is the blindness of men, such are their prejudices, that when
this is done to their hand by him who spoke as never man spoke, they overlook
all the instruction that is given, and cannot see any part of the character of
the godly, or the least expression of true piety in the words. But think they
rather express the heart of a friend to sin, an enemy to God, and an obstinate
opposer of his wonderful mercy offered to sinners in Jesus Christ. Who would
expect to find Mr. M. among these, who has had so long a time, and been under
so many advantages to find out what is the spirit of true Christian piety, and
what are the exercises of the saint in his approaches to God?

But let us attend to the reasons he gives against the meaning and design of
this parable, which I have endeavored briefly to establish, and in favor of
his own.

1. He says "there does not appear any thing in the publican's prayer
conclusive of his being a saint, no distinguishing character of a saint." I am
sorry this did not appear to him, since I am sure nothing but prejudice or some
worse cause could prevent it. But enough of this before.

2. He queries what instruction is here given worthy of a divine teacher, if
the parable is understood in the sense he opposes? "Is it that the prayer of a
saint, put up in faith, is more acceptable to God than the prayer of one of the
vilest sinners upon earth?" WHY was the pharisee one of the greatest sinners on
earth? He was a reformed sinner, and did many duties from a principle of
self-love and natural conscience. He had tenderness of conscience, and was very
exact and careful to avoid all known sin, and do all known duty. Why did not
God take a favorable notice of him, and express his approbation? Mr. M. will
say perhaps, he trusted in his own righteousness to recommend him to God.

Answ. 1. Why should he not do this? How can this be so great a sin, since this
was, according to Mr. M. worthy of God's favorable notice?

Answ. 2. The awakened convinced sinner has as much of this same spirit and
disposition as the pharisee had. It is true, his conscience is convinced that
his own righteousness will not avail for his acceptance: but this is not in his
favor, but rather against him, as he continues of this disposition of heart,
and indulges it, under all the light and conviction he has, and is actually
attempting to recommend himself by his own righteousness and doings; this being
as agreeable to his heart, as it was to the pharisee. And his heart opposes the
way of acceptance by a Mediator, at least as much as the pharisee did.




ANS The instruction given is very great, and most important and interesting.
It does not teach us indeed, what prayer is most acceptable and pleasing to God
for it is own sake, or considered in itself; for in this respect all sinners are
perfectly on a level, and the holiest prayer is no more acceptable than any
other. The holiest saint that ever was, is no more acceptable to God in his
person or offerings, than the vilest sinner on earth, considered in any other
view than as united to Christ, and trusting in his merit and righteousness
alone to recommend his person and offerings; for both are, in any other view
under the curse of God, and proper objects of the divine displeasure and
abhorrence. But our divine teacher here tells us, in a very plain, familiar,
striking way and manner, what is that character, and what are those exercises
in which the sinner comes to God, so as to find acceptance and obtain mercy
through a Mediator, as distinguished from every character, and all the
exercises which fail of this. Or with what temper and exercises the true
Christian draws near to God, and lives by faith in Christ, from first to last;
and in what true Christian humility and piety consists, as it is distinguished
from every thing else, and points out the only way to heaven, in distinction
from all bypath. This I endeavored briefly to illustrate just now. Woe to him
who has not yet this instruction, either from this, or some other passage of
scripture.

3. He asks "Is this the whole truth? Does it agree with the scripture account
in general, of the difference between a saint and a sinner?" What has been said
before is an answer to this. And it is not a little surprising that such a
question could be asked. But the next words are more shocking still. Is it not
the character of a saint to lift up his eyes with his heart to God in prayer;
to draw near with full assurance of faith, and come boldly to a throne of
grace? All which are directly the reverse to the character here given to the
poor, dejected publican.

ANS. The publican had a great degree of the assurance of faith' which
consisted in trusting in the mercy of God, while his great sinfulness was in
full view. There is no true assurance of faith but this. And he was bold indeed
to come to God for mercy, and make this his only refuge, bringing nothing in
himself but sin, and a clear and affecting view of his amazing, infinite guilt
and vileness. This is all the true Christian boldness that ever any one had or
exercised in coming to the throne of grace. There is no other boldness but that
of the pharisee, set in direct opposition to this of the publican. He who does
not like, and exercise the boldness at the throne of grace, which is described
in the character of the publican; but exercises another sort of boldness before
God, has certainly nothing but a pharisaical boldness, whatever name he may
call it by. I see not why Mr. M. should not, like the pharisee as a saint, had
he not been called by so bad a name, and expressly condemned by our Savior. I
am confident he had that very boldness which Mr. M. means by Christian
boldness, so far as his idea of it differs from that which appears in the
publican. And I know not why Mr. M. cannot well say and do just as the pharisee
did; only call it humble boldness, instead of proud boasting. The publican is
said not so much as to lift up his eyes to heaven, not to denote dejection, but
humility and faith, in opposition to the pride and boldness of the pharisee;
even that christian humility, without which, there is no true confidence and
boldness at the throne of grace.

It is to be hoped that Mr. M. daily makes this prayer and comes to the throne
of grace with that very faith and boldness, which is recommended in the
character of the publican, and that he has been advancing in this for many
years, however unaccountably he has overlooked it on this occasion, and wrote
in such a manner, that I know not how the humble christian can read it, and
enter into the true spirit of it without being surprised and shocked in a
manner that is not easily expressed.

4. He says, though "This man went down to his house justified," i. e. actually
accepted and pardoned, it does not follow that he was so when he prayed; but he
might be converted soon after, even before he got down to his house. This is
therefore no evidence that he did not make an unconverted prayer; and is so far
from being against his sense of the parable, that it strongly supports it, and
shows the efficacy and success of the prayers of the unconverted; so is an
instance more to his purpose.

ANS. Christ here exhibits a character in the publican, and these words are
predicated of this character, and nothing else, and are the most express
assertion, that they who have this character are accepted and justified. And
they who, because they like not this character, will imagine and form another,
quite different one, about which, Christ says not one word, and apply these
words to that, are very presumptuous, and set their own wisdom up above that of
a divine Teacher. They who take this liberty will make wild steerage indeed!

The words immediately following, which Mr. M. has entirely neglected, are
worthy of particular notice. " For every one that exalts himself, shall be
abased; and every one that humbles himself shall be exalted." These words fix
the sense of the parable, if nothing else did. The pharisee exalted himself;
the publican humbled himself; therefore was justified, and exalted. Here Christ
does in the most express manner declare that all who are of the character
exhibited in the publican, and do as he did, do humble themselves, and shall be
exalted. Here then Mr. M. has again found an absolute promise of salvation, to
his humble, unregenerate sinner; and must according to his interpretation hold
to such promises. We might from this, and other instances of the like kind,
safely conclude he had renounced the book he formerly wrote to prove the
contrary, had he not mentioned it in his preface to this with approbation, and
thanked me for espousing the same cause, and finishing the debate. But as the
case now stands, it is a glaring instance, among many others of the most gross
inconsistence with himself.

Mr. M. through his whole book, and in the passage I am now upon, frequently
speaks of his awakened sinner, as the humble sinner, and often as legally
humbled. This is not a scripture expression, and it is difficult to know what
he means by it, unless it be true humility, or else something directly contrary
to it. The scripture every where speaks of the humble person, as one who by his
humility is distinguished from the ungodly, and as one who is interested in
God's favor, as our Savior does in the words under consideration. Ahab and
Rehoboam and the princes of Israel are said to humble themselves. 2 Chronicles. XII.
6, 7. But this has reference only to their external conduct; the appearance and
profession of true humility which they put on, and not to any thing in their
hearts. If they had really and heartily humbled themselves, they would have
been exalted and saved forever: But as they did this only externally, God gave
them, an answerable external deliverance, and that only.


I PASS to another passage in this remarkable note. Mr. M undertakes to
represent the state of an unregenerate sinner, with respect to his desires of
the salvation offered in the gospel, by a person who has a mortification, so
that it is necessary the limb should be cut off in order to save his life. In
this case, from his love and desire of life, he on the whole, earnestly
desires, and cheerfully submits to the operation. P. 88, 89.
This, Mr. M. says, is "a plain simile." I answer, it is not so, nor at all to
the purpose, unless the unregenerate do on the whole desire the salvation which
the gospel offers: yea, desire it as a man, in danger of death, desires life,
and do cheerfully submit to the terms of salvation, and actually choose and
embrace Christ and his righteousness as offered in the gospel, in order to
escape damnation.

MR. MILLS's notion of faith, is, I think, worthy of special remark. He does
not undertake to describe faith, and particularly show what it is: but he
repeatedly suggests what may lead us to his notion of it. He, speaking of
persons insisting that the unregenerate are required to pray in faith, adds, A
thing as impossible in nature, as for the same thing to be, and not to be at
the same time; not only because faith implies regeneration, but also because
there is no promise for the unregenerate to ground their faith upon, as the
author has abundantly proved. P. 42.
And again, speaking of the same thing, he says, Besides, what have the
unregenerate, while such, to ground an act of faith in prayer upon? since, as
the author has well proved, they have no title to any of the promises. P. 94.


What is faith, then, according to him? why plainly this, a peson's really
believing that God has promised life and salvation to him, or that he has an
interest in the divine promises: for if faith was any thing else but (...), a
person might believe before he has any promise made to him, or is interested in
any promise; which Mr. M. here says he cannot, and that it is as impossible as
for the same thing to be, and not to be at the same time.

It follows from this that sinners must be interested in the promises, before
it is possible for them to believe, or do any thing in faith. For if there is
no promise made to any thing lower than faith, and short of that, so that the
sinner may be interested in the promise, before he believes, he never can
believe, because in order to his exercising faith, he must be entitled to the
promise. But Mr. M. agrees, and has earnestly contended that there is no such
promise. Therefore, according to him it is absolutely impossible, as
impossible, as that the same thing should be and not be at the same time, that
there ever should be any such thing as faith exercised by any in this world,
whether regenerate or unregenerate: for none have a title to any promise before
they believe.

It also hence follows that it is not the duty of the unregenerate to believe,
and so not their duty to exercise any true holiness; nor are they in the least
to blame for the neglect of all this; it being absolutely impossible to them.
And if faith and repentance are not their duty, unbelief and impenitence are no
sin. No wonder then Mr. M. has espoused the cause of the poor, innocent,
unregenerate against me, who had charged them with great guilt and vileness in
continuing impenitent unbelievers, and had represented this as the greatest sin
of which they could be guilty. This is perfectly wrong and abusive, if his
account of faith is right. And no wonder he is zealous to find abundance of
unregenerate duties to be done; for according to him nothing else is their
duty; and if they have no unregenerate duty to do, they have nothing to do, and
nothing is required of them; it being most unreasonable and absurd to call upon
them to repent and believe.

But if faith is a cordial belief of the truths of divine revelation; or seeing
them to be what they are with approbation of heart, so that nothing is wanting
in order to this but a right taste and temper of mind, or a wise and
understanding heart; then this is the duty of all, for the neglect of which,
none have the least excuse; and all may be most reasonably called upon to
believe, and threatened with God's highest displeasure and eternal damnation,
if they neglect it. But if Mr. M.'s account of faith is right, none of these
things are true. Who can attend to this, and many other things which Mr. M. has
said agreeable to it, and not think that at bottom, he believes the
unregenerate are not at all to blame for unbelief, or any thing in which
unregeneracy consists, even though he has never expressly asserted it, and has
more than once granted the contrary? -- But I pass to another thing which is
worthy of particular notice.

MR. MILLS, after he has said much to prove that the unregenerate are commanded
to do unregenerate duty; at length desires it may be noted to prevent mistakes
and objections that in what has been, or may be said of the unregenerate's
being required to pray, etc. he would be understood to mean such of the
unregenerate as are visibly related to God in covenant; at least, admitted by
baptism, and thereby being trained up under the advantages of the gospel, laid
under solemn vows to deny ungodliness, etc. These, all these, whether
regenerate, or unregenerate are required to pray and attend on all other
religious and christian duties, as above. P. 97.


He keeps this in view, and reminds the reader near twenty times as a matter of
great importance to be observed, that he is speaking of "God's covenant
people." His "visible covenant people, visibly related to God in covenant."

It is difficult, I think to know what he means by this. But let his meaning be
what it will, it does not appear to what purpose he makes this observation, or
what mistakes and objections it tends to prevent. Does he mean to exclude all
others from any obligations to do duty, and as not being required to do any
duty at all? It seems he does: But for what reason? If his arguments prove that
there are unregenerate duties required of any, they equally prove they are
required of all, whether visibly in covenant or not. Has Mr. M. nothing to say
to others; must not they be required to attend on means, pray and do other
duties? must they be left to abandon themselves to all wickedness, and have
nothing required of them? What does he mean by this distinction? Does he
suppose that none are under any obligation to any duty, until they of their own
accord enter into covenant with God, and solemn engagements and vows to do it?
If there are any commands requiring something to be done by the unregenerate,
while they continue such, being impenitent enemies to God, no reason can be
given why all such, whether "visibly related to God in covenant" or not, are
not required to do these duties.

But why does he say, "These are required to pray, and attend other religious
and christian duties?" What he asserts, and attempts to prove is, that they are
required to do unchristian duties: duties which persons are to do, not with a
christian, but with a perfectly unchristian spirit; not as christians, but as
enemies to Christ. And how can these be called christian duties?

By those who are "visibly related to God in covenant," he means, I conclude,
if the words have any meaning, those who have entered into covenant with God,
by professedly giving themselves up to him, as his friends and servants, to be
obedient to him in all things, as his people and servants, and as the disciples
of Jesus Christ. None but such are visibly related to God in covenant. None but
such put on the profession and appearance of God's people, nor are in
appearance (which I suppose is the same with being visibly so) in covenant with
God. But such are in appearance and profession, or visibly, not unregenerate,
but true christians. It is expe^^ed of these that they will do the duties which
Christ requires of his people, and attend on all his institutions and
ordinances, and walk agreeably to their profession and vows. So far as they
visibly fail of this, they come short of the character of those who are
"visibly related to God in covenant." It is therefore impossible that he who is
visibly unregenerate, can be of God's visible covenant people, as impossible as
it is, that one should be a true christian in appearance and profession, who at
the same time appears to be an open enemy to Christ. There is therefore the
greatest absurdity, in addressing and teaching those who are "visibly related
to God in covenant," as though they were unregenerate, and appeared to be so, or
directing and exhorting them to unregenerate duties. Therefore if such
directions and requirements are made to any, they must be made to the visibly
unregenerate, and not to those who are God's visible covenant people, or the
visible friends and servants of Christ. Mr. M. is therefore so far from
"preventing mistakes and removing objections" in these words, that he has
himself made as gross a mistake as he well could, and opened a door to the
greatest objections, while he confines unregenerate duties to the visibly
regenerate, and at the same time calls them christian duties; and excludes all
the visibly unregenerate, to whom alone exhortations and commands to
unregenerate duties can be made, if to any, as not being the proper subjects of
such exhortations and commands. The covenant of grace, the christian covenant,
by entering into which men become "visibly related to God in covenant,"
proposes and requires no duties to be done by them, as visibly unregenerate and
enemies to God, but christian duties, which are incumbent on them as
Christians. Their entering into this covenant therefore lays them under no
obligations to act as the unregenerate, and do duties as such; but the
contrary. If they might before this, while visibly unregenerate, be exhorted
and commanded to do unregenerate duties; they cannot now; upon their becoming
visible saints, and visibly related to God in covenant, they are to be treated
as saints, and not as unregenerate, and the duties of the christian covenant,
which they are to do in the character of Christians, are to be indicated oh
them, and no other.

Mr. M. however appears to be of a different opinion; he thinks the
unregenerate may sincerely and heartily enter into covenant with God, and do
christian duty with no better a heart than they have, and not pretend, profess
or engage any thing more than an unregenerate person may heartily do,
consistent with his being unregenerate and appearing to be so. However
inconsistent this is in itself, it is in a measure consistent with Mr. M.'s
notion of the unregenerate, under awakenings and convictions of conscience. He
considers them to be so humble, penitent and obedient; so well disposed toward
their duty, and desirous and inclined to obey and serve God, and do all that
they can; and as little or nothing to blame for not embracing the gospel or
doing any thing that implies regeneration and saving conversion; that it is no
wonder he thinks they may heartily give themselves to God with a desire to
serve him, and do all their duty, waiting on God in this way, to do that for
them, which they, (poor innocent creatures!) cannot, work in themselves, which
they would be glad with all their hearts to do, if it was in their power. All
who have such notions of the unregenerate, naturally talk of their covenanting
with God and being his visible vovenant people, while they are visibly
unregenerate; and think the unconverted may sincerely and properly do and be
all this, and heartily perform many duties which are required of them; with
much more such like jargon.

But they who consider the unregenerate as impenitent and obstinate enemies to
God and Jesus Christ, who with all their hearts oppose and reject the gospel,
for which they have no excuse, but are as voluntary and as wholly blameable in
this, as in any external acts of sin; and that these external acts, such as
lying and profane swearing, derive all their odiousness and blame from this
sinfulness of heart, and (as being fruits of it: and that unregeneracy itself,
or that in which it consists, is a most odious, blamable, scandalous
wickedness, and that no external, overt act of sin is properly scandalous, in
any other view than as an evidence and fruit of the former: I say, they who
view things in this light, and have this notion of the unregenerate, which I
have before endeavored to show is the true one, will never talk in the
language of Mr. M. which I am considering. They have no notion that covenanting
with God, and being God's visible covenant people, is so consistent with the
character of the unregenerate, that they have any right externally to enter
into this covenant. They are sensible that such an appearance and profession,
and visible covenant relation to God becomes none but the true Christian; and
if the unregenerate take on them this appearance and profession, they lie to
God and man, in a most aggravated and shocking manner; are guilty of mocking
God, and of gross hypocrisy: and so do that which is much more vile and
provoking in God's sight than no profession, or pretense to that which implies
love to duty, and to God. And they know the unregenerate do not deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live soberly and righteously in this world
unless it be in appearance and pretense, which is most contrary to the truth,
and the worst sort of lying.

I SMALL conclude this section with observing that Mr. M. has in the latter
part of his book a great deal to say about "some that are, or have been public
teachers." He charges those with holding several things which I should think
did not concern me, was it not that I am some how blended with them, as if we
were one and the same. I know not what right Mr. M. had to do this. I have no
connexions with them that I know of, nor do I think I am obliged to answer for
what they have said. It is enough if I can answer for myself.

I have heard there have been some religious jars and contentions of late
years, in the county in which Mr. M. lives, and one or two ministers have been
deposed in the tumult. These things he attributes to the "new divinity" which
he often mentions; and to "some who are or have been public teachers." These,
it seems have raised disputes to the greatest height, divided towns, broke
societies and churches, "alienated affection among dear brethren," etc. P. 121.
Mr. M. has himself been very zealous and active in these affairs; and it has
been though, by many, that he, with some of his brethren who joined with him,
have overacted their parts, and have been themselves very much the blamable
cause of these divisions and breaches, which might have been prevented or
healed, in a great measure at least, had they conducted with that prudence and
judgment, that brotherly tenderness and caution which became them.

But be this as it may, I see not what connection these things have with any
thing I have wrote. They took place chiefly before my section on means was
published, and "those who are or have been public teachers," if I can guess who
they are, have been as far from approving that section as Mr. M. himself. And I
think his jumbling these things together as he has done, has no tendency to
give light in the controversy between him and me; but is suited to lead those
who have not been particularly acquainted with these matters, into a mistake.

SECT. IV.
Mr. Mills's INCONSISTENCIES with himself.

A NUMBER of these have been mentioned and particularly pointed out in the
foregoing sections: I shall just mention them here, under the head of
Inconsistencies, and point out others which have not been considered.

I. In P. 16, 17, he insists that internal light and conviction of conscience,
does not aggravate the guilt of the sinner. And yet, in P. 30, he represents
sinning against the light of conscience as the great and chief aggravation of
the sinners guilt. And, in P. 68, say; "It is readily granted that he that sins
against a greater degree of light, is in that respect a greater sinner."

II. Though he grants that he who sins against a greater degree of light, is in
that respect a greater sinner; and that sins against the light of conscience
are the greatest sins: yet. P. 63, he represents him to be the greatest sinner,
whose conscience is perfectly blind and stupid.

III. He says the greater sinfulness of the inhabitants of Bethsaida, etc. by
which they were worse than the Tyrians and Sidonians, consisted in their not
being brought to legal repentance and external reformation, by the preaching of
Christ and his mighty works; P. 12, 13.
and yet he elsewhere says, P. 34, 35.
these very persons did repent and reform under the preaching of John Baptist,
Christ and his apostles, and by the mighty works done among them.

IV. He insists upon the necessity of the influences of the spirit of God, in
order to bring men to an awakened, convinced state, or to what he calls legal
repentance and humiliation. And yet he supposes the Tyrians and Sydonians would
have been actually brought to this, without any such influence, and by the bare
use of the external means which the Jews enjoyed, and that Christ himself
asserts this. P. 12, 13.


V. He quotes the words of the Westminster and Savoy confessions with
approbation, in which it is said "the works done by the unregenerate cannot
please God. P. 5, 6.
And yet he says of Ahab, Jehu, and the Israelites at Mount Sinai, who were
unregenerate, that God took a favorable notice of their works, and gave his
express approbation of them. P. 31.


VI. In what he says concerning the scribe, P. 26 -- 28.
he supposes that a person cannot be said to be near, or not far from the
kingdom of God, on account of his ^ight speculative knowledge. In direct
contradiction to this, he says elsewhere, P. 61.
"It is evident and certain that every degree of knowledge, that is necessary
in order to a state of grace and salvation brings them in state one degree
nearer to it."

VII. He says, I have not so much as once mentioned the sinner's breaking off
from his sins, as that whereby he is more in the way of mercy, than going on in
them, P. 58.
And yet he repeatedly says P. 16, 54, 55, 58, 59.
that in my account of what renders a sinner more likely to be saved,
reformation of life, to the highest degree the unregenerate are capable of, a
diligent attendance on means, and all there is in a common work of the spirit
of God, are implied.

VIII He calls my sense of Luke XIII. 24. a new sense, P. 47.
and at the same time represents it as the Arminian sense. And it appears to
have been his own sense, above twenty years ago, if he was then consistent with
himself.

IX. He insists upon it, that the doctrine that impenitent unbelievers grow
more guilty and vile in the use of means, under awakenings and convictions, has
a very bad tendency, and is matter of great discouragement to a painful
attendance on means, and encouragement to sinners to abandon themselves to
carelessness and vice. Yet he says that their appearing to themselves to grow
worse, which is commonly, if not always the case with those under genuine
convictions, is no matter of discouragement, but the contrary. The latter is in
direct contradiction to the former; for if their looking on themselves as
growing worse, is no matter of discouragement to them, then their really
growing worse cannot be so.

X. Though he insists much upon it, that God requires duties of the
unregenerate, which they are to do as such, and which are to be done without
the exercise of any true holiness or goodness; yet, in the midst of all this,
he turns right against himself, and says, God requires good duties, gospel
holiness, and that God does not abate his demands of sinners by reason of their
"prevalent indisposition of heart, and disinclination of will to do right;" P.
115.
that "God don't make the depraved will of the creature, the rule of his duty;
but, on the dreadful penalty of damnation, requires him to reach the appointed
end. Make you a new heart and a new spirit, for why will ye die?" P. 52.
That God does not require these duties as they come marred out of their hands.
P. 115.
And yet he says in the same page, God does require them as they come out of
their hands, because they are less sinful than the omission of them would be.

XI. Mr. M. is a zealous asserter that there is not one promise in the whole
Bible, to the doings of the unregenerate; yet, in direct contradiction to this,
he represents them as doing that to which express promises are made, and
applies such promises to them. See P. 70, 72.


XII. He speaks of denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, etc. as the fruit and
exercise of holiness, which the unregenerate never attain to P. 52.
But, in contradiction to this, he elsewhere represents the unregenerate as
doing all this. See P. 84, 97, 120.


XIII. He asserts that many under the gospel, are under a natural impossibility
of believing, and therefore cannot be required to believe at present. P. 83. --
86.
But, directly contrary to this, he elsewhere asserts, that all these are
required to pray in faith; to make them a new heart, and turn to God, and
believe, on pain of damnation. See P. 52, 97.


XIV. He represents the unregenerate as not required to do any thing, if they
are not required to do unregenerate duties P. 50, 51, 107.
Yet contrary to this, he repeatedly says the unregenerate are required to be
holy, and to do duty in a right and holy manner, as has been just now observed.

XV. He says, "the utmost seize of the unregenerate have nothing in them
pleasing to God, nothing that can recommend them to his favor." P. 93.
He also says, that these very seize have something in them of which God
takes a favorable notice, and which have his express approbation. P. 31, 32.


XVI. He insist upon it that they who have no light and conviction of
conscience, have as much to answer for, and are as guilty in God's sight, as
they who have this in the greatest degree: P. 63.
yet, directly contrary to this he says, "It is readily granted that he that
sins against a greater degree of light, is in that respect a greater sinner."
P. 68.
And that light and conviction of conscience "is a great and precious favor
from God, and endearing grounds of thankfulness;" P. 59.
consequently if abused, renders a person more guilty than if he had it not.

XVII. He represents the awakened, convinced sinner as reforming all known sin,
and as coming up to all known duty. P. 7, 28, 56, 109.


But he elsewhere represents such as seeing themselves guilty of more sin than
they were sensible of before. The law comes and sin revives; P. 92.
and says, The great impurity and sinfulness attending the sinner's best
duties, after his utmost efforts, is the very means God is wont to make use of
to humble them. P. 100.
How can they see the great sinfulness of their best duties, when they avoid
all known sin, and do all known duty!

XVIII. He represents one end of awakenings and convictions to be sinners being
"fully convinced that in them dwells no good thing. P. 92.
But he else where says there is some sort and kind of goodness in these
seize of the unregenerate. P. 57.
How then can they be "fully convinced that there is no good thing in them?

XIX. He says the unregenerate are required to break off from all known sin,
and every thing in the way of embracing Christ, even the secret pride of the
heart. P. 109.
This is certainly to come out of a state of sin; which in the preceding page,
he says is not required to be done antecedent to faith in Christ, or "otherwise
than by the medium of the gospel, in the way of faith."

XX. He represents the streams to be nothing to the fountain; the acting out of
sin to be as nothing to the fountain of sin in the heart. P. 11.
This is directly contrary to what he says of the reformed sinner, as being on
this account only so much less guilty and vile than others, or than he was
before; even so as to become in a great degree innocent. And he insists that
such external reformations, or cutting off these streams of external sin, are
of so great account as to over-balance, the aggravated guilt which such
contract, by continuing in unbelief and rejection of the gospel, under all the
greater light they now have.

XXI. Mr. M. blames me much for speaking of any end to be answered by the use
of means, by the unregenerate, which is short of saving grace, or true
holiness; and says that God requires them to attend on means to this end. P.
51, 52.
But when he comes to tell what end means answer, and to what end God commands
sinners to attend, he gives a different and contrary account of the matter, and
says the end the use of means answers to them, is to convince them of their
sinfulness and humble them, etc. P. 91, 92, 100.
And that "they are not required to God's gracious acceptance, but to other
wise and holy purposes worthy of God, such as the advancement of his
declarative glory in the world, etc. P. 101.


XXII. Mr. M. is guilty of contradiction in representing the Pharisee who went
up to the temple to pray, etc. as one of the vilest sinners on earth, merely
because he trusted in himself that he was righteous, and thought himself better
than others; while he himself insists upon it that such who refrain from all
known sin, and do all known duty, as the Pharisee did, are in fact better than
others, and that God takes a favorable notice of them, and has a peculiar
respect to them on this account. And particularly represents the young man who
came to Christ to learn what good thing he should do to inherit eternal life;
and was to all appearance as self-righteous as the Pharisee. I say, represents
him as of so lovely a character, as to attract Christ's respect and affection.
I believe Mr. M. will find it difficult to tell wherein the great difference
lies in these two characters, by which the former is the vilest sinner on
earth; the latter very desirable and amiable.

To these inconsistencies I shall add several, in which Mr. M. has been guilty
of contradicting in his inquiry, what he has asserted in his former treatise,
called "A vindication of gospel truth," etc.

XXIII. In his vindication, he speaking of St. Peter's words to Simon, "Repent,
and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee,"
says, "This perhaps, as here used, imports indeed only a suspicion of the truth
of the man's repentance, and not any doubt of God's forgiveness, in case his
repentance were sincere. P. 76.
But in his inquiry he asserts the contrary, and builds his argument from these
words on this assertion. P. 70, 71.


XXIV. In his vindication, P. 17.
he says, The scripture no where puts mankind upon seeking their everlasting
happiness, in any other way than that of well doing, truly such in the account
of God, i. e. doing his commandments; that is, as the unregenerate never do, as
he explains his meaning in the words which I shall quote directly. This is in
direct contradiction to great part of his inquiry, in which he asserts and
labors abundantly to prove, that God requires unregenerate doings, by which
men are directed to seek their everlasting happiness, and strive to enter in at
the st^^it gate. etc.

XXV. He goes on to say in his vindication, P. 18.
certainly none will pretend that well doing in the account of God, or (which
is the same thing) doing his commandments, is what agrees to the unregenerate,
under the guilt and dominion of sin. He has contradicted this two ways in his
inquiry. He has done it by insisting that the unregenerate do God's
commandments, and may keep them perfectly and be in this respect perfectly
obedient, while they are under the guilt and dominion of sin; even all the
commands to unregenerate doings. He also contradicts this by representing Jehu
as doing well in God's account, when all that he did is considered and spoken
of as the doings a man unregenerate. P. 32.


XXVI. In his vindication, P. 30, 31.
he denies that men are commanded or directed to ask any thing of God in
unbelief; or to pray in any way short of faith. And to support what he asserts
quotes the words of St. James; "But let him ask in faith, etc. But in his
inquiry he insist upon it as a very important doctrine that men are required to
pray in unbelief, or as the unregenerate do. And he zealously asserts that
these words of James are not in the least inconsistent with this doctrine, and
by no means prove that "prayer short of a gracious manner of performance," and
short of faith, "is in no sense required." P. 105, 106.


XXVII. In his Vindication, P. 41.
he says, since sin is the predominant principle in the unrenewed man, from
whence all his actions must take their principal denomination, and have their
specification, how is it possible for the best doings of such a man, while
under the dominion of sin, to harmonize, in any degree, with the moral nature
of God, so as to be approvable in his sight?

This he contradicts in his INQUIRY two ways. First by saying that God takes a
favorable notice of the doings of the unregenerate, and that they as such have
had his express approbation. P. 31, 32.
Secondly by insisting upon it, that God commands those doings; which
necessarily implies his approving of them, and is indeed the same thing; and by
insisting upon it that though God commands these doings, he does not command
that which is sin.

XXVIII. In his Vindication P. 66, 67.
he says the doings of the unregerate are displeasing and offensive to God; and
are, "in their whole moral complexion, infinitely disagreeable, and therefore
displeasing to the divine purity." Most he says about the doings of the
unregenerate, in his Inquiry, is in direct contradiction to this.

XXIX. In his first book he asserts "there is infinite contrariety, between the
purity of the divine nature, and the polluted doings of the most refined
creature under sin's dominion." P. 64, 65.
In his last book he undertakes to show that it is consistent with the purity
of the divine nature to command such doings; or, which is the same, approve of
them.

XXX. In his Inquiry, P. 112.
he speaks of obedience from self love, a required in the scriptures, and
therefore a duty. But in his Vindication P. 65.
he speaks of selfishness or self-love, as in direct opposition to that which
is right and good. In this view he says "their cries for mercy, and their very
best devotions are, at bottom, but selfish, carnal and impure in God's sight.
Here, according to him, selfishness, or self love, is the same with carnal, or
the carnal mind, which is itself enmity against God. But in his last book this
is a principle of obedience, which men are commanded to exercise.

XXXI. In his Vindication, P. 64, etc.
he insists upon it, that to represent the doings of the unregenerate, who are
under the dominion of sin, as pleasing and acceptable to God, or any way
tending to obtain his favor (while they do not come to Christ but reject him)
is most contrary to God's character as moral governor of the world, and to the
whole gospel of Christ, and dwells upon this as a matter of great importance.
But in his Inquiry, he has got on the other side of the question, and takes
pains to show that the doings of such, even of Ahab, Jehu, and the Children of
Israel at Mount Sinai, who were under the dominion of sin, and had no regard to
a Mediator, had God's express approbation, and obtained his favorable notice,
so far, as out of respect to these doings, to grant them a great salvation.

The reader will here observe how much more orthodox Mr. M. was in these
important points, when he wrote his former book, than he is now. If he should
go on in the way he is now going, and write another book, is it not to be
feared that he will give up most of the important doctrines of Calvinism, and
appear quite on the other side of the question, toward which he has made such
large strides already? I am sure if he will be in any measure consistent with
himself, he must either retract much he has said in his last book, or go fully
into the Arminian scheme. It is to be hoped he will readily do the former.

I shall conclude this INCONSISTENT section with the words which Mr. M. uses,
when he thought he had fastened a contradiction on his former antagonist. Vind.
P. 23, 24.
so very difficult a thing is it, for any one, in the defense of error,
consistently to speak the same things! And when this is the case, it must be
equally difficult for the reader to fix upon the true meaning of an author; or
indeed for his answerer to confute what is said in one page, and not at the
same time confirm what is said in another.

SECT. V.
SHOWING the evil tendency of Mr. Mills's Inquiry.

IT is hoped that what has been said, is sufficient to show that what Mr. M.
has designed chiefly to oppose in his Inquiry, are important truths, and
therefore that what he advances and attempts to support, are real and hurtful
errors: And the (...) tendency of some things he has advanced has been
mentioned and pointed out. But I suppose it will be proper and useful more
particularly to attend to this matter, and consider what is the natural
tendency of this book, all taken together, so far as it is received and has
influence.

I. I THINK it fully appears, from the view we have had of Mr. M.'s book, that
it tends greatly to the dishonor of Christ and his gospel. It does so in
representing sinners more to blame for other sins, than for the sin of
unbelief, and rejecting Christ and the gospel; yea^ or if the sinner is little
or nothing to blame for the latter, if he reforms all other known sins. This
view of the matter Mr. M.'s book gives; no one will ever learn from this, that
the sin of rejecting Christ and the gospel at heart, and that with direct acts
of opposition and enmity against him, is a greater sin than injuries done to
our neighbor: but he will find the contrary through the whole book implicitly
or expressly asserted; and that he has often denied that there is any crime in
the former. Thus he has justified the wicked in the greatest sin he is guilty
of, and appeared on his side in the great and chief controversy between Jesus
Christ and sinners.

Now what could be more dishonorable to Christ and the gospel than this, and
what could set his character and the great salvation in a more unworthy, mean
and contemptible light! It has been observed in what a different light divine
revelation sets this matter; not only that men are without excuse and wholly to
blame for not heartily embracing Christ and the gospel; but that this is
immensely the greatest sin that men can be guilty of, in comparison with which
any other sin, is not to be mentioned: and it is easy to see in what a grand
and honorable light this sets Jesus Christ. And is it not as easy to see that
the contrary doctrine, which is Mr. M.'s, equally degrades and dishonors this
glorious character?

In this Mr. M. has fallen in with the inclination and humor of a fallen
world. Mankind are backward to be convinced of the sin of unbelief, and of not
heartily receiving Christ, and embracing the gospel; they are inventing a
thousand pleas and excuses in their favor, in opposition to such convictions.
They will be convinced of any thing almost, rather than this. And when any are
convinced in their judgment and conscience, that this is altogether their
crime, and the greatest that they are guilty of, this truth is, beyond most
others, opposite and galling to their hearts. All this is owing to their not
having any love to Christ, nor a view and sense of his worthy and glorious
character. Mr. M. has joined hands with them in this matter, and all he has
said tends to prevent this conviction; to justify and quiet the sinner in the
pleas and excuses he is making in his own favor. I therefore think his book
may be justly looked upon as an attempt to exalt, flatter and justify sinners,
at the expense of the honor of the glorious Redeemer. I own I view the matter
in this light; and this has been a supporting and animating consideration to me
in the midst of all the opposition made to the doctrine I have advanced on this
head, by means of Mr. M.'s book, or any other way; and in the pains I have
taken to support this doctrine, in opposition to Mr. M.'s objections: for I
consider myself as pleading the cause of Christ and attempting to exalt and
honor his character, in opposition to a self-justifying world; and to condemn
and abase the sinner, however imperfect and deficient the attempt may be.

II. MR. M.'s book tends to prevent sinners coming to any proper, true, and
thorough conviction of their guilt and vileness, and the state they are in; and
the whole drift and spirit of it is in direct opposition to this. This I have
taken notice of in the foregoing sections, and it appears from what has been
observed in the last particular. The sinners opposition and enmity of heart
against Christ and the gospel is kept wholly out of sight, through the whole of
Mr. M.'s book, and the most that he says, supposes that there is no such thing
in the heart of an awakened, convinced sinner; and is in direct opposition to
its being the greatest of all sins, if there is any such thing. Therefore
wherever Mr. M.'s book is believed, and has influence, there will be no true
genuine conviction of sin; and so there can be no conversion to God. And he who
is brought to genuine, thorough conviction of sin will renounce and discard Mr.
M.'s book, so far as he understands it, as what is most directly contrary to
the truth. There is no medium between this and losing his convictions. Mr. M.'s
book is therefore just as mischievous and hurtful in its tendency; as i^ an
attempt to prevent sinners consciences being thoroughly awakened and convinced;
or to remove such conviction wherever it takes place.

III. MR. M.'s book exactly coincides with the inclination of the sinner's
heart, who is in some degree awakened and thoughful about his eternal interest,
and has reformed external sins, and betook himself to external duty; and tends
to flatter such to their eternal destruction, and give them that ease and
resting place, which must be taken from them, or they will perish forever.

As soon as a sinner's conscience is awakened, he reforms his external conduct,
and betakes himself to external duty, with a view to distinguish himself from
others, by his doings, to grow better, and do something to abase the divine
anger and displeasure against him; and if he believes Mr. M.'s book, he will
think he has obtained his end, and his conscience will be quieted, and he will
rest in a great measure easy and secure; for now he has forsaken all known sin,
and does all known duty, and God is less angry with him; yea, takes a
favorable notice of him; and on this account he is in a likely way to be
saved. What can such an one have to disquiet his conscience? He has done his
utmost, and waits at the foot of sovereign mercy for God to do the rest, he not
being at all to blame for not having a new heart and embracing the gospel. In
this resting place Mr. M.'s book fixes and secures him, where many thousands
have perished eternally!

Mr. M. has therefore, by his poor ^abor^, only provided a refuge of lies for
the sinner to fly to and rest in, which is perfectly agreeable to his heart,
while an enemy to Christ, and the great salvation. Nor can he possibly be
driven from this on his plan, and so long as he believes what he has written.
There are multitudes of secure sinners now in New England, and elsewhere, who
have had some awakenings of conscience, and serious thoughtfulness about their
souls and eternal interest, and are in their view avoiding all known sin, by
doing all duty; and are resting here, and in their own imagination waiting on
God to do that for them which they cannot do of themselves, and which they
think they are not at all to blame for not doing. And here they will perish,
unless driven from this refuge of lies, which they are as fond of as is the
open profligate of his way of sinning. For men will love that which gives them
ease and comfort. Such will therefore be pleased with Mr. M's book, and love it
just as much as they love their own ^ase. And nothing will drive them from this
fatal resting place but a clear conviction of that which Mr. M. has kept wholly
out of sight through his book, and has at least implicitly denied in all he has
said in opposition to me, viz. that the sinner is wholly to blame for not
embracing the gospel immediately; and that his want of a heart to do this, and
the opposition of his heart to it, is by far the greatest crime he ever was
guilty of, for which God is very angry with him, and his wrath abides upon
him, and he is every moment exposed to sink into an aggravated destruction. As
soon as they are convinced of this, they will see there has been no sincerity
in all their reformations and doings; but all the exercises of their hearts
have been a direct and strong opposition to all that God requires of them;
especially to the important, merciful declaration, which implies the whole he
has to say to sinners "This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased: HEAR
YE HIM" They will see that they have an amazingly hard and obstinate heart, for
which they have no excuse; that their neck is an iron sinew, and their brow
brass; which appears in a more clear and striking light now than ever, in that
they persist in opposing and rejecting the most kind invitations of the gospel,
under all the convictions of their consciences, and terrifying apprehensions of
the wrath to come. It is needless to say that such a person will reject Mr.
M.'s book, at the same instant that he is delivered from his former delusions,
and is by these convictions driven from the fatal resting place just mentioned.

IV. MR. M.'s book tends to discourage and drive to despair every sinner who
has any good degree of true, genuine conviction, if it should be believed by
such, unless it drives away his convictions, and he returns to a degree of
security and ease.

It has been observed before, that this must be the case, according to Mr. M.'s
own concession: for he allows that sinners, under deep and genuine convictions,
have been ready to look upon themselves as greater sinners than heretofore;
yea, perhaps, as growing daily worse and more hard-hearted. This being the
case, when such hear Mr. M.'s doctrine, that the design of the use of means is
to render them less guilty and vile, and that this is the great encouragement
to use means, that hereby they may be in the way of duty and obedience, and
become less sinful, so as to obtain God's favorable notice and approbation,
and on this account be more in the way of God's mercy, and, in the disposition
and exercises of their minds, get nearer to the state of a good man, and so be
more likely to be saved: I say, when he hears this doctrine, and still views
himself in the light in which Mr. M. grants all such are ready to view
themselves (and I add in which such always view themselves, as it is agreeable
to the real truth, and not to see it, is to be greatly deluded; so not to be
under genuine convictions) so far as he pays any regard to it, it will strike
discouragement and despair through his heart. And the glorious gospel which
offers salvation to the chief of sinners, as freely as to the least sinner in
the world, which can be the only relief and remedy to such an one, will be
wholly hid from his eyes, until he renounces the chief and leading doctrines of
Mr. M.'s book, as gross and fatal delusions.

V. MR. M.'s book is suited very much to please Arminians and Semi-arminians,
and to support and strengthen them in their opposition to the truths of the
gospel.

It is certain that all these are, with no small degree of zeal on his side of
the question in this controversy; and it is easy to see the reason why they are
so. Mr M. has represented his awakened, reformed sinner in a light very
agreeable to their notion of such. He is a humble sinner, who, with tenderness
of conscience and trembling at God's word, reforms all known sin, and complies
with all known duty. He does his utmost, and seeks the Lord with trembling, and
trusts in his mercy, making this his only plea. All this the sinner comes to on
principles of nature, and in this way obtains the divine approbation and
favorable notice, and has nothing further to do, but thus to wait on God. And
what reason has such a person for any distress and terror of conscience? He is
prepared to be comforted, and told that all things are well, and he has nothing
to do but to hold on in this way of duty. This is exactly agreeable to their
notion, and sets human nature in its fallen state in the light in which they
represent it. They indeed may think that such are good Christians, and in the
sure way to heaven, and have nothing to say about regeneration, and a new heart
by the immediate influences of the spirit of God, in order to bring such
persons to the exercise of what is called true grace after they have attained
to all that has been mentioned. And though Mr. M. does not appear fully to agree
with them in this, yet they have, many of them at least, sense and discerning
enough to see that herein he is quite inconsistent with himself, and that if
the things he chiefly insists upon, are allowed and established, the
fundamentals of their scheme are established, and the rest will follow of
course. They can therefore patiently bear with a number of Mr. M.'s
inconsistent whims (as they think them) about regeneration, saving grace, etc.
while they are only mentioned incidentally, and not much insisted upon; and
these things which are important articles in their scheme are earnestly
contended for; seeing if the latter are established, the former cannot be
maintained, but will of course be neglected, if they do not fall into general
contempt.

I would particularly observe here, that the doctrine that they who are the
least sinners and have done most duty, are on this account most likely to be
saved, which runs through Mr. M.'s book, contains the substance and soul of the
Arminian scheme, and if followed in all its just consequences, will subvert
every important doctrine of Calvinism. For according to this, God in showing
mercy to sinners has respect to their moral character, and by distinguishing
themselves from others, and mending their moral character by becoming less
sinful, and doing those things by which they obtain God's approbation, they
recommend themselves to his mercy, as more fit and proper objects of it than
others whose moral character is worse, and who are greater sinners in God's
sight. -- It is easy to see this turns every thing in this affair into the
Arminian channel. It entirely shuts out the doctrine of God's sovereignty in
the exercise of his saving mercy toward sinners, having mercy on whom he will
have mercy, without respect to any thing in their moral character, as being
better or worse. And it founds the determinations of God with respect to the
salvation of one man rather than another, on something foreseen in his moral
character, by which he has done something to distinguish himself from others.
It introduces the Arminian notion of justification by works; for according to
this, their own moral character, and those things by which they are loss
sinful, do recommend them to God's special favor, and are the reason and ground
of their obtaining mercy rather than others. But the sinner is certainly
justifiable by that which recommends him, and is the ground and reason of his
finding mercy rather than another, though it be but a negative righteousness, and
less sinfulness. And if this is of such avail with God, how much will positive
virtue and goodness avail to recommend? And it follows from this that man is
not in such a lost, helpless, depraved state as Calvinists have generally
represented him to be; but has those good principles, in the exercise of which
he may do his duty, and distinguish himself, so as to become one toward whom
God's mercy more readily flows out, than toward another.

Mr. M. has appeared greatly alarmed at my espousing what he says is the
Arminian sense of a single text. He might reasonably be much more alarmed, if
he should see his own performance in a true light, and find that the most that
he had said, is in support of that cause. If he shall not be made sensible of
this, we may not expect to hear from him much more of the peculiar doctrines of
Calvinism.

VI MR. M. has by this performance pleased and strengthened all those who are
fixed upon a self-righteous bottom, who have never seen their own true guilt
and vileness, and are thinking themselves better than others, especially those
whose external moral conduct is not so regular and good as their own.

We have reason to think there are many such professing Christians. This may be
the case, whatever sect or party they belong to; and let the principles they
espouse, or profession they make be what they will. They do at bottom think
themselves better than others, on some account or other, however insensible
they may be of it themselves, and have ways to hide it from their own eyes, or
from others. No wonder if such are well pleased with Mr M.'s book, and
zealously espouse his cause; for what he has said is agreeable to the
disposition and feelings of their hearts, and to their experiences. But it is
difficult to conceive how the true Christian, or the unregenerate under genuine
convictions, can approve of the leading sentiments in this performance. Indeed
Mr. M. has granted that the latter cannot, or is not like to do it; for he is
ready to look on himself as a greater sinner than heretofore; and there is no
other way for him to think himself to grow better, and less sinful, but to lose
his convictions, and relapse into his former delusions; so no other way to
reconcile him to Mr. M.'s book; unless it be by his becoming a true convert,
and embracing the gospel. But will this do it? He now has his eyes opened, in a
sense and degree in which they were not before under the deepest and most clear
convictions in an unregenerate state, to behold the astonishing worthiness and
glory of Jesus Christ, who has practiced the most amazing condescension and
goodness toward him, and always stood at his door and knocked, and freely
offered himself to him; and he beholds with wonder and astonishment the wisdom
and glory of the gospel, and the greatness and excellence of the salvation
which is by Christ; all which he has oppoposed, rejected and despised, under
all the scene of awakening, convictions and distress which he has passed
through. And in this view now abhors himself, and repents in dust and ashes at
the feet of Christ. And will he in these views look back on that horrid scene
of quarrelling with God, and resolute, fixed opposition of heart to the person
who now appears so glorious in his eyes, and astonishingly good and kind, in
which he resisted and strove with all his might against the inlightening,
awaking influences of the spirit of God: I say, will he now think he was
through all this growing less sinful, than he was in a state of security, and
doing his duty, though not from the highest principles, yet on the good
principles of nature; and that by thus growing better, he obtained God's
favorable notice and approbation, and made approaches to the state and temper
of a good man; and so got more and more in to the way of mercy, until he
arrived to thorough conversion! No surely. He will view himself in a light
directly contrary to this, to a degree not easily expressed. How then can he
approve of Mr. M's book?

I can easily see how such an one as our divine Teacher characterises in the
Pharisee should think the awakened, convinced sinner is become less sinful than
he was before, and that God is more ready and inclined to show mercy to him on
this account; and that he will look on himself much better than any open
profligate whatsoever, and swell in his own thought of himself, and in his
confidence of acceptance with God on this account. But I am quite mistaken in
my notion of a true Christian, if he is ready to look on an impenitent rejecter
of Christ, under genuine convictions as growing better, or on himself as on the
whole a less sinner than the most secure, deluded, and openly vicious sinner
that he is acquainted with: Nor is it easy to prove that he is in fact so:
Considering his superior light and advantages, and the great and distinguishing
obligations he is laid under by God's goodness to him; and considering the poor
returns he makes, the weak and low degree of right exercises of heart; and the
great and dreadful degree of opposite exertions and exercises; and the
unspeakable degree of sinful deficiency in all his right and holy exercises, in
which he falls so vastly short of the perfect rule of his duty: I say, if we
take into view all this, perhaps it will be by no means clear that he is on the
whole less guilty and vile, than he was in a state of unregeneracy; but be this
as it will, it is hard to conceive how he, in the affecting view of the
dreadful degree and amazing aggravations of his own sins of omission and
commission, should be ready to think himself a less sinner than others, or than
he once was. Therefore he is in no danger of using the language which the
Pharisee did before God. "God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, --
or even as this publican." At the same time I see not why all who
understandingly approve of Mr. M.'s book should not use this very language; and
why this must not be the language of their hearts, whatsoever words they use.

If any professing Christian is disposed to look on himself a less sinner, less
guilty and vile in God's sight, than he was in a state of security in his
youth; and that he has been growing a less sinner ever since he was first
awakened, and looks round on profligate sinners, as on the whole much more vile
than himself; and approaches to God with this view of himself, as being on this
account more in the way of God's mercy, and a more fit and proper object of it:
I say, if he views himself in this light, and has answerable exercises of
heart, (which is indeed agreeable to the spirit of Mr. M.'s whole book) he is,
I think, a strange sort of Christian, even as strange a one as was the pharisee
when he went up to the temple to pray.

VII. M. M.'s book is suited to please all those who think themselves good
Christians, and are excusing themselves in their deficiencies, and want of the
exercises of love to God, and every christian grace, from their utter
inability, and want of power to exercise and perform these things: and tends
greatly to support and strengthen them in this dangerous wicked way.

There are many, we have reason to think, of this sort. The doctrine of man's
inability to do any thing spiritually good and holy of himself they imbibe as a
certain and important truth: And as they hold it, is very agreeable to their
corrupt hearts; for they at bottom think they are under an inability, or want
of power to be holy, which does really excuse them for not living in the
constant exercise of faith, and love to God. So that the doctrine, as they hold
it, is not true, and is as agreeable to the corrupt heart of man, as any that
was ever invented. Hence it undoubtedly is that many are such zealous defenders
of it, and have it so much in their mouths, that man can do nothing of himself,
etc. And when this doctrine is set in a true, scriptural light, and it is
insisted upon that man is under no inability to any good exercise, but what
consists in the perverseness and wickedness of his heart, for which he has no
manner, no degree of excuse; that he has full power and ability to do every
thing that God commands; to embrace the gospel, and be perfectly holy, were it
not for his indisposition of heart and unwillingness to do it; and that the
whole difficulty lies here, and is just the same as in any other case, where a
person is backward and unwilling to do what is proposed to him; only as it may
be greater in degree, more perfect and fixed; and therefore that this
inability, and inexcusable, voluntary, aggravated wickedness, are one and the
same thing; and the more of this sort of inability there is, the more vile is
the person; and so much more guilty and inexcusable: I say, when they hear
this, they are greatly displeased and alarmed, and cry out of it as
Arminianism, or a very bad and dangerous doctrine; because it deprives them of
their sweet resting place and refuge to which they have been used to flee, and
get ease to their consciences, and avail themselves of an excuse, so as not to
feel themselves guilty for that which is indeed their greatest sin, and the
chief of all their wickedness.

Such persons as these, instead of confessing their sins, are hiding them from
their own eyes, and excusing themselves in that for which they ought to be
greatly ashamed and blush before God; so have never been in any good measure
convinced of sin, but are really justifying themselves before God in their
greatest wickedness: And they are of a spirit and temper as contrary to true
Christianity, as can well be imagined. And the doctrine of man's impotency, as
they hold it, is really as contrary to the truth, and as agreeable and pleasing
to corrupt nature, as are any of the Arminian doctrines which assert man's
self-sufficiency to all that is required of him; and more so in some respects.

All such will no doubt, like Mr. M's book, and be agreeably supported and
strengthened by it. But this is only to confirm them in a wicked course, highly
dishonorable to Christ and the gospel; in a delusion which, if persisted in,
will prove ruinous to them, whatever great experiences, and remarkable
discoveries and comforts they may boast of.

SECT. VI.
IN which Mr. Mills's speaking against METAPHYSICAL REASONING AND ARGUMENTS, is
briefly considered.

MR. M. has not expressly asserted that any of my reasoning in support of what
he opposes is metaphysical; much less has he attempted to point out any
particular instances of metaphysical reasoning in any passage of mine, upon
which he remarks. However, he often speaks of metaphysics, metaphysical
subtelties, abstruse metaphysical reasoning, etc. with disapprobation, and in
such a manner as will lead the reader to think he has to deal with an
antagonist, who is very metaphysical. Now metaphysical reasoning is the same in
his account, with abstruse, unintelligible, fallacious and deceitful reasoning,
on which there is no dependence, and ought to be wholly disregarded and
avoided. The most remarkable passages of his on this head are the following. P.
30, 31.
Here removing as far as possible from all abstruse metaphysical reasoning, and
far fetched consequences, at least doubtful and uncertain; of which kind
experience teaches that what is called demonstration in one age, is rejected
in another; and what is called so by one man is of no validity with another;
and often times with the same man at different dates of his life: let us, I say,
removing as far as possible from these things, etc. Again, P. 103.
Another ground of this mistake, as it appears to me, is too great a fondness
for, and dependence upon conclusions come into, as the result of subtle
metaphysical reasoning, as though they were certain, and might be depended on;
while nothing is more common than mistakes in these cases, etc.

It is to be observed here, that what he condemns, and professes to keep at the
greatest distance from, under the name of metaphysical reasoning, includes all
reasoning that can be used by men; for it is common for men to make mistakes in
reasoning, in whatever way they reason: And the best and clearest reasoning,
which is real demonstration, is called so in one age, and ^^^^cted in another:
and the most strong and (...) reasoning (...) allowed to be so with one man,
and yet be of no avail with another; and this may be the case with the some man
at different periods of his life. Therefore to keep at the greatest possible
distance from all reasoning of which these things may be predicated, is the
same as to keep at the greatest possible distance from all reasoning whatever.

Besides, it is worthy to be considered perhaps, whether Mr. M. has helped
himself, or his reader by all this caution; and whether he has not, after all,
fallen into such a way of reasoning, whether (...) be called metaphysical or
not, as is of no validity with himself in different dates of his life, and by
which he has repeatedly reasoned himself into contradictions at the same time
of life. Of this the reader who has attended to the foregoing sections will
judge. If by abstruse metaphysical reasoning be meant nice distinctions where
there is no difference, or using words without any distinct and clear ideas;
affirming and denying the same thing at different times, and drawing opposite
consequences from same premises; mistaking and misrepresenting the thing about
which the question is perhaps Mr. M.'s Inquiry is as remarkable an instance of
such metaphysics as any this age has produced.

But if by metaphysical reasoning and arguments, is meant making critical and
clear distinctions between those things which really differ, and carefully
examining those subjects to the bottom which have been treated in a confused,
intricate manner, or have been thought by many quite abstruse and
unintelligible, there is no reason why any one should try to keep at a distance
from this, or avoid it in any instance; for to do so, is only to confuse and
bewilder himself, and to take a method to keep himself in ignorance with
respect to the most important and interesting subjects. And it will be evident
to any one who will allow himself to think, that the holy scriptures cannot be
in any good measure understood, and the consistence of one passage with another
discovered, if such reasoning as this is neglected. And this is, in effect,
laying aside all clear reasoning on any subject, and to make reason itself a
very useless thing, and to substitute something else in the stead of reason.

Many have conceived such an aversion to what they call metaphysics, and
carefully keep at such a distance from every thing which to them is abstruse,
uncertain and difficult to be understood, that they are never like to know any
thing that requires close attention of thought, and any degree of accurate
reasoning; or make any progress in the most useful knowledge. And, what is
worse, they do what they can to prevent others from entering into a free,
critical and painful inquiry after truth, especially those who are in their
youth, and are coming upon the stage, by gravely cautioning them against
meddling with metaphysical subjects, and dark, abstruse matters; and directing
them to attend only to the things that are plain and easy, and require no
metaphysical arguments to investigate or support them. Unhappy is the young
student in divinity who has this advice, and is influenced by it: For by acting
upon this maxim, and endeavoring to keep at the greatest possible distance
from metaphysics in this sense, he will have but little more knowledge than
what he has by tradition; and this too will chiefly consist in a set of
orthodox words, without having any intelligible meaning to them. If close and
accurate reasoning falls into discredit, and a care to make clear and nice
distinctions, and the utmost pains to enter deep into important subjects, and
search them to the bottom, are neglected; the mind must have very little true
knowledge, and can come to no proper satisfaction and certainty about any
thing, that requires reasoning; and is under a necessity of r^stl^g in
indolence and ignorance.

IT has been the way of almost all sects and parties when they have found
themselves unable to support their cause by reason, and have been opposed and
pressed with reasons and arguments, which they have not been able fairly to
answer, to cry out against such reasoning, and to endeavor to bring it into
disgrace, by calling it by some ill name. Thus the Quakers, and almost all
enthusiasts when urged with most clear and demonstrative reasons against many
of their absurd notions, which they have not been able to answer, have
endeavored to support themselves, by calling (...) reason, and representing it
as something directly contrary to the bible, and all true religion.

And Pelagians and Arminians have been in too many instances treated so by
their opponents, the professed Calvinists. The former have gloried in their
reasoning against the latter, as unanswerable demonstration. The latter instead
of detecting the weakness, fallacy and absurdity of the reasoning of the
former, and maintaining their cause on this ground, as well they might; have
endeavored to defend themselves from this weapon by bringing it into disgrace,
and rejecting it under the name of carnal, unsanctified reason, etc. This has
been so far from humbling or giving them the least conviction of their errors,
that it has had a contrary effect to a very great and, sensible degree. And no
wonder; for this was the direct tendency of it, as it is an implicit confession
that they felt themselves worsted at reasoning.

Some of the latter, however, especially of late, have undertaken to reason
with the former; and have defended the principal doctrines of Calvinism, and
have been able to show that they can be supported by the strictest reason and
argument, and are agreeable to the reason and common sense of mankind, as well
as to the holy scriptures: and have detected the weakness and fallacy of much
of the reasoning of the former; and have made it appear that many of their
principal tenets are contrary to all reason, and imply the greatest and most
palpable absurdities. Upon this the former unable to defend themselves any
longer with their boasted reason, have affected to run down all reason and
arguments used against them, only by calling them abstruse, metaphysical
reasoning and notions.

And in this some professed Calvinists are joining with them to keep up the cry
of metaphysics, either because they are too indolent and inatentive to attend
to close and accurate reasoning; or find some of their own tenets in which they
are inconsistent with themselves, confuted by arguments which they are by no
means able to answer. And thus Sandeman and his followers, sensible that they
cannot so well defend their scheme of religion by reason, and confute what is
urged against them from this quarter, are well on their guard against any
reasoning, especially that which they cannot answer, and endeavor to keep
themselves in countenance by exploding it under the name of vain philosophy,
and carnal reason.

It is allowed that reason maybe abused and perverted to bad purposes, as well
as any thing else; and men may reason very plausibly, and with the pretense and
appearance of great exactness and accuracy, and clear demonstration, and yet
their arguments be at bottom very weak, sophistical and absurd. In this case,
it becomes the friends of truth to detect and show the weakness, fallacy and
absurdity of the reasoning, instead of rejecting it all only by calling it
abstruse metaphysical reasoning, etc. For the best and clearest reasoning may
be called by such names, as well as any thing else, and often has been. And
when any one takes the latter method, he will not be wronged, I conclude, if we
determine that he does it purely because he is not able to answer the argument,
and finds himself worsted at reasoning.

The cry against metaphysics has of late been increasing; by which those who
make it would condemn, and prejudice people against every thing in divinity
which they either do not understand, or dislike, and yet are unable to show it
to be contrary to scripture or reason. Yea, some speak against teaching and
vindicating those truths and doctrines, which they acknowledge to be agreeable
to scripture, and contained in it, merely because they are, they say,
metaphysical niceties, and so abstruse and difficult to be understood, that it
is much best to say nothing about them; and not trouble people with things,
which they never can understand.

It may be easily accounted for, if this outcry is made by those who would
prevent attention to doctrines which they dislike, but cannot confute; or by
lazy, superficial thinkers, who are not willing to be at the pains to think
closely upon any subject: and at the same time have such an opinion of their
own knowledge and penetration, as to conclude that what they do not understand,
no one else does, or ever can. But it is difficult to say why any others should
join with them, and it is a pity that they should be influenced by them.

Every truth in the bible is dark and abstruse to all those who do not
understand it. And though some doctrines are more easily understood than others;
yet none can be well and clearly understood without thought and attention of
mind: And some of the most important doctrines never will be understood by
lazy, superficial, inaccurate thinkers. The bible was never designed to be
understood by those who will not be all attention to it, and study it with that
exact and accurate though it and reasoning, by which they may distinguish the
things that differ. He only who will thus "cry alter knowledge and lift up his
voice for understanding; seek for her as for silver, and search for her as for
hid treasures," shall understand what are the doctrines of Christianity, and
find the knowledge of God. So far therefore as the cry of metaphysics prevails,
and people are hereby held back from thinking for themselves, and are
prejudiced against every thing which they now do not understand, and against
all attempts to explain and vindicate any truth contained in the bible, because
at first thought it is dark and abstruse to them, and they do not understand
it; just so far the bible is locked up from them, as really as it is from the
common people in the church of Rome. And it is perhaps worthy of particular
notice, that the objections made by Papists against the bible's being read by
common people, are nearly the same with those, which are urged by those who are
for excluding all metaphysical reasoning from matters of religion, viz. That
they will not understand it; being very incompetent judges of these things,
they will only puzzle and confute their own minds; or they will reason
themselves into error; think differently from one another, and so get into
hurtful and endless disputes.

CONCLUSION.
THE reader who has been at the pains carefully to peruse the whole of the
foregoing treatise, will find the unregenerate sinner set in a dreadful and
very shocking light. He is dead in trespasses and sins. Ephesians. II. 1.
An entire enemy to God in his mind by wicked affections and works, and all he
does is sin, even of the nature of opposition and enmity against God: Romans
VIII. 7. Col. I. 21.
And he is wholly inexcusable and perfectly to blame for every minute's
continuance in this state for every wrong exercise of heart, and for not
repenting and believing the gospel. And all means used with him: all the light
and advantages he has, and all his awakenings, and convictions of conscience,
serve to aggravate and increase his guilt and vileness; and all his strivings
and prayers, are very sinful and vile, provoking and abominable in God's sight.
He is every hour sinking deeper into guilt, and after his hard and impenitent
heart-treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of the
righteous judgment of God. Romans II. 5.
And this is the scripture account of the matter.

Upon this view of the matter, the question will naturally arise. What shall he
do? If one should be told that he may find this question asked more than once
in the bible, and immediately answered by inspired men, should we not expect he
would eagerly search to find what the answer is, and rest satisfied in it? The
answer is, "Repent and be baptized. Acts II. 38.
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ." Acts XVI. 31.
This divinely inspired answer to this important question is plain and easy to
be understood. This is the awakened, convinced sinner's next and immediate
duty: and not to do this immediately; but to do something else instead of it,
is to rebel against Christ, which rebellion is aggravated and criminal in
proportion to his degree of light and conviction.

It is his indispensable duty immediately to take all that blame to himself
which belongs to him, and to justify God, and his law which condemns him, and
heartily approve of it; entirely to give up all his old objections which his
heart has made against God, and his ways, as wholly groundless and infinitely
criminal; and heartily to renounce all his pleas in his own favor, whereby he
has justified himself, and by which he has been opposing God and quarrelling
with him; and on which he has really been placing his whole dependence; which,
had they been right, would have wholly excused him, and cast all the blame on
God, and his law. I say it is his immediate duty to give up all these
objections and pleas, which his whole heart, as being infinitely criminal, and
to feel and acknowledge that he has done nothing but treasure up wrath, and
that he is most justly condemned to eternal destruction.

And as there is no hope in the case of such a sinner, but what arises from the
truth of the gospel, even the free and sovereign grace of God in Jesus Christ,
therein revealed; and as the greatest sinner is as freely invited as the least
to come to Christ, and receive pardon and salvation without money and without
price; it is the sinner's duty without delay, to drop all his prejudices, and
disaffection to Christ and the gospel, which have heretofore blinded his eyes,
and hid the all-convincing evidence of it is truth and glory from his heart; and
to admit the evidence of the truth and divinity of the gospel, and believe with
all his heart that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that God has raised
him from the dead, with a hearty approbation of his character, and submission
to him, and trust in him as his Lord and Savior, his prophet, priest and king,
being heartily devoted to his service, his interest and glory.

All this, I say is the sinner's immediate, indispensable duty, which is to
"repent and believe the gospel." To this he is therefore to be exhorted and
urged by all proper motives; and all the instruction given him ought to be with
a view to this. And unless he complies with this, and repents and turns to God,
all means and advantages, all light and conviction; all his exercises,
strivings and exertions, will serve to sink him deeper into deserved perdition.
So long as the sinner believes this, and has his attention kept up to it, in a
view and sense of the dreadfulness of damnation, he will be pained at heart, in
a view of his dreadful case, and will find no ease till his heart gives up
every point of controversy between him and his Maker, and he heartily embraces
the gospel. And to exhort him, and set him to do any thing short of this as his
duty, in doing which he will become less sinful and abate the divine
displeasure against him, and be waiting on God, etc. is to divert him from that
truth which is of the highest importance to him to be attended to; and to give
him that ease and rest, which must be taken from him, or he will perish forever.

If we will look into the bible and carefully examine that, we shall find that
sinners are no where exhorted to any thing short of repentance and turning from
sin to God, or to any thing which does not imply this. This is what Moses and
the prophets exhort to; And Christ and his apostles inculcate this on sinners
as their next and immediate duty, and exhort to nothing short of this. How then
can any who have the bible in their hands, be at a loss how to address sinners,
and not know what exhortations are to be given to them?

SOME perhaps may think that by dropping all exhortations to sinners to some
doings and duty short of repentance and embracing the gospel, we condemn all
the revivals of religion and supposed conversions that have taken place in
former times in New England, or elsewhere; as they suppose these have taken
place under the preaching which has inculcated unregenerate duties, and this is
the only preaching which has been successful.

ANS. If the matter is well examined into, it will doubtless be found that
whenever there has been any remarkable revival of religion, which has been
attended with such appearances and visible effects, as to give reason to
believe it was in any measure genuine, it has been under the instruction and
preaching which has principally insisted upon the guilty lost state of the
sinner, his utter inexcusableness in rejecting Christ and the gospel; the great
and aggravated wickedness of all his exercises and doings while he continues in
impenitence and unbelief: the sufficiency and willingness of Christ to save all
that come to him; and the exhortations which have been principally insisted
upon have been to come to Christ, and embrace the gospel. And under such
preaching, and in the view of these truths sinners have been awakened, and
hopefully converted. Therefore at such times especially the complaint has been
wont to be made, which is made by many now, viz. That sinners were called upon
and most earnestly exhorted to repent and believe, but were not told how they
should do this, by being directed to a set of duties short of faith, by which
they should obtain it.

And if at such times there has been a mixture of preaching different from
this, and contrary to it, and there have been exhortations to unregenerate
duties; there is not the least evidence that this has had a good tendency; but
we have reason to conclude that it has done hurt rather than good, so far as it
had any influence.

ERRATA
Page 4. line 9, from bottom, read perfectly Page 14. line 18, r. unregenerate.
Page 22. line 18, r. come. ib. 6, f. b. r. unspeakably. Page 23. lines 2, 3, r.
with the latter. ib. 13, f. b. r. reward. Page 27. line 10, r, sinned. Page 30.
line 12, r. ^^^se. Page 31. line 25, r. ^e forsook. Page 38. line 14, f. b. r.
deeds. Page 41. line 4, r. unparalleled. Page 52. line 6, f. b. r.
unreasonable. Page 55. line 5, r. renowned. Page 60. line 5, f. b. r. whom I
describe. Page 61. line 15, r. sinner. Page 64. line 9, f. b. r. book. Page 65.
line 13, f. b. r. became. Page 66. line 15, f. b. r. sincere in their, etc.
Page 83. line 16, f. b. r. have known. Page 90. line 7, r. in fact. ib. 26, r.
mistakes. Page 103. line 18, r. his having. Page 106. line 15, f. b. r.
expressed in, etc. Page 107. line 20, f. b. r. pursuing some, etc: Page 108.
line 24, r. dreads sin. ibid 13, f. b. r. desire of, etc. Page 111. line 5, r.
despair. Page 113. line 4, r. and say here, etc. ibid 6, r. secure. Page 120.
line 7, r. malevolence. Page 123. line 14, r. accommodate. Page 126. line 17,
f. b. r. says the sin, etc. Page 130. line 6, r. frame. Page 135. line 20, f.
b. r. there are promises: Page 146. line 13, before unregenerate blot out the.
Page 152. line 30, r. he is become. Page 153. line 16, f. b. r. since he was,
etc. Page 155. line 17, 18. for unregenerate r. regenerate. Page 166. line 10,
f. b. r. He insists. Page 167. line 7, r. known duty. Page 168. line 7, f. b.
r. he insists Page 170. line 14, f. b. r. as if, etc. Page 172. line 10, f. b.
r. sight. Page 176. line 10, r. into the way.
N. B. The most material error that has been observed, is that in page 155,
line 17, 18, where for unregenerate, must be read regenerate. The reader is
desired to take particular notice, and make the proper correction. -- Some less
important errors are purposely omitted, and others may have escaped notice:
with respect to both which the candor of the reader is requested.


