Mr. HAVEN's ELECTION-SERMON, MAY 31. 1769.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY. Sir FRANCIS BERNARD, Baronet,
GOVERNOR: HIS HONOR THOMAS HUTCHINSON, Esquire; LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, THE HONORABLE
HIS MAJESTY'S COUNCIL, AND THE HONORABLE HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, OF THE
PROVINCE OF THE Massachusetts Bay in New England, MAY 31st, 1769.

BEING the Anniversary of the ELECTION of His MAJESTY's COUNCIL, for said
PROVINCE.

By JASON HAVEN, A. M. Pastor of the First Church in DEDHAM.

BOSTON: NEW ENGLAND: Printed by RICHARD DRAPER, Printer to His Excellency the
Governor, and the Honorable His Majesty's Council. MDCCLXIX.

AT a COUNCIL held at the CouncilChamber in BOSTON, on Thursday the first Day
of JUNE, 1769. PRESENT His Excellency the Governor in Council,
Advised and Ordered, That the Thanks of the Governor and Council be given to
the Rev. Mr. JASON HAVEN for his Sermon preached Yesterday being the Day
appointed by the Royal Charter for the Election of Counselors for the
Province: and that ROYALI TYLER and SAMUEL DEXTER, Esqrs wait on him with the
Thanks of the Governor and Council accordingly and in their Name desire of him
a Copy of his said Sermon for the Press.

A. OLIVER, Secry.

An ELECTION-SERMON.
PSALM LXXV.6, 7. FOR promotion comes neither from the east, nor from the
west, nor from the south: But God is the Judge; He puts down one, and
sets up another.
BY the light of reason and nature, we are led to believe in, and adore God,
not only as the maker, but also as the governor of all things. In the same way
we may be satisfied that it is agreeable to the divine will, that civil
government be established among men, on principles equitable in themselves, and
conducive to the common good. But in these points, revelation comes in to the
assistance of reason, and shows them to us in a clearer light than we could see
them without it is aid. This is done by many passages of sacred scripture, and
by that which I have now read in particular; which, without a critical
examination of it is connection, or any labored comment on it, may lead us to
consider -- God's approbation of civil government -- His agency in putting men
into, and removing them from places of power -- what views persons should have
in seeking and accepting a part in government -- what rules should be observed
in introducing men into office -- how those that are promoted should behave
toward the people -- and how the people should behave toward them. The two
former of these heads of discourse lie plainly in the words of my text; the
others are natural inferences from them.

THE FIRST thing to be considered is God's approbation of civil government
among mankind. This might be argued from the dispositions and capacities which
he has implanted in human nature. By these men are adapted to society, and
inclined to associate together; and by associating, the happiness of each
individual may be greatly improved.

By forming into civil society, men do indeed give up some of their natural
rights; but it is in prospect of a rich compensation, in the better security of
the rest, and in the enjoyment of several additional ones, that flow from the
constitution of government, which they establish. Individuals agreeing in
certain methods, in which their united force and strength shall be employed for
mutual defense and security, is a general idea of civil government. These
methods of defense being lawful and right in themselves, must be agreeable to
the will of God "who loves righteousness:" They must please him who is "a God
of order and not of consusion;" as they tend to prevent "confusion and every
evil work," which otherwise would prevail, without restraint, among such
imperfect creatures as we are.

THE state of things in our world is evidently such, as to render civil
government necessary: But for this, life, liberty, and property would be
exposed to fatal invasion. The lusts of men, from whence come wars and
fightings, would not be under sufficient restraint. Their conduct would be like
that complained of in Israel, when they had no king: "Every one did that which
was right in his own eves. Judges xvii.6.
" Men would resemble the fishes in the sea, the greater devouring the less.
This state of things as fully determines the will of God, who delights in the
happiness of his creatures, in favor of civil government, as it could have been
done by an express revelation. The voice of reason, in this case, is the voice
of God.

BUT the will of God, as to this thing, is not only deduceable from these
reasonings: His word of revelation declares it. "The powers that be are,"
expressly said to be, "ordained of God." Civil rulers are called "the ministers
of God." And "he that resists them" is said to "resist the ordinance of God."
Rom xiii.1, 2, 4.


BUT though God's approbation of civil government is so evident; yet he has
not seen fit to point out any particular form of it, in which all men are
obliged to unite. This is left as a matter of free choice and agreement. Men
have a natural right to determine for themselves, in what way, and by whom they
will be governed. The notion of a divine indefeasible right to govern, vested
in particular persons, or families, is wholly without foundation; and is, I
think, as generally exploded at this day, by men of sober minds, as that of
uninterrupted succession in ecclesiastical office, from the apostles of Christ,
in order to the validity of christian administrations.

THE most impartial disquisitions of this matter, faith an anonymous writer,
founded on the common sense and practice of mankind, have long ago convinced
the wise and unprejudiced, that no individual, however nobly born, has a right
over the person or property of another, except only from mutual compact, entered
into for general benefit; the conditions of which, are as obligatory on the
governing, as on the governed parties. No man, in the nature of things, is any
way superior or inferior to his fellow citizens, but on such conditions, as
they are supposed to have mutually consented to. It is only to prevent the
confusion which riches, interest, or ambition might create, among persons
equally qualified, that the sovereignty has been settled in particular
families. It is in regard only to convenience, that the succession should
remain uninterrupted, as long as it can be consistent with the good of the
whole. But where this is infringed, dispensed with, superseded, the obligation
is cancelled. The people are free, and may either choose a new form of
government, or put their old, into other hands.

ALL nations have not chosen the same form of government: Nor can we determine
that any one would be best for all. The different genius, temper and situation
of nations and countries, may make different constitutions of civil policy
eligible, as different temperaments in human bodies, and the different climates
in which they are placed, require different methods of regimen.

THE Theocracy of the Jews does not disprove this natural liberty of choice.
That was no doubt a signal favor to that people, while it continued; and it was
ungrateful in them to be so soon weary of it. Other nations were left to their
liberty, to choose such a form of government, as they might think would best
answer the end of all government, the public welfare; whether that of Monarchy,
Aristocracy, or Democracy; or a mixture of these. It is a mixture of these that
our nation has fixed upon: And this we are ready to think the happiest that
can be. We may possibly be prejudiced in favor of it, because it is our own.
Indeed we have less reason to think we are, since we have so many testimonies
of strangers to it is excellency. Besides these testimonies, we have had such
proofs of it is goodness, as are most convictive, those of experience. By it "we
have enjoyed great quietness, and important favors have been done to our
nation."

IN this form of government, power and privilege are happily united. They are
wrought into it is foundation, so that they cannot be separated, but by pulling
down the pillars of it. Magistrates cannot exercise their power, without
maintaining the rights and privileges of the people: And people cannot enjoy
their rights and privileges, without asserting and supporting the power of
magistrates. We have reason to be thankful to the great Founder of civil
government, that under his influence, our nation has agreed in this
constitution, which has already contributed so much to it is happiness; and the
important blessings of which, we hope, will flow down to the latest posterity.

INDEED the best form of government will not render a people safe and happy,
without a good administration. More depends on places of public trust being
properly filled, than barely on the constitution. A people may perhaps, for a
season, be tolerably happy, under the most exceptionable form of government;
but can scarcely be so, under the best, when administation is grossly corrupt.
Their rights and privileges are very nearly affected, by the character and
conduct of their rulers. The advancement of persons to places in government, is
therefore a most interesting affair. It requires the serious attention of all,
who have a hand in it: And it will lead every man of religion, to implore the
favor and influence of the supreme ruler, who puts down one, and sets up
another.

This leads me,

SECONDLY. To consider the agency of God, in putting men into, and removing
them from places in government.

PROMOTION, faith the penman of my text, comes neither from the east, nor from
the west, nor from the south. We cannot (as one remarks on the words) "gain it,
either by the wisdom of the men of the east or by the numerous forces of the
western isles; or from those of Egypt or Arabia, which lie southward of Judea.
The reason why the north is not mentioned may be because the same word which is
rendered north signifies God's secretplace or counsel, from whence promotion
does come." Perhaps no more is intended by this poetical expression, than that
the most favorable concurrence of second causes, will not prevail to advance
persons in government, without the influence of the first. A truth which none
can disbelieve, who admit God's superintendency over all human affairs. A
truth, in the faith of which, our own observation may have been sufficient to
confirm us. Have we not known some, ready to compass sea and land, and to go
from east to west, and from north to south, in pursuit of honor? And yet have
they not found it like a shadow, in this respect, as well as in some other,
that it has fled before them with a motion as swift as that with which they
have followed it? While they have tried every promising method to climb the
slippery hill of honor, all their attempts have been blasted, and blasted in
such secret and unexpected ways, as could not be accounted for, but by the
agency of him "who disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands
cannot perform their enterprise." Job V.12.


PROMOTION being denied to the power of second causes, is attributed to that of
the first. God is the judge: He puts down one, and sets up another.

GOD is the judge -- When several parties contend for the prize of preferment,
he determines it to which he pleases, so as best to serve his own purposes.
It is not only safe but happy for the world, that absolute and uncontrollable
power should be possessed by a being of infinite wisdom, invariable justice and
boundless mercy. Such power is often ascribed to God, in the inspired writings.
Wisdom and might are his: He removes kings, and sets up kings: He has put
down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree. The most high
rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. Dan. II.21,
Luke I, 52. Dan. IV.


GOD is the judge of men's qualifications for government, and his "judgment is
always according to truth." He knows whom to promote and whom to depose, in
order to answer the wise plan of his universal providence. This power God does
not usually exercise in an immediate way, but by the intervention of several
second causes; and these are united and combined together in such a manner, as
could be done by no understanding but one that is infinite. Sacred, and other
histories furnish us with instances hereof. The advancement of Joseph to great
dignity and power in the Egyptian court, is a remarkable one. A variety of
unconnected causes operated to bring this about, unconnected in themselves, but
united by him, "whose kingdom rules over all." It was by the agency of God,
that king Saul was disgraced, and David advanced; an event, to which it is
probable, our text has special reference. By this it came to pass, that proud
Haman was hanged on the gallows he had made, of fifty cubits high; while
Mordecai the Jew, for whom he had prepared the same, was promoted: By this,
that haughty Nebuchadnezzar was turned a grazing among the beasts, to teach him
that "the heavens do rule:" By this, that boasting Herod was eaten of worms,
because he did not consider that he was one himself.

THE influence of the supreme governor of the world, in bringing about such
events, in later ages, is not less real, though perhaps less evident and
immediate. It must be acknowledged in putting down some, and setting up others,
in our own nation and land. The fall of that unhappy and misguided king,
Charles the first, was an instance of it. So was that ever memorable event, so
happy in it is consequences to GREATBRITAIN, and to these COLONIES, called the
REVOLUTION, when king James the second abdicated the throne, and KING WILLIAM
and QUEEN MARY, of glorious memory, were advanced to it; which made way for the
present happy establishment in the house of HANOVER. The people of this
province, not only shared in common with their fellow subjects, on the other
side of the Atlantic, in the advantages arising from this great change in
government, but were particularly happy, in being delivered from the oppressive
and tyrannical administration of Sir Edmund Andros. The agency of heaven in
these events, does not determine the innocence or guilt of those, who were the
voluntary instruments of bringing them about. "Thou could have no power at
all against me," said our Savior to Pilate, "except it were given thee from
above:" John XIX.11.
Yet this did not prove him innocent, in "condemning that just one."

THE promotion of men to places of power and trust, who either have no talents
for government, or are disposed to use those that they have, to wicked
purposes, is an event, which may seem hard to be accounted for. "God's
judgments are a great deep." This however must be a settled principle with us,
"that the Judge of all the earth does right." His providence is by no means to
be impeached. The moral evils which take place, in consequence of such
promotions, are not to be charged on him. He may permit such things, to punish
a bad temper, either in the persons promoted, or in the people over whom they
are set, or in both. We should consider it as the primary design of such
punishment reform them; but if they remain incorrigible under it, a fuller
display of God's rectoral justice and hatred of sin, will be made in their
ruin. "The scripture says unto Pharaoh, even for this same purpose have I
raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be
declared throughout all the earth. Romans IX.17.
" In judgment to Israel, Saul, and several wicked kings, were set over them.
"There is (says Doctor Tillotson) a kind of moral connection and communication
of evil and guilt, between princes and people; so that they are many times
mutually rewarded for the virtues and good actions, and punished for the sins
and faults, of one another."

GOOD men, who have excellent talents for government, and a disposition to use
them for the public advantage, are sometimes kept out of place, or suddenly
stripped of that civil power with which they had been clothed. This is a
chapter in the book of providence hard to be explained. In this way, we have
reason to think, God sometimes designs to punish a people's ingratitude to him
for a good administration, which they have enjoyed; their unsubmissiveness to
it, and abuse of it is blessings. He may also intend the advantage of the
persons thus displaced, by a dispensation generally grievous enough to them. He
may behold their virtue endangered by their elevation: He may foresee that they
would not be proof against the temptations of it; and that they would neglect,
what to them, as well as to others, is "the one thing needful," the care of
their souls. Many have lost ground in religion by advancement, and recovered it
by a return to private life.

HAVING remarked on the agency of God in advancing and deposing men, I go on,

THIRDLY, TO consider what views they should have in seeking and accepting
places in government. I here mention seeking places, for I do not imagine that
all kinds and degrees of this, are to be condemned; though the character of
seekers, in general, is a very odious and invidious one. Importunity in a
candidate for promotion is a presumptive evidence, that he is unfit for it. Men
of the best qualifications have generally disdained those low arts and
intrigues, by which some have made their way into places of power. It is hard
to say what can be more base and wicked, than the conduct of those, who attempt
to rise by the help of adulation and bribes, unless it be that of those who
hearken to them, and become the tools of their pride and ambition. That temper,
however, deserves to be denominated a false modesty, which makes men always
decline preserment, when it comes in their way; or avoid those offices which
require great abilities, when they know themselves to be possessed of them.
Hereby they may be chargeable with hiding talents which they ought to improve
for the public good.

BUT all men's endeavors to rise in government should be such, as they have
reason to think God approves; such as they can with sincerity recommend to his
blessing, and wait on him to succeed. If this is not the case, they are in
effect fighting against God. They ought not to seek, nor even to accept, such
offices as they know they cannot discharge, in a good measure answerable to the
nature and importance of them.

GOD is the judge -- You should be able to look up to him in confidence, that
he approves every step you take in the way to posts of honor; and with a
willingness to be disappointed, if in his unerring wisdom he sees you to be
unfit for them; and that your success would operate either to the damage of the
public, or of yourselves. Such a serious regard to God, as the fountain of all
power, would shame men of virtue and modesty, out of those base methods, by
which, it is to be feared, some are seeking after promotion.

MEN indeed are generally partial to themselves: They think their
accomplishments greater than they are. Under the influence of this partiality,
some may with honest simplicity solicit, and enter into, such departments in
government, as they can by no means fill with dignity, and to the satisfaction
of the public. This evil is to be guarded against by those, whose part it is to
introduce men into office.

The rules to be observed by such is the

FOURTH thing to be considered. They should act with great fidelity and
caution. This fidelity and caution is necessary, both in superior magistrates,
in their appointments, and in the people, who choose persons into office. The
business is of a very interesting nature; in doing it they should consider
themselves as instruments in the hand of God, and therefore bound to consult
his will, and to govern themselves by it. This teaches them to promote men
according to their apparent merit; and not to be influenced by private
connexions, and prospects of personal advantage. The public prosperity greatly
depends on your faithful discharge of your duty in this respect. You are
accountable to God for the manner in which you discharge it. You are bound as
you will answer it to him, to consider the qualifications of candidates, for
places in government, and to promote such, and such only, as you think in some
good measure possessed of them.

WHAT these qualifications are, I have not time particularly to consider. Two
of the most essential, and in which most others may be included, I shall
briefly mention -- Wisdom and Religion.

No small degree of wisdom and knowledge is necessary to constitute a good
ruler, whether he fills a place in the legislative, or executive part of
government. Solomon when advanced to be king over Israel, prayed for a wise and
understanding heart: God approved his petition as seasonable, and gave a
gracious answer to it. Wisdom is not only necessary for kings, and for persons
in the highest seats of government, but proportionable degrees of it, for those
who hold subordinate places. Rulers are compared to light, which, by a familiar
metaphor, signifies knowledge. "The heads of the tribes of Issachar," chosen to
represent their brethren on a certain important occasion, are expressly said to
be "men, that had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do."
1 Chronicles. XII.32.


GOVERNMENT is by no means safe in the hands of weak and ignorant men, how good
soever their intentions may be. When such men have the management of our public
affairs what can we expect, but that they run into confusion and disorder?

NOR is it every kind of knowledge that will qualify a man to govern. He must
be acquainted with men, as well as things; otherwise he will be in continual
danger of being imposed on, by the subtilty and address of designing men around
him. He will confide in those who are not to be trusted, and make those his
counselors, who will take pains to lead him astray. It is the character of the
supreme ruler, that, "He is a God of knowledge, by whom actions are weighed." 1 Samuel II.^.
Rulers among men, should have skill to form a due estimate of the actions of
persons, under all that coloring which they lay on them. If they have not, how
can they approve and reward those that have a salutary influence on the public?
How can they disapprove and counteract those of a contrary nature?

RULERS should not only be acquainted with the natural rights of the people,
which are the same under every form of government, but also with those which
originate from the constitution of the country where they live; that they may
be tender of both, and able to defend both. They should know how to state the
bounds of their own authority, and of the rights of the people; that while with
firmness they assert the former, they may not infringe on the latter. Wisdom is
necessary to direct them in all that variety of business, to which their
stations call them; which variety I cannot now further consider.

RELIGION is the other qualifications which I mentioned, as necessary to the
character of a good ruler. He must be a man of religion, who discharges the
duties of magistrate with fidelity. By a man of religion, I mean one that is a
true fearer of God, one that is in a good measure santified by his grace,
formed to the temper recommended by the gospel of Christ, and sincerely
endeavors to act up to those rules of piety and virtue, which are therein
prescribed.

PIETY toward God is the only basis, on which a proper conduct toward men,
can stand firm and steady against those blasts of temptation, to which all men
are exposed; and which beat on those, that are in elevated stations, with
peculiar violence, as storms do on a house that stands on an eminence. "He that
fears not God, will not regard man," will not regard him, with that tender
concern for his prosperity, and that sincere endeavor to promote it, which the
laws of religion require. True patriotism (for such a thing no doubt there is,
though many may be strangers to it, who are fond of the name) has it is
foundation in religion. A vicious man has no settled principle of action. He
is ruled by selfish passions. To gratify these, he will sacrifice his
conscience; he will trample on law, when he can do it with impunity; he will
betray his friends; he will sell his country; having first "sold himself to
work" all these kinds of "wickedness."

DIRECTLY the reverse of this, is the tendency of religion, when it is pure and
undefiled. It regulates the passions; it enlarges the mind; it fills it with
noble, and benevolent designs; it leads men to enterprise great things for the
public good; it drives away the mists of prejudice and temptation, which are so
apt to obscure the path of duty; it inspires a noble fortitude and resolution
to pursue the end of government, though it should lead through a scene of
painful opposition; though the best intentions should be misconstrued, and the
most important services go unrewarded.

Now those that are concerned in promoting men to public stations, are bound to
have great regard to their virtue and religion. "For the God of Israel said,
the Rock of Israel spoke to me -- He that rules over men must be just, ruling
in the fear of God." 2 Samuel XXIII.3.
King David determined to act on this principle in calling men to office under
him. "Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful in the land: He that walks in a
perfect way he shall serve me." Psalm. CI.6.


GOD who is the judge, and who never errs in judgment, has plainly intimated
the necessity of the two leading qualifications for rulers, which I have
mentioned -- and not barely mentioned, but a little enlarged upon, as this head
of discourse has a particular aspect on the public transactions of this day.
And are you not under the most solemn obligations to regard the will of God in
promoting men? When you do so, you are workers together with him in the matter:
When you do not, you set yourselves in opposition to him; and if he suffers you
to succeed, it will no doubt be in judgment to you, and to the land.

FIFTHLY. THIS subject instructs those who are advanced to places of power and
trust, how they should behave, and presses fidelity on them by the most serious
motives. They are to consider themselves as promoted by God, and accountable to
him for their conduct in public life. God is the judge: He puts down one,
and sets up another.

RULERS ought always to look on their authority as derived to them. They are
not originally possessed of any. This consideration should make them humble. It
should give a check to a proud and haughty spirit; if, at any time, they find
such an one ready to prevail. It should guard them against an overbearing
tyrannical behavior. They should frequently make the reflection of the
apostle; What have we that we did not receive? And if we received it, why do we
boast?

THEY should consider their authority also as limited by the author of it; and
that, both as to degree and continuance. God puts down, as well as raises
up. The triumphing of wicked rulers, who abuse their power in ways of pride and
oppression, is generally short. To one of this character, the remark of the
ancient sage concerning a hypocrite may be applied; "Though his excellency
mount up to the heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds, yet he shall
perish forever: -- They that have seen him shall say Where is he"? Job XX.6, 7.
When a virtuous people are oppressed, they may carry their complaints to God,
in humble confidence, that he will not long "suffer the rod of the wicked to
rest on the lot of the righteous." Psalm CXXV.3.


THE consideration that their promotion comes from God, should make rulers
careful to improve it in a way, the most agreeable to his will, that they can.
They do this, when they faithfully pursue the ends of government; when they
studiously imitate the supreme ruler of the universe, "the scepter of whose
kingdom is a right scepter." Legislators do this, when they are solicitous that
all the laws they enact, be just and good, correspondent to those of the
supreme Lawgiver. And those that execute the laws, when they act in their
offices, with steadiness and impartiality, that they may be a terror to
evildoers, and a praise to them that do well. All those who are vested with
authority do this, when they have a tender concern for the rights and
privileges of the people, and endeavor to preserve them entire and inviolate --
when they feel for them under all their burdens; and "in all their afflictions
are afflicted" -- when they construe their conduct into the most favorable
sense it will bear -- when they are ready to pass by, and excuse as many faults
and offenses, as will consist with the regular support of government -- when
they are willing to lose something of the severity of the magistrate, in the
tenderness of a father -- In a word; when in their administration, "mercy and
truth meet together, righteousness and peace kiss each other." Psalm LXXXV.10.


RULERS should use their influence in, an especial manner to promote religion.
This they should do, not only by rewarding virtue, and punishing vice; but by
what is often more influential, their own pious and good example. People in the
lower classes in life, have a peculiar fondness to imitate those that are in
stations of eminence and dignity. This would operate for the general good, were
"great men always wise," virtuous, and circumspect, in their conversation. The
morals of a people are greatly affected by those of their rulers. Religion
flourished or declined in Israel very much according to the disposition and
practice of their kings. Solomon observed that "if a ruler hearken to lies, all
his servants are wicked." (...)
Vices receive a currency from the example of princes, as money does, from
their image and superscription. If magistrates are eminently pious and good,
they are lights in the world, which shining before others induce them to
"glorify our Father who is in heaven," by a correspondent practice of piety and
goodness. But if they are vicious, they are like baleful comets, that spread
plagues and desolations through a land, by their malignant influences.

GOD is the judge, says our text. Rulers should always consider him in that
character. To him they are accountable for their conduct. I say not indeed that
they are not, in some sense, accountable to men. The power of government is by
God, the original source of it, lodged in the people. By them it is delegated,
under divine providence, to certain of their brethren, to be improved for the
common good. When therefore they prostitute it to oppress and enslave, in
direct contradiction to the ends of government; the people have a right to call
them to, account, and to take out of their hands the power which they have so
abused.

BUT they are especially to consider themselves as accountable to God. They
should remember that he now acts the part of a judge, so far as by his
impartial eye to survey all their counsels, designs, and actions. They should
consider him, as always present with them; and that their most secret purposes
and schemes, are "naked and opened to the eyes of him, with whom they have to
do" Heb. IV.13.
; whose "eyes are as a flame of fire Rev. I.14.
;" And that this "righteous Lord loves righteousness and his countenance
approves the upright." Psalm. XI.7.


A SOLEMN sense of God in this tremendous character, cultivated in the minds of
rulers, would banish a thousand temptations to venality and corruption. It
would lead them to a humble review of their past behavior, that the errors of
it may be repented of, and similar ones avoided, for time to come. It would
make them afraid to indulge to any selfish and sinister designs, which militate
against the public welfare, though they were sure to conceal them from the eye
of men. The fear of God would check the fear of man, and prevent it is
prevailing on them, so as to ensnare them. They would not fear losing their
places, by faithfulness in discharging the duties of them. They would consider,
it is the favor of God that makes their mountain stand strong; that their times
are in his hands; the date of their political, as well as natural life.

RULERS should look forward to that approaching day, when they must appear
before God's august tribunal, and give account of all the talents he has
committed to them. They should endeavor to bring that day near in their
meditations. It is apt to appear more distant than it really is, and so lessens
to the eye of the mind, as objectd do by their distance to that of the body.
The word of revelation assures us, that "it is appointed for all once to die,
and that after death is the judgment; Heb. IX.27.
" and that "every one shall give account of himself to God, Romans XIV.12.
" who is no respecter of persons; but will render to every one according to his
deeds. It is an invariable rule, according to which God will proceed in the
judgment, "that unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required."
Luke XII.48.
Rulers have much committed to them; unfaithfulness in the use of it, will
render their guilt very great, and their doom very dreadful. If they are now
conscious of being habitually and allowedly unfaithful, they may well tremble,
as a wicked governor once did, upon hearing of a judgment to come.

BUT a prospect happily different from this -- a prospect as bright and
glorious as this is dark and gloomy, opens upon that ruler, who cultivates in
his heart the principles of undissembled piety and virtue, and forms his
conduct upon them; whose governing aim is to comply with the will of God in all
things, and to secure his approbation. He can look forward to that important
day, in which God will judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, with calmness
and comfort. He then shall receive the plaudit of his Judge, before assembled
worlds of angels and men -- "Well done good and faithful servant; thou have
been faithful in a few things; I will make thee ruler over many things; enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord!" Matthew. XXV.21.


FINALLY. Our subject suggests the duty of a people to their rulers. Rulers and
subjects are correlate terms; they cannot subsist seperately. If God sets
somein the place of rulers, and invests them with a power to govern; He
certainly appoints others to the place of subjects, and makes it their duty to
submit to government. People are bound to regard the will and agency of God In
clothing persons with civil authority. When they do so, they will obey "not
only for wrath, but also for conscience sake;" Romans XIII.5.
and treat them according to the nature and design of their offices, and their
fidelity in the discharge of them.

IT is incumbent on a people cheerfully to support civil government. This is
not to be viewed as the part of charity and generosity, but of justice. The
support of those, who employ their time and talents to serve the public, should
be made easy and honorable. Those who diligently attend to the duties of their
stations, have care, labor and anxiety enough: People should not increase
these, by withholding from them an adequate reward for their services. This
would tend to dishearten them, and to weaken their efforts for the public good.

A RESPECTFUL treatment of their rulers is also the duty of a people. It is an
apostolical injunction, that we "render honor to whom honor is due." Romans
XIII.7.
It is due to those, who are raised to important seats of government. We should
pray for them. We should treat their persons with veneration and esteem. We
should speak of them, and to them, in decent and respectful language. To act
contrary to this, is to weaken the springs of government, and to encourage
those to "speak evil of dignities," who are already too much inclined to do it.
"It is written, thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people." Act,
XXIII.5.


A PEOPLE are in duty bound to submit to their political fathers, in every
thing lawful. If they refuse this, they frustrate the design of God and men, in
clothing them with this character; and government is at an end. Submission is
injoined on a people, by several of the inspired writers. The passages in which
it is so, have been often quoted, on occasions similar to the present, and are
I trust too well known to need repeating at large. Romans XIII.1, -- 7.
They have by some been made to prove too much. They are no doubt to be
understood with some limitation. "He is the minister of God to thee for good,"
says St. Paul, of the civil magistrate. This implies, that so far as he pursues
the end for which God placed him in office, he is to be obeyed. Nor should
small instances, in which we imagine he fails of this, be looked upon
sufficient ground for refusing submission. Tnese may arise rather from human
frailty, than any settled disposition in him to abuse his power. But when he
uses his authority for purposes just the reverse of those for which it was
delegated to him -- when he evidently encroaches on the natural and
constitutional rights of the subject -- when he tramples on those laws which
were made, at once to limit his power, and defend the people -- in such cases
they are not obliged to obey him. They are guilty of impiety against God; and
of injustice to themselves, and the community, of which they are members, if
they do: for his commands interfere with those of the supreme ruler, and
overthrow the foundations of government, which he has laid. "We must obey God
rather than man." Acts V.29.


THE doctrine of passive obedience and non-resistence, which had so many
advocates in our nation, a century ago, is at this day, generally given up, as
indesensible, and voted unreasonable and absurd. The unreasonableness and
absurdity of it, has indeed been proved by some of the greatest reasoners of
our age.

WHERESOEVER law ends (says the great MF.LOCK) tyranny begins, if the law be
transgressed to another's harm. And whoever in authority exceeds the power
given him by law, and makes use of the force he has under his command, to
compass that upon the subject, which the law allows not, ceases in that to be a
magistrate; and, acting without authority, may be opposed as any other man, who
invades the right of another. -- Here, it is likely, (continues he) the common
question will be made, who shall be judge, whether the prince or legislature
act contrary to their trust? This, perhaps, ill-affected and factious men may
spread among the people, when the prince only makes use of his just
prerogative. To this I reply: The people shall be judge; for who shall be judge
whether his trustee or deputy acts well, and according to the trust reposed in
him, but he who deputes him, and must, by having deputed him, have still a
power to discard him, when he fails in his trust? If this be reasonable in
particular cases of private men, why should it be otherwise in that of the
greatest moment, where the welfare of millions is concerned; and also where the
evil, if not prevented, is greater, and the redress very difficult, dear, and
dangerous? THERE may indeed be danger that illdisposed men -- men disaffeted to
government in general, will "use this liberty," which the God of nature has
given us, "for an occasion to the flesh," to gratify the disorderly lusts of
it; and so to disturb the peace of the society, of which they are members. But
this is not a sufficient reason why we should discontinue our claim to it.

SUBJECTS will, however, find it to their advantage to suffer great
inconveniences, rather than to rise up against men in authority. They are not
to expect an administration without faults. Small faults should not be remarked
on with bitterness, or mignified with all the power of invention. This would
increase the burden of government, already heavy enough on those, who are
faithful in discharging the duties of it; and ^end to discourage those from
taking a part in it, who are best qualified. A generous readiness to make every
kind allowance for what may be amiss in others, is perhaps one of the rarest
qualities in the world: It is however a very necessary one, in the several
connexions of society, and particularly in that between rulers and people.

IF any thing has been suggested in this discourse, which may serve to lead
rulers, or people, into a better understanding of their duty, and to animate
them to diligence and fidelity in discharging it, the design of our assembling
in this house of worship is not lost. I will suppose you possessed of every
instructive sentiment that has been suggested, if any such there has been,
and therefore shall not make a recapitulation of what has been said, in the
way of particular address.

INATTENTION to the duties of their stations is inexcusable in all orders of
men. It becomes criminal and dangerous, in proportion to the importance of
these duties. The public welfare greatly depends on the fidelity and vigilance
of civil rulers.

IT is I hope with sincere gratitude to God, that we see this anniversary. The
public transactions of it, Honored Fathers, we look upon to be very interesting
to this people. We have been seeking to the fountain of wisdom, for guidance
and direction to be afforded to you, in them. To day you exercise an important
privilege of our happy constitution, that of choosing Gentlemen to sit at the
Council board; who are not only to constitute one branch of the legislature,
but to the best of their judgment, at all times, freely to give their advice to
the Governor, for the good management of the public affairs of this government.
This is a privilege on which the happiness of this people not a little depends.
It was always dear to our fathers, and is so to us. By it we have the great
satisfaction of seeing the Council consist of men from among ourselves, whose
interest is the same with that of the people; and who are under all conceivable
obligations to seek their welfare. This is a privilege secured to us by royal
charter; on which security, I trust, under God, we may depend, for the
continuance of it down to the latest posterity. A privilege which we have not
forfeited; and God forbid we should, in any future time, be guilty of such
conduct, as might render it just to deprive us of it.

WHAT we enjoy by charter, is not to be looked upon barely as matter of grace;
but, in a measure at least, of right. Our fathers faithfully performed the
conditions, on which charter privileges were granted. To do this they passed
through a scene of hardships labors and sufferings. These were productive of
great advantages to the mother country. Our charter privileges are those of
Englishmen; those of the British constitution; as our form of government, in
this province, is an image in miniature of that of our nation.

THE appointment of the Governor, and commander in chief, is by the province
charter, which we wish never to see vacated, reserved to the crown. In this we
acquiesce: We indeed consider it as preferable to annual elections by the
people.

BOTH the other branches of the legislature, we have the liberty of choosing.
We hope the good people of this province have acted, with due consideration, in
the choice they have made of persons to represent them, in the present
assembly; and that all who are to be concerned in the elections of this day,
will be influenced by motives, truly religious and patriotic. It is not wealth
WHEN L. Quintius Cincinnatus was created Dictator, riches were not by the
generality of the Roman citizens thought necessary to preferment. His estate
was a farm consisting only of four acres of land: He was at plough when the
deputies came to him from the Senate, to acquaint him of his promotion.
Wherever wisdom and virtue were found in a person, though destitute of a
fortune, he stood fair to be advanced. And yet there were a few among the
Romans even in that day, as there is a greater number among us in this, who are
well described by Livy, when he says -- Operae pretium est audire, qui omnia
prae divitiis humana spernunt; neque honori magno locum, neque virtuti putant
esse, nisi esfuse affluant opes.
-- it is not family -- it is not either of these alone, nor both of them
together though I readily, allow neither is to be disregarded, that will qualify
men for important seats in government, unless they are rich and honorable in
other and more important respects. This province has had men, and such I doubt
not there are still among us, in whom all these qualities are happily united.
But in the first place, and before all other things, you should regard wisdom
and integrity, understanding and religion, as qualifications for the business
of government. If you aim to choose men thus qualified, you are "workers
together with God," who is the fountain of all promotion. If you give your
suffrages for those, whom you know to be of a contrary character, you are
chargeable with nothing less than a voluntary opposition to the will of heaven.
A serious thought, with which, we wish to have your minds deeply impressed.

IT is always important to have wise and faithful rulers. It is peculiarly so,
when the state of a people is difficult and perplexed. None can doubt our's
being such, at the present day. All must agree in this, however different their
sentiments may be, as to the immediate occasions of our troubles. Mutual
confidence and affection, between Great Britain and these Colonies, I speak it
with grief, seems to be in some measure lost. I trust nothing of our loyalty to
the best of Kings, or of our readiness to yield obedience to the due exercise
of the authority of the British Parliament, is lost. People indeed generally
apprehend some of their most important civil rights and privileges to be in
great danger; and that several of them cannot be enjoyed under the execution of
certain acts, lately passed in the Parliament of Great Britain. How far these
apprehensions are just, is not my province to determine. Nor shall I pretend
fully to point out the political causes of our unhappiness; or the steps which
are necessary to be taken, for the redress of our grievances.

THIS matter more immediately belongs to you, our honored Fathers. If we
suffer by being misrepresented to our most gracious Sovereign, or to his
ministry, it is your part to remove the hurtful influence hereof, in such ways,
as you shall think most proper and decent. It Is yours, to set the temper and
conduct of this people, in a just light before the throne. It Is yours, to
carry their cries, and tears, and humble petitions thither. It Is yours, to
plead their cause, with "right words," which "are forceable," and "words of
truth," which must, which will prevail.

THE Ministers of religion will unite their endeavors, to investigate and
declare, the moral cause of our troubles. We should endeavor, my reverend
Fathers and Brethren, and I trust we have been endeavoring, to direct the eye
of our people to the hand of God, in the evils which are come upon us, and
which threaten us. "Is there any evil in the city, and the Lord has not done
it?" Amos. III.6.
Are not these calamities to be viewed, as tokens of the divine displeasure
against us, on account of our sins? Is it not a day, in which we ought to "cry
aloud and not spare, to show our people their transgressions and their sins?"
Isai. LVIII.1.
Should we not most importunately call them to repentance and reformation, as
the only way, in which we can expect the removal of our difficulties? It has
probably been the fault of this people, in these days of darkness and doubtful
expectation, that they have fixed their thoughts too much on second causes,
without duly regarding the first -- that they have been too ready to censure
the conduct of others, without making proper reflections on their own. Has not
God reason to complain of us, as he did of Israel, in a day of calamity; "I
hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright. No man repented him of his
wickedness, saying what have I done?"

Jer IIIII. 6.
THE prospect at this day is indeed dark: The darkest part of it arises from
the decay of religion, and the prevalence of wickedness among us. Is it not too
evident to be denied, that "iniquity greatly abounds," and that "the love of
many" to God and religion, "is waxen cold?" Must we not own that by our sins,
we have forfeited all our privileges, into the hands of God; though I trust
not, into the hands of men? And are not many of the evils we suffer, the
natural and necessary, as well as moral effects of our vices? Is it possible a
people should be happy, when pride, and extravagance, luxury, and intemperance
abound among them? Will not poverty and disease, uneasiness and contention,
naturally spring from these vices? Does not the providence of God loudly call
on all orders of men, to unite their most vigorous endeavors, to check the
growth of the sins which I have mentioned, and of others which might be named;
such as the profanation of God's name, If God's holy name is, at this day, too
frequently and sometimes irreverently invoked, even in a judicial manner, every
sincere friend to virtue and religion must wish to have this practice, so
affrontive to the Deity, and so destructive to the morals of the people,
discontinued.
and day; uncleanness; and acts of violence, injustice, and oppression We
confide in the wisdom and fidelity of our rulers, to make and execute good and
wholesome laws for the suppression of these vices; and for the encouragement of
industry, frugality, and temperance, and all those virtues which constitute and
adorn the christian character; and to add life and energy to law, by their own
good example. And I hope we shall all, in our several stations, most heartily
abet the important design. Our temporal salvation, under God, depends upon it.
A virtuous people will always be free and happy.

RIGHTEOUSNESS exalts a nation. Could we see people in general, humbling
themselves under the mighty hand of God, in the evils that are come upon us --
could we see a general disposition in them, to break off from their sins by
righteousness, and from their iniquities by turning to the Lord -- could we see
practical piety and religion prevailing among all ranks of men -- how much
would the prospect brighten up? God would appear for us, who is the hope of his
people, and the savior thereof in the day of trouble. Jer. XIV. 8.
And if God be for us, who can be against us? Romans VIII. 31.
He can work deliverance for us in a thousand ways to us unknown. Then our
peace shall be as a river, when our righteousness is as the waves of the sea.
Mutual harmony and affection shall be restored between Great Britain and her
colonies, and between all orders of men in them. The burdens under which we
groan shall be removed. We shall no longer be so unhappy, as to be suspected of
wanting loyalty to our King, or of having the least disposition to refuse a
constitutional subjection to our parent country. The great evils which we now
suffer, in consequence of such groundless suspicions, shall be removed. We
shall sit quietly under our vines and figtrees, enjoying the fruit of our
fathers unremitting labors, and of our own, and have none to make us afraid. We
shall behold our settlements extending themselves into the yet uncultivated
lands. "The wilderness shall become a fruitful field, and the desert shall
blossom as the rose." Our navigation shall be freed from it is present
embarrassment; and trade recover a flourishing state. Our rights and privileges
shall be established on a firmer basis than ever. Every revolving year shall
add something to the glory and happiness of AMERICA. And those that behold it
shall see occasion to say, "Happy art thou O people! Who is like unto thee,
saved of the Lord! The shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thine
excellency!" Deuteronomy. XXXIII. 29.


WHOSE brehst does not burn with desires to see his dear native land in such a
state, the happy reverse of it is present one! Who would not be ambitious of
contributing something toward it! This we have all power to do. Let us up, and
be doing, and the Lord shall be with us.

BUT Christianity, my respectable hearers, which we profess, carries our
thoughts beyond this present state of things. This life is but the preface of
our existence. Affairs will never be in so happy a situation in it, as we could
wish for. It is not agreeable to God's universal plan of government, that we
should here be free from every pricking brier and grieving thorn. We are too
apt to lay our account for refined happiness in this life. Frequent
disappointments are necessary to teach us our error, and to wean us from the
vanities of time and sense. This is the salutary effect of our troubles; and
when we find it in ourselves, we should acknowledge the kindness of heaven in
permitting them.

A FEW days will close the present scene with us all. We must quit our
stations, be they higher or lower. We must bid adieu to this world, and enter
into the eternal one. There an endless circle of happiness, infinitely greater
than can be derived from the most prosperous state of things here, is provided
-- provided by the mercy of God, through the mediation of Christ -- provided
for all, who repent and believe the Gospel -- for all, who act their part well
on the stage of the present life -- who serve God and their generation
faithfully, according to his will.

Be this the object of our principal hopes, and desires! Let us continue
patient in the ways of well doing; seeking for glory, honor and immortality;
till, through the riches of God's grace in Christ, we be crowned with eternal
life.

THE END.

