A SERMON, PREACHED IN THE NEW LUTHERAN CHURCH OF ZION, IN THE CITY OF
PHILADELPHIA, At the Instance of the MINISTERS, WARDENS, and VESTRY-MEN, of the
incorporated CONGREGATION of ST. MICHAEL's, On the 26th DAY of JUNE, 1769.

By the Revd. Mr. RICHARD PETER'S, Rector of CHRIST-CHURCH and ST. PETER's, in
the said City.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JOHN DUNLAP, at the Newest Printing-Office, in
Market-street, the Third Door below Second-street. M.DCC.LXIX,

TO THE MINISTERS, WARDENS and VESTRYMEN, of the incorporated Congregation of
ST. MICHAEL's;
MY DEAR BRETHREN IN THE LORD,
I T was at your pressing Instance, that I preached this Sermon. It is at the
same pressing Instance, that I consent to its Publication. I had many more
Things wrote down in my Notes than I delivered. The Weather, you know, was hot,
and my State of Health but indifferent. It would have pained both me and the
Audience to have made a long Sermon. I have therefore inserted some Things that
were not delivered, but have taken Care to insert none, but such as will
explain the several important Points of Belief and Practice, that were then
laid before, and pressed upon, my Hearers. The Manner in which the Text is
treated is not to be got in the modern fashionable Systems of Divinity; but it
is, and always has been, in the Heart of every pious Believer of the blessed
Incarnation. These Persons are no Strangers to what is here said; but will
cheerfully assent to, and be delighted therewith. But where the Heart has not
received, nor is sensible of, this blessed Incarnation, -- there, I expect
Rebuke and Censure. Be it so. Let it produce no Ill Will, nor angry Contention.
Let us not enter into Disputation about Terms. If these Censurers are sincerely
desirous to know the Truth, and will apply for it, where it only can be had, in
and from Christ Jesus, they will from him learn Meekness; and as soon as they
have received this Grace from their Savior, the Glory, as it is here
described, will not stay long after, and then, they will possess the Thing. It
makes no Difference in the Thing itself by what Name they call it, nor how they
imagine it comes into their Hearts -- whether with or at their Birth -- or in
their Baptism, -- whether with or without a Person's Predestination and
Election, -- or whether, and how far they think, their own Will is concerned in
it. God's Manner of conveying Grace and Power into the Heart, leaves no Room
for such Questions as these.

The Scripture gives this plain Account of the Process of Salvation in every
one; namely, the Seed of the Woman -- the Seed of Abraham -- the Seed of David
-- and the Seed that was by the Conception of the Holy Ghost in the Body of the
Virgin Mary -- opened itself in the Body of Christ, ("a Body have thou prepared
for me: Then said I, Lo! I come" --) and there grew up to its full Perfection
of Glory, and is now a perfect God-man, sitting at the right Hand of God in
Heaven, and helping us, who have, one as well as another, a Seed within us
after its Kind, to go through our Trial here on Earth, and when this is done,
to attain our Body of Glory in Heaven. In this Faith let us live and die; and
let us publicly declare that this Faith is not a Matter of Opinion, or any
Thing that will bear a Dispute, but is a self-evident Manifestation made in the
Heart by Christ himself coming there, with his Kingdom of Heaven and the Glory
that he had with the Father from the Beginning, agreeable to his own
Declaration and Promise.

O righteous Father! the World has not known thee: But I have known thee; and
these have known that thou have sent me. And I have declared unto them thy
Name, and will declare it, that the Love, wherewith thou have loved me, may be
in them, and I in them.

I am, Your affectionate Brother, In CHRIST JESUS, RICHARD PETER'S.
SEPT. 15, 1769.
ST. LUKE, CHAP. II. V. 13th, 14th. And suddenly there was with the Angel a
Multitude of the Heavenly Host praising GOD, and saying, Glory to GOD in the
Highest, and on Earth Peace, Goodwill toward Men.
MY DEAR FELLOW CHRISTIANS OF THIS EVANGELICAL CHURCH,
MAY the God of all Grace, who has called us to his eternal Glory by Jesus
Christ, make you perfect in your Christian Course, stablish, strengthen, settle
you!

Your Invitation to the Ministers and Members of the Episcopal Church, to mix
their Devotions with yours, and to partake of the Joy you must needs feel on
bringing this large Building to such an admired and astonishing Perfection,
fills us with an high Sense of your Brotherly Love to us in Christ Jesus. It
reminds us of the Love and tender Affection which subsisted between the first
Christian Churches, and which makes so large and delightful a Part of the
Apostolic Epistles recorded in Scripture. All those numerous Congregations,
which in diverse and distant Parts, and under various Forms of Divine Worship,
were brought together by the Apostles and first Preachers of the Gospel, had
nothing afflictive or joyous in their Affairs, but what they were all alike
Sharers in. As often as Occasion called them to distant Places, they went with
the utmost Cheerfulness into one another Churches; and joined together in
Communion of Prayer and Exhortation. And is it not much to be lamented, that
the same affectionate Intercourse does not prevail now? Do we not all worship
the one God and Father of All -- the one Son and Redeemer of All -- the one
Holy Ghost and Sanctifier of All? What though Churches are built in different
Forms; what though Ministers wear different Habits; what though every national
Church has a different Mode of Expression in the Compilement of their Articles
and Prayers -- has not Christ Jesus provided one and the same strong Coment of
Love and Charity, to tie and keep all these his different Members together?
Should these Differences be Reasons for Enmity, Distance, or separate
Interests? -- What does the Spirit of Christ say to us all on this Occasion? As
the Body is one, and has many Members, and all the Members of the one Body,
being many, are one Body, so also is Christ; for by one Spirit are we all
baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or
free; and have been all made to drink into one Spirit. We heartily wish this
Union of Hearts, this Communion of affectionate Intercourse, was general among
Protestant Churches: And we have a very sensible Pleasure in being able
publicly to declare, that between your Church, the Swedish Church, and our own
Episcopal Church, there has always been, from the very first, a kind and loving
Participation of Divine Service and Brotherly Offices. May the good God bless
this disinterested friendly Union! and may we all use our own earnest
Endeavors to inspire the same Zeal into our Children, that we may for-ever
continue in the sincere Love of one another, and in an open undisguised
Participation of Worship and Instruction! -- And there is good Reason why it
should be so: Because, if we will only look into our Liturgies, Church-Offices,
and Articles of Religion, we shall find so near a Resemblance, as may well
entitle us to the Name of Sister-Churches. In some Things we do differ; and
with an honest open Freedom let each of us give its own the Preference. We may
do it safely, and perfectly agreeable to the Spirit with which both Churches
established their own particular Constitutions. Our Prayers breathe one and the
same primitive Apostolical Piety, the same impartial universal Love. Holding
these, why not differ from one another in some Points? And what hinders any of
us from declaring, as I do at present, that upon the same virtuous Principles,
that any one Man loves, esteems, and prefers his own Church, so any other
Person may love and prefer his Church likewise; and all of us may, and ought,
however we differ in Articles and Modes of Worship, to hold a loving
Intercourse with, and do good to one another.

Having thus expressed my honest and sincere Preference to my own Church, my
general Love to all Protestant Churches, and my particular Regard to this
Evangelical Church -- let us now turn our Meditations to the Church of God in
Heaven, where there is no Difference in Judgment, nor any Abatement of Charity.
The Holy Angels, we hope, are here present, and feel a sensible Delight at the
Opening of this and of every other Protestant Church. If, as our Savior says,
there is Joy in Heaven over one Sinner that repents, as we may have an humble
Confidence that this Church will be the Means of bringing many Sinners to
Repentance; so these Angels cannot but be partaking of the pious Joy which
fills every Breast on the Commencement of Divine Service in this beautiful
Temple. And were the Angels at this Juncture to make their personal Appearance,
(as Christ is with them, as well as with us, "All in All") they could give no
ampler Testimony to his essential Glory and Divine Nature, nor to the Merits,
Blessings, Extent and Character of his holy Religion, than they gave at his
Incarnation, thus expressed by St. LUKE, And suddenly there was with the Angel
a Multitude of the Heavenly Host praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the
Highest, and on Earth Peace, Good Will toward Men.

Hence it appears, my dear Fellow-Worshippers, that Christ's Religion, founded,
as it wholly is, on his Incarnation, makes every Man an Angel, and, I had
almost said, every Angel a Man. It unites Heaven and Earth. By it Angels enter
into all our Concerns, and become Ministers of God to us in every Thing
relative to our Salvation: And by it we can without Presumption boast, that we
are Fellow-Citizens with the holy Angels, and of the Household of God. One
Nature -- One Life -- One Spirit -- One Will with Angels -- Oh! What a blessed
Inter-Community is this? -- How repeatedly revealed? -- And upon what a firm
Foundation established? -- Do not your Hearts feel an Enlargement, that reaches
to the Throne of God? Are you not by beholding your Face in Christ Jesus -- you
in him, and he in you -- changed from Glory to Glory, till you see no other
Difference between yourselves and the holy Angels than this -- they are already
made perfect, and have their Consummation and Bliss -- You are but Beginners in
Glory, but proceeding, through your Union in Christ, from Step to Step, till
you reach, if not exceed, the Stature of the highest Cherub and Seraph.

And that I may make you sensible of this your Importance in Christ Jesus, I
beseech you to enter with me into the Consideration of the Divine Service and
Worship, which these holy Angels performed to God; the first solemn Worship
that was performed at, and on Account of, the blessed Incarnation of Christ. --
Let us devoutly examine the Ground and Foundation, the Reason and the Motive of
their Worship. Let us look into the Temple of their Hearts, see what it was,
that was stirring there, and in what Posture they stood; that we may learn,
when we come into this or any other Church, how to worship God rightly, and to
put ourselves into a proper Posture both of Soul and Body. You see the Subject.
Let us divide it properly, that you may have a distinct Notion of it.

I. It is, first, to show you the true and full Ground and Foundation, together
with the true Reason and Motive, of this angelic Worship addressed to our
Savior at his Incarnation:

II. It is to show what was their Posture, and what was in their Hearts, when
they sounded forth this heavenly Hymn, that we may learn, when we enter into
this or any other Church, to stand in the same Posture:

III. As all that which stirred up these heavenly Strains of Divine Worship in
the Breasts of the Angels, is by Christ's Incarnation in you, and in every Man
in the World, (since you may all praise God as these Angels did, and for the
same Reasons, and with the same Truth) I shall most earnestly press you to call
it forth into the same spiritual and heavenly exercise.

And there appeared with the Angel a Multitude of the Heavenly Host praising
God, and saying, GLORY to GOD in the Highest -- On Earth PEACE, -- GOOD WILL
toward Men.

This, then, is the Triune Ground of their Worship -- GLORY -- PEACE --
GOOD WILL. -- What a rich Ground is here, out of which the Worship of these
Angels arose? These three Things are the eternal Representations and Symbols of
the Triune God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost. GLORY belongs to the FATHER --
PEACE and RECONCILIATION to the SON -- GOOD WILL, or a Will to all Goodness, to
the HOLY GHOST. Let us speak of all these distinctly, and in their Order.

GLORY has its Source in the Most High God. There is its Center -- there is its
Circumference. It makes the Heaven of Heavens. It is the Outflowing of the
Unity of God* It is the Father's first and most perfect Manifestation. Out of
this Original come all the Glances and Cheerfulness that we see in our own
Light, when the Sky is in its most serene and pure State and Temperament. To be
in Glory is to be in God. When God puts his Glory into Men's Hearts, he gives
them himself. These Angels, sensible, that all their Glory, both inward and
outward, is continually received by fresh and fresh Supplies, out of and from
God, acknowledge it in this Hymn; and such Acknowledgement made humbly and
thankfully, and continually, with a true Devotion and Love of Heart, is all the
Glory and Worship, that the highest Angel can give to God; namely, owning, that
all he is, and has, and does, is from God alone, and that he has no original
personal Glory of his own, but that it is all derived -- All is God in him, and
he in God.

But what was the particular Reason and Cause of this present Adoration? Did
this Fountain of Glory break out in any particular Place? Had it assumed any
new Form? Was it come into any new Temple, that it should require a new
Address, a new Act of Adoration and Worship? Yes, yes, my dear Hearers, --
This, that these Angels saw, was a new Thing. They now for the first Time saw
this Glory in its full Brightness, infinitely exceeding in Luster that which
shone in themselves -- They saw it blazing out of the Heart of the Son of God
-- They saw it incarnated in the Infant Jesus -- All that Glory, which filled
the very high Place of their Residence -- all that Glory that formed the
Shechinah in the Holy of Holies -- was come down upon Earth, and had brought
itself into the Breast of a little Child. This was the Reason of the Appearance
of a Multitude of Angels, that the Shepherds might see beforehand that Glory
about the Angels, which they should behold encircling the newborn Babe. What a
self-evident Proof was this to the Shepherds of the Divinity of this Infant?
They were not left to the Inferences of Reason -- to the Application of
Prophecies -- but to the Evidence of their Senses; since the very Glory that
shone round these Angels, they would find shining in the very same Manner about
the Babe that was lying in the Manger. -- This Glory, then, was the true
heavenly Sign, so much spoken of in the Law and the Prophets, by which not only
these Shepherds should know for certain the Birth and Person of their Savior,
but all the devout Men in Israel, who had waited for the Messiah, should
likewise be favored with the same Certainty, should see the same Glory, and so
with old Simeon, bless God, that they had even before their Death the
Satisfaction of seeing the "Lord's Christ."

Behold in this Visit of the Angels, and its Consequences, (and admire and
adore the eternal Truth of God for it!) a full and satisfactory Proof of the
Accomplishment of all those Prophecies, which speak of the Glory of God as a
specific Excellence in the Christian Dispensation! Behold this great Gospel
Truth brought Home to the Senses of all the pious People among the Jews;
namely, that the Glory of the second Temple infinitely exceeded the Glory of
the first.

2. But then, secondly, the Angels, not only worshipped this Glory as an Heaven
manifested within the Body of the Infant; but they worshipped it on a View of
the Effects it should work on Earth, even, UNIVERSAL PEACE AND RECONCILIATION.
Behold here it became a new Center, a new Source, a new Creation, which was to
cover the Earth, as the Waters cover the Seas, and to be poured over all Flesh.
It was to spread all over the fallen World, and, wherever it came, it was to
redeem, save, purify, cleanse and pacify all the disturbed Elements of Nature.
It was to be a Fountain of new Blood in the Veins of all the corrupted Sons of
Adam. It was with the Meekness of the Lamb to take away all the Sins of the
World, to turn the angry, fretful, proud, envious Passions of Men into
Gentleness, Sweetness and delightful Joy. In short, it was to bring every
sinful Soul into Temperature, Harmony, Equality and Peace. It was in Heaven the
GLORY of the Father, and from thence these Angels worshipped him as the GOD of
GLORY. Now that it was in the Son, and was become in him the Brightness of the
Father's Glory, it was rightly called on Earth PEACE: For wherever it should
enter, it would restore Peace, and bring every Thing into its original REST and
SABBATISM. "There remains yet a Rest for the People of God."

3. God and Man thus reconciled, this Glory conceived, and assumed its last and
most perfect Form, even a Spirit of universal Love, which is the third Object
of the Divine Worship paid by these Angels, namely, "GOOD WILL TOWARD MEN." --

For in and out of this Brightness of Glory shining in the Heart of this
newborn Babe, these Angels saw and worshipped a PROCEEDING WILL AND SPIRIT --
the Spirit of Love, -- an eternal and unchangeable Will to all Goodness,
Happiness and Perfection, even the HOLY GHOST himself, here called GOOD WILL
TOWARD MEN; because this Spirit was to descend into, and become the Leader and
Guide of all the Hearts of Men. It was to regulate their Human Fire as a sacred
Tincture, an Holy Oil, a divine Breath, and heavenly Baptism, breathing through
and purifying all Human Nature, sanctifying and glorifying all the Children of
Men. These Angels worshipped this GOD THE HOLY GHOST, as doing his perfecting
Offices first in the Body of JESUS CHRIST, and, in and by him, in the Body of
every Man in the World, who would receive his Inspiration.

Having shown this Worship in its Threefold Distinction of GLORY, PEACE and
GOOD WILL; let us attend to what is further said in Holy Writ upon this
Subject, that we may be more and more convinced of the Reasons and Motives of
this particular Act of Worship.

In the Psalms and in the Prophets, GOD foretold, that, whenever he should
bring his Firstborn into this lower World, there, as well as in Heaven "all
the Angels should worship him." Accordingly, the HOLY JESUS was no sooner born,
but the Angels were convened to render him that Homage, which was so
particularly foretold. One Angel might have sufficed to announce to the whole
World the Birth of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, just as GABRIEL alone was sent to the
VIRGIN MARY to apprize her of the Honor intended her. But the Matter had been
otherwise planned, -- and therefore there was with the Angel a Multitude of the
heavenly Host praising God and saying, GLORY to GOD in the Highest, and on
Earth PEACE, GOOD WILL toward Men.

In this supernatural Convention of Angels, on this particular Occasion,
another Matter was brought about, even the MYSTERY, which, St. Paul says, was
hid from the Beginning of the World in GOD, who created all Things by JESUS
CHRIST, to the Intent that unto the Principalities and Powers in heavenly
Places might be known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of GOD according to the
eternal Purpose, which he purposed in CHRIST JESUS. Thus these Angels beheld in
the Incarnation of JESUS CHRIST what they did not know before, and what, as ST.
PETER says, "they had earnestly desired to look into," namely, the Source of
their own Birth. They did not desire to know this from such a Temper as SATAN
did, who, from Pride, longed to find out his first Forms, thinking that he
should discover something there, that would render him independent of GOD --
No, No --. These Angels were of a very different Temper. They had been present,
when the Spirit of Prophecy, mentioning CHRIST, had predicted things in which
they were to be as much concerned as the Sons of Men. It was these partial
Intimations given from Time to Time by the SPIRIT OF GOD, that occasioned their
Curiosity and earnest Desire, as ST. PETER says, to know the Sufferings of
CHRIST, and the Glory that should follow. Here then first at this blessed
Incarnation, these Angels saw, that the WORD now become incarnate, this present
SON OF GOD beginning to be a SON OF MAN, was and is the Creator of Angels as
well as of Men: And that all Things both in Heaven and Earth were made by him,
and that not a single thing of all that was made, was made without him; that He
only was in the Beginning, GOD IN GOD, GOD OF GOD; and that they, together with
their Heaven, the eternal Seat of the Divine Presence were all after and from
this JESUS: And therefore they worshipped CHRIST from a Sense, that he was just
as much their Creator and Maker and Former -- just as much their Strength and
Glory and Life, -- (and that this was likewise the Case with Respect to all
other Principalities, Dominions and Thrones in Heaven) as he was now by his
Incarnation declared to be, and to have been, from all Eternity the
Reconciliation and Peace and Salvation of fallen Man.

Learn, therefore, O ye Sons of Men, from this plain Passage of Scripture,
which manifestly includes in it all that has been here said of CHRIST: That in
all the Nature of Things both in Heaven and Earth, there was none that could
bring Salvation to fallen Man, but this SON of GOD -- that as GOD had created
Man at first by his SON, this SON could only be his REDEEMER. If CHRIST had not
been the Creator of Angels, their Worship had been Idolatry. And if CHRIST had
not been the CREATOR as well as REDEEMER of Man, the Worship performed to him
in all Christian Churches is likewise rank Idolatry.

Thus have I, with a Copiousness which the Subject required, and which
Scripture amply furnishes, finished my first Head.

II. Let me now proceed to my second general Head, and show in what Posture
these Angels stood, that is to say, what that Spirit was, which in them sounded
forth this Divine Hymn; that we may learn, when we enter into this or any other
Church, to put ourselves into the same Posture.

From what has been said it appears that there neither is nor can be such a
Thing as Selfishness, or Self-Will, Self-Love or Self-Esteem in Heaven. Such a
Falsehood could never take Place, 'till the first Union between GOD and the
Creature was broken. 'Till then the Creature could not acquire an Idea or
Sensibility of Self. For we see here by the Account which Scripture gives of
our Creation in CHRIST JESUS, that the first Beginning of our Creation is in
and out of JESUS CHRIST. It is not in and out of Nothing, but in and out of
JESUS CHRIST, who, being the Fullness of the Godhead, and having all the
Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge in him, brought the same Powers that were in
himself into the first created man. Now what did ADAM do? What did these Angels
do to help forward this creating Work? Or what share of Power had they in the
forming themselves? -- None at all. -- Their Capacity of receiving Happiness
was from GOD. The Happiness they did receive was likewise from GOD. He opens
his Hand and fills all Things living with Plenteousness. He inspires his own
Likeness and the Love of his own Goodness. The whole Image and Similitude of
GOD was, in these Angels and this Adam, antecedent to every outward Work or
Action that proceeded from them. -- Now what was, what could be in the Hearts
of Beings thus made, and perfectly sensible, that they were thus made --
perfectly sensible, that they had nothing of their Happiness either from
themselves, or from one another, but that their All was from GOD? Could their
Adoration be any Thing else but their Feeling -- their Sensibility of that,
which GOD was always doing in them and to them? And could it produce any Thing
else but an Union of Hearts, an united Splendour of heavenly FIRE, LIGHT and
LOVE: GOD in the Angels -- and the Angels in GOD. The whole Heavens and Eternal
Nature on this Occasion came into View, and were a Temple of Love, and every
Angel's Heart was a living separate Apartment therein. CHRIST was the
HIGH PRIEST with the URIM and THUMMIM of MAJESTY and PERFECTION on his Breast,
and the HOLY GHOST was the sacred Oil, the Frankincense and sweet smelling
Odor that filled the whole Temple with Aromatic Fragrance: All thy Garments
smell of Myrrh, Aloes and Cassia. When these Angels turned their Countenances
toward one another, as every Heart glowed with one and the same Divine Fire,
the Flames of Love came forth -- contracted like a Magnet, and brought all
together -- It made but one Pyramid of Majesty, and Light and Love. What a
Transcendency of Happiness is there in this Angelic Posture? Was it possible,
think you, that these Angels could receive an Increase of GLORY or GOOD WILL?
-- Yes -- Yes -- Our SAVIOR, who alone felt the highest Degree of Joy that
could be raised on any Occasion, shows us, how these Angels might find
themselves in an higher Degree of Sensibility, than they had ever before
experienced. Hear the Lip of Truth itself! -- There is Joy among the Angels in
Heaven over one Sinner that repents more than over Ninety and Nine just
Persons who need no Repentance. -- You may easily conceive then, that if this
was the Case as to a single Sinner, there must needs have been an Exuberance,
an Effervescence of Joy at the endearing Prospect, which this Blessed
Incarnation afforded of Salvation to a whole World of fallen Sinners. Surely,
surely the Glass of Eternal Wisdom would at this Time be held up to these
Angels, in which FATHER, SON and HOLY GHOST were delighting themselves with the
Aspects of Thousands and Thousands of lost and undone Sinners, that from the
North and from the South, from the East and from the West, now happily redeemed
and enlarged, were crowding in such Numbers and with such an holy Vehemence and
Ardour into the Courts of Light, that the Kingdom of Heaven itself suffered
Violence.

Attend, then, to the Posture of these Angels! -- If they looked toward GOD,
there was the Triune Majesty of Love -- if toward one another, there it was in
full Communication springing forth as the Glance of a Firmament without them,
and within them taking a particular Seat in every one of their Hearts, and
bringing with it their natural Bodies of Glory. -- If they looked toward the
Earth, the same Streams of Happiness were spreading themselves all over its
Surface, gliding at the same Time into every Human Heart, that felt the Power
of its Redemption. Language they could have none: For such Love as this is
above all Language. They could do nothing but repeat a thousand and a thousand
Times this one Song of Praise: GLORY to GOD in the Highest, and on Earth PEACE,
GOOD WILL toward Men.

III. As all that which stirred up these heavenly Strains of Divine Worship in
the Breasts of these Angels is, by CHRIST's Incarnation, in you and every Man
in the World, since you may all praise GOD as these Angels did, and for the
same Reasons, and with the same Truth, I shall now, in the last Place, most
earnestly press you to call it forth into the same spiritual and heavenly
Exercise.

It is easily said, that such high Powers are in Man; (and if in one Man, then
in every Man, for "with GOD there is no Respect or Distinction of Persons") but
how is this proved? For surely no Man, that is once persuaded of this Truth
will be so unjust to himself, as not to trust entirely to them, and quit all
Systems of Divinity, which fall short of these Powers, as inadequate to the
just Demands of a rational Religion. CHRISTIANITY makes but one Pretension, and
that is, to save Man from Death, and to help him to Life. In ADAM all die: --
In CHRIST shall all be made alive. Our SAVIOR, just as he was going to ascend
into Heaven, after he had finished all that Part of our Redemption that could
be done on Earth, gives his Disciples a special Commission to go and convert
all the World to his Religion. The Form is strongly expressive of what this
Religion was in its Nature and Efficacy, and deserves well to be minutely
considered; for it most certainly does warrant me with Scripture to assert what
I have done as to the Powers inherent in you and in every Christian Man.

All Power, says our SAVIOR, is given to me both in Heaven and Earth. -- Go
ye, therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the NAME of the FATHER,
and of the SON and of the HOLY GHOST; teaching them to observe all Things,
whatsoever I have commanded you, and Lo! I AM WITH YOU ALWAYS EVEN UNTO THE END
OF THE WORLD.

Let us distinguish all the Parts of this Commission, and give unto each the
Peculiarity of its Nature, as distinguished from every other Part. It consists
of these several Particulars -- "Go, teach all Nations" -- Go, baptize all
Nations -- in the Name of the FATHER, and of the SON and of the HOLY GHOST. --
Go, teach all Nations to observe all Things, whatsoever I have commanded you --
and in, and while you are doing this in all Places and in all Ages, I shall
accompany you, and be with you to the End of the World."

"Go, teach all Nations." The Word in the Original is -- (...) -- Go and
disciple all Nations -- as much as to say -- Go and communicate to all Nations
every Word that I have said, and every Thing that I have done relative to
Salvation, which I have communicated to you in the whole Course of my being and
conversing with you, in the particular Character of my Disciples -- Go and
assure them in my Name, that every Thing I spoke to you in the Character of the
MESSIAH, every Thing I have done and promised to do, in and for you, is the
very same as if I had said and done and promised it to every particular Man in
the World: For I have nothing in Charge from my FATHER in Favor of any Man, or
any one of you my Disciples relative to Redemption, that is not equally in
Favor of every other Man in the World. Go, therefore, to all Nations without
any Distinction, and make them in my Name these most solemn Assurances, that
when they, through your Instruction and Baptism, become Disciples to my
Religion, they will be as much entitled to every Thing that has been said to
you, or any others either privately or publicly, relative to Salvation, by me
in my Character of the MESSIAH, as you are: And that they may know this to be
Truth and Reality in their own Persons, just as you do, baptize them in the
NAME of the FATHER, and of the SON, and of the HOLY GHOST -- that is, in other
Words -- Go and use the same Ceremony of Baptism, that has always been in Use
in the Church: And when you administer it, make a most solemn Declaration in my
Name, that every Man so introduced into the Church by you or your Successors,
shall be received into a Participation of the Power, Nature, Life and Spirit of
FATHER, SON and HOLY GHOST; their essential Powers shall be given to them by
these three sacred Persons in the Divinity, who shall live and dwell and work
in and with them all the Time they are in this World, in the same Manner as
they did live and dwell and work in me all the while I lived on Earth in the
Body which I took out of the VIRGIN MARY: And as this was in every Respect like
their own Bodies, I can therefore unite with them just as I did with it, and I
will unite with them, and become incarnate in their Bodies just as I did in my
own Body.

"Together with this Baptism, all the Effect of which is to take Place by my
own Incarnation and Operation in them, you are to instruct all Nations without
Distinction, and enjoin them that they will take Care to observe every Thing
that I have communicated to you, as my Disciples, either in the Way of Precept,
Information, Illumination, Inspiration, or any other Kind of Revelation or
Manifestation, either natural or supernatural. Instruct them in all these
Things -- Hide nothing from them -- Lay it before them in the same easy and
satisfactory Manner as I have laid it before you -- Bear your Testimony
concerning the Whole of it to all these Nations -- Assure them, as my
Witnesses, that it was said and came to pass to and in your own Persons, and
that you can, therefore, speak of it with the same Certainty as you can of any
other Things that are made known to you by your earthly Senses. -- Go and bear
this further Witness, that all, who, through your Means, become my Disciples,
with the same Truth and Honesty that you are become Disciples, shall, like you,
find the same Things done in themselves, and become like you living and true
Witnesses of the Truth of my Religion: And be assured, that in order to enable
you to experience these Things in yourselves, and to make others likewise
experience them, I will be with you and them to the End of the World."

Thus have I given you the distinct Meaning of the Terms made Use of, viz. The
NAME of FATHER, SON and HOLY GHOST; and of the Nature, Power and Efficacy of
the Baptism administered in their Name. Numbers of Texts might be adduced in
Proof of this honest and full Explanation: But detached Texts may be made to
speak any Thing and every Thing: Therefore to avoid such an useless Adducement
of single Passages of Scripture, I shall lay before you a continued Discourse,
made by our SAVIOR, just before his Apprehension in the Garden, wherein all
that is said by our SAVIOR is evidently upon the same Subject we are now
speaking of. This is in the XVIIth Chapter of St. JOHN's Gospel, which I cannot
shorten without Injury to the Sense, and therefore shall transcribe the whole
for your most serious Consideration.

These Words spoke JESUS, and lift up his Eyes to Heaven, and said, FATHER, the
Hour is come; glorify thy SON, that thy SON also may glorify thee. As thou have
given him Power over all Flesh, that he should give Eternal Life to as many as
thou have given him. And this is Life Eternal, that they might know thee the
only true GOD, and JESUS CHRIST whom thou have sent. I have glorified thee on
the Earth: I have finished the Work, which thou gave me to do. And now, O
FATHER, glorify thou me with thine own Self, with the Glory which I had with
thee before the World was. I have manifested thy Name unto the Men which thou
gave me out of the World: Thine they were, and thou gave them me; and they
have kept thy Word. Now they have known, that all Things whatsoever thou have
given me, are of thee. For I have given unto them the Words which thou gave
me; and they have received them, and have known surely, that I came out from
thee, and they have believed, that thou did send me. I pray for them: I pray
not for the World, but for them which thou have given me, for they are thine.
And all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them. And now
I am no more in the World; but these are in the World, and I come to thee. HOLY
FATHER! keep through thine own Name those whom thou have given me, that they
may be one, as we are. While I was with them in the World, I kept them in thy
Name: Those that thou gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the
Son of Perdition; that the Scripture might be fulfilled. And now come I to
thee, and these Things I speak in the World, that they might have my Joy
fulfilled in themselves. I have given them thy Word, and the World has hated
them, because they are not of the World, even as I am not of the World. I pray
not that thou should take them out of the World, but that thou should keep
them from the Evil. They are not of the World, even as I am not of the World.
Sanctify them through thy Truth; thy Word is Truth. As thou have sent me into
the World, even so have I also sent them into the World. And for their Sakes I
sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the Truth. Neither
pray I for these alone, but for them also, which shall believe on me through
their Word: That they all may be one, as thou, FATHER, art in me, and I in
thee; that they also may be one in us: That the World may believe that thou
have sent me. And the Glory, which thou gave me, I have given them: That they
may be one, even as we are one. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be
made perfect in one, and that the World may know that thou have sent me, -- and
have loved them, as thou have loved me. FATHER, I will, that they also, whom
thou have given me be with me where I am; that they may behold my Glory, which
thou have given me: For thou lovedst me before the Foundation of the World. O
righteous FATHER, the World has not known thee; but I have known thee, and
these have known, that thou have sent me. And I have declared unto them thy
Name, and will declare it; that the Love wherewith thou have loved me, may be
in them, and I in them.

If this Discourse, which is a connected, designed and devout Address of our
BLESSED LORD to his Disciples, all dictated by divine Love, and all to the
present Point, de duly considered, I may proceed to ask, whether the Words can
have any other Meaning than this -- That GOD the FATHER, and GOD the SON, and
GOD the HOLY GHOST will, by Covenant, and agreeable to the Plan of Redemption,
as settled in Heaven, and gradually revealed by MOSES and the PROPHETS, by
CHRIST and his APOSTLES, make such an inward and real Operation in the Soul of
every Christian, as will bring into it a Manifestation of GOD, and heavenly
Glory, and Eternal Life -- of the very Life and Kingdom where CHRIST now dwells
at the Right Hand of GOD? And let me ask further, can such a Manifestation be
made to any Soul of Man, on any other Supposition, but that the same GOD, that
makes this Manifestation, has already in the Constitution of the Soul, by the
redeeming Grace of CHRIST, given it a Power and Capacity to receive and become
a Partaker of the heavenly Power, Nature and Glory, which he is thus from
Eternity to Eternity manifesting in it?

Here then I rest. This is the Foundation, Ground and Reason why, with the
Scripture, I declare to you, that you have all the same Powers, and can with
the same Truth of Nature sing forth the same Praises, as these Angels did: And,
therefore, as much as Eternity is preferable to Time, as much as heavenly
Powers surpass earthly Powers, with an Ardour proportionable to this great
Difference, I beseech you to turn to your incarnate SAVIOR. In and through him
you have in you all that which is in these Holy Angels. There is this
Difference -- We see but in Part, as through a Glass darkly -- they see even as
they are seen -- They have an outward Heaven -- Ours is yet hidden within the
Heart -- But it is as much an Heaven as theirs -- and will and must grow to the
Height of theirs, if we will suffer it to grow -- We live by Faith and Hope --
They, by Possession and Light. But should this be any Discouragement? No --
Because the very JESUS that gives them the Fullness of their Light, and the
Powers, Colors and Virtues of the Figures and Fruits that are perpetually
within their View, and tasted with all the Luxuriancy of a perfected Sensation
-- That very JESUS gives us the same Things, as a Nourishment of our Faith and
Hope, that we may gradually, as every other Thing in Nature does, grow up to
that Perfection of Love which makes the Felicity of these Angels. I say as
every other Thing in Nature does; for between the Growth of our heavenly and
earthly Powers and Graces, there is an exact Similitude. Look at the Root of
the Lily, or any other Flower, it will show you your own Nature and Powers --
how they may lie dormant, and how they come to be quickened again to Life. When
the Root of a Lily or Rose, or any other Flower, is in a Drawer, or in the
frozen Ground, in the Middle of an hard Winter, it has in it, even in this
State of Death and Inactivity, all that which makes its Beauty and sweet Smell
when it comes to blow in the Summer. The Sun, it is true, brings forth all this
into it, but the Sun does not give it its Nature; this was in it at all Times,
and as much when it lay in the Drawer as when the Sun is operating upon it with
its Summer Heat. For if it had not the Peculiarity of the Lily in its Nature,
the Sun would have no more Power over it, to make it produce its fine
Colorings, and sweet Smell, than over any other common Lump of Earth. Be not,
therefore, discouraged, that your spiritual Powers are by Nature in this
defective inactive State; but learn from this Comparison, that JESUS CHRIST,
the Light and Life of the spiritual World, does all that to your dead, hard,
angelic Nature, shut up in an outward Body of earthly Flesh and Blood, which
the Sun of this World does to the Lily Root, namely, he helps you, and every
other heavenly Man, out of his own present Death, into his highest State of
Life. You can have no Doubt then, my dear Fellow-Worshippers, but the very same
high Powers, that were and are in CHRIST JESUS, are in you; for he is in you
THE HOPE OF GLORY. All that is now necessary is to know and distinguish CHRIST,
and his Residence in you. And let me tell you this Gospel Truth, that you have
as complete and real a Way to know this as these Angels have. -- You may know
it by these Marks, and Sensibilities -- When you are all Hunger and all Thirst
for Goodness, and an heavenly Life: When you see, not from Reasoning and
Speculation, but by the Understanding, which is opened by the SPIRIT of GOD to
your own Spirit, your own Nothingness -- your own total Inability to bring
forth Good in yourselves without abiding in CHRIST; and can and do, without
mourning and grieving on this Account, rejoice in GOD, that he has shown you
your own natural Inability, not to torment you, nor to leave you in the Anguish
of a Desire not obtained, but in and through this Hunger and Longing, to pour
into you the Riches of his Grace, and every Sort of Divine Food, that can
nourish you to eternal Life. Could you have done any the least Thing in the
World toward regaining your first lost heavenly Life, he would have had no
Need to come into your Bodies by the new and living Way, which he has
consecrated. You can never mistake his Presence and Power over you. When you
find your Hearts formed to Holiness, Goodness, Charity, mutual Forbearance and
every Sensibility, which the Spirit of Love can inspire -- then you are sure,
that JESUS is within you. -- Then adore, worship, serve and conform to this GOD
within you. Give him Thanks and Praise -- nor give him barely the Praise of
your Tongue, and the Adoration of your Heart -- but go and conform to the good
Temper he has brought into you. Go among your Fellow Creatures -- Go about
doing Good -- See, whether among your Families, in your Neighborhood, among
your Friends, yea and among your Enemies too, there is any Good to be done, any
Differences to be settled, any injured Reputation to be redressed, any sick Man
to be comforted, any innocent Modesty to be encouraged and brought into Action:
For all this is JESUS CHRIST in you of a Truth: And do every good Thing you can
any where, as Opportunity presents; and do it quickly, cheerfully and
effectually, for its own Sake, because it is good, knowing that CHRIST does
Good always for its own Sake.

This is all the Worship you can perform to GOD, in Return for the Good his
HOLY JESUS is always doing in you, namely, not to oppose the working of his
Spirit in you -- Do you but desire him to mend your Hearts, and he will do it.
A Christian cannot be at any Uncertainty about the present or future State of
his Soul, or be ignorant of what he is or to what he belongs, whether to the
good or the wicked Spirit -- since he finds in Scripture all the Things, all
the Feelings, all the Sensibilities, all the Passions described and ranged
under their proper Masters -- Every Thing is minutely put down in this blessed
Book, that the Spirit of JESUS works and effects in our Hearts.

Would you (I again repeat it) know the JESUS of the holy Scriptures? Would you
know the true CHRIST of GOD? -- You can never know him otherwise than as you
know yourselves, by a Self-evident Sensibility of what passes, and is done, and
felt, in your own Spirits -- When Love, Benevolence, Generosity, Goodness,
Patience, Meekness and Humanity, are the reigning Affections of your Hearts,
then CHRIST is in you of a Truth. For these, as I said, are declared in
Scripture to be the true genuine Fruits of the HOLY SPIRIT -- These are the
Branches, CHRIST is the true Vine, and the FATHER is the Husbandman.

To conclude, would we worship GOD on Earth as the Angels do in Heaven, we
should neither think, nor speak, nor know any Thing of SELF. They know no more
than this, that GOD, when he made them, brought himself into a finite Figure,
which he took out of his own Nature at his own good Will and Pleasure; and when
he had done all that was agreeable to his own good Pleasure, as to their
outward Form and Shape, then he brought his BLESSED SON into their Hearts. --
This bringing his SON into their Hearts was not fully known. It was a MYSTERY
hid in GOD -- namely, that he created all Things by JESUS CHRIST. This MYSTERY
they saw more fully opened -- and they worshipped the HOLY JESUS as a MYSTERY
just opening -- And, without Controversy, great is the MYSTERY of GODLINESS --
GOD was manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into Glory.
-- With this I began -- with this I end: This is and ever will, with all good
Christians, be the Beginning, Middle and End, the Alpha and Omega, the First
and the Last -- And I pray GOD it may be so to us all! -- AMEN, AMEN.

FINIS.
ERRATUM.
Page 31, Line 9, for "to" read "for his Disciples,"


