THE CONSISTENCY OF THE SINNER'S INABILITY TO COMPLY WITH THE GOSPEL; WITH HIS
INEXCUSABLE GUILT IN NOT COMPLYING WITH IT, ILLUSTRATED AND CONFIRMED: IN TWO
DISCOURSES, On JOHN VIth, 44th.

By JOHN SMALLEY, A. M. Pastor of a Church in FARMINGTON.

HARTFORD: by GREEN and WATSON, near the Great Bridge M, DCC, LXIX.

SERMON I. Man's Inability to comply with the Gospel.
JOHN VI. 44. No Man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me draw
him.


IT is, no doubt, of the last importance, that people should be convinced, and
made thoroughly sensible of their impotence and helplesness in themselves, and
their entire dependence on divine grace, for salvation. So long as sinners
think they can recommend themselves to the favor of God, by their own
righteousness, they will never come unto Christ, that they might have life. For
the whole have no need of the physician, but they that are sick. And so long as
persons imagine they labor under no insuperable inability, as to complying
with the gospel, they will never feel their dependence on him, who alone is
able to work in them, the whole good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of
faith with power. Nor will they feel disposed, or see the occasion they have,
to give unto God the glory, which is indeed due unto his name, In their
salvation. Accordingly, the depravity, blindness and deadness of mankind, in
things of a spiritual nature, and their utter inability to comply with the
gospel, as well as to obtain salvation by the deeds of the law, are much
inculcated and insisted on, in the sacred scriptures.

BUT then, there is a difficulty, in the minds of many, how to reconcile this
total helplesness of sinners, with the sincerity of the gospel offers, or with
the justice of men's being condemned and punished, for their impenitence and
unbelief. And indeed, it does seem as if men could not be to blame, for not
doing impossibilities: Nor should we in other cases, think there was much
kindness or sincerity, in offering a favor on conditions that were known to be
impracticable.

THERE is scarce any one, I believe, that has ever though it much about religion,
but what has, at one time or other, felt himself pinched with this difficulty.
And it is will not to have a most pernicious influence upon the minds of sinners
in general; but more especially, when they come to be under awakenings, and
begin to enquire, "what they shall do to be saved." According to what they hear
in sermons, yea, and according to what they read in their bibles, they are
greatly at a loss to see, how the ways of the Lord can be equal. "The carnal
mind," they are told, is -- not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can
be. And that, they that are in the flesh cannot please God. They are therefore
under a necessity of sinning, yea, of doing nothing else but sin. And yet,
"every transgression and disobedience," is to receive a most dreadful
"recompense of reward," the wrath of God being revealed from heaven, against
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. And no relief, no deliverence from
wrath, is to be hoped for through the gospel, but upon impossible conditions:
Such conditions as no natural man, no one who is dead in trespasses and sins,
ever did, ever will, or can comply with. And yet a noncompliance with these
conditions, exposes to an amazingly aggravated, additional condemnation;
insomuch that it will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, in the day of
judgment, than for those who enjoy the light of the gospel, and do not embrace
the salvation it offers.

But how these things are consistent with reason; how they can ever be
reconciled with the goodness, or the justice of God, they are greatly at a
loss. Such a view of the matter, seems to them to make the Most High indeed,
what the slothful servant said, a hard master, reaping where he has not sown,
and gathering where he has not strewed. Or, like the cruel Egyptian
taskmasters, requiring the full tale of brick, without allowing the necessary
straw; requiring that of his creatures which he knows exceeds their utmost
strength, and then they are beaten; yea, must be punished with everlasting
destruction, for not doing, what they would do with all their hearts, but it is
no more in their power, than it is to make a world.

Now, until this difficulty can be fairly got over in people's minds, it seems
impossible they should, in their consciences, justify God, or condemn
themselves as he condemns them. Or that they should understand, either the
justice of the divine law, or the grace of the gospel. It is therefore
certainly highly necessary, that what the scripture says upon this subject,
should be set in a consistent light, so as to commend itself to every man's
conscience, in the sight of God.

THERE are several ways, in which this has been attempted. Some account for
God's suspending our salvation upon impossible conditions, and condemning men
for not doing what it is not in their power to do, by observing, that we lost
our power by the fall. Our present weakness and blindness, was brought upon us
as a righteous punishment, for the disobedience of Adam; and God, they say, has
not lost his right to command, because man, by his own folly and sin, has lost
his ability to obey. That is, we ought, it is our present real duty to exert,
not only all the strength we actually have, but all we should have had, had it
not been for the original apostasy.

BUT to this it will be objected, that we never reason and judge in such a
manner, in any other case. We do not think those who have lost their eyes, are
still to blame for not seeing; or those who have lost their reason, for not
understanding; or that it is the duty of those to labor with their hands, who
have no hands to labor with. Not, though we suppose they were deprived of
those faculties, in a righteous manner, for their sins. Or, suppose a servant,
by his own folly and bad conduct, has brought a fit of sickness upon himself;
do we think it reasonable for his master, still to require him to go out into
the field every day, and do as much work as if he was well? And is the servant
to blame, in not obeying such commands? Does he daily commit new sin, in not
working, when perhaps he now wishes with all his heart he was able to do it;
but has not strength enough to go a step, or bear his weight?

IT must, I think, be granted, we do generally suppose, a man's present duty
cannot exceed his present strength, even let his strength have been impared by
what means it will. We never hear even a good man, pretend to repent or blame
himself, that he has not seen the light of the sun all day, and resolve not to
be guilty of the same sin tomorrow, when he has been stone blind for twenty
years. I shall not therefore, undertake the defense of this, as any solution of
the difficulty, to the apprehension of reason and common sense. Nor can I think
that any one was ever inwardly convinced of the sin of unbelief in this way.
However well meant it might probably be, by the first inventers of it, it seems
rather calculated to ease the consciencies of men, by casting all real blame,
back upon the first sin only.

OTHERS, (and those who would not be thought, and are not suspected, to leanin
any measure toward arminianism) have supposed it necessary to soften matters a
little, as to the sovereignty of grace, and the helplesness of sinners, if we
would avoid the above inconsistency, or reflection upon the divine justice.
They would have it maintained, indeed, that sinners are unable to do much, if
any thing toward their selvation, merely of themselves. Nor do they suppose
that any one is ever brought to true repentance and faith in Christ, without
the special grace of God. But then they apprehend, it may, and must be
admitted, that sinners are able, by the help of common grace, to do those
things which are connected with, and may be considered as a sort of preliminary
conditions of salvation: conditions upon which regeneration, and an ability to
come up to the actual terms of the gospel, is promised, or however, will
undoubtedly be bestowed. That is, they suppose, if sinners will seek and pray,
use the means of grace, and do the best that persons under their circumstances,
and having such hearts as they have, may do; God will not be wanting on his
part, or leave them to perish. That if they exert all the strength, and make a
good improvement of all the assistance they have, they shall have more, and
more given them; till in the end they are enabled to obtain mercy, and to lay
hold on eternal life. That if there are no absolute promises, to such earnest
and sincere, though feeble, efforts of the unregenerate, yet certainly there
are many very precious encouragements; which may indeed, securely enough be
relied on. So that, on the whloe, no sinner is under any real impossibility of
obtaining salvation. For every one, let his impotence be as great as it will,
can certainly do what he can. And if upon his doing this, God will not fail to
help him, as to what he cannot do; then every one may be saved, any weakness or
depravity he labors under, notwithstansting. Nor do they see how we can
vindicate the divine justice, or fairly cast the blame of the sinners perdition
on himself, without supposing such a universal sufficiency of grace, as this.

Now if this can be made out to be really the case, that all are actually and
in every view, enabled to do those things which are connected with eternal
life; there will be no difficulty, I apprehend, with any one, to see that the
ways of the Lord are equal. For according to this, there seems to be no respect
of persons with God, even in the distribution of his freest favors, any more
than in his judicial proceedings. The difference between him that is saved, and
him that perishes, not originating from any in equality in the bestowment of
divine grace; but solely from the better improvement one sinner makes of the
same grace, than another does. Here then the way is clear on the side of
natural notions, reason, and common sense.

BUT, I am afraid, it will be as hard to reconcile this way of solving matters,
with the scriptures, and with the truth of fact, as it is, the former one, with
reason. Certainly, the scriptures seems to speak a language quite different
from this. In them we are taught, That it is God that makes one man to differ
from an other, for the better, and not he himself. That it is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shewith mercy. and "that he
has mercy, on whom he will bave mercy; and whom he will he hardens." And in
our text, our Savior accounts for the murmuring and opposition, of the
unbeleiving jews, by making this observation to his disciples upon it; "no man
can come to me, except the father which has sent me draw him." By which he
evidently meant to intimate, that the conduct of his opposers, considering what
human nature was, was not to be wondered at. That they acted no otherways than
all other men would, if left to themselves as they were. That those who now
followed and obeyed him, would never have come to him or become his disciples,
had it not been for a gracious divine influence upon their minds, which was not
granted to those murmurers and opposers; had they not been effectually drawn,
by him in whose hand are the hearts of men, and who turns them as the rivers
of water are turned. We are plainly taught in this text, taken in the
connection in which it stands, as we are also in a multitude of other places,
that men do not first distinguish themselves, by hearkening to the calls of the
gospel; but that it is God that makes one to differ from another, in this
respect, by his sovereign and distinguishing grace. The point of doctrine,
therefore, that I shall insist upon from the words is this,

That none are able to comply with the gospel, but those who are the subjects
of the special and effectual grace of God; or those who are made willing, and
actually do comply with it.

WHAT I have in view, in the following discourse, is not only to confirm this
doctrine; but to endeavor to set it in such a light, as to obviate the
formentioned difficulty, of salvation's being offered on impossible conditions,
and men's being condemned for not doing, that which they are incapable of. And
after what has been said, I think there is no way of attempting to clear up
this mystery, left, but by showing that there are two essentially different
senses, in which men are said to be incapable of doing things: or, by having
recourse to the distinction of natural and moral inability. Accordingly, the
method I propose, is, I. AS clearly as I can, to state and illustrate this
distinction. II. TO show, that men certainly labor under one, or the other, of
these kinds of inability to comply with the gospel, until they are made the
subjects of effectual divine grace. III. MORE particularly to consider and
evince, the moral impotence of sinners, And IV. ENDEAVOR to make it appear,
that there is, ordinarily, no other incapacity in sinners, in this matter, but
only of the moral kind.


I. THEN, it is to be observed, for the clearing up of this subject, that there
are two very different kinds of inability: so different, that the one however
great does not lessen moral obligation in the least; whereas the other, as far
as it goes, takes away obligation, and all desert of blame and punishment
entirely.

THESE two kinds of inability, as I hinted, have commonly been distinguished,
by calling one a natural, the other a moral inability. Which distinction may be
briefly stated thus. Moral inability consists only in the want of a heart, or
disposition, or will, to do a thing. Natural inability on the other hand,
consists in, or arises from, want of understanding, bodily strength,
opportunity; or, whatever may prevent, our doing a thing, when we are willing,
and strongly enough disposed and inclined to do it. Or, in fewer words, thus:
whatever a man could not do, if he would, he is under a natural inability of
doing; but when all the reason one cannot do a thing, is because he has not a
mind to, the inability is only of a moral nature.

THIS distinction takes place, equally with regard to evil actions, and good
ones. Thus, for instance, the divine being cannot do evil; not because he wants
opportunity, or understanding, or strength, to do, with infinite ease, whatever
he pleases; but only because he is not, and it is impossible he should be,
inclined to do iniquity. He is so infinitely and immutably holy, wise, just,
and good; that it is not possible he should ever please to act otherways, than
in the most holy, righteous, and best manner. Hence, though we read that, "with
God all things are possible," and that he can do every thing; yet alsewhere we
are told, he cannot deny himself; and that it is impossible, for God to lie.

ON the other hand, satan is incapable of doing right, or of behaving
virtuously, in the least instance or degree. But not because he wants natural
abilities; for undoubtedly in that respect, he is far superior to many that are
truly virtuous. His being incapable of any thing but infernal wickedness, is
altogether owing to his being of such an infernal disposition.

AND it is not uncommon, to speak of incapacity in mankind, both as to doing
good and doing evil, in this twofold signification. Some persons we say are
incapable of doing a mean thing. Not that we think it is above their natural
capacity; but it is beneath them; they abhor, or they would scorn to do it.
Others are incapable of several sorts of villainy, not through any want of good
will enough that way. They only want a convenient opportunity, or sufficient
ingenuity. -- And just so it is in regard to doing good. Some have it not in
the power of their hands; others have no heart to it. One is of a truly
generous spirit, and nothing but his own poverty, keeps him from being what Job
was, a father to the poor, the fatherless and him that has none to help him.
Another is rich, and might be a great benefactor and blessing to all around
him; but he has no heart to devise liberal things. He cannot be free and open
handed; it is not in him to be so. He is deaf to the cries of the poor, blind to
their wants, and dead to all the generous feelings of humanity and compassion.

SOME are so feeble and infirm, that they can do scarce any bodily labor;
though they are extremely free and willing to lay themselves out to the utmost
that their strength will bear, and often go beyond it. Others are strong and
healthy enough, and might get a good living, and be useful members of society;
but such is their invincible laziness, that their hands refuse to labor, and
they can hardly get them out of their bosoms. Some are effectually kept from
shining, or being very useful, in any public sphere in church or state, through
the weakness of their heads: others, as effectually, by the badness of their
hearts. Some are incapable of being taught by reason of mere natural dullness:
others only because they are of an unreachable spirit, and full of
self-conceit. Some are blind for want of eyes; but it is an old proverb, that
none are more blind, than those who will not see.

THESE examples, are sufficient to illustrate the distinction I am insisting
on, and to make it evident, that by incapable, we often mean something very
different from want of natural capacity. We may also perceive from these
instances, that there is a real necessity for using such words as, unable,
incapable cannot, etc. in this diversity of signification, in which we see they
are used, in common speech, as well as in the scriptures. For whenever any
thing, whether in ourselves or without us, is really absolutely inconsistent
with our doing a thing, we have no way fully and strongly enough to express
that inconsistence, but by saying we are unable, we cannot, it is impossible;
or using some word of like import. And now it is certain that want of a heart,
or inclination to do a thing, may be, and is, as inconsistent with our doing
it, as any thing else could be. Covetuousness is as inconsistent with
liberality as poverty is, and may as effectually hinder a man from doing deeds
of charity. Indolence is as inconsistent with industry, as bodily weakness and
infirmity is. The want of an upright heart and a public spirit, is as
inconsistent with the character of a good ruler, as the want of wisdom and
understanding. And the want of all principles of virtue, must be as
inconsistent with acting virtuously, as even the want of those intellectual
faculties, which are necessary to moral agency. And so on the other hand, as to
doing evil things. There is no possibility of doing them, that is, knowingly,
designedly, and as moral agents, without an evil disposition. Our free and
moral actions, are, and must be, as invariably guided and dictated by our own
minds, as they are limited and bounded, by our natural power. That is, every
one must act his own nature, and choice; otherways he don't act himself; he is
not the agent. And if, when we would express this sort of necessity, we should
not use the same phrases as are made use of in cases of natural necessity-but
for fear of a misunderstanding, should carefully avoid saying a man cannot,
when ever we mean only that he had not such a heart as is necessary, and only
say that he will not, in all such cases; our language would often sound odd,
being out of common custom, which governs the propriety of words; and not only
so, but it would not be sufficiently expressive. Should we be afraid to say, it
is impossible for a man to love God, or come to Christ, while his heart is
altogether, wicked, and full of enmity against God and Christ; people would be
ready to think we immagined this might sometimes happen, and that there was no
real impossibility in it of any kind. Whereas there is as real, and as absolute
an impossibility in this case as in any supposable one whatever. To be more
guarded therefore, than the scripture is, in this matter, would be to be
unguarded. The apostle demands, can the fig tree, my brethren, bear
olive-berries? either a vine figs? and the prophet, can the Ethiopian change
his skin? or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, who are
accustomed to do evil. And our Savior says, a good tree cannot bring forth
evil fruit neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. A good man out of
the good treasure of the heart, brings forth good things. And an evil man out
of the evil treasure, brings forth evil things. There is as certain and never
failing a connection in this case, as any natural connection whatever. Which
ought by no means to be dissembled, but openly maintained. But then it is
certainly of a quite different, and even a directly opposite nature, to all
intents and purposes of moral agency. And it is of the last importance, in my
apprehension, that this also should be maintained, and manifested to every
man's conscience.

BECAUSE a man must act according to his own heart or as he pleases; does this
destroy his freedom! it is the very thing in which all free agency consists. --
The pulse can beat; and the limbs can move, in some bodily disorders, or when
one that is stronger than we takes hold of them; whether we will or no. But God
does not consider us as accountable, for such actions as these. And we should,
not without reason, think it very hard, should he blame or punish us for them.
For an honest and good man's pulse may beat, as irregularly as the worst
villain's in the world. Or his hands, in a convulsion, may strike those around
him, in spite of all he can do to hold them still. Or one may be carried by
force, along with a gang of thieves, and be taken for one of them, though no
man hates such company and actions as theirs, more heartily than he does. Such
involuntary actions, every one sees a man is not, and ought not to be,
accountable for. And the reason is, no bad inclination of ours, or want of a
good one, is necessary in order to them. They are so free, as to be independent
of us, and out of our power. If all our actions were like these; noways
necessarily connected with our disposition, and choice, and temper of mind; we
could not be accountable creatures, or the subjects of moral government. If a
good tree, could bring forth evil fruit, and a corrupt tree good fruit: if a
good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, could bring forth evil things,
and an evil man out of the evil treasure, good things; the tree could never be
known-by its fruit. It could never be known by a man's actions, any thing what
his heart was. So that, if they were dealt with according to their works, the
most upright and well disposed, would be as liable to be punished; and the most
ill-natured and ill-disposed, as likely to be rewarded, as the contrary. Whence
all moral government must be at an end.

CERTAINLY, if we are justly accountable, rewardable or punishable, for any
actions; if any actions are, or can be, properly our own, it must be such as
are dictated by ourselves, and which cannot take place without our own consent.
An inability, therefore, to act otherways than agreeably to our minds, is only
an inability to act otherways than as free agents. And that necessity which
arises from the temper and choice af the agent himself, and that which is
against his choice and his very nature, are so far from coming to the same
thing at last, that they are directly contrary one to the other, as to all the
purposes of morality: freedom, accountableness, and desert of praise, or blame,
reward or punishment.

AND this is agreeable to the sense of all mankind, in all common cases. A man's
heart being fully set in him to do evil, does not render his evil actions the
less criminal, in the judgment of common sense, but the more so: Nor does the
strength of a virtuous disposition, render a good action the less, but the more
amiable, and worthy of praise. Does any one look upon the Divine Being, as less
excellent and glorious, for being so infinitely and unchangeably holy in his
nature, that he cannot be tempted with evil, or act otherwise, than in the most
holy and perfect manner? Does any one look upon the devil, as less sinful and
to blame, because he is of such a devilish disposition, so full of causeless
spite and malice, against God and man, as to be incapable of any thing, but the
most horrid wickedness? -- And as to mankind: Who is there that does not make a
difference, between him that is incapable of a base action, only by reason of
the virtuousness of his temper, having all the natural talents, requisite for
the most consummate villainy; and him that is incapable of being the worst of
villains, for no other reason, than only because he don't know how? Does any
one think, that only the want of a will to work, excuses a man from it just as
much as bodily infirmity does? Or, do we any of us, ever imagine, that the
covetous miser, who with all his useless hoards, has no heart to give a penny
to the poor, is for that reason, equally excusable from deeds of charity, as he
who has nothing to give?

WE certainly, always make a distinction, betwixt want of natural abilities to
do good, and the want of a heart; looking upon the one as a good excuse, the
other as no excuse at all, but rather as that in which all wickedness radically
consists. A natural fool, no one blames, for acting like a fool: But to him
that knows to do good, and does it not; to him it is sin, in the sense of all
mankind, as well as in God's account. If there be first a willing mind, we
always suppose it ought to be accepted, according to that a man has, and not
according to that he has not. But the want of a willing mind, or not being a
mind to do well, is universally considered as a crime, and not as an excuse.
Nothing is more familiar to us, than to distinguish in this manner. Nor can any
man of common sense, help judging thus.

NOW, this distinction is as applicable to the case before us, as it is to any
other case. Some may be unable to comply with the gospel, through the want of
those powers of mind, or those bodily organs, or those means of grace, without
which it is impossible to understand the character of Christ, or the way of
salvation, let their hearts be ever so good. In either of which cases, the
inability is of the natural kind. Others, may have all the outward means, and
all the natural faculties, which are necessary in order to a right
understanding of the gospel; and yet, through the evil temper of their minds,
they may be wholly averse to it, and wholly blind to the glory of it. They may
be disposed, to make light of all its proposals and invitations, and to treat
every thing relating to religion and another world, with the utmost neglect and
indifference. Or if their fears of "the wrath to come," are by any means
awakened, and they are made with much solicitude, to enquire what they shall do
to be saved; still, they may be utterly disinclined to submit to the
righteousness, or the grace of God, as revealed in the Gospel. They may be
still, such children of the devil, and enemies of all righteousness, as to be
irreconcilably averse to all the right ways of the Lord. They may have such an
evil heart of unbelief to depart from the living God, as is absolutely
inconsistent with consenting to the covenant of grace, or "believing to the
saving of the soul." Now, when this is the case, the inability the sinner is
under, is only of a moral nature. We may pass on now to the

II. HEAD, viz. To show that all who are not the subjects of this special and
effectual grace of God, must certainly be unable, in one or the other of these
senses, to come to Christ, or comply with the gospel.

THOSE, many of them at least, who dislike the distinction now explained, and
some who seem in a sort to admit it, suppose all men have, and must have, every
kind of ability to do their duty, and to obtain salvation. But, I apprehend, it
will be very easy to make appear, that this certainly is not the case. A
variety of scripture arguments, and a multitude of texts, might be adduced
here, were they needed. But that all have not, both the forementioned kinds of
ability to comply with the gospel, either of themselves, or by the help of
common grace, is as evident as any thing needs to be, merely from the fact,
that many do not do it, but actually live and die in impenitence and unbelief.
By common grace is meant, that grace which is given to sinners in general,
those that are not saved, as well as those that are. They who believe all, are
in every sense, able to work out their own salvation, through the gospel, would
not be thought to frustrate the grace of God. They do not suppose sinners are
able to do this of themselves, but that some divine assistance, some working of
God in them, both to will and to do, is really necessary in the case. But then
they suppose, all this needed grace, whatever it be, is given to sinners
without exception; and hereby they account for God's commanding all men every
where, to repent and believe the gospel. "I grant, indeed," says an ingenious
arminian writer, Dr. Stebbing, on the opperations of the spirit.
that by reason of original sin, we are utterly disabled for the performance of
the condition, without new grace from God. But I say then, that he gives such
grace to all of us, by which the performance of the condition is truly
possible, and upon this ground he does and may most righteously require it.
Here by the way, it is worthy of particular remark, what notions many are
obliged to entertain of divine grace, in order not to reflect upon the divine
justice. To require perfect holiness of creatures so enfeebled and depraved as
we are, they suppose would be evidently one of the most unreasonable things in
the world. Therefore God has been graciously pleased to send his Son to obey
and die in our room, that we might not be "under the law but under grace." But
then the covenant of grace, is not mild and gracious enough to be quite
strictly just; because by reason of original sin, we are utterly disabled for
the performance of the condition upon which salvation is suspended still. To
remedy the unreasonableness of this, new grace from God is required.
Accordingly "he gives more grace." He gives such grace to all of us, whereby
the performance of the condition, is truly possible; and upon this ground he
does and may most righteously require it! Thus, not only the obedience and
death of Christ, but likewise all the grace of the Holy Ghost which is
necessary to salvation, is found no more than barely sufficient to screen the
ways of God to men, from the just imputation of unreasonableness, and
unrighteousness. It is certainly difficult to conceive, how any man who really
views things in this light, however much he may talk of free grace, can ever
feel himself any more obliged and indebted to God, than if he had only dealt
with us in a righteous manner from first to last, never requiring more of us
than we were able to do, and so no occassion or room had been given for any
grace in the affair. And yet this view of the matter, is really as friendly to
the grace of God, as any conceivable one which proceeds upon the principle,
that nothing more can be justly required of us, than we have a moral as well as
natural power to do.

BUT what I had more especially in view here, was to enquire how it comes to
pass that any in fact do not embrace the gospel, if that grace is given to
every one which is sufficient, in all respects, to enable him to do it. If we
want the faculties of body or mind, or the opportunity and means, which are
necessary in order to obtain the knowledge of the truth, those difficulties
must be removed: And if we want a heart to take pains to know the truth, or to
love and embrace it when discovered, that difficulty also must be removed, or
else we are not, in every sense, enabled. It is not, in all respects, truly
possible that a sinner should come to Christ, till every thing that is
inconsistent with his coming is removed out of the way. It is truly impossible
that any one should cordially embrace the gospel, so long as he has not such an
heart in him; though it would be impossible in a very different respect, if he
had not external light, or natural powers sufficient. And now, if God gave that
grace to all of us, whereby we were enabled in both these senses, to comply
with the gospel, the infallible consequence must be, that we should all of us
actually do it. To say that a man has both natural and moral ability to do a
thing, is the same as to say that nothing in nature is wanting in order to his
doing of it but only his own good will, nor that neither. Or, that he both
could do it if he would, and is sufficiently willing to. And whenever this
happens to be the case, I believe it is not very likely, the thing will, after
all, not be done. If in the instance before us, it is really thus; if sinners
not only could come to Christ if they would, but they have likewise all that
willingness of mind, which is necessary in order to their actually coming, what
in the universe can ever be assigned, as the reason why in fact they do not?
This must certainly be an event, absolutely without any cause.

THE truth is, when people puzzle themselves upon this subject, and insist we
are not accountable, and cannot be blamed, any further than we have a moral as
well as natural power to do otherways than we do, what their minds run upon, is
only natural power after all. They may say they know what we mean by moral
power, viz. that disposition to do a thing which is necessary in order to our
doing it; and they mean the same. But however, when they get into the dispute,
they get bewildered, and lose sight of the distinction. They don't suppose an
impenitent sinner, going on still in his trespasses, has a present, actual
disposition, and a sufficiently strong one, to hearken to, and obey the gospel.
But something like this seems to be in the bottom of their minds, viz. that he
must be able to be disposed; or he must have such a dispositon as would be
sufficient, if he was disposed to make a good use of it. Now this is only to
use the word disposition improperly, and to conceive of it as a mere natural
power; a price in our hands, which may be used well or ill, and which will turn
to our benefit or condemnation, accordingly as we are disposed to improve it.
The disposition they think of, is not in the least degree virtuous, nor any
ways necessarily connected with virtuous conduct. But it may lie still, or go
wrong, and will do so, unless a man is disposed and exerts himself, to make it
act and keep it right. The sinner is not helped out of his difficulties in the
least, by having such a disposition as this. Yea, should we go further, and
say, the impenitent sinner might have a heart to embrace the gospel, if he
would take proper pains in order to it; and he might do this, if he was so
disposed; and he might be so disposed if he would try; and he could try if he
had a mind to. Yet, IF after all, he has not amind to try, to be disposed, to
take any proper pains, to get a heart, to embrace the gospel, or to do any
thing that is good; he is still in as bad a situation as any body supposes him
to be in. There is no more hope of his coming to good, so long as this is the
case with him, no more possibility of it; nor do we say any thing more in his
favor, than if we had only said as the scripture does of the fool, that there
is a price in his hand to get wisdom, but he has no heart to it. Pushing the
sinner's moral depravity and impotence back in this manner, may get it out of
the sight of those who cannot see above two or three steps: But this is all the
good it can do. There is still a defect in him some where; and such a one as
will prove his everlasting ruin, unless removed by such grace as he has never
yet experienced.

IT must forever hold true and certain, that if sinners do not come to Christ,
it is either because they could not if they would; or else because, on the
whole, they are not willing to. And if, in the room of coming to Christ, we
should substitute some lower and preliminary condition of grace and salvation,
it would be just the same case. Suppose it were using means, praying and
seeking in the most engaged manner the unregenerate sometimes do; all do not
come up to this; and the reason certainly is, they are under a natural, or else
a moral inability of doing it. Either they could not seek in this manner, if
they would, or else they are not inclined to, but their disposition is to
employ their time and thoughts about other things. So that bringing down the
conditions of the gospel lower, in consideration of the depravity of men; or
supposing common grace, whereby all are enabled to come up higher than they
could of themselves, removes no difficulties, at least not those designed to be
removed, unless the way of life is supposed to be level to the inclinations of
all men; or that all are in fact made willing, and actually are saved.

ON the whole, I think the principle, that God can in justice require of his
creatures, only what he gives them a moral as well as natural power to do, must
be given up. Otherways we are reduced to a necessity of supposing, all the
blame, if any are lost, must lie entirely on God, and not on them. And as to
those who are saved, they can have nothing to say in his praise, but only that
he has been barely just to them. That having given his Son to obey and die, to
deliver them from his law, which was an infinitely unreasonable one, for fallen
creatures to be under; and having given his spirit to enable them to come up to
the otherways impossible terms of the gospel, he has on the whole, dealt not
unrighteously by them. If therefore we think, there is any way to vindicate the
righteousness of God in the damnation of any; or that any thing can fairly be
said to the praise of the glory of his grace, in the salvation of them that are
saved, we must suppose he is not obliged in justice to give all of us both the
kinds of ability that have been spoken of. And if we believe that any in fact
do not obtain salvation, we must conclude they are not in both these senses,
enabled to obtain it. Which was all I undertook to prove under this second
head. The

III. THING proposed was, to consider the moral inaability of sinners in this
matter.

THERE is not so much need of laboring to confirm this, that unregenerate
sinners have not such an heart in them, as is necessary in order to a
compliance with the gospel; because proving the preceding and subsequent
propositions, will infer the truth of this. If there is certainly an incapacity
of the natural or moral kind, as has now been shown; and if there is certainly
no natural incapacity, as I am to make appear under the next head; then
certainly there must be a moral one. Besides, I have time to treat this head
but very concisely, considering the importance of it.

IT may be proper to be observed here, that the disinclination of sinners, as
to some things which are pre-requisite to a compliance with the gospel, is
different in different persons. Though even this difference, I suppose, is
owing to divine grace, or to more's being done for one than for another.

IN the openly vicious and immoral sinner, there is a prevailing inclination to
persist in his dissolute and immoral practices. And there is reason to
conclude, that none of this character would ever reform, and that all would be
of this character, if left to their own heart's lusts, without any divine
restraints.

IN secure and unawakened sinners, there is no disposition to attend to the
concerns of their souls, and seriously consider the state they are in, or to
make any sollicitous enquiry about the way of salvation. They make light of
these things, and go their way, one to his farm, and another to his
merchandise. And such is their attachment to the vanities of time, and their
aversion to attend to things of another world, that there is no reason to
think, any one of this character, would ever become serious, thoughtful, and
engaged about his eternal well-being, if left entirely to himself.

IN the awakened sinner, though earnest in his enquiries, there is still an
utter want of an honest openess of mind, to admit a conviction of the truth. He
that does evil hates the light, neither comes he to the light, lest his deeds
should be reproved. He whose inward parts are very wickedness, will always hate
to see, and, if he can possibly help it, never will believe what he really is.
Hence awakened sinners very often, never do, and if left to themselves none of
them ever would, "know the plague of their own hearts." While they think they
are doing all in their power to increase their convictions, they are all the
while inwardly striving with all their might, against conviction, and trying to
find some plausible ground to think well of themselves, and to establish a
righteousness of their own. Nor will they ever be sensible how "deceitful and
desperately wicked" their hearts are, and how hopeless their case is, in
themselves, till a conviction of it is forced upon them by the most overbearing
and irresistible evidence.

AND even in the convinced sinner, whose mouth is most effectually stopped, who
is forced to see that sin is alive and has full dominion over him, and that he
is indeed dead; in him who has the fullest conviction of every necessary truth,
that any unrenew'd sinner ever had; there is still, if nothing further is done
for him, no disposition heartily to approve of the law, or comply with the
gospel; no disposition to repent truly of any of his transgressions, or receive
and be dependent on Christ alone for pardon and salvation; no genuine desire to
be saved from sin, or to be saved from wrath in that way, in which God's
justice can be vindicated, or his grace exalted. But after all his convictions,
there remains still in his heart, a most fixed, inveterate, and unconquerable
opposition to all these things. Nor will he ever be cordially reconciled to
God, by the mere force of truth in his conscience, any more than the wicked
will be at the day of judgment, or the damned in hell.

THAT no light, or conviction of the understanding, which the natural man is
capable of receiving, can be sufficient to draw, or drive, him into a true
compliance with the gospel, is very evident from what is said concerning the
necessity of regeneration. When Nicodemus came to Christ, wanting information
about the way of life, our Savior soon let him know that mere instruction,
even by a teacher come from God, was not all that was wanted. Yea, that a man
could receive no instruction, about the kingdom of heaven, to any saving
purpose, unless something else was done for him first. See John iii. 3. Jesus
answered and said unto him, verily, verily I say unto thee, except a man be
born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. And again, to explain the matter
further, ver 5. Except a man be born of -- the spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. The necessity of such a change as is meant by being born again,
or born of the spirit, turns upon the truth of man's being by nature, under a
total moral depravity. Accordingly, our Savior immediately adds, That which is
born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the spirit, is spirit.
That is, a man has nothing truly spiritual or, holy, in him by the first birth;
but every thing of this kind, comes by the renewing of the Holy Ghost. Agreably
to this, the apostle Paul says, Romans vii. 18. "I know that in me, (that is in
my flesh; in my nature as far as it is unrenewed, unsanctified, and as it was
by the first birth) there dwells no good thing." And in Romans viii. 7. he
says, The carnal mind, the mind we have as born of the flesh, is enmity against
God; for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. He adds,
So then, they that are in the flesh; cannot please God.

THIS is the reason we must be born again. If there was any thing spiritual in
us, as born of the flesh, there would be no necessity of this second birth. If
we were not by nature dead in trespasses and sins, there would be no occasion
for our being quickened, by divine power and grace. If sinners were inclined at
all to that which is good, they would not need to be created unto good works.
If man had not wholly lost the divine likeness, there would be no need of being
created again after God, in righteousness and true holiness. If the heart of
the sons of men was not altogether depraved, to the very bottom of it, there
would be no necessity of the old "heart's being taken away, and a new one
given." If men's alienation of affection from God, did not arise from
unlikeness to him, but only from ignorance and misapprehension about him, no
change of nature would be at all necessary. Mere light in the head, mere
conviction of the understanding, would then produce a cordial reconciliation.
Yea, if a man has any degree of righteousness and true holiness, nothing but
convictions can be wanting, in order to his complying with the covenant of
grace, and entering into the kingdom of God. He would no sooner be convinced of
the holiness and righteousness of God, but he would feel his heart drawn forth
in love to him. He would no sooner be convinced that the law was holy, just and
good, but he would be pleased with it, and loathe himself for all his
transgressions of it. He would no sooner be convinced of the unparrallel'd zeal
which Christ has shown in the cause of righteousness, and how he has magnified
the law and made it honorable, but he would be charmed with him, and see him to
be the chiefest among ten thousand, and altogether lovely. He would no sooner
be convinced, of the holy tendency of all his doctrines and all his laws, but
he would cordially embrace, and cheerfully obey them. He would no sooner
understand, that his design was to save his people from their sins, but he
would receive him, with all joy and thankfulness, as his Savior and Lord.

BUT, if the hearts of men are totally depraved, destitute of righteousness and
true holiness entirely, the case will be quite otherways. A holy God, a holy
law, a holy Savior, a holy gospel, will not surely, then appear lovely in
their eyes, but the contrary. Nor will a clearer understanding and conviction
of what they really are, excite complacence and satisfaction in them, but the
greater aversion and dread. They cannot, in that case, be cordially united to
Christ, until his character or their's, is essentially changed. They can not be
drawn to him, unless by force, and against their wills, till either he ceases
to be what he is, or they are made new creatures. For an unjust man is an
abomination to the just; and he that is upright in the way is abomination to
the wicked. And, what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? And
what communion has light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with
Belial?

CAN a man whose heart is wholly corrupt, and unholy, choose the holy Jesus for
his Lord and Savior, and cordially embrace the pure and holy doctrines and
precepts of his gospel? Can one who is really and at heart, wholly in love with
the service of Satan, inlist, with any sincerity, into the service of Christ,
all whose work and business is, to destroy the works of the devil? Can one who
is all the while an enemy in his mind to God, yea, whose mind is enmity itself
against God, be delighted with the character and ways of his well-beloved Son,
who is the brightness of the Father's glory, and the very image of his person?
Can one who is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be, be subject
to the Mediator, or suited with his conduct in being obedient even unto death,
to condemn sin and do honor to the divine law? Can one who is an enemy to all
righteousness, be pleased with Christ in this view of his character, pleased
with him, "for his righteousness sake," and for the zeal he has shown to
"magnify the law and make it honorable?"

THIS is the reason the Father is well pleased in him as Mediator. And "all
that come unto God by him," must be pleased with him in this view also. There
can be no true reconciliation between God and man, unless both parties
acquiesce, and are suited with what the Mediator has done; and that considered
in the same point of light. God is well pleased, indeed, with the love Christ
has shown for lost men. For the Father was always as benevolently disposed
toward this fallen world, as the Son was. But yet had he not as Mediator,
shown a proper regard to truth and righteousness; had he not "condemned the sin
of men," and given to God the glory that was due unto his name, the holy
Governor of the world could not have acquisced in his mediation. The Lord was
well pleased for his righteousness sake. And if we are not pleased with him in
this view, but merely for the sake of his kindness and goodwill to men, we do
not come into his plan of reconciliation and of peace. If that view of the
amiableness of Christ, and that well pleasedness with his mediation, which is
implied in a compliance with the gospel, had nothing more in it than only
seeing it to be a beautiful thing in him to feel so much interrested in our
welfare, and willing to do and suffer so much to save us from misery and ruin;
then indeed, no change of nature in the most depraved creature would be
necessary in order to it. We may be as wholly selfish and regardless of God's
glory as any sinner over was, and yet be greatly charmed with the meditation of
Christ, viewed only in the favorable aspect it has upon our interest. And,
undoubtedly, thousands have been fatally deceived in this manner. Taking this
for a discovery of "the gory of God in the face of Jesus Christ," and the
effects of it for conversion and sanctification. For such a view of Christ and
of God through him, will, under certain circumstances, produce a sort of
repentance, love and obedience, in one who was, and continues to be, entirely
void of real holiness. Let a sinner only have an impressive sense of the
dreadfulness of damnation, and of his danger of it, and in the midst of this
have the love of Christ, and what he has done and suffered for sinners, come
suddenly into his mind, in a manner that makes him believe, or at least
strongly hope, he is one of the happy number for whom Christ laid down his
life; and is it possible but that be should be filled with comfort and joy, and
have his affections greatly drawn forth toward such a kind and almighty
Savior? And when lie comes now to view God in Christ as his reconciled God and
father he will naturally feel quite otherways affected toward him too. When he
believes God has loved him with an everlasting love, and elected him from
eternity to be a vessel of mercy and an heir of glory; his enmity against him
will hereupon naturally subside; he will necessarily be ashamed and grieved
that he has had such unworthy thoughts of him, and has behaved so unsuitably
toward him. And such an apprehension of his new state, and of God's great
goodness, may produce a lasting alteration in his life. He may be very zealous
in religion; and possibly very regular in his morals likewise Here then, is
faith, repentance, love, and new obedience, without the least occasion for any
conformity to God in true holiness from first to last. Such things as these are
the natural growth of the human heart under such rain and sunshine. There is no
need of any alteration in the soil, or of any foreign seed sown in it.

THIS may be more clearly conceived, by the help of a similitude. Let us then,
suppose a king that is strictly just in his administration; forbiding, on very
severe penalties, all unrighteousness among his subjects, and very thorough in
seeing that justice is duly executed on all offenders. A number of his
subjects, who are viciously inclind, are uneasy under such restraints, and grow
disaffecteed to their sovereign, and at length form a conspiracy to dethrone
him. But before they are quite ripe for executing it, their plot is happily
discovered. They are taken and brought to judgment; found guilty, and condemned
to die. Their hatred against their prince is hereby greatly increased. One of
them, however, is exceedingly dejected in spirit, at the thoughts of his
approaching execution. For some time he remains in prison with the rest, in
fearful expectation that every day may be his last. But in the midst of his
greatest anxiety, a messenger at last arrives with a gracious pardon. He is
delivered from prison and from death. Yea, his offended sovereign has set his
heart so peculiarly upon him, that instead of having him executed with his
fellow criminals, he is determined to make him a particular favorite at court,
and raise him to honor and wealth, far exceeding his former condition before he
became a rebel and a traitor. How great is the surprise! how insupportably the
joy, upon hearing all this! the wretch's enmity and hatred is quite overcome.
Especially if he now understands that the king had always a particular kindness
for him, and never designed any penal laws should be executed upon him, let him
do what he would. He is filled with the most admiring sentiments of his injured
gracious sovereign, and loves him above all men in the world. But hardly dares
to look up to him, he is so ashamed of his former temper toward him, and the
black design he had meditated against his crown and life. All this does not
suppose any alteration in the rebels real character. All this may be, and
undoubtedly will be, though his vicious disposition, which first gave rise to
his disaffection to his prince, still remains in its full strength. There is no
need of his becoming a new man, a friend to righteousness and an enemy to
iniquity, in order to his becoming in this manner, a warm friend to his royal
(...) and benefactor, considered merely as such. He may be so all his days; may
be one of the foremost in his commendation at least in extolling the great
things he has done for him; and he may behave excellently well when under the
kings eye, or when he expects, he will hear of it, with a view to please him,
and yet be at heart as unrighteous a creature as ever he was, even to his dying
day.

Now such a kind of reconciliation to God, will naturally take place in a
sinner, if he is only effectually terrified with the thoughts of "dwelling with
devouting fire, and inhabiting everlasting burnings;" and then gets a hope of
God's love. There is no need of being born again, or ever having any thing of
the moral likeness of God, in order to it. Yea, there is no need of conviction,
in order to such a conversion as this. I mean a conviction of the equitableness
and moral fitness of the divine administration. Light, concerning the holiness
and justice, wisdom or general goodness of God, is not what produces such a
change as this; nor is it any ways necessary in order to it. Accordingly
persons of this kind of piety, have no great concern to know what God is in
himself, but only what he is to them. They have no notion of entering much into
the nature and ends of his law, or of the gospel, and seeing into the divine
character and glory as thereby exhibited. These are matters of empty
speculation with them; things which vital piety has nothing to do with. They
know as much about God's general character; as much about the things the
Psalmist prayed that his eyes might be opened to behold; as much about "the
things the angels desire to look into," as ever they expect or want to.

THESE may perhaps not improperly be denominated antinomians; though they are
divided into a variety of sects and contending parties upon particular
questions, about the faith which is not founded in holiness, but which is the
foundation of every thing.

SOME strenuously insist, that no faith can administer hope and comfort enough
to make men truly good, short of "a full persuasion and confidence of our own
salvation." Or, a being well satisfied "of our reconciliation with God, and of
our future enjoyment of everlasting heavenly happiness." To get this persuasion
is the grand secret, or "mystery of sanctification." To give this persuasion
without any evidence of it is truth, and even while it is supposed to be in fact
not true, is the great work of the Holy Ghost, begetting "an inclination, and
propensity of heart, to the practice of holiness." -- Others, not so fond of
mystery, or not so well understanding "the way of manufacturing truth without
evidence," and of making a falsehood true, by the pains taken to believe it;
choose rather to suppose, "the simple truth," or general report of the gospel,
beat effectually into a man's head, when "he is thoroughly pinched with the
impossibility of hope, on every other side, will give such a refreshment to his
mind," as will do the whole work. That many in all ages, only on hearing this,
have become quite ashamed of their former rebellion, have been led to love
their sovereign, and encouraged to do those things which are well pleasing in
his sight; and accordingly have known what it was to stand in his presence, and
have their joy made full in beholding the light of his countenance. The faith
that does all this, they would have a bare persuasion, or conviction in the
understanding, of what is called the truth; leaving the heart to take care of
itself. This, we are told, some call the faith of devils. But that however keen
the intended reproach be, it can have weight with none but such as are swayed
by sound instead of sense. For, according to the scripture, the same truth
which saves Christ's people torments the devil's. So we find them saying what
have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou son of God? art thou come hither to
torment us before the time? they believe, they hate, and yet they tremble at
that truth which Christ's people believe, love and find salvation in. The
difference then, in the affections excited by a belief of the gospel, in the
minds of true believers and devils, arises entirely from the different
circumstances they are under, and not from any difference in their tempers. The
devils hate to be tormented, and Christ's people love to be treated kindly and
made happy. So the same belief of the same truth, which excites the hatred and
horror of the former, fills the latter with joy and love. This difference is
not hard to discern; and is naturally enough accounted for. But how any one,
who is not swayed by sound instead of sense, should think of making more of
this than only a circumstantial difference, is not so easy to be conceived. A
bare change of place and external treatment, would make devils of such
converts; and such converts of devils, in a moment. They being after all
essentially, exactly alike.

THIS way of affecting all the alteration wanted in wicked men, merely by
notious in the head, however firmly credited, and whether true or false,
whether called an appropriating faith, or a simple belief, or by whatever other
name, must forever leave a change of nature quite out of the question. Indeed
it evidently proceeeds upon the supposition, that there is really no
difference, between saints and sinners, angels and devils, only they are
treated differently, or some don't understand things so well as others.




To conclude this head, and the present discourse. If the moral depravity of
unregenerate sinners, was fully underderstood, it must undoubtedly appear that
this alone is sufficient to account for all that is said in the scripture
concerning their inability, and to make the grace of the Holy Ghost as
necessary, as that makes it. If they have an evil heart of unbelief, wholly
inclined to depart from the living God, such a heart will effectually and
forever turn them aside, so that they cannot deliver their soul. Nor would
better natural abilities than they have, be of the least service to them. If
ever they come to good, it must be by strength that is under a better direction
than their's is. Greatness of capacity has not the least tendency to produce
goodness, in one who is altogether destitute of it. Sinners of the most exalted
genius and strength of mind, are certainly no more able to make themselves new
creatures than the very weakest are. And the reason of this is as obvious, as
the fact is certain; viz. because whatever strength any one has, he always lays
it out according to his own heart, and not contrary to it. Consequently all the
strength of men and angels, yea even Omnipotence itself, if the sinner had the
direction of it, would never make him good. Could he have divine power at his
service, according to his utmost wish, it would not be to change his heart, but
to enable him to act it out without control. If therefore, sinners only knew
what hearts they have, this alone would bring them to despair of help from
themselves, let their natural powers be never so good, and make them see that
if ever they are saved it will be no thanks to them. Should we even suppose a
self determining power in the will, those who are dead in sin would not be able
to help themselves by it. For who is there to put such a power into action the
right way? they will not do it. And a self determined determination, contrary
to a man's heart, were such a thing possible, would be no more thanks to him,
than the having his heart changed by divine power. It can never be by their own
power or holiness, that they are first determined to that which is good, when,
by the supposition, they have no holiness, and all their power is employed in
opposition to it.


SINNERS inwardly imagine, if they were only dealt fairly with they should do
well enough. If they perish, they think it will be owing to the fatal influence
of some dark decree, or to God's requiring more of them than they can possibly
do, let them exert themselves never so faithfully. But he that imagines thus,
knows not the plague of his own heart. "He that trusts in his own heart, is a
fool."

SERMON II. The natural Ability of Men to understand and embrace the Gospel
considered; and the Subject applied.
JOHN VI. 44. No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me draw
him.


THE general observation raised from these words, was to this effect,

THAT no man is able to comply with the gospel of Christ, without the effectual
grace of God.

A principal thing I had in view, was to clear this doctrine of the common
objection in men's minds against it, as if it represented the Most High, as
being insincere and unrighteous in his dealings with sinners. Offering them
salvation on terms he knows they cannot come up to; and then condemning and
punishing them, for their noncompliance with such impossible conditions.
Accordingly, I undertook, in the first place, to explain and illustrate a
distinction of two kinds of inability; and to show that men are, not
unfrequently, in common speech, and scripture, said to be incapable of actions
which are their aversion, or which they have not an inclination to, as well as
of things which they could not do if they were so disposed. As likewise, that
there is a real occasion for using this and the like expressions, in such a
manner. There being, indeed, an absolute impossibility of a man's acting
otherways than agreeably to his own heart, as well as there is of his doing
things which exceed his natural strength.

Secondly; I endeavored to show, that sinners while they actually neglect the
great salvation, are certainly unable, in one or the other of these senses, not
to neglect it. That so long as they do not come to Christ, it must be true that
they want, either such natural ability, or else such a heart, as is necessary
in order to their coming to him.

Thirdly; I considered the moral depravity of sinners, showing that they have
such an evil heart to depart from the living God, that until their natures are
changed, it is impossible they should come to Christ, or choose him and his
salvation. We are come now, to the

IV. AND last head proposed; viz. To prove that sinners labor under no other
impossibility of complying with the gospel, but only what arises from their
disinclination to it; or from the badness of their hearts.

I DO not mean, however, nor will any understand me, to assert this, with
respect to every individual of the human race. For as the apostle observes,
"how shall men believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they
hear without a preacher?"

THERE are, undoubtedly, a great many in the world, who, in their present
circumstances, could not get the knowledge of the gospel way of life, if their
hearts were good. There are some that have not the means of grace; there are
others that have not the use of reason; and there are others who have not, and
never had, the sense of hearing. It is not asserted concerning any of these,
that they are not under a natural incapacity to come to Christ. But what I
undertake to evince, is only, that persons who have ordinary intellectual
powers, and bodily senses, and are arrived to years of discretion, and live
under the light of the gospel, labor under no natural inability to obtain
salvation: But that if they cannot comply with the revealed way of life, it
must be owing entirely to their disinclination to it, or to the badness of
their hearts.

THERE are multitudes that evidently do not view the matter in this light. It
is needful therefore, that this point should be labored a little particularly.
The

1. ARG. I shall make use of for the confirmation of it is, that it is not
God's usual way, to require natural impossibilities of any of his creatures;
and to condemn them for not doing, what they could not, if they would.

GOD commands none of us to fly above the clouds, or to overturn the mountains
by the roots; or to do any such kind of impossibilities. Yea, we are
particularly told in his word, that if there be first a willing mind, it is
accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not.
If a man has but little estate, it is not expected or required that he should
give away a great deal to pious or charitable uses. If a poor widow casts in
two mites, when it is all she has, it is as well accepted as if it were two
millions. If a man has never so little strength, of body or of mind, a willing
exertion and good improvement of that little, is all that is required of him.
This is exceeding evident from those summaries of the whole law, which we have
both in the old testament, and in the new. Moses says, Dieut. 10.12. And now
Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy
God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God,
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul? And our Savior, in answer to the
question of the scribe, which is the great commandment in the law?" says, Mat.
22 37 -- 40, and Mark 12, 30. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all Thy mind, and with all thy strength.
This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, thou
shall love thy neighbor as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law
and the prophets.

IT is evident from these passages, that the whole law, in the highest
perfection of it, is level to some kind of capacity which men still have, in
the present fallen state. We are not to suppose, indeed, it is their moral
capacity; or that all the Lord our God requires of us, is only to love and fear
and serve him, as much as we are disposed to. This would be no law at all. It
would be a dispensation from all law; a liberty for every one to walk in the
way of his own heart, and treat the Deity just as his inclination leads him. We
are not to suppose a perfect law, can come down any lower, than to require a
perfect heart, and a perfectly good improvement of all the talents and strength
we have. And it is evident, neither Moses, nor our Savior, understood the
divine law as requiring more than this. To love and serve God, with all the
heart, soul, mind and strength, cannot mean more than to the utmost extent of
our natural abilities, be they greater or less. Some men are not capable of so
high a degree of love to God as others, though they are equally upright and
well-disposed; because their mental powers are not so great; or their
advantages to get the knowledge of God have not been so good. In like manner
some cannot do so much for God, for want of opportunity, etc. Now all proper
allowences are made in the divine law, for things of this nature. The more any
one has of intellectual or bodily strength, or outward advantages; the more is
required of him; and the less any one has of these, the less is required. As to
loving our neighbor as ourselves; this is undoubtedly equally in the power of
the weak and of the strong, of him that is capable of higher and lower degrees
of affection, provided he is equally upright disinterested and impartial.

ON the whole, I think it is exceeding plain and evident, that God in his holy
and righteous law, requires no impossibilities of any of us, but what become so
by reason of our present evil temper of mind, and unwillingness to exert the
natural strength we have in the manner we ought. And now, if we have natural
powers sufficient for understanding and doing our whole duty; and nothing
hinders any of us from coming up to all that sinless perfection, which is
required in God's perfect law, but only our own wicked hearts; I conclude few
will think any thing else hinders sinners of ordinary capacity, who enjoy the
outward means of grace, from repenting and complying with the gospel. A

II. ARG. that sinners who enjoy the external light of the gospel, are not
under a natural impossibility of complying with and obeying it, may be drawn
from what the scriptures plainly teach, and what is generally believed,
concerning the great difference that will be made betwixt such sinners, and
those who never heard of a Savior, as to their final condemnation and
punishment.

OUR Savior let those cities where he had chiefly preached and wrought his
miracles, know, that their final doom would be much the heavier for it; and
that it would be more tolerable for even Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of
judgment, than for them. But this, and what is commonly said, about the great
guilt of gospel sinners above others, surely supposes that there is some
difference between them and the heathen, as to a possibility of their
understanding the way of life, and attaining salvation. It supposes the former
have a real price in their hands, which the latter have not. But if the gospel
sinner is under a natural inability to repent and believe in Christ, an
inability arising from any thing else besides his own heart, this could not
surely be the case. Why should one who is, and always has been, so weak or
disordered in his intellect, as to be incapable of understanding the gospel, be
thought a greater sinner for living in a christian land? We do not think this
is the case as to idiots, or quite delirious persons. We do not think they will
have more to answer for than the heathen will. But if we believe a natural
impossibility is required of men in this case, because their natural capacity
was impaired or lost by the fall: then for the same reason we might expect,
that the heathen who never heard of the gospel, and natural fools who can
understand nothing about it, would be punished for not embracing it, as much as
any. For they would not have been under those disadvantages had it not been for
the apostasy.

ARG. III. IT is expressly attributed in scripture, to the evil hearts of men,
as the sole cause of impenitence and unbelief under the gospel.

AND it ought to be particularly observed, that this is done with professed
design to set aside the plea of ignorance, which sinners are so exceeding apt
to harp upon; and to let them see that they are without excuse. This is the
condemnation, our Savior says, that light is come into the world; and men have
loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil. In another
place he says, if ye were blind, ye had not had sin; but now ye say we see,
therefore your sin remains. And again; if I had not done among them the works
which none other man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both seen,
and hated both me and my father. Now they have no cloak for their sin. That is,
if they had not had those powers of mind, or those means of conviction that
were necessary, it is true, they would not have been to blame, it would have
been no sin in them, not to have believed in and received me as their Messiah.
But now when their understandings are good enough; and when means, powerful and
sufficient external means have been used with them; their unbelief and
rejection of me, can be owing to nothing but the desperate wickedness of their
hearts. It is knowledge and not ignorance of my character, that is the spring
of their hatred. Or if any of them are ignorant, it is their own fault. There
is light enough, only they hate it, and will not come to it.

ARG. IV. That it is not owing to weakness of the understanding, or any natural
defect, that sinners in general under the gospel are not saved, is evident from
the inferior abilities of many of those who actually obtain salvation,

IT is not men of the strongest and brightest genius, and they only, that
understand and embrace the gospel; but they are persons of very ordinary powers
of mind, as often if not oftener than any. Ye see your calling brethren, says
the Apostle to the Corinthians, how that not many wise men after the flesh, --
are called. But God has chosen the foolish things of the world, and the weak
things to confound the mighty, etc. And our Savior says, I thank thee, O
father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. Even so, father, for so it
seemed good in thy sight. Though God bestows the special influences of his
grace, just where and when he pleases, or as seems good in his sight, yet he
has doubtless always a sufficient reason for fixing upon the particular objects
of his sovereign mercy, exactly as he does. We are not to conceive of it, as a
blind partiality, but a wise sovereignty, that is exercised in this matter. The
reason why not many of the noble and honorable are called, but rather the base
and such as are despised, is, we are told, that no flesh should glory in his
presence. And the reason why it seems good in the sight of God, to hide these
things from the wise and prudent, and to reveal them unto babes, may be, and
undoubtedly one reason of it is, that hereby it may be made evident, it is not
owing to the superior strength of men's natural powers that they discover the
strait and narrow way which leads unto life; nor to their weakness, in
respect of natural abilities, that they do not. If babes are able to see the
suitableness and glory of the gospel way of salvation, unquestionably, wise men
might, were it not for something besides weakness of understanding, or any
deficiency in the intellect merely. It is evident from hence, that natural
weakness can be no insuperable bar in the way of man's obtaining salvation,
unless they are weaker than babes.

ARG. V. AT least this will be undeniably evident, if we consider what is done
for a person when these things are revealed unto him; or when he is made to see
the things of the spirit of God, as they are spiritually discerned.

GOD does not reveal any new truths, not contained in his written word; nor
does he give any new faculties to persons, or enlarge their natural powers of
body or of mind, when he enables them to believe and obey the gospel. But what
he does for them, is to alter the temper and disposition of their hearts. If we
found all that became real christians, however weak before, were immediately
afterward, persons of genius and abilities superior to all other men, we
should, indeed, have reason to suspect that the unregenerate wanted better
understandings, rather than better hearts, in order to their being able truly
to know Jesus Christ, and the way of life. But this is not the case. It is the
heart that is created anew, when one becomes a good man, and not the head. We
find the natural powers of men are the same after regeneration as before; and
often far inferior to many of their neighbors, who have experienced no such
change. It is true, the wisdom of good men runs in another channel; they are
wise to do good, and apt to get divine knowledge; but that is only because they
have a taste for these things, and are disposed to take pains about them. The
children of this world are, in their generation, wiser than the children of
light. They prosecute their own schemes, and make proficiency in what they turn
their hands to, and set their hearts upon, beyond what good men do in the
things of virtue and religion. What makes good men see the glory of God, which
others can perceive nothing of, is not their having more speculative knowledge
about the divine character, than others have, or are capable of; but their
being conformed to God in temper and in heart; conformed to him "in
righteousness and true holiness." This, indeed, makes divine things, and all
things of a moral nature, appear in quite a new light; and hence they are said
to be renewed in knowledge. He that is altogether unholy, let his head be never
so clear, and his speculative knowledge never so great, cannot have all that
perception of holiness, which the weakest saint has, who feels the opperation
and power of it in his own heart. There is no knowledge like that we get by
experience. A man that has never felt a particular kind of pain, we say, can
have no idea of it; so of parental affection, one who has never experienced it,
knows not what it is. The same may be said of all kinds of sensations and
affections; the experiencing them, gives a knowledge of them that can no
otherways be obtained. And this holds true with respect to holy exercises and
affections as much as any other. Hence, those who are made partakers of a
divine nature, or who have put on the new man which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness, are capable of a kind of knowledge of God,
which is peculiar to themselves. Accordingly the apostle John says, Every one
that loves, is born of God, and knows God. He that loves not, knows not
God; for God is love. 1 John iv. 7, 8. He who is acquainted with the feelings
of universal benevolence, in his own breast, has a different idea of him who is
good unto all, and whose tender mercies are over all his works, than he whose
heart is contracted, and who is truly good to none, has, or is capable of.
Particularly; he who is conformed in heart to God, sees a beauty in his
character and government, which no one of an entirely opposite temper can
possibly do. The reason is, whatever any one regards, and is zealous about, he
is necessarily pleased to see others regard, and be engaged in promoting. Thus
if a man values his own particular interest or reputation, as every one does,
he is thence unavoidably pleased to see others tender of it, and disposed to
promote it. And if a man is benevolently concerned for the public interest, he
will in like manner be peculiarly delighted to see others public spirited and
zealously aiming to secure and advance the general good. The entirely selfish
soul, feels as if his own private happiness was the most valuable, yea the only
valuable thing in all the universe. Hence if he can only believe, God has set
his kindest love on him, from eternity; and sent his only Son from his bosom to
die for his sake, (whether necessary or unnecessary, wise or unwife, right or
wrong, it matters not;) this gives him the most exalted, the most glorious
conception, of the parent and lord of all worlds, that his narrow soul can
possibly contain. -- But, to him that is born of God, and assimulated in
temper, to his father which is in heaven, things will appear in a quite
different light. To him who is made to be in any measure of a true, a God-like
public spirit, an impartial, infinite disposition to maintain universal order,
to promote universal good, is the grand, the infinite beauty.

To have the spirit of Christ, or the same mind that was in him, is, in like
manner, the only thing that can enable a person to have that sense which all
saints have, of the greatness and glory of his redeeming love. Hence it was the
apostle Paul's prayer for the Ephesians, that they being rooted and grounded in
love, might be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the breadth, and
length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ, which passes
knowledge. Ephesians. iii, 17, 18, 19.

AND to have a heavenly, that is, a holy temper and spirit, is necessary in
order to have a true understanding of any thing heavenly; any thing of the
inheritance of the saints in light, or of what God has prepared for them that
love him. This the Apostle very particularly and largely takes notice of, in 1
Cor. ii, 11 -- 15. "For what man," says he, knows the things of a man, save
the spirit of man which is in him? The spirit of man; the narrowness, pride,
and various corrupt affections by which mankind are actuated, would be very
incomprehensible to us, did we not feel, and had we never felt, any thing of
the same in our own breasts. We should be perfectly amazed to see how men act,
not being able to conceive what inward feelings or principles should excite
them to behave in such a manner. -- The things of a man; the enjoyments which
fallen creatures so fondly dote on, and so eagerly pursue after, to one who
never had any thing of their spirit, it would be inconceivable how there could
be any thing gratifying, or agreeable in them, to any mortal. -- So the things
of God knows no man, but the spirit of God. The enjoyments of religion and of
heaven, can no more be perceived to have any thing in them, by one who is
entirely destitute of a divine and heavenly temper. -- Now we have received,
not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God; that we might know
the things that are freely given to us of God. That is, the holy delights and
entertainments provided for saints in a future world. Which things also we
speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost
teaches; comparing spiritual things with spiritual. -- In describing these
future glories and felicities, we do not make use of such language as a carnal
taste would suggest, or as would be thought the true sublime, by the wise of
this world: but we speak of them in a manner to which we are led by the spirit
of holiness. To give us the most elevated ideas of the joys to be expected in
heaven, we compare them, not with the idolized possessions and delights of time
and sense, but with those spiritual enjoyments, those holy exercises and
gratifications, which true saints experience, in some low degree, in this lower
world. -- But the natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God:
for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. -- The unrenewed sinner, having nothing spiritual in
him, to compare spiritual things with, being a stranger to spiritual joys, or
the feelings and pleasures of a truly virtuous mind, they will necessarily seem
empty, out of the way things to him; nor can he perceive their true excellence
and worth, because their being perceived thus, depends entirely upon the spirit
and temper a man is of.

IT appears from these passages, that it is neither the having new truths
suggested, that are not contained in the scriptures; nor the having the
understanding convinced of the truths contained in them; nor the having new
faculties of mind given, or the old ones enlarged, or mended, or any how made
better, that enables a man to see God, or Christ, or heavenly things, as saints
see them. But that a foundation is, and can be laid for this, only by a man's
becoming a saint, or having a new spirit given him; the spirit which is of God.

IN a word; whatever is said by some about rectifying the natural faculties, it
is very generally agreed, that regeneration is not a physical change, but a
moral one. That it consists, not in making men great, but in making them good.
That the new creation, is nothing else but the moral image of God, consisting
in righteousness and true holiness. But if these things are so, then certainly
all the inability that is removed, and consequently all that wants to be
removed, by the renewing of the Holy Ghost, is entirely of a moral nature. An
inability which altogether consists, in the want of an honest and good heart.

ARG. VI. This way of conceiving of the impotence of fallen men, does not
frustrate, but tends most of all to advance and magnify, the grace of God.

UNDOUBTEDLY that view of the inability of man, which is most easily and fairly
reconcilable with the justice of God, ought to be embraced, provided it does
not derogate from the freeness and riches of divine grace, in the sinners
salvation. Now I presume there are few, but what are sensible of some
difficulty, in reconciling God's requiring natural impossibilities of us, with
any notions we have of justice. As if he should require a man to fly, or lift a
million weight, or make a world. And should suspend his salvation on the
condition of his doing such things as these, which are evidently beyond the
capacity of any man, let his disposition be as it will. And should say he had
no cloak for his sin, in not doing things of this nature. And that for his not
complying with such a merciful proposal of salvation, it should be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for him. I say, I
believe there are few, but must be sensible of some difficulty in seeing into
the reasonableness, and justice of this. But then, perhaps they may think,
there is no way to leave room for such a display of divine grace, as we are
taught there is, in the salvation of men, without supposing something like this
to be in fact the case. They may think there can be no necessity of the grace
of the Holy Ghost, on supposition sinners can comply with the Gospel, whenever
they are disposed to. But any apprehensions of this kind, must arise from a
very favorable opinion of the goodness of the sinners disposition. As if he
was so willing to use his talents, and improve the price put into his hands
aright, that God has no way sufficiently to display his grace toward him, but
by requiring things of him, which the holiest creature in the universe, under
his circumstances, could not perform. If men are ill-disposed, they so far
stand in need of grace to enable them to do, that which without any such divine
help they would find no difficulty in, if they were well disposed. And is it
not easy to see, that it will require as much power, and more grace, to change
a sinners heart, than to alter a man's head, or enlarge any of his natural
faculties?

THE sot, who has lived in a course of intemperance from twenty to three score,
is still under no inability to reform, but only what arises from his own
appetite and inclination. He might still refuse the glass, and become a sober
man, without any body's advice or help, if his own will was not wanting. But
yet no one would think it a less unpromising undertaking, to go about to
reclaim such a person, than to cure one of a bodily infirmity in which the
patient's will had no hand, and which he could not get rid of himself, let him
be never so heartily, and steadily, and strongly desirous of it. Suppose such a
one, that had had all motives, fetched from this world and the world to come,
repeatedly urged upon him, in the tenderest and most forcible manner by all his
friends; but without the least effect. Should one at last, find means to
persuade him into a thorough and lasting reformation; would he not be thought
to do as great a thing, as he that should cure one of a natural infirmity that
had long baffled the skill of all the physicians?

MORAL sickness may be as hard to cure, and require as powerful means, and as
able a physician, as natural sickness. And if a man is dead in the moral sense;
that is, has lost all principles of true virtue entirely, he is as absolutely
beyond the reach of all means, as to their bringing of him to life again, as
one that is dead in the natural sense. Moral means, can only work upon such
moral principles, as they find to work upon. They cannot produce a new nature,
new principles of action, any more than natural means can make new life for
themselves to work upon, in a dead carcass. Cultivation and manuring may make a
bad tree grow, and bear fruit, after it is kind. But can never make a thorn bear
figs, or a bramble-bush, grapes. Let what means will be used, so long as the
tree is evil, the fruit will be so likewise. If mankind have lost the moral
image of God entirely, it is easy to see, that nothing short of a new creation,
can restore it to them. If they are dead in trespasses and sins, the quickening
them, must be an instance of the working of God's mighty power, in a
supernatural manner, like that of raising Christ from the dead. And without a
work of this kind, whatever means are used with them, they will never have the
least spiritual life, or real holiness. Ob. Regeneraion is frequently
represented in scripture, as being effected by means. Men are said to be born
again by the word of God. 1 Pet. i. 23. To be begotten by the word of truth.
James i. 18. And Paul says to the Corinthians, "In Christ Jesus I have begotten
you through the gospel." But how is this to be reconciled with making the
quickening of sinners, properly a supernatural work?

Ans. Almost all the supernatural works, recorded in the scriptures, are
represented as wrought by means, as much as regeneration is. The red sea was
divided by Moses's rod; and the river Jordan by Elijah's mantle. It was by
smiting the flinty rock, in the wilderness, that the waters were made to flow
out of it like a river. Moses brought forth this water, as much as Paul
regenerated the Corinthians. It was by throwing a stick into the river, that
the young prophet's ax was made to swim; and by washing seven times in Jordan,
that Naaman was healed of his leprosy. (...) was by prophesying over a valley
of dry bones, as represented in the vision of Ezekiel, and calling to the four
winds to breath upon them, that they were converted into a living army. It was
with clay made of dirt and spittle, that our Savior opened the eyes of one
that was born blind. And by calling with a loud voice, that Lazarus was made to
hear, and come out of his grave, after he had been dead four days.

Now to suppose that regeneration is effected by means, as much as these things
were, is not inconsistent with its being properly a supernatural work. But that
it is effected by the power of means, is what the scriptures are far from
leading us to conceive. It would be thought very remarkable, if any one should
undertake to explain the connection, betwixt the means used and the effects
wrought, in those instances now mentioned, in as natural and intelligable a
manner as some have attempted to do, betwixt light in the understanding, and
the productions of grace in the heart of a totally depraved sinner. But yet, I
apprehend, any of those things, may be as rationally accounted for, from the
known laws of nature, as regeneration can; and that the plain account of
scripture, as much obliges us to think, the former were effected by the power,
or natural tendency, or proper causality of means, as that the latter is.




AND now, does not the admiting such a total moral depravity, suppose room and
necessity enough, for the grace of the Holy Ghost in the salvation of men,
without supposing any deficiency in their natural faculties?

BUT let us compare the two hypotheses, that of a natural inability, and the
contrary one which I have now been endeavoring to prove, and we may easily see
which gives the highest conception of the grace of God. Those who conceive
sinners labor under a natural incapacity to come to Christ, place the defect
in the understanding. They suppose that ignorance and mis-apprehension, is the
primary cause of all our enmity and opposition to God. And consequently, that
as soon as the understanding comes to be rectified and rightly informed, we of
course become reconciled in heart to the ways of God; and pleased with the
character and mediation of Christ. This seems to suppose we always had been
conformed to God's real character, in the temper of our minds; and that all we
had been quarrelling with, and enemies to, was only a false idea of God; or
such a character as no one ought to love. As if a very righteous man, should be
prejudiced against and greatly engaged in opposing another, that was really as
righteous and good a man as himself. But he had been misinformed about him,
and conceived him to be quite a different man, from what he really was. Now as
soon as his understanding comes to be truly enlightened, or his mistakes are
removed, and he gets a thorough acquaintance, the good man loves the good man,
of course, without any change of character in either. But, shall we view the
enmity of the carnal mind against God in this light, in order to have the most
exalted idea of the divine grace, in the salvation of such a carnal person?
Shall we suppose that the reason, and the only reason, why he is not, neither
indeed can be, subject to the law of God, is because he does not, neither
indeed can understand it? Or because, through the weakness of his natural
powers, he understands it so, as it would be wicked to obey it, and no truly
virtuous and upright mind, could be subject to it, or suited with it, in his
sense of it? -- In that case, all that is necessary to be done by the divine
spirit, is, to inform us rightly concerning the holy nature and ways of God;
and let us know that all our hatred of him, is owing to a mere
misunderstanding; and that he is really just such a being, as we all naturally
love; even altogether such an one as ourselves. Can there be a necessity of any
thing supernatural, in bringing a sinner "out of darkness into God's marvelous
light," if this is all that is implied in it? -- Yes, it will be said, a
supernatural work upon the understanding, is still necessary. Though light
alone, will produce all the change of heart that is wanted; yet not objective
light merely, but what may perhaps be called subjective light. That is, the
understanding itself, must be strengthened, or enlarged, or brightened, or some
how made better; otherways the external light, however clear, will shine in
darkness, and cannot be comprehended.

Now if this is the supernatural work of the spirit, which persons are the
subjects of when they are born again, it is of the same nature, as if a natural
fool, should, by a miracle, have reason given him. It is apprehended, this
representation of the matter, will be though it no fair, if not quite ridiculous.
Men don't mean to be made natural fools of, neither. The weakness, and
blindness, and want of abilities so much complained of, is nothing of this
kind. They would be thought to have as much wit, as much reason, and good
sense, as the best, notwithstanding all their darkness of understanding. Nay,
they may exceed even a Lock, or a Sir Isaac Newton in clearness and strength
of mind, and yet have such weak intellects, as to be incapable of understanding
truly, the plainest principles of the oracles of God. Thus the reputation of
the head, and the heart, are equally taken care of; while the poor defect,
which must bear the blame of all the sin in the world, is crowded into a corner
of the soul, which no soul has, and therefore, which (...) cares how much is
said against.
But is this the way to advance the grace of God most, in our salvation? Is it
the most wonderful instance of rich grace, to give an intelligent mind, to one
whose heart was so good, that he only wanted to have reason enough to be able
to understand the gospel, and he would embrace it most cordially as soon as
ever it was proposed to him? does the grace appear so great in this, as in
changing the heart of one who was an enemy to the true God? One that might have
had light enough, only he hated the light and would not come to it? Or one that
had had the light of conviction forced upon him, and had both seen and hated,
both the Father and the Son, both the law and the gospel?

LET any one only think how he would address himself to God, with a view to
magnify the riches of his grace in saving him. Would he think that lessening
his former natural abilities as much as possible, was the way to do this most
effectually? Would he acknowledge that man by the fall had lost his rational
powers, and was become no wiser than the beasts of the field, and of no more
understanding than the fouls of heaven; and therefore, that he had been utterly
incapable of knowing what a kind of being God was, or what his law required, or
getting any just notions concerning Christ and the way of salvation? That no
one whose mental powers were so weak, or so much disordered, as his had always
been, could ever possibly get a true understanding of any of those things? And
if God had not been graciously pleased to give him a better head, he must
inevitably have been lost forever? Is this, I say, the acknowledgment one would
make, with a view to glorify sovereign grace, in bringing him out of darkness
into marvelous light? -- Or would he not rather acknowledge the goodness of
God, in giving him rational powers in his first formation, and so rendering him
capable of acting a higher and happier part than the mere sensitive creation;
capable of serving and enjoying God as a rational creature? Would he not
acknowledge that, though God might most justly have deprived him of all the
peculiar dignities and advantages of the rational nature, for his own and not
merely for Adam's abuse of them, yet he had not done it? That he had not been
denied the use of reason, or the opportunity and means of knowing God as many
had been? But that under all these advantages to know God, he had not glorified
him as God, nor been thankful. That he had shut his eyes against the clearest
light, turned a deaf ear to the most gracious calls, and hated the best of
Beings; hated him, not for what he is not, but for what he is; for his
righteousness, for his holiness; for those very things for which angels and
saints, so much admire and love him. And that the more he knew of God and
Christ, the more he hated them; and should forever have done so, had not divine
grace most astonishingly interposed in favor of so vile a wretch, and changed
his nature, given him quite another spirit.

IT is strange if any should seriously think, that displaying abroad their
natural weaknesses and infirmities, and alleging these as the only causes why
they have not known or done, better than they have, is the way to humble
themselves most before God, and to do the most honor to his grace in their
salvation.

THOSE who hold to natural inability, and suppose all that sinners want, is to
have their understandings rectified, thereby virtually and really, though I
suppose not designedly, deny moral depravity altogether. But should we suppose
sinners are depraved, and even totally depraved, in the temper of their minds;
but that they are so impaired in their natural powers too, as to be incapable
of understanding and complying with the gospel, if their hearts were good: This
natural inability in addition to the moral, would not lay a foundation for a
larger and fuller display of divine grace in their salvation, but the contrary.
Suppose mankind, when they lost the moral image of God, had lost their reason
too, and become fools in the natural sense; and that when their understandings
were restored, they were renewed in the temper of their minds also; then, you
see, they would never have had opportunity to discover their moral depravity,
as when they have had understandings good enough, and have known God, but in
works have denied him, being abominable, and disobedient, and to every good
work reprobate. It would not appear to themselves, or to any but the Searcher
of Hearts, what an evil disposition they had been of, and what a moral change
had been wrought in them. And consequently, the divine grace toward them, if
it was in reality as great, would not be manifested so much. But, indeed, the
grace of God in the salvation of men, on that supposition, would not in reality
be so great. The better understandings any have, and abuse, the greater is
their guilt; and consequently the greater the grace that saves them.

ALL that now remains is the Improvement. And,

1. FROM what has been said I think it follows, that there is no foundation for
conceiving of sinners as being to blame and inexcusable, in part of their
neglect of the great salvation, and not in the whole of it; or that they may
reasonably be exhorted, to do part of what is implied in coming to Christ, but
not the whole. Some seem to suppose that unregenerate sinners are not to blame
for not doing things which imply real holiness, and cannot be done without, as
repenting truly of their sins, believing in Christ, loving God, etc. But that
for not doing other things, which may be done without any holiness at heart, as
reforming externally, praying, etc. they are altogether inexcusable. But is not
this evidently a distinction without any just foundation? Either the natural
abilities of men must be the measure of their duty, and all they come short of
this is sin; or else their duty is to be measured by their moral ability, and
they are to blame only so far as they fall short of doing, what they have a
heart to do. Now if we are under obligation to do well, to the utmost of our
natural power, and no abatement of duty ought to be made, on account of an evil
heart, or the want of a good one; then sinners are to blame and altogether
inexcusable, in not forsaking sin heartily, as well as externally; in not
believing in Christ, loving God and being cordially obedient to his will. For
none of these things are impossible to such as are well disposed. But if moral
power is the measure of duty, if want of a disposition to do otherways than a
man does, renders him excusable and not to blame; then all are excusable, none
are to blame. The thoughtless and secure, the prayerless and profane, the most
profligate and abandoned, are as excusable, as little to blame as any others.
For the inclinations of the worst of men, it may, without any great stretch of
charity, be supposed, are as bad as their actions are. They are none of them
any more wicked than they are disposed to be. Nor have any of them a moral
power to be any better. The dissolute and immoral might reform, it is true, if
they were inclined to. The careless sinner might become serious and thoughtful
about his salvation, might read and hear, meditate and pray, if he was so
disposed. But it is as true, that sinners might come to the saving knowledge of
the way of life, might repent and believe the gospel, were they so disposed.
Nothing but a heart is wanting in one ease any more than in the other: And that
is wanting in both cases. The vile person will speak villainy, and his heart
will work iniquity, to practice hypocrisy, to utter error, etc. We are told
that "the heart of the sons of men is full of evil." And what they will do, if
left to themselves, we are also told. See Romans i. 27 -- 31. God gave them over
to a reprobate mind; that is, left them to act their own minds without
restraint. And what was the consequence? They were filled with all
unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, full of
envy, murder, etc. The scandalous sinner will not become externally reformed,
without restraining grace; nor will the secure sinner seek and pray, and use
the means of grace, unless he is awakened; any more than a man will come to
Christ, without the drawing of the father. The drunkard has not a moral power,
that is, a sufficient inclination, to forsake his cups, while he does not
forsake them; nor the lewd person to forsake his lewd practices; nor the
murderer to hold back his hand from shedding of blood, any more than the
natural man has to embrace the gospel.

THERE is therefore no propriety in exhorting the unregenerate, to do only such
things as are consistent with an entirely depraved and wicked heart, as if
nothing further could be expected of them at present, any more than there would
be in exhorting the most abandoned of mankind, to do only what is consistent
with their disposition and course of life, because nothing better can be
expected of them, till they are better disposed, or are under greater
restraints.

ACCORDINGLY, there is no such compounding with the natural man, for what he
can do, without a heart to do any thing that is good, to be met with any where
in the sacred scriptures. God's present demand upon every one of us is, "give
me thy heart." He does not say, give me thy external obedience only, make a
decent show of seeking and serving me, and it shall suffice for the present;
for as for thy heart, I know, there is no hope, it has loved strangers, and
after them it will go. The law requires truth in the inward parts; yea it
demands a perfect heart. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength; and
thy neighbor as thy self. Not, thou shall seek and pray for this temper,
toward God and man, but thou shall have it. -- The New Testament preachers of
salvation through Christ, say, repent and believe the gospel. Repent and be
converted that your sins may be blotted out. The sum of their preaching, "both
to the Jews, and also to the Greeks," was, repentance toward God, and faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Not testifying, "as the manner of some is," that
if sinners will do what they can, (meaning what their wicked hearts will let
them do, what the carnal mind which is enmity against God, may consent to,)
they will not be left to perish; but God will undoubtedly have pity on them,
and afford them further help.

CERTAINLY, if the divine law is just, no man can justly excuse himself, or be
excused, short of a perfect heart, and a perfect life. And if the gospel is
true, there is no safety for any sinner, no ground of dependence that God will
have mercy on him, or ever show him any favor, short of Christ, and an actual
interest in him by faith. He that believes not, is condemned already, because
he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God. He that
believes not the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on him.
He that believes not shall be damned.

It Is extremely obvious, that the scriptures every where treat the impenitent
and the unbeliever, with as little ceremony as any sinners whatsoever. And it
is exceeding evident, I think, from what has now been said, that reason affords
no plea in their favor, but what will equally excuse any sinner in the world,
in being as he is, and in doing as he does. If the want of a good heart, is a
good plea, every sinner, and every imperfect saint, may avail himself of it to
his complete justification. Those who are sanctified but in part, cannot be
blamed for being but imperfectly holy. Those who have no true holiness at all,
cannot be required to have any, or be blamed if they act as well as they can
without it. And, by the same rule, not so much as an external reformation, can
be required of those who have no mind to reform. Nothing can be said to the
purpose of excusing sinners on account of the badness of their hearts, unless
we would undertake to maintain this general principle, that the duty of every
one, must be only just according to every one's disposition. But if this
principle is true, every one must easily see, there can never be any such thing
as neglect of duty, or desert of punishment, or need of grace, in the universe.

2. FROM what has been said it may appear, that there is no force in that
common plea in the mouths of sinners, namely, That they did not bring their
depravity upon themselves, but were born with it. If their hearts are
altogether sinful, they did not 'make them so, nor is it any of their fault;
they have only such hearts as were given them, without their choice or consent.
-- Now in arguing thus, they evidently view a wicked heart, in no other light
than as a mere weakness, which a man would not choose, but it is what he cannot
help. They consider it as a thing not at all faulty in its own nature; so that
if they are to blame about it, it must be for something previous to it, and
quite of another nature. Concerning innocent natural infirmities, we justly
judge in the above manner. Thus if a man is sick, we don't blame him for it; we
know bodily sickness is no moral evil. But if we are told the man brought his
sickness upon himself, by intemperance, or some bad conduct, then we fault and
condemn him; that was a moral evil, though this is not^ -- Now those who make
the above plea, reason just in this manner about sin itself. As if it was not
sin, merely to be a sinner; or to commit sin when one has an inclination to.
But that the bringing a sinful disposition upon ourselves, had we done this,
would indeed have been a very wicked thing.

HENCE it seems to many, as if the poor sinful children of men, were only as it
were under a fit of sickness, which Adam brought on himself and them, by doing
an evil deed which he might easily enough have avoided, in as much as he was
perfectly holy; but that we his miserable offspring, being by nature sinners,
are under a necessity of sinning, and therefore cannot be to blame for it. It
seems as if Adam was in reality the only sinner, and his first sin, the only
sin of the human kind; because that sin was committed while man had, not an
imaginary, but a real, a moral as well as natural power, to abstain from all
sin. That is; the first sin did not arise from, or consist in, any defect in
the will; and herein consists the sinfulness of it. If Adam did not sin before
he had any inclination to, and while he was strongly enough inclined to the
contrary, it is easy to see, he had just the same excuse for his first sin, as
we have for any of ours. Let his first sin be placed where it will, whether in
actually eating the forbidden fruit; or in hearkening to any temptations to do
it; or in being off his watch; or in whatever any one pleases, still we must
suppose it committed while his heart was perfectly good, else he did not sin
without this boasted excuse of other sinners, want of a moral power to do
otherways. Thus by forgetting that sin is in itself sinful, we are led to look
for something else that is so, not in sinners, but in perfectly innocent
beings! We are led to suppose, creatures are capable of being to blame, no
longer, or further, than they are holy! We conceive Adam to blame, because of
the uprightness of his heart; and ourselves blameless, because our hearts are
so wicked! For in this way, we certainly bring nothing but perfect holiness
into the account, as an aggravation of Adam's sin, beyond those of his
posterity.

THE very first idea we can have of sin, is a depraved and wicked heart. And if
this is not a blameable thing in itself, there is no danger of finding any
thing that is. Could we clearly confound all distinction betwixt natural and
moral evil, and so betwixt natural and moral inability, as things essentially
different, from our own consciences, we should be secure enough. And in matters
of religion, men generally do confound these things so far as to feel very
easy, and very much as if there was no sin. But let a neighbor be very unkind
and injurious to them, and they begin to see a difference. This does not look
to them, just as if he was only lame, and unable to go out of their way. Nor do
they lay the blame upon Adam, but upon the malicious and unrighteous wretch
himself. Nor does their being told, it is his very nature to be so, make them
think much the better of him.

3. IF the distinction now insisted on was well understood, and clearly kept in
view, it would appear, in like manner, that a sinner's not being able to change
his own heart, is really nothing in his favor. Here, some may be ready to
think, is the grand difficulty after all. What they wanted to know, was, not
whether sinners would be able to comply with the gospel, or to obey the law, if
their hearts were good; but whether it is in their power to have such an heart
in them. For what does it signify what a man could do, if he had that which he
has not, and can by no means obtain? -- Sinners don't see how it is their own
fault, that they have such bad hearts, and do nothing from gracious principles,
provided it is not in their own power to alter themselves in this respect.

NOW if a wicked heart was not a moral evil, but a thing of the same nature as
a weak head, a bad memory, or an infirm constitution, this would be the case. A
man is not to blame for having these, provided he cannot help it. But if a
wicked heart is a thing of a criminal nature, a thing quite different from any
such natural weaknesses, then there is no force in the above reasoning. If to
have a heart to hate and oppose, God and our neighbor, instead of loving them
as we are required, is a moral evil; as certainly it is, and the sum of all
moral evil; then to say a man cannot alter in this respect, is only to say he
cannot help being a most vile and inexcusable wretch. To be unalterably in love
with sin, does not surely render one the less sinful, but the more so. Surely
the wickeder a man's heart is, the more faulty and to blame he is.

BUT the fallacy, whereby sinners elude their consciences in this matter, lies
in a secret supposition that they could not change their hearts, nor would they
be changed, though they should never so sincerely, and heartily, and uprightly
try to do it; which would indeed be a very hard case. If a sinner honestly, and
from a truly virtuous disposition, tried, to the utmost of his natural power,
to alter his entirely wicked disposition, but it would'nt alter; he was as bad
as ever after all; it would seem indeed, that he was in a very pitiable
situation, but not very faulty. Yea, it would be difficult to see wherein he
was at all to blame. And that something like this, is the real view which
multitudes have of the matter, is very evident.

LET us put the case (as people would have it) that sinners were, in all
respects, able to change their own hearts. Only it must take some time, a month
suppose; and they must apply themselves very diligently, very faithfully to the
work, all that while, in order to accomplish it. There is a sinner, however,
that neglects his opportunity, and spends the whole month in sin, without ever
using any means, or making the least attempt to get a good heart. Is he not to
blame now for this? Most certainly he is. But why so? Why so! -- Does not every
one see that such carelessness in a case like this, such indifference about
becoming good, when it was entirely in one's power, must be inexcusable to the
last degree? To continue thus in sin, when there was no manner of necessity of
it; surely this can never be justified. -- But another sinner was much better
disposed. He seized the favorable opportunity, and applied himself with the
greatest imaginable diligence; and at the month's end, actually became a good
man. Now was he to blame, during this time that he was thus faithfully
laboring, and doing all in his power to become good? By no means. But why not?
He had a bad heart. Yes, but he did as well as ever he could, notwithstanding
that. No man could have done better, under his circumstances. And he was
actually of a wicked disposition, no longer, than till he could possibly be
otherways.

THUS people would be apt to judge in such cases. And this shows what notions
men have of inability with reference to the sinner's changing his heart; and
what the reason is they say the distinction of natural and moral inability
signifies nothing. For by whatever name it is called, they will conceive of it
as being of the same nature. If they own it lies in the wicked disposition of
the sinner altogether, yet they don't conceive it lies in the disposition he
acts from, but in a great, ugly disposition he is acting against, but is unable
to overcome. They suppose the inability he labors under is such, that he may
be well disposed, and do well; yea, that he may be disposed to do the whole
duty of one under his circumstances, and actually do it, and yet not be able to
help being of an entirely depraved and wicked disposition. Nor could they find
the least shadow of an excuse for him, did they not view his case in this
absurd light; -- did they not consider him as faithfully exerting himself, with
an honest and good intention, endeavoring to become good, but all in vain. Or
at least, did they not suppose him willing enough to exert himself in this
manner, only he knows it will signify nothing. In this way it is that a
perverse and stubborn will, a wicked and unwilling mind, comes to be thought as
innocent a thing, and as good an excuse, as any in the world. It is viewed as a
mere weakness; a thing not inconsistent with trying to be holy, but
inconsistent with being so, let one try never so heartily. Which is the proper
notion of natural inability. And to maintain this notion, they have a double
meaning to every word, by which "the abominable thing" which men are to blame
for, can possibly be expressed. Sins they distinguish into voluntary, and
involuntary, necessary and unnecessary, faulty and faultless ones. They also
make two sorts of wicked hearts. One that is really wicked, and for which men
are to blame; another that is totally wicked, but not really so at all, and
which is no man's own fault. Could they only be made sensible that their sins,
and their wicked hearts, were of the bad kind, their mouths would be stopped.
But to fasten a conviction of this upon them, is one of the most difficult
things in the world. They will affix such ideas to every word that can be made
use of to express an evil disposition of mind, as to make an innocent thing of
it; -- a kind of dead weight, which, either they make themselves as easy as
they can under, knowing they must bear it; or else are striving with all their
might to shake off, but cannot. The seeking sinner, at least, is supposed to
have as sincere an inclination to become truly good, and to have a heart to do
his duty, as a sick man has to be well. His wishes, his desires, and endeavors
are all very good. All he wants is to be directed how, or to have strength
enough to be able, to get a good heart. Thus deceitful above all things, is the
heart of a sinner! Thus artful in hiding itself, and keeping out of sight, and
laying all blame somewhere else! The heart, the disposition, the inclination,
the will, are readily allowed to be altogether wrong and sinful, while yet what
is properly meant by all those words, is still supposed to be good enough; and
hence the sinner cannot see how he is to blame. Yea the very thing for which
alone any one can be to blame, is looked upon as his sufficient excuse and
justification. Thus "a deceived heart has turned him aside, that he cannot
deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand?"

4. WE may hence learn, what alone is sufficient to convince a man that his
utter impotence does not lessen his obligation in any measure, or afford him
the least cloak for his sins. It is only his being made sensible what his
impotence really is, and wherein it consists. The apostle Paul says, Romans vii.
8, 9. Without the law sin was dead. For I was alive without the law once: but
when the commandment came, sin revived and I died. The former of these
situations of the apostle, is that of every sinner who cannot see how it is
possible he should be wholly helpless, and yet altogether inexcusable, at the
same time, and in the same respect. He has no just conviction of the plague of
his own heart, He is alive, and sin is dead. He sees neither his impotence, nor
his sin, in a true light. If he saw one, he would necessarily see both. Let an
unregenerate sinner only see his real heart, and he will see that he is
helpless enough. And let him only see this sort of helplessness, and he will
never have a thought of it is being of the nature of an excuse. A man never
finds himself utterly helpless in this view, utterly unable to become good, by
reason of his actual badness, until he finds all the bottom springs and
principles of action within him, are entirely wrong. That he does not so much
as intend to do his duty, as duty, and never did. That he does not mean well,
in any thing he does. This makes him see that his plowing is sin, and that all
his most painful religious duties, must be an abomination to him who looks on
the heart, and knows what they all spring from. He sees he has no regard for
God's glory, cares nothing what becomes of it, if he could but be safe and
happy himself. He sees he is dead, and all his works are dead works; and that
he must be created anew, or he shall never do any thing as he ought. But does
this view of his deadness, make him loose sight of his sinfulness and guilt?
does he now feel himself excused and free from blame, because his heart is so
totally depraved, so opposite to God and all that is good? No. Sin revives,
just as fast as he dies. His deadness is seen to be nothing but the very life
and soul of sin. His having such a heart, his being of such a temper, that he
can do nothing, can delight in nothing but sin, he sees is the very thing that
God's law condemns him to everlasting burnings for, and that most justly. If
such a disposition as he finds himself now to be of, would extenuate a
creatures guilt, there is not a devil in hell that could ever be damned. --
When a sinner once sees what he really is, his helplesness and his sin, are
seen quite consistent; and one just as great as the other. For indeed, they are
one and the same thing.

5. FROM what has been said it may easily be seen, that there is no want of
directions proper to be given to sinners, but that all the difficulty is, they
are not in a disposition to regard and follow them. People are always ready to
ask, but after all, what shall sinners do? can you give them any directions how
to get out of this helpless condition? is there any thing for them do, or is
there not? -- Now this; however common it is, is certainly very impertinent. If
it is a settled point, that the case with sinners is, they have no heart to do
any thing that is good, people must strongly forget themselves to ask, is there
any thing for them do? as if all the difficulty lay in answering this question,
or in pointing out duty to them! surely there is enough to be done, if they
would but do it. It is easy to direct them to the course they ought to take;
and it would be easy to put them in a way in which they might have great reason
to hope for salvation, if they thought it a matter worth taking pains about,
and were of a teachable spirit, and willing to follow good advice. It is much
easier to say what they should do, than it is to make them willing to do it.
They should become serious, and thoughtful about eternal things. They should
amend their ways and their doings, which are not good. They should "search the
scriptures," and take every method, improve every opportunity in their power,
to acquaint themselves with God -- and Jesus Christ -- the law -- the gospel --
and with their own character and state. They should cry after knowledge, and
lift up their voice for understandidg: They should seek it as silver, and
search for it as for hid treasure. They should lie open to conviction, and be
willing to know the truth, and to embrace it when discovered. They should not
cover their sins, but be sensible of, humbly confess, and heartily forsake
them. They should, "return unto the Lord" their Maker and rightful Sovereign,
submiting to his authority, owning his justice, and accepting his grace through
the Mediator. Or, in other words, they SHOULD repent, and believe the gospel.

BUT if they will not follow these, nor any good directions that can be given
them, who can help it? If they will set at naught all the counsel of wisdom,
what good can the best counsel do them? If they will not hearken to the calls
of the gospel, will not come unto Christ that they might have life; will do
nothing proper to be done by persons in their circumstances, there is,
absolutely no help for them: unless God himself interposes, and works in
them, to will and to do (...) his good pleasure.

6. According to what has been said, there can be no reasonable objection
against God's giving no encouragements of salvation, on lower terms than an
actual compliance with the gospel. Many are ready to say, if there are no
promises (or encouragements amounting to the same thing) on any terms short of
saving faith, God is not in earnest in his proposals to sinners, and does not
treat them well, but rather trifles with and mocks them in their misery; for he
knows that no unregenerate sinner can come up to such terms, any more than he
can make a world. But according to what has been said, if sinners were but in
earnest themselves about their salvation; if they were dispot'd to treat God
well, and not to mock and trifle with him, there would be no difficulty in the
case. There were natural impossibilities in the way of our obtaining salvation.
But Christ has removed every thing of this kind out of the way. He has paid the
dreadful debt of suffering which we could never pay; and has wrought out an
all-perfect righteousness for out justification, which mere creatures, having
once transgressed, could never do. And now he says, Ask, and it shall be given
you: Seek, and ye shall find: Knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every
one that asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to him that
knocks, it shall be opened. Past sins are no bar in the way; for there is "a
fountain set open," not only for Judah and Jerusalem, but for all the world to
wash in, from sin and from uncleanness. The greatest unworthiness is no
objection; for the invitation is, Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the
waters, and he that has no money; come buy and eat, yea, come, buy wine and
milk, without money, and without price. Whosoever will, let him come, and take
the water of life freely. Sinners, you have really as fair an opportunity for
life, according to the gospel, as probationers can possibly have; as full a
price in your hands, as your hearts can possibly desire. There is nothing on
earth; there is nothing in all the decrees of heaven; there is nothing in all
the malice and power of hell, that can hinder your salvation, if you don't
hinder it yourselves. Nor need you be discouraged by reason of any bad
disposition brought upon you by Adam, which you are heartily sorry for, and
would be glad to git rid of, but cannot. For the Second Adam is able to help you
in this, as well as other respects; and will do it in a moment, if you in the
least degree really desire it. The very thing he came for was to save from sin,
the power, as well as the guilt of it; and to save whoever wants to be thus
saved. This was the very reason his name was called Jesus. Nor need you
imagine, that you must lay out all your own strength first, and do all that can
reasonably be required of one under your circumstances; and then may have just
an encouragement of being saved of grace after a life of such perfection. This
is the most reproachful idea of the God of all grace, that you can possibly
entertain. No. If you do so well that it would be hard for God to refuse you
salvation, he will save you most righteously, and never desire you should
pretend to think there is any grace in it. But he will receive you graciously,
and love you freely, if you desire it, though you have not done so very well.
He means to exercise as much grace, as he would have the honor of, and not to
be eternally praised for what is not his real due. He is willing to save you in
as gracious a manner as ever you thought of, or can wish for. Only weigh the
matter, and say whether you choose to be saved. Enter into the nature of
gospel-salvation; attend to the character and laws of Christ. And then say,
whether you will have him and be his; whether you are willing, and would really
choose to exchange the servitude of satan, for that liberty wherewith Christ
makes his followers free; or whether you must plainly say, you love your old
master and your lusts, and choose rather, to have your ear bored, and be a
servant forever. But, however, be sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come
high unto you; and if you freely refuse to have any part or lot in it, be
assured, that when the wicked are turned into hell, with all the nations that
forget God, it will be more tolerable for Sodom than for you. But I must not
enlarge further, by way of particular inference.

ON the whole; I am not able to conceive how any one who enters into the
matter, can question the propriety of making the distinction insisted on in
these discourses; or with what appearance of reason, any can pretend it is a
useless distinction. As to the importance of it; it may easily be observed, in
how many instances, upon the most leading points, and in the most material
respects, by the help of this distinction, common sense will cross the common
notions of sinners, exactly where the bible crosses them. -- It sets reason,
and scripture, divine justice, and divine grace, in a quite consistent view;
whereas without it, I apprehend they must forever appear irreconcilable. -- It
leads good men to see that human infirmities and imperfections, are not such
comfortable extenuations of guilt, as they are sometimes ready to make of them.
That all their moral infirmity, all their want of perfect holiness, is entirely
their own fault; and what they ought to be deeply humbled for, and go mourning
under all their days -- It shows sinners, that their perdition is really
altogether of themselves: That all ground of discouragement in their case, is
their own badness. And not their unworthiness, neither, but merely their
unwillingness to be made clean. That this indeed makes their case desperate,
from every other quarter but the uncovenanted grace of God. In themselves, or
from any (...) that man can say or do, there is no hope. No, (...) have loved
strangers, and after them they (...) go. And as to changing the hearts of such,
God has reserved it as the sovereign prerogative of the throne of his grace, to
have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and compassion on whom he will have
compassion. -- It administers not so much comfort, indeed, to sinners in their
impenitence and unbelief, as they would be glad to have. But in this awful
condition, they have generally comfort enough, and too much in all reason. To
kill their self-righteous hopes, and let them see their guilt and danger, their
utter helplesness, and yet entire inexcusableness, is the kindest thing that
can be done for them. This, however, is the grand objection; the grand reason
why it is said, it does no good, it comes to the same thing when all is done
and said. The sinner is as helpless, and as absolutely dependent on sovereign
grace, if his inability lies in his disposition, as if any thing else was the
matter with him. For a wicked heart will as infallibly shut a man out of
heaven, if he is left to it, as any thing in the world could. -- Hence very
ingenius writers, even though they make the distinction now insisted on and by
their first expressions one would think saw the difference, will yet suppose
after all, that the terms of salvation must be level to the hearts of men; or
that something must be done, whereby sinners may be saved, notwithstanding
their moral impotence. That things must not be left so, that even his own
iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and be shall be holden in the cords
of his sins. -- To say that if salvation is offered to all who heartily desire
and choose it, and so truly ask for it, it is offered on the lowest terms is
therefore treated with contempt; and it is replied, then we may well say, woe to
the sinner whose confidence in his own sincerity fails him. If a man has not
this hearty desire, and cannot create it in himself he is in a deplorable
condition. Accordingly the scriptures are ransacked for encouragements, if not
promise, to something lower than asking for salvation, or being willing to have
it. And the totally depraved heart, is carefully sounded, to fin^ ground for
doings that are not unlawful, though altogether unholy. That upon these better
sort of unholy doings, (...) one side, and those encouragements on the other, a
bridge may be built over all impossibilities of every kind so that no sinner
shall be in a deplorable condition, by reason of his moral depravity. But every
one may get to heaven, in spite of his heart. This is making distinction that
are something to the purpose.


AS to the foundation there is for the distinction;

1. WE have seen the bible is as express and full in making the difference
supposed, as it is in any thing. We have seen that all the heart, soul, mind
and strength; that is, a perfectly willing and faithful exertion of all our
faculties, however enfeebled they are, is all that God requires of us in his
perfect law. Nor is there a single instance of a natural impossibility's being
required of any man, in all the sacred records. Nor is it once intimated, that
natural impossibilities might justly be required of us, because our natural
powers were impaired by the fall. But, on the other hand, we have seen that the
most absolute moral impossibilities are required of all men, without the least
scruple, as if there was no kind of difficulty in them. That a perfect heart
and a perfect life, are as much required of men now, as if they were not fallen
creatures; and required of the greatest sinner, as much as of the best saint.
No peculiar provise's are made, in favor of even the most abandoned.' Nor is
it once intimated, any where in scripture, that the reason why men may be
required to do that which is lawful and right, though it is contrary to their
inclination, is because Adam did that which was unlawful and wrong, contrary to
his inclination. Or that all the reason why a wicked heart, is not entirely
innocent, and a good excuse, is because man brought it upon himself, by his own
folly and wickedness, before he had any thing of it. -- We have seen, that the
way our Savior took to convince men, their rejection of him and his gospel was
their sin, was by showing them, it could proceed from nothing but the badness
of their hearts; and not by leading them to believe it was primarily owing to a
mere weakness or disorder in their understandings, occasioned by the original
fall. He readily admitted that if men were blind, or if they had not sufficient
means of information and conviction, their unbelief would be no sin. But when
he could prove to them that it could be owing to nothing but their hating the
light, because their deeds were evil, this he supposed fairly implied their
condemnation, and left them no cloak for their sin. Nor does it appear that any
unbelievers in those times, had refined so far as to reply in their own
vindication, that they could not help hating the light, because their hearts
were evil. This seems to be a cloak for unbelief, of a more modern invention.

2. WE have seen that common sense, most readily and fully giv^^ into such a
difference as this, in all common cases; in every supposable case in which the
vindication of our own character is not concerned. Yea in cases where men are
most interested, and most straightened for a plea in their own justification, they
rarely think of pleading a bad intention, and a very wicked heart. If a man,
when questioned for a supposed faulty action, can show that it was an
oversight, and not owing to any ill design; or if he can make appear, that he
had not opportunity or capacity, to do better than he did; these, are always
allowed to be things to his purpose. But it is rare that any one undertakes to
excuse himself, as to any injurious conduct, or omission of duty, with respect
to his fellow men, by showing that he is, and always was, of an exceeding
wicked and unrighteous disposition, and that has (...) was quite as bad as his
conduct. No one, unless he was out of his wits, would ever think of making such
a plea as this before a human court. It is only in matters of religion, and
before the divine tribunal, on their last, decisive trial, that criminals
themselves think of making this plea, or that it would avail any thing, unless
to their greater condemnation.

AND we have seen, that the reason why sinners are ready to look upon a wicked
heart as a good excuse in matters of religion, is because they mean no such
thing by it, nor do they think they have any such thing as, a heart at all
wicked. When they talk of moral depravity, deadness in sin, want of a
disposition to that which is good, etc. They really mean by such expressions --
they know not what. Something that is consistent with their sincerely wishing,
desiring, and endeavoring to the utmost of their natural power, to do their
whole duty. And this is all the reason they think a bad heart is an excuse with
respect to these things, any more than in other cases. This is the reason why,
in their view, "sin is dead," and looks like such a kind of thing as must
necessarily be always dead; it not being possible in the nature of things that
it should be alive, longer than only just to bring itself into existence!

IT may therefore, notwithstanding this seeming exception, well be considered
as a quite universal dictate of common sense; that the want of a heart, and the
want of natural capacity, in regard to excusing men, are entirely different
things.

3. WE have seen, that reason discovers a just foundation for this decision of
the moral sense, and of the scriptures, as clearly as it discovers any thing of
a moral nature. We have seen that an ability to act otherways than agreeably to
our own hearts, would only be an ability to act unfreely and of constraint.
That actions which may be done contrary to, or without our wills, are actions
for which we cannot in reason be accountable. That only taking away moral
necessity, the necessity of men's acting or not acting, according to their own
disposition and choice, unavoidably subjects then to a fatal necessity, a
necessity of acting otherways than they would choose, or whether they will or
no. Reason plainly teaches, that things done under that necessity which arises
from our own hearts, and that which is against them, are just as different, as
things in which we are the agents, and things in which we are not: -- Just as
different as Peter's girding himself when he was young, and going whither he
would, and his being girded afterward, and carried whether he would not: --
Just as different as a man's wilfully murdering himself, and his being murdered
by another, in spite of all he could do in his own defense. -- We have seen,
that if want of holiness excuses a person in being unholy, and if a disposition
to sin excuses a person in sinning, then every unholy creature, every sinner in
the universe, is perfectly excusable.

THUS if scripture, reason, and common-sense, all concurring in the fullest
manner, can confirm any thing, an essential difference betwixt natural and
moral inability, the inability which arises from our own hearts, and that
arising from any other quarter, is most fully confirmed. Nor can any one say
that these two kinds of cannot, come to the same thing, as to excusing men,
without contradicting the highest degree, of every kind of evidence we can
have, of any moral truth. -- "He that has an ear, let him hear."

ERRATA.
PAGE 11. line 3 for internal, read infernal. p. 29. l. 14. for insupportably,
read insupportable. p. 47. l. 6. from bottom, for productions, r. production.
p. 56. l. 13. from bot. for not, r. no. p. 63. l 19. for strongly r. strongely.
p. 64. l. 6. from bot. for dispot'd, r. dispot'd. Some less material errors are
omitted.


