SOME ACCOUNT OF THE Charitable Corporation, LATELY ERECTED For the Relief of
the WIDOWS and CHILDREN of Clergymen, in the Communion of the Church of England
in America; with a Copy of their CHARTERS, and FUNDAMENTAL RULES.

AND ALSO A SERMON, Preached in Christ-Church, PHILADELPHIA, October 10, 1769,
before the said CORPORATION, on Occasion of their FIRST MEETING.

By WILLIAM SMITH, D. D. Provost of the College and Academy of Philadelphia.

Published, by Order, for the Benefit of the CHARITY.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by D. HALL, and W. SELLERS, opposite the Jersey Market.
MDCCLXIX.

THE MOST REVEREND AND HONORABLE FREDERICK, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; THE
MOST REVEREND AND HONORABLE ROBERT, Lord Archbishop of York; AND THE RIGHT
REVEREND RICHARD, Lord Bishop of London.
Most worthy PRELATES!
THE CORPORATION lately erected "for the relief of the WIDOWS and CHILDREN of
Clergymen, in the communion of the church of England in America," having
honored me with their commands to publish the following SERMON, together with
some account of the rise and progress of the pious and charitable design which
it recommends; permit me to offer Both to the world under your patronage -- not
only as, by Charter, the management of the Charity itself is committed to the
inspection of the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, and the Bishop of London,
for the time being; but likewise as an humble acknowledgment of the obligations
which each of you, my Lords, who now adorn those Sees, have been pleased to
confer on,

Your most dutiful, and most obedient son and servant, WILLIAM SMITH.
Philadelphia, October 14, 1769.
Some Account of the Rise and Progress of the Charitable Corporation, "for the
Relief of the Widows and Children of Clergymen, in Communion of the Church of
ENGLAND in America."
THE distressed circumstances, in which the Episcopal Clergy in the more
northern provinces of America, and especially the Missionaries in the service
of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, have too frequently been
obliged to leave their families, had long been matter of discouragement to many
from entering into the ministry of our Church, as well as of regret to pious
and worthy members thereof.

AFTER sundry overtures, from time to time, it was at length resolved, at a
meeting of the clergy at Elizabeth-Town, in New Jersey, October 1767, to
appoint a committee to frame some plan of provision for the distressed widows
and children of such of our clergy as should die in narrow or necessitous
circumstances. In pursuance of this appointment, the reverend Dr. Auchmuty,
Rector of Trinity Church, the reverend Dr. Cooper, President of King's College,
both of New York, the reverend Mr. Cook, Missionary in Monmouth county,
New Jersey, and myself, met at Perth-Amboy, May 12, 1768; and drew up a scheme
for the approbation of our brethren; recommending it to them to solicit
charters in each of the three provinces of New York, New Jersey and
Pennsylvania, that we might be a body corporate, in which ever of these
provinces we might have occasion to meet.

THIS scheme having obtained the approbation of several succeeding meetings of
the clergy, and a draft of a charter being settled, two persons were appointed
in each province to solicit the passing thereof; viz. the reverend Dr.
Auchmuty, and Dr. Cooper, in New York; the reverend Mr. Cook, and Mr. Odell,
in New Jersey; and the reverend Mr. Peter's Rector of Christ-Church and St.
Peter's, Philadelphia.
, and myself, in Pennsylvania. And justice requires, that the most public and
grateful testimony should be given of that readiness and cheerfulness, with
which the several Governors consented to the grant of the charters in their
respective provinces.

THE charter for Pennsylvania was obtained the 7th of February last; the
honorable JOHN PENN, Esquire the Governor, having ordered the seal to be put to it
on the first application. And the worthy and honorable Proprietaries of the
province, as soon as the design was made known to them in London, took the
earliest opportunity to signify their hearty approbation of it, and wishes for
its success. His Excellency, Governor FRANKLIN, showed the same readiness, and
the charter for New Jersey was completed in May. That for New York, although
cheerfully assented to by his Excellency Sir HENRY MOORE, Baronet, was delayed
by his indisposition and death; but the passing it was one of the first acts of
his successor, the honorable Lieutenant Governor COLDEN, who put the seal to
it, the 29th of September last.

AS it will be of use, to the members of the corporation especially, that each
of them should have a copy of their charters to have recourse to, as occasion
may require, I shall here insert that for New York; not meaning thereby any
other preference than what is usually claimed by that colony, in virtue of
seniority, among her sister ones.

CHARTER Of the CORPORATION, for the Relief of WIDOWS and CHILDREN of
CLERGYMEN, in the Communion of the CHURCH of ENGLAND, in America.
GEORGE the Third, by the Grace of God, of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
King, Defender of the Faith, and so forth; TO all to whom these presents shall
come, GREETING. WHEREAS our loving subjects, the clergy of our province of
New York, in North America, in communion of the church of England, as by Law
established, by their humble petition, presented to our trusty and well-beloved
Sir Henry Moore, Baronet, our Captain General and Governor in Chief in and over
our province of New York, and the territories depending thereon in America,
Chancellor and Vice Admiral of the same, and read in our council for our said
province on the twenty-second day of March now last past, Have set forth, that
the clergy of the church of England in the American colonies, and especially
the missionaries in the service of the Society for the propagation of the
gospel in foreign parts, are, with great difficulty, able to provide for their
families, so that their widows and children are often left in great distress;
that for remedy thereof corporations have, by charters, been erected in the
provinces of Pennsylvania and New Jersey, for receiving, managing and disposing
of such sums of money, as may be contributed and given as a fund toward the
support and relief of the widows and children of the said clergy; and for the
further promotion of which laudable and charitable design, the petitioners
humbly prayed our royal charter, under the seal of our said province of
New York, to create them, and such other persons as should be named therein, a
body politic and corporate, with the like powers and immunities as are
contained in the abovementioned charters, granted in the colonies of
Pennsylvania and New Jersey, or such other powers and privileges, as might be
thought expedient by our said Captain General and Governor in Chief. WHEREFORE
we, favoring the said useful and laudable design, and being fully convinced of
the loyalty and affection of the clergy in America, in communion of the church
of England, as by law established, to our royal person and government, are
graciously pleased to grant to the Petitioners their reasonable request -- KNOW
YE, that of our especial grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, We have
given and granted, and by these presents, for us, our heirs and successors, Do
give and grant, that our trusty and well-beloved Cadwalader Colden, Esquire our
Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief of our province of New York, Sir
William Johnson, Baronet, John Watts, Charles Ward Apthorpe, and Henry Cruger,
Esquires, of the province of New York; William Alexander, Esquire claiming to be
Earl of Stirling; Peter Kemble, Charles Read, James Parker, Samuel Smith, and
Frederick Smythe, Esquires, of the province of New Jersey; James Hamilton,
Lyn-Ford Lardner, Benjamin Chew, and James Tilghman, Esquires, of the city of
Philadelphia, in the province of The gentlemen named before the clergy, are of
the councils of the different provinces.
Pennsylvania; the Reverend William Smith, Samuel Auchmuty, and Thomas Bradbury
Chandler, Doctors in Divinity; Miles Cooper, Doctor of Laws; Richard Peter's,
William Currie, Richard Charlton, Philip Reading, George Craig, John Ogilvie,
Samuel Cook, Samuel Seabury, Thomas Barton, Charles Inglis, William Thompson,
Jacob Duche, Leonard Cutting, Alexander Murray, Ephraim Avery, John Beardiley,
Jonathan Odell, Samuel Magaw, John Andrews, Abraham Beach, William Airs, and
William Frazer, clerks; Joseph Galloway, Alexander Stedman, John Ross, Richard
Hockley, Samuel Johnson, Thomas Willing, John Swift, Samuel Powel, Francis
Hopkinson, and William Atley, Esquires, and Doctor John Kearsley, of the
province of Pennsylvania; John Tabor Kempe, John Livingston, Elias Debrosses,
James De Lancey, James Cortland, Isaac Willet, Nicholas Stuyvesant, James
Duane, Jacob Le Roy, Benjamin Kissam, Jacob Walton, and William Axtell, of the
Province of New York, Esquires; Cortlandt Skinner, Daniel Coxe, and John
Lawrence, Esquires, of the province of New Jersey; and such other persons as
shall be hereafter elected and admitted members of the corporation erected, and
to be erected, by these presents, according to the tenor hereof, and of such
bye-laws and constitutions, as shall hereafter be made by the said corporation,
be, and for ever hereafter shall be, by virtue of these presents, ONE BODY
CORPORATE AND POLITIC in deed, fact and name, by the name of, THE CORPORATION
FOR THE RELIEF OF THE WIDOWS AND CHILDREN OF CLERGYMEN IN THE COMMUNION OF THE
CHURCH OF ENGLAND IN AMERICA, and them by the same name, ONE BODY CORPORATE AND
POLITIC in deed, fact and name, we do for us, our heirs and successors, fully
create, constitute and confirm, by these presents; and Do grant that by the
same name they, and their successors, shall and may have perpetual succession,
and shall and may, at all times hereafter, be persons able and capable in the
law to purchase, take, have, hold, receive, enjoy and transmit to their
successors lands, tenements, rents and hereditaments, within our said province
of New York, York, to the value of One Thousand Pounds Sterling by the year in
the clear, above all outgoings and reprizes, in fee simple, or for any other
estate, term or interest, whatsoever; and to take, have, hold, receive, enjoy
and transmit to their successors, goods, chattels, moneys, and effects, but at
no one time to exceed the sum of Twenty Thousand Pounds Sterling in the gross,
within our said province of New York, And may and shall, by the name aforesaid,
do and execute all things touching and concerning the same, for the benefit,
succor and relief of the WIDOWS and CHILDREN of such deceased clergymen, who
have been in communion of the church of England, as shall or may be
contributors to the funds of the said corporation, and in such manner, rates,
proportions and annuities, as shall be reasonably settled, adjusted, agreed to,
and expressed in the bye-laws and regulations, which shall be made, from time
to time, by our said corporation, and their successors. And also, that they,
and their successors, by the name aforesaid, be, and shall be for ever
hereafter, persons able and capable in the law to sue and be sued, plead and be
impleaded, answer and be answered unto, defend and be defended, in all or any
courts of justice, and before all or any judges, officers or other persons
whatsoever, in all and singular actions, plaints, pleas, suits, causes, matters
and demands, of what nature, kind or sort soever. And that it shall and may be
lawful to and for them our said corporation, and their successors, for ever
hereafter, to have a Common Seal for their use, and in their affairs and
business, and the same, at the will and pleasure of them, and their successors,
to change, alter, break and make new, from time to time, as they shall think
best: And for the well governing and ordering the affairs of our said
corporation, we do, for us, our heirs and successors, further grant, that it
shall and may be lawful for them, and their successors, to meet together on the
First Tuesday after the feast of Saint Michael, in every year, and at such
other time and times, and in such places, upon such public notice given, as may
be fixed and agreed upon by certain fundamental regulations, to be first duly
made and enacted, by a majority of our said corporation, and never afterward
to be altered, but by a like majority of the members for the time being: And
they our said corporation, being so met, in such number, and agreeable to such
notice, as shall be fixed by the said fundamental regulations, shall have full
power and authority, from time to time, to make other necessary laws and
regulations, and to transact, manage and settle; all such matters and things,
touching and concerning the affairs of our said corporation, as they shall be
empowered and authorized to transact, settle and manage, by virtue of the
fundamental laws and regulations of our said corporation, once duly made and
enacted by a majority of the contributors and members as aforesaid. And all the
bye-laws and regulations so made, whether concerning the election of officers
and servants, or concerning the Government, and management of the estate,
goods, chattels, revenue, business and affairs, of our said corporation, shall
have full effect and force, and be binding upon, and inviolably observed by,
all the members of the said corporation, from time to time, according to the
tenor and effect of the same; PROVIDED that the same be reasonable in their own
nature, and not contrary to the laws of that part of Great Britain, called
England, or of our said province of New York. AND FURTHER, we do hereby
constitute and appoint Richard Peter's, of the city of Philadelphia aforesaid,
clerk, to be the First President of this our corporation; and Thomas Bradbury
Chandler, doctor in divinity, to be the First Treasurer; and Jonathan Odell,
clerk, to be the First Secretary; who shall continue in their respective
offices until the first Tuesday after the feast of Saint Michael, now next
ensuing, and from thenceforwards until one president, one or more treasurer or
treasurers, and one secretary be chosen in their rooms, in such manner, and for
such term and period, as shall be settled by the fundamental regulations, to be
made for that purpose by a majority of the said corporation, duly met and
convened. AND LASTLY, we do hereby, for us, our heirs and successors, ordain,
order, and appoint, that the accounts and transactions of the said corporation,
legally and properly vouched and authenticated, shall, from time to time, and
as often as demanded, be laid before the Lords Archbishops of Canterbury and
York, and the Bishop of London, for the time being, or such person and persons
as they may from time to time appoint for that purpose, in America, in order
that the said Archbishops of Canterbury and York, and the Bishop of London, for
the time being, or such person and persons, appointed by them as aforesaid, may
ratify and confirm the said accounts, or subject them to such revisal, check
and confirmation, as may be thought just and reasonable. IN TESTIMONY whereof,
we have caused these our letters to be made patent, and the great seal of our
said province of New York to be hereunto affixed, and the same to be entered on
record in our Secretary's office, in our city of New York, in one of the books
of patents there remaining. WITNESS our said trusty and well-beloved Cadwalader
Colden, Esquire, our Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief of our said
province of New York, and the territories depending thereon in America, at our
Fort, in our city of New York, by and with the advice and consent of our
council for our said province of New York, the twenty-ninth day of September,
in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and sixty-nine, and of our
reign the ninth.

CLARKE.

THE Charters granted in Pennsylvania and New Jersey being, in every article,
the same as the above, it would be needless to insert copies of them here. The
names of the persons incorporated are the same in all of them, and stand in the
same order; excepting only, that the names of those who are of the Council for
each province, stand first in the charter granted in that particular province.

As the first meeting appointed by each charter, was to be on the Tuesday and
Wednesday next following the Feast of St. Michael, 1769, which were the 3d and
4th of this present October; most of the Clerical, and sundry of the Lay
Members, met accordingly at Burlington, in New Jersey, on Tuesday, October 3d;
and the President having taken the chair, the different Charters were read, and
compared with each other.

ON the day following, the members who were met, being 19 in Number, presented
an Address of Thanks to his Excellency Governor FRANKLIN, which he answered
with the warmest wishes for the success of the pious design for which the
corporation had been erected; and added, that it would always give him pleasure
to render any acceptable service to the members or the Church of England.

As humble Application had been made some time before to the venerable Society
for the Propagation of the Gospel, praying their countenance and assistance in
carrying the design into execution; their Answer, signed by their worthy
Secretary, the reverend Dr. Burton, was produced and read as follows, viz. That
as a mark of their earnest desire to forward so benevolent an undertaking, they
willingly charge themselves with an annual contribution of Twenty Pounds
Sterling to the Scheme for each of the provinces of New York, New Jersey and
Pennsylvania; that is, SIXTY POUNDS STERLING per annum in the whole; for which
the treasurer of the Corporation for the relief of the WIDOWS, etc. may draw on
the treasurer to the Society, for propagating the gospel, commencing from the
time that the Charters should be obtained, and the Subscriptions of the Clergy
themselves take place here. -- The Thanks due to the venerable Society for such
a fresh mark of their goodness and kindness to the Episcopal Clergy in these
parts, are ordered to be properly transmitted to them.

FINDING that a majority of the members of the Corporation could not be
conveniently convened at Burlington, to enact Fundamental Rules, agreeable to
the tenor of the Charters, it was sound necessary to proceed to Philadelphia,
without breaking up; and a committee was appointed to have all the necessary
papers in readiness. It was also agreed, that there should be an Anniversary
Sermon before the Corporation; and that each of the Clerical members should
preach in turn, agreeable to the Order in which their names The names were
placed in the charters according to seniority of degree among those having a
Doctor's degree, and after them according to seniority of Priest's Orders.
stand in the charters. By this regulation it fell to my share to be prepared
to preach the following SERMON at Philadelphia, as soon as the requisite
majority should be convened; and I sincerely wish it may be found an
introduction in any degree worthy of a Charity so truly founded in the best
principles of Religion, as well as Humanity!

THE remainder of the business being transacted after the sermon, will be taken
notice of in its place.

A SERMON, Preached in Christ-Church, Philadelphia, October 10, 1769, before
the Corporation for the Relief of the Widows and Children of Clergymen, in
Communion of the Church of ENGLAND, in America.
JOB xxix. 11 -- 13. When the ear heard me, then it blessed me; and when the
eye saw me, it gave witness to me; BECAUSE I delivered the Poor that cried, and
the FATHERLESS, and him that had none to help him. The blessing of him that was
ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the WIDOW's heart to sing for joy.

JEREMIAH xlix. 11. Leave thy FATHERLESS CHILDREN, I will preserve them alive;
and let thy WIDOWS trust in me.

JAMES i. 27. PURE RELIGION and undefiled, before God and the Father, is this
-- To visit the FATHERLESS and WIDOWS in their affliction; and to keep
ourselves unspotted from the world.


MY RESPECTED HEARERS!
IT is from no affectation of singularity, that I have introduced this
discourse to you, with Sundry texts of scripture, instead of One; but to show
how rich are the sacred oracles of God, as in exalted lessons of BENEVOLENCE in
general, so particularly that amiable branch thereof which I am to recommend to
your present regard. Through the whole inspired books of the Old Testament, as
well as the New, we shall scarce find a writer that has not made the cause of
the FATHERLESS and WIDOWS peculiarly his own.

AMIDST a very imperfect system of Morality, even in the Heathen-world, the
voice of God, speaking in the hearts of men, had carried their Lessons of
Benevolence to a more exalted pitch, than most other branches of their
Doctrine; in so much, that some of their Sages could embrace, in the calm Wish
of PHILANTHROPY, the whole Homo sum; humani nihil a me alienum puto.
human species.

BUT it was from the Scriptures of GOD, and particularly from the divine
Documents of our SAVIOR and his Apostles, that the doctrine of UNIVERSAL LOVE
AND CHARITY, received its finishing luster, and was placed on its true
foundation* Although the motives to this heavenly virtue be strong, both in the
Old and New Testament, yet are they carried infinitely farther in the Latter,
and pressed home upon nobler and more animating principles.

TRUE it is, that no writer can express a more amiable Spirit of Benevolence,
nor recount his acts of Mercy and Kindness, with more conscious delight and
complacency, than the author of the book of Job; as well in the passage before
us, as elsewhere --

WHEN the ear heard me, then it blessed me; when the eye saw me, then it gave
witness to me -- and why? BECAUSE I delivered the Poor that cried, and the
FATHERLESS, and him that had none to help him. The blessing of him that was
ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the WIDOW's heart to sing for joy.

THE principles upon which he acted in all this, may perhaps be understood from
what he says afterward --

FOR -- If I have withheld the Poor from their desire, or caused the eyes of
the WIDOW to fail; if I have eaten my morsel myself alone, and the FATHERLESS
has not eaten thereof; if I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any
Poor without covering, and his loins have not blessed me -- and he were not
warmed with the fleece of my sheep -- If I have made Gold my hope, or have said
to the fine Gold, thou art my confidence -- this were an Iniquity to be
punished by the Judge; for I should have denied that God is above Job xxxi. 16
-- 28.
. --

SO that the sum of his argument seems to amount just to this -- That if out of
the Good Things wherewith my Almighty Creator has abundantly blessed me, I
should refuse to communicate and provide for the Destitute, I should be worthy
of the highest punishment. For this would be, in effect, to claim all those
things as my own absolute and perfect property, which are only given me in
trust by my benevolent Maker. It would be denying that the Almighty reigns in
heaven Above, the sole and absolute source of every thing we enjoy here Below.
In such case, justly might He re-claim his own, strip me of all his bounty has
given me, turn me naked into the world, leave the wife of my bosom destitute,
and my children, in their turn, to beg in vain for that bread which my
unfeeling heart refused to others.

SCARCE any higher than this will the Old Testament documents of Love and
Beneficence be found to run; and no small height it is -- but founded, however,
on arguments of Almighty justice and judgment, seemingly reaching no farther
than to secure the divine favor in this world. Wholly in this strain is the
language of the old law itself --

YE shall not afflict any WIDOW OF FATHERLESS CHILD; for if ye afflict them in
any wise, and they cry unto me, I will hear their cry, and my Wrath shall wax
hot, and I will kill you with the Sword; and YOUR WIVES shall be WIDOWS, and
Your Children FATHERLESS Exodus xxii. 22.
. --

SUCH denounciations of Wrath and Punishment, like the Thunderings and Burnings
of the Mount, were suited to bend and awe the hearts of a people, whose Genius
was too gross and servile, or too stubborn, to be wooed and won by the soft
breathings of Everlasting LOVE. And here the danger was, that attentive only to
the Letter of the Law, and its awful Sanctions, but not discerning its divine
Spirit, the outward offices of LOVE and BENEFICENCE, might be fulfilled from
Carnal motives -- to secure the Divine favor in this world -- as considering
that the more liberally they might give, the more liberally they would be
supplied, of God's infinite bounty. Or the fond Praise of Men might be no small
motive -- that the ear which heard them might bless them, and the eye which saw
them, bear witness to their good deeds. --

OF this Spirit were those who affected to bestow their Alms before men. But
when JESUS CHRIST came to give a more noble foundation to the Law of LOVE and
CHARITY, this Ostentatious Spirit met with his early reprehension. Although he
did not annul the Old Testament motives to Love and Almsgiving, he added new
ones, infinitely more powerful and animating. He placed Life and Immortality
before us. He taught us that we were Candidates for an Eternity of Glory, which
none could be fit to inherit, but they who, having the LOVE OF GOD shed abroad
in their Hearts, did, for his sake, Love all his CREATURES, and prepare their
Souls for the final enjoyment of Him, through the constant exercise of every act
of Kindness and Mercy here below. And in the rapturous glimpses he gives us of
this future and eternal bliss, and of that awful process and sentence which is
to fix the doom of mankind -- CHARITY to the Poor, the Sick, and the Needy, is
made the grand Preparation of the Heart, for all that we can hope to enjoy from
him.

NOR was it by Doctrines alone, but by constant and living Example, that this
heavenly Temper was inculcated by Him. As his Errand into the world was at
first proclaimed by choirs of Angels to be Glory to GOD on high, with Peace and
GOOD WILL to Men on earth -- so GOOD WILL to Men was the leading principle of
his whole life; which was at last closed with an act of GOOD WILL so
stupenduously great, that both Men and Angels were left astonished at the
Benevolence thereof -- For he died to save sinners -- He breathed out his last
in LOVE which passes knowledge Ephesians. iii. 19.
, -- constituting LOVE as the grand criterion, whereby all who should
afterward profess his name, might be truly known John xiii. 35.
as his.

IN this evangelic view, well might LOVE be styled a New Law; as founded not in
a mere Regard to almighty Justice, or Fear of almighty Judgment; but in a Heart
that is cast into the very Mold of LOVE itself -- in a Temper that is Angelic,
nay, even Seraphic, Godlike, Divine, and already so raised above this world, as
to be daily ripening for the world to come!

FOLLOWING this Doctrine of LOVE, given by our blessed SAVIOR, nay, Living in
it, and Feeling it in all its divine efficacy, his faithful Apostles constantly
pressed it home to men, upon his own heavenly principles. Thus we find St.
James, in the Text read to you, placing all Religion in a Heart thus set loose
to the world -- thus breathing the dictates of Humanity and Love.

PURE Religion, and undefiled before God (our Savior) and the Father, is This
-- To visit the FATHERLESS and WIDOWS in their affliction, and to keep
ourselves unspotted from the world.

BUT the fervent Apostle St. Paul, of all others, with his usual zeal, enters
the fullest into this subject. His 12th and 13th chapters to the Corinthians,
are one continued lecture on our Savior's heavenly Doctrine of CHARITY; which,
by a sublime train of argument, he exalts above all other Virtues and Graces --
even above those truly Evangelic Ones -- FAITH and HOPE.

IF therefore, we would wish to understand this essential Doctrine aright, and
to be truly actuated by the Life and Spirit of Heavenly Love, a short analysis
of our Apostle's arguments, will be of the utmost use; and also be the best
introduction I can give to the recommendation of that particular Branch of
Charity; for which I have the honor to be appointed an humble advocate before
you.

THERE had started up, in the Church of Corinth (as there has, alas! in many
churches since) a set of men, who being elated with an overweening conceit of
their own Spiritual Gifts -- the strength of their FAITH, and the ardor of
their HOPE, in Christ Jesus -- made that a plea for lording it over their
brethren; and for Spiritual Pride, rash Condemnation, and censorious contempt
of others; contending that those endowed with superior Gifts and Acquisitions,
were as the Head, Heart, and Vital parts of the Body, while others were as the
meaner Members.

SAINT Paul attacks them on their own Principles; and, by a beautiful Allusion
to the Body Natural, proves that Christians of lower seize, were as much
members of Christ's Mystical body, as those of the highest; and that to condemn
or judge uncharitably of them, was as much a Schism in the Body Mystical, as if
in the Body Natural, the Foot should say, because I am not the Hand; and the
Ear, because I am not the Eye -- that therefore, they are not of the Body. For
if the whole were an Eye, where were the Hearing? If the whole were Hearing,
where were the Smelling?

JUST so in the Body Mystical. Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all
Teachers? are all Workers of Miracles? Have all the Gifts of Healing? Do all
speak with Tongues? Do all Interpret?

YOU do well, says he, to covet earnestly these "best of Gifts." But, would you
have the true Spirit of your Master CHRIST, and be his Followers indeed? --
Behold, I will show you "A MORE EXCELLENT WAY," than that of striving to make
yourselves great by Boasting of any your own Acquisitions, however eminent.

HE then begins his divine Sermon on CHARITY; and surely, my Brethren, he could
not have delivered himself with a more glorious and fervent Zeal, had he lived
to see those fiercer Contentions, that Havoc and Destruction, which the want
of this Gospel-virtue of CHARITY has introduced into modern times -- that
Spirit of Bitterness and Violence; that Thirst of Imperiousness and Dominion;
that presumptuous Censure and religious Railing; that Strife for modes and
opinions, unessential to Christianity; that Desire of obtruding our own
distinguishing Tenets on those around us, rather than the common Commandments
of CHRIST; that Earnestness of Compelling their FAITH, rather than provoking
their LOVE and OBEDIENCE by our good example -- all which unchristian Temper
has been, like the worm at the root of Jonah's Gourd, eating out the very
Vitals of Religion; and has often made this world more like an Aceldama, or
field of Blood, than the peaceful Heritage of the meek and lowly Jesus. For
most certain it is, from sad experience, that when once this Temper begins to
prevail, not only the LOVE OF GOD is forgotten, but along with it the LOVE OF
OUR NEIGHBORS also; and the Heart, by Habits of Bitterness, Censoriousness,
Contention, Violence and Revenge, becomes gradually call us, and dead to all
the softer impressions of Humanity, Mercy and Good Will.

SAINT Paul, determined to give an early check to this growing evil in the
Churches, attacks it with an undaunted firmness, and truly Apostolic ardor.

SUPPOSE, says he, that you had all those Gifts and Acquisitions, whereof you
so fondly glory -- suppose your Eloquence so great, that you could speak with
the tongues of Men and Angels; your Knowledge so enlarged, that you could
understand all Mysteries, and interpret all Difficulties; your desire of
Almsgiving such, that you could bestow all your Goods to feed the Poor; your
Mortification to the world so strong, that you had subdued all carnal
appetites; your FAITH sufficient even to remove mountains; your HOPE in CHRIST
so fervent, that you could give your Bodies to be burnt for the Truth of his
Doctrines -- Yet, for all this, I tell you, that "if you have not CHARITY, you
are NOTHING!" All these Gifts and Acquisitions -- all these good Deeds -- are
of no estimation in the sight of GOD, if they are not ministerial to that LOVE
which is the fulfilling of the whole Law; and are not performed in that more
excellent Way of CHARITY, which is the Spirit of the Gospel, and the very badge
of Christian Perfection!

FOR Eloquence, employed to puff up the vanity of the possessor, and not
exerted, in the spirit of Love and Truth, to propagate Universal Holiness, "is
but as the sounding Brass, and tinkling Cymbal."

ALMS-GIVINGS, Mortifications, Zeal for Doctrines, or Zeal against them,
sanctimonious Appearances, the most consummate Knowledge -- all of them are
dead and unprofitable, if not accompanied with the unfeigned LOVE of God and
our Neighbor. Nay, even the divine virtues of FAITH and HOPE are fruitless,
unless productive of CHARITY, which is Greater than They!

BUT although this vast pre-eminence is given to CHARITY over FAITH and HOPE, let
us not think that St. Paul meant to derogate from the latter. On the contrary,
he every where magnifies Them, that CHARITY, on the Comparison, may appear the
more illustrious. And in this very place, he paints before us, in the strongest
colors, the FAITH and HOPE of Abraham, of Moses, the Patriarchs, and first
Martyrs; showing that, by these divine Graces, they were led to persevere in
Love and Obedience through all the trials of life. --

WOULD we truly know the Apostle's distinction on this head, methinks it may be
rendered obvious in a few words, however needlessly perplexed it has been.

FAITH and HOPE with him are indeed ever made the foundations of true RELIGION.
But LOVE is the superstructure; or it is Religion itself, in all its perfection
and glory. FAITH, in his comprehensive language, is the Substance of Things
Hoped for, the Evidence of Things not seen -- That is to say -- a strong Belief
in the adorable Perfections of God, and in the worth and reality of Invisible
things -- a Belief that as his Veracity has never failed us in the Past, so
neither will it fail in the Accomplishment of those glorious Future Things
which he has promised, although they may be too high and mighty for our present
Comprehension. And thus those future Invisible things become Evidenced to us,
and presented before us, as if already enjoyed in Substance and Reality;
leading us to lay hold of Christ as offered to us in the gospel; all which is
connected with, or necessarily productive of, the next divine grace and virtue,
styled by our Apostle HOPE, or "the HOPE of Righteousness by FAITH" -- a firm
and joyous Confidence, that our sincere, though imperfect, Services will be
accepted through Him, instead of that unsinning Obedience required by the strict
tenor of the Law; and that we shall be Justified, Sanctified, and finally Saved
by coming to God, in this "new and living way."

NOW, can such Views of God's Goodness as these, be without LOVE? Or would
these views be of any use at all, but for leading us to that LOVE, which begets
Obedience and Conformity to what is so Lovely and Venerable?

JUSTLY therefore is this living FAITH styled the foundation of that EVANGELIC
Religion, whose essence is LOVE. For surely we cannot have LOVE to Him in whom
we have not HOPE; nor have HOPE in Him in whom we have not BELIEVED. But still,
if our FAITH and HOPE were to stop short of LOVE and OBEDIENCE, they would be
of no value; for Love and Obedience are their end; and are the only perfections
that can assimilate us to Angels, or in any wise make us fit for that heavenly
Communion, Where LOVE is to constitute our eternal Felicity.

THUS, my brethren, I have endeavored, as briefly as I could, to state St.
Paul's great argument for the Pre-eminence given to CHARITY. And, I trust, what
has been said, will not be deemed a deviation from my subject. For it was my
express purpose, by taking a Text from both Testaments, to show how infinitely
more powerful are the Motives to LOVE and Beneficence, under the New than the
Old covenant; and that, therefore, if we do not shine superior in all acts of
Love and Mercy, under so Loving and Merciful a Dispensation; even the men of
Nineveh, and the Queen of the South, shall rise in judgment against us --
seeing neither Jew nor Gentile, before the coming of CHRIST, had those gracious
and tender Calls to LOVE, Which the Gospel is now constantly sounding in our
ear!

YE Sages! ye Rabbi's! ye venerable names of antiquity! we honor you for your
Lessons of Benevolence; and rather blush for ourselves that you proceeded so
far, than wonder that your progress was no greater.

YET say, O thou JEW, whoever thou were, in ancient times, whose heart was made
to glow for thy species, on the principles of thine own Law -- say, what would
have been thy raptures of Benevolence, had thou known the true Messiah, and
been tutored in his mild and evangelic doctrines of Love?

SAY also, thou GENTILE-SAGE! whoever thou were, that by considering God only
as the common Creator, and all Men as the work of his hands, could from
thence infer the duties of Mutual Love among the whole species -- say further,
whoever thou were, that, by beholding His stars in the firmament mix their
friendly rays in aid of each other, could from thence conclude, that all his
creatures here below ought to mingle in like friendly offices -- say, how would
thy soul have been enflamed toward God, and toward Man, had any Star or
Constellation, in all thy Catalogue, pointed See a thought somewhat to this
purpose in Hartley, Sermon. 7th.
to Christ the Power of God, dying in an Act of LOVE to thee -- nay, setting
LOVE before thee, as his last great Command, and the sum total of everlasting
bliss?

BUT here thy perspective was limited -- where (blessed be God) ours is
infinitely extended; for CHARITY (to crown our Apostle's eulogium on it) never
Fails, but endures for ever: It has a place among the perfections of God,
which neither FAITH nor HOPE can have; since, where all is pure VISION, there
can be no exercise for FAITH; nor, where all is perfect FRUITION, can there be
room for HOPE. Our FAITH and HOPE can give us no resemblance of God; but our
CHRITY makes us, in some sort, what He himself is in a Superlative manner --
the Helpers of the Helpless, and partakers of his own joy in beholding a happy
world! Our FAITH and HOPE may serve us as the Handmaids of LOVE here below; but
leaving them behind us, as of no further use, our LOVE is all that we shall
carry hence with us, as our Dowery from Earth to Heaven!

AS yonder majestic One of the largest rivers in North America, on which the
city of Philadelphia stands.
Delaware is fed and supported in its course, by tributary rills and springs
flowing from each mountain's side, till at length it comes to mix its waters
with its Parent Ocean, where it no longer stands in need of their scanty
supplies; so FAITH and HOPE are the nourishing Springs of our LOVE in our
journey Heaven-wards; but when once arrived there, we shall no longer stand in
need of their Aid. When that which is Perfect is come, that which is in Part
shall be done away. Our FAITH shall be swallowed up in VISION, and our HOPE in
FRUITION; but our CHARITY and LOVE shall remain for ever, mixing and blending
in the unbounded ocean of PARENTAL and ETERNAL LOVE!

O CHARITY, thou heaven-born Virtue! Can the tongues of Men, or even of Angels,
speak more excellent things of thee? Or can a more transcendent rank be now
assigned thee -- than, that the Savior of the world has thus made thee the
badge of Christian perfection; and his inspired followers have enthroned thee
as the Queen of all Evangelic Graces and Virtues; declaring, that neither the
Martyr's zeal, nor the self-denial of the Saint, nor all Languages, nor all
Knowledge, nor any Virtue besides, can profit or adorn the man any thing, who
is unadorned with thy sweet celestial garb! But he who is thus adorned, is the
most august spectacle upon earth -- whom even Angels survey with delight, as
clothed in that peculiar garb, which Christ himself vouchsafed to wear here
below, and which shall not need to be put off in Heaven above.

WE see, then, my brethren, that Gospel-Charity, thus explained, includes in it
almost unspeakable things; its shortest character, to sum up all in a few
words, being no less than this --

"An ardent and seraphic LOVE OF GOD, grafted in a steadfast Belief of his
adorable Attributes, a firm Reliance on the goodness and justice of his Moral
Government, a rapturous and comprehensive view of his scheme of Providence, a
Heart thoroughly touched and melted with that astonishing Plan of Love
manifested in Christ, and a Mind darting forward to those everlasting scenes of
bliss promised through him, in a well grounded and triumphant Expectation of
their sure accomplishment. Now the true LOVE OF GOD, founded on such exalted
principles as these, cannot but be accompanied with the second branch of
Gospel-Charity, the LOVE OF OUR NEIGHBOR also -- engaging us in an
affectionate Concern for the welfare of our Whole Species, with a quick and
pervading Sense of all the Good or Evil that can befall them in this world;
considering them as Brethren -- made by the same PARENT-GOD; Redeemed by the
same SAVIOUR-JESUS; traveling together to the same heavenly Country, and
commanded to alleviate each others burdens, "and not to fall out by the way."

TO you then, who have this just conception of the nature of Gospel-Charity,
and have the true Love of God, and of Mankind, reigning in your hearts, my
intended Application will be easy. For if all acts of Love and Beneficence, so
far as our abilities and opportunities reach, be branches of this heavenly
virtue, I have the authority of Scripture to say, that the Cause of the
FATHERLESS and WIDOWS, claims a primary and most special regard.

IN the Text, taken from Jeremiah, the Almighty himself, in the midst of the
severest denounciations against a rebellious people, yet seems to relent in
mercy toward the FATHERLESS and WIDOWS -- Leave thy FATHERLESS CHILDREN, I
will preserve them alive; and let thy WIDOWS trust in me.

UNDER the Law, remarkable was the attention paid to the STRANGER, the
FATHERLESS, and the WIDOW. When thou cuttest down thine Harvest, and have
forgotten a Sheaf in the field, thou shall not go to fetch it -- it shall be
for the STRANGER, the FATHERLESS, and the WIDOW -- when thou beatest thine
Olive Tree, thou shall not go over the boughs again -- when thou gatherest the
Grapes of thy Vineyard, thou shall not glean it afterward -- it shall be for
the STRANGER, the FATHERLESS, and the WIDOW Deuteronomy. xxiv, 19 -- 21.
.

EVEN David, although he resisted his own natural affections, and continued
inexorable to the recall of a favorite Son, who had offended him, yet could not
withstand those mournful accents of the WIDOW of Tekoah -- Help. O King -- I am
indeed a WIDOW-WOMAN, and my Husband is Dead --

THE story is truly tender, though feigned. And if this WIDOW's Apparent Distress
could procure an oath of David, that a hair of her son (whose life was
forfeited to the public) should not fall to the ground, only by pleading, that
if this son was lost, her coal, which was alive, would be quenched, and neither
name nor remainder be left to her husband on earth -- I say, if this story of
Feigned Distress could so far prevail, surely the voice of Real Distress will
have a still greater influence -- the voice of WIDOWS indeed! not pleading for
lives forfeited to the law, but for Themselves, and their Children -- for the
Names and Remainders of your own Clergy, that they may not be wholly lost upon
earth -- the Names and Remainders of men, who have once been your dear Friends
in CHRIST-JESUS; men who, in their lifetime, have administered to you heavenly
Counsel, and sweet Comfort, in his precious Word and Covenant; and men who may
have often opened your Souls to flow in those godlike streams of Benevolence
and Charity to others, wherewith those Helpless Remainders of themselves now
stand in need to be relieved and refreshed at your hands.

MANY words are not needful to explain the nature and propriety of such a
Charity as this, nor need I mention the long Call there has been for its
establishment.

YOU well know the situation and circumstances of the Clergy of the Church of
England, in these Northern Colonies; for the Relief of whose families, when
left in distress, this design is more particularly set on foot. Except in a few
places, their chief support depends on the Bounty of our fellow members of the
Church in Great Britain; and that venerable Society, who have the Distribution
of this bounty, have of late been obliged, and will be still more obliged, to
retrench their allowance; that, like faithful Stewards, they may be likewise
able to reach out their helping hand to those numerous Petitioners for New
Missions, which arise from the constant increase of People in these Colonies.

THE additional Support which our Clergy receive from their Congregations, is
generally small, and exceedingly precarious; decreasing sometimes in Nominal,
often in Real value; while the expense of every Necessary in life is
proportionably increasing.

DECENCY, a regard to Character, to their own Usefulness, to the credit of
Religion, and even your Credit, among whom they minister, require them to
maintain some sort of Figure in their families, above those in common
professions and business; while, certain it is, on the other hand, that any
sober reputable Tradesman, can turn his Industry to more account than They.

THE like regard to Decency and character also forbids our Clergy to follow any
Secular employ, in aid of their circumstances; unless, perhaps, here and there
one, by Education, should have been qualified for some Practice in the Healing
Art of Medicine, which is not deemed incompatible with the Pastoral duty, where
it is not too large.

ON the whole, this I will venture to assert, that were the generality of our
Clergy to make their calculation according to the way of the world, the money
The money expended this way can scarce be estimated at much less than L 500
sterling, and many of our missionary clergy do not receive L 30 sterling per
annum from their congregations, some not more than half that sum, and not a
great number much above it.
expended in their education at Schools and Colleges, a Voyage for Holy Orders,
and the purchase of necessary books (if it had been laid out at first as a
common Capital at Interest) would bring them a greater annual return, without
any trouble or fatigue, either of Body or Mind, than they can procure by the
labor of their whole lives, in discharge of their pastoral duty, exclusive of
the Bounty of benevolent persons in the mother country.

I AM far from mentioning these things as Complaints; I know they are of
Necessity in many places; and I trust none of my brethren among the Clergy will
ever make their Calculation in this way; but keep their Eye on their MASTER's
Service, looking forward to the "Recompense of Reward." Yet what I mention is
so far necessary, as it shows incontestibly the great propriety of the design
before us.

IT certainly requires little attention to what passes around us, to see that
the families of our deceased Clergy are often left among the most distressed in
their vicinity. The Father, by strict economy, and good Example, may be able
to support them in some degree of Reputation, during his own Life, although not
to flatter them with the hopes of any Patrimony at his death. By his own Care,
and some convenience of Schools, he may give the Sons the rudiments of an
Education for his own profession, or some other useful one in the world. The
Mother, with the like anxious Care, and fond Hopes of rendering the Daughters
respectable among their Sex, may employ her late and early toil to train their
Minds to those virtues, and their Hands to that Diligence and Industry, which
might one day make them the sweet accomplished companions of worthy men in
domestic life. --

BUT alas! amidst all these flattering dreams and fond presages of the heart,
the Father, perhaps in his prime of years and usefulness, is called from this
world. The Prop and Stay of all this promising Family is now no more! His Life
was their whole dependence, under God, even for daily Bread! His Death leaves
them almost destitute -- destitute, alas! not of Bread only, but even of
Council and Protection upon earth!

FATAL reverse -- Ah! little do the world in general, and especially they who
bask in the easy sunshine of affluence and prosperity -- little do they know
the various complicated scenes of private anguish and distress -- Here they are
various and complicated indeed!

THE Bereaved and Disconsolate MOTHER, as soon as Christian Reflection begins
to dry up her tears a little, finds them wrung from her afresh by the
melancholy Task that remains to her. She is now, alas! to reduce the once
flattering hopes of her tender Family, to the standard of their present sad and
humbled condition! Hard Task indeed! The Son is to be told that he must no more
aspire to reach the station which his Father filled; and the Daughter is to
learn that, in this hard and selfish world, she must no longer expect to become
the Wife of him, to whom she once might have looked on terms of equality -- The
Son, perhaps, must descend to some Manual employ, while even the poor pittance
necessary to settle him in That, is not to be found; and the Daughter must
serve strangers, or be yoked perhaps in Marriage for Mere Bread; while the
mournful mother (without the slow-procured help of Friends) can scarce furnish
out the decent Wedding Garment!

WHAT did I say? the decent Wedding Garment, and a Marriage for Mere Bread?
This were an Issue of troubles devoutly to be wished for! -- But, ah me! The
Snares of POVERTY in a Mind once bred up above it -- shall every unguarded
unprotected Female be able to escape them? Alas! no -- Some VILLAIN-DECEIVER,
with Vows and broken Oaths, with LOVE in his Mouth, and HELL in his Heart,
taking advantage of Innocence in Distress, lays his scheme of destruction sure;
and with the ruin of the Daughter, brings the Mother's gray hairs down to the
grave with accumulated sorrow!

JUST, but indignant, Heaven! Is there no chosen Vengeance in this World, to
heap on the heads of such perfidious monsters, to SAVE them from that
Vengeance, which they have merited, though yet we dare not wish them, in the
World to come!

THIS sad part of the Catastrophe of many Females, descended from fathers, once
venerable and pious in their day, we would willingly have passed over in
silence; were not the experience of what has happened in other countries, more
than sufficient to awaken our apprehensions in this.

THE picture here drawn, is no exaggerated one; and when the Children of
Clergy, in low circumstances, are in an early age deprived of both Parents --
then are they ORPHANS indeed! and every distress, every temptation, falls upon
them, with aggravated weight!

TO be FATHERS, then, to such FATHERLESS CHILDREN; to take them by the hand,
and lead them out, through the snares of the world, into some public Usefulness
in life, that the Name and Memorial of our dear Brethren and faithful Pastors
deceased, may not be wholly lost upon earth -- I say, to DO THIS, and give some
Gleams of comfort to the afflicted WIDOWS and MOTHERS that survive -- must
surely be one of the most delightful Actions of a BENEVOLENT Mind; and THIS, my
brethren, is the glorious object of the CHARITY for which we are Incorporated,
and which we have undertaken to solicit and conduct.

BLESSED, therefore, be all they in this world and the next (Laity and Clergy)
into whose Hearts God has put it, to associate for so noble and pious a
purpose. In like manner, may that venerable Society in England be blessed,
whose annual Subscription has laid so liberal a Foundation for the work; and
blessed also be those Governors of Provinces, who have so cheerfully and
readily given us their Charters for carrying it into execution!

HAPPY in such Beginnings and such Countenance, let us set ourselves earnestly
to the discharge of our Part; leaving the Issue to GOD, and the Benevolence of
good Men.

SOME I have reason to think that such persons are far from a majority of any
denomination. Many of all persuasions have expressed their hearty wishes for
the success of the design; and I am particularly bound to acknowledge the ready
assistance received from a worthy friend of mine, who had a principal share in
framing the plan for the relief of the widows and children of Presbyterian
ministers; and who communicated to me not only several useful papers, but
likewise whatever remarks he thought might enable us to improve our Plan, on
the experience of any difficulties or deficiencies that had occurred in the
execution of theirs.
, perhaps, there may be, long accustomed to view every Transaction of our
Church on this Continent with a jealous eye, and who being loudly tenacious of
every privilege of their own, though sparing in their allowance to others -- may
therefore conceive more to be Intended by this undertaking than is Expressed.

TO such, however, if it may have any weight with them, I will declare, that
although every thing relative to this design from the beginning has passed through
my own hands, assisted by a few others, appointed for that purpose, I have
never known the least hint or thought of any thing further expected from the
execution of it, than what our charters express.

BUT should it have all that happy Effect to us which some may apprehend from
it, namely -- that of producing a more intimate Connection and UNION among our
Clergy and Church Members; surely it is what we ought most ardently to desire
and pursue, at this time especially.

WHEN we see our Church and Ministry unreasonably opposed, and borne down in
their common and essential rights; when we behold men seemingly Leaguing
together to perpetuate this opposition from Father to Son; it can certainly be
no Harm in us, but our bounden Duty, to look to our own Concerns also; and
particularly to take some Thought, that our Children be not left wholly
Destitute in a world where We, and They on our account, are likely to meet with
so little favor from many --

BUT my subject is CHARITY -- I would not violate that subject; and I bless God
that it has not been violated, on our part, on this trying occasion; and that
our general conduct has been such, as not to discredit the long-approved
Moderation of that Church to which we belong.

IN the spirit of meekness and sober argument, firm, but (we hope) decent, our
endeavor has been to show -- That the Fears and Jealousies mustered up
concerning us, could have no possible Foundation, without a total Abolition of
the whole system of Law and Policy in these Colonies; that the Contingency
which could render such an Abolition possible, is as unlikely to happen as any
thing that can well be imagined in this world; and that therefore, on the
whole, it rests with the Consciences of our opponents themselves, to reconcile
their own conduct to any principles of BROTHERLY LOVE and CHARITY, or to any
other principles whatever, not bordering on Intolerancy of Spirit, and an undue
lust of Dominion on their own part.

SO far, we may felicitate ourselves. And if to have acted thus can be thought
a breach of CHARITY, we must reply, that there is a CHARITY to Truth and Right,
superior to all others. We have now but one step further, my brethren, to
secure a Conquest, equally complete and glorious -- Let us, in the continuance
of every act of Moderation, Love and Well-doing, be a LIVING ANSWER to
Gainsayers; and the time may yet come, when, every other Strife being
suspended, we shall all be so mollified one to another, so possessed of the
Spirit of Gospel-Love, that we shall think it our mutual Honor, as it is our
mutual Duty, to mix our whole endeavors in the Propagation of our Common
Christianity, only striving whose Zeal shall be foremost -- nay, and even to
mix our Deeds of Charity to the distressed, they with us, and we with them, as
God shall give us abilities, without regard to Sect or Party.

HAPPY time, should it ever take place! For then would Men indeed FEEL a Truth,
now little attended to; and which I wish I could write in letters legible to
the whole Universe -- "That there is a greater Weight and Moment of
CHRISTIANITY, in one Deed of Benevolence, where we have the Power to do Good,
or in one Sigh for Distress, where we have not the power (proceeding from a
heart that is right toward God, and toward man) than in all the doubtful
Points of Controversy, all the Opposition to Modes and Forms, that have busied
and enflamed the world ever since the REFORMATION -- and which will never
deserve the true name of a REFORMATION, till this foul Reproach is wiped away
from it also!"

BUT till that happy time arrives, it is to those of our own Communion we must
chiefly look, for the success of the pious Charity before us. Humane and
benevolent as they are known to be in all cases of Distress, the FATHERLESS and
WIDOWS of their own Clergy will never be without Advocates and Benefactors
among them.

THE particular Rules by which this Charity is to be conducted are open to all;
and the main support of the Fund is to be the annual Subscriptions of the
Clergy themselves, with such casual Benefactions as, by the Providence of GOD,
may be added to it.

IF Success should, in any Degree, be answerable to our hopes and wishes, it
will surely be a high Satisfaction to the members of our Churches, to behold
their Ministers so relieved from those anxious cares, which every man must have
on the prospect of leaving a distressed Family behind him, as to proceed
cheerfully in all Duty; knowing, that although they can acquire little, and leave
less of their own in this world, there is some small provision to place their
children above total want, and some Protectors and Friends to guard their
Infant-years.

BUT a still higher Satisfaction will arise at the last Day, to all who have
participated in such LABORS OF LOVE -- to hear those whom their Benevolence
has relieved, testifying for them before their ALMIGHTY JUDGE -- or rather to
hear their ALMIGHTY JUDGE himself testifying in the name of those relieved
Destitutes, and embracing them with the following glorious sentence --

COME, ye blessed of my Father! inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world --

FOR I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; thirsty, and ye gave me drink; a
stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me; sick, and ye visited me;
in prison, and ye came unto me. --

THAT all of us may be so Habituated to acts of Mercy and Love in the present
world, as to be found fit for this happy sentence in the next, may GOD, of his
infinite Mercy, grant through JESUS CHRIST! Amen.

AFTER the conclusion of the foregoing SERMON, a very generous collection was
made at the Church-doors for the benefit of the Charity, as will appear by the
annexed list of donations. And the members of the corporation, having continued
in church till the congregation was dismissed, proceeded from thence to present
an address of thanks to the honorable Governor PENN, for his Grant of a
Charter; requesting that their thanks might, in like manner, be transmitted,
through him, to the honorable Proprietaries of the province, THOMAS PENN, and
RICHARD PENN, Esquires, for the hearty approbation they had given of the
design; to all which his Honor was pleased to return a very affectionate
answer, expressive of his readiness, at all times, to serve the interest of the
Church of England in general, and this Charity in particular.

AFTER dining together, the corporation applied themselves to the business for
which they were met; and the great attention paid to it by the lay members --
the accuracy and care with which all the proposed articles and fundamental
rules were examined, digested and corrected, especially by the gentlemen of the
law, deserve to be held continually in grateful remembrance by the Clergy. Some
of the gentlemen who were present, had been kind enough to come from 30 to 60
miles distance, to make up the requisite majority. The same zeal would have
been manifested by the respectable Lay-members residing at New York,
notwithstanding their great distance, if their presence had been absolutely
necessary. But it was resolved to spare them as much as possible till the next
year's meeting. The members present at this meeting of October 10th, 1769, were
as follow.

Reverend Richard Peter's, President.
Hon. To the 67 charter names are to be added the four following, elected at
this meeting, viz.

Hon. John Penn, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of Pennsylvania. Rev. Mr. Muhlenberg,
first Minister of the Lutheran churches, Philadelphia. His Excellency William
Franklin, Esquire Governor of New Jersey. Rev. Mr. Preston, Missionary at Amboy,
New Jersey.
The names of the Governors were not inserted in the charters, as members ex
officio, it being thought more respectable to obtain their own leave to elect
them, from time to time. The Hon. Cadwalader Colden's name was inserted, during
Sir Henry Moore's government.

Those marked thus are of the Council for Pennsylvania, and those marked thus
are of the Council for New Jersey. The Council of the provinces are styled
"honorable." -- The names stand above, in the order in which they were taken
into the Minutes, from the Pennsylvania charter, under which the meeting was
held.


John Penn, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of Pennsylvania, Hon. James Hamilton, Esquire
Benjamin Chew, Esquire Attorney General of Pennsylvania, James Tilghman, Esquire
Charles Read, Esquire Frederick Smythe, Esquire Chief Justice of New Jersey, Joseph
Galloway, Esquire Speaker of the Assembly of Pennsylvania, Esquires.
Alexander Stedman, John Ross, Richard Hockley, Samuel Johnson,
Thomas Willing, Esquire one of the Judges of the Supreme Court, Pennsylvania,
Esquires.
John Swift, Samuel Powel, Francis Hopkinson,
Dr. John Kearsley, Daniel Coxe, Esquire of Trenton, New Jersey, John Lawrence, Esquire
Mayor of Burlington, New Jersey. D. D.
Rev. William Smith, Samuel Auchmuty, Thomas Bradbury Chandler,
Miles Cooper, L. L. D. Clerks.
William Currie, Richard Charlton, George Craig, Samuel Cook, Thomas Barton,
William Thompson, Jacob Duche Leonard Cutting, Alexander Murray, Jonathan
Odell, Samuel Magaw, John Andrews, Abraham Beach, William Airs, William
Frazer, Henry Muhlenberg,

The above Members being a full majority, agreeable to the tenor of the
Charters, the following FUNDAMENTAL LAWS and REGULATIONS were unanimously
agreed to and enacted.

N. B. SAMUEL ATLEE, Esquire did not arrive time enough for this meeting, but was
present the day following.

FUNDAMENTAL LAWS and REGULATIONS, of the Corporation for the Relief of the
Widows and Children of Clergymen in the Communion of the Church of ENGLAND in
America, duly made and enacted at Philadelphia, on the 10th Day of October,
1769, by a Majority of the Members of the Corporation met for that Purpose,
according to the Tenor of their Charters.
LAWS relative to ANNUITIES, etc.
I. THE yearly contributions of the clergy, whose widows and children shall be
hereby entitled to annuities, shall not be less than eight Spanish milled
dollars, of the present current weight, namely, seventeen penny-weight and six
grains, nor more than twenty-four such dollars, or the value thereof, in
current money of the province, where each contributor lives.

II. No annuities shall be paid but to the widows and children of such
clergymen as shall have been contributors to the fund; and the respective
annuities to be paid to the widows and children of such clergymen, shall be
five times the sum of their annual contributions.

III. In order to have a certainty, both as to the quantum, as well as the
payment of the annual rates, each contributor shall abide by that rate or class
which he first chooses; unless he shall change into another class, on such
terms as to the corporation shall appear to be reasonable: And each contributor
shall pay his annual contribution to the corporation, on or before the first
Wednesday after the feast of St. Michael in every year, under the penalty of
one penny in the pound for every day's default: And if the said penalty of one
penny in the pound, together with the whole contributions due, shall not have
been paid up during the life of the contributor, then his widow and children
shall receive only an annuity proportionable to the payments made by the
husband or father.

IV. Every yearly contributor, who shall marry oftener than once, shall pay one
year's contribution extraordinary on every such marriage, as he makes the
chance in general worse against the fund.

V. If the husband or father of any person or persons, entitled to an annuity
on this plan, shall not have paid five annual contributions into the fund; then
the widow and children shall only be entitled to ten per cent. per annum for
thirteen years, on the amount of the contributions paid by the deceased.

VI. If any contributor shall have paid for five years, or any number of years
under fifteen, and exceeding five, the annuitants shall receive only half the
annuity which belongs to the rate or class subscribed to by the deceased, until
such time as the yearly deduction of half the annuity, added to five or more
payments, made by the deceased (without computing interest) shall together make
a sum in the fund, equal to the sum of fifteen annual payments in the rate or
class to which such deceased contributor belonged; which partial annuities,
payable agreeable to this article, shall be proportioned between the widow and
children as hereafter fixed, in respect to full annuities, viz.

VII. If there be no children, the widow of every contributor, if fewer than
fifteen payments shall have been made by the deceased, shall receive the whole
annual sum due by the last preceding article; and if fifteen such payments
shall have been made complete by the deceased, then the widow shall receive the
whole annuity due on the husband's contribution during her widowhood; and if
she marry again, she shall, from the time of such second marriage, receive only
half such annuity during her natural life.

VIII. If there be a child, and no widow, such child shall be entitled to the
whole or partial annuity for thirteen years, agreeable to the foregoing
articles; but if there be more than one child, and no widow, the annuity,
whether whole or partial, shall be equally divided among them, to be laid out,
in case they are minors, in their education or apprenticeship, with the advice
and approbation of such executors or guardians as the father may have
nominated; and if none such shall have been nominated by the father, then in
such manner for the benefit of the child or children, as the corporation shall
direct.

IX. If there be a widow, and one child, the annuity, whether whole or partial,
shall be equally divided between them, under the limitations aforesaid: And if
there be a widow, and two or more children, she shall have one third during her
widowhood, or one sixth during her natural life, if she should marry a second
time; and the remainder for thirteen years, shall be laid out for the use of
the children as aforesaid.

X. The corporation may, if they think proper, with the consent of the
annuitants, or of their guardians, if they be minors, pay the child or children
of contributors such a sum in hand, as shall be equal to the annuity of such
child or children, according to the number of years for which such annuity
should be paid, deducting legal interest, and taking into the account the
chances against the life of such child or children, for the term such annuity
is to be paid.

XI. The corporation shall have power to increase the rates of annuities, as
the state of the fund shall admit; and for that end, all benefactions that
shall be made to this fund shall, for the term of ten years to come from this
day, be put out to interest, on good land security, and the said interest,
annually collected, and again put out to interest, shall be appropriated as an
augmentation of the capital stock, for the said term of ten years; and, after
the expiration of the said term, the interest of all benefactions shall be
equally divided among all the children of contributors for the term that their
annuities respectively shall continue payable, according to the foregoing
articles.

LAWS relative to MEETINGS and BUSINESS.
I. AT every annual meeting, agreeable to the charter, there shall be one
president, one or more treasurers, and one secretary chosen for the ensuing
year; and if any of the said officers should be absent from any meeting, the
members met shall choose another to officiate in his stead, during that
meeting. At any annual meeting, the members met as aforesaid, shall have power
to elect such new members as they shall think fit, and likely to promote the
good purposes of the charity; and all elections whatsoever, shall be by ballot;
and the majority of votes shall be sufficient for the election of the
president, treasurer or treasurers, and secretary; but no new member shall be
admitted, unless four fifths of the whole votes be in his favor.

II. There shall at each annual meeting be chosen a standing committee of six
members, consisting of two out of each of the three provinces, who, together
with the president, treasurer or treasurers, and secretary, shall direct and
carry on the necessary correspondence of the corporation, and from time to time
assist the treasurer or treasurers, in managing the rents and estate of the
corporation, and in putting out at interest the moneys coming into the stock,
either by the annual contributions of the clergy, or the occasional donations
of benevolent persons, for which good land security shall be taken, at least to
double the value of the moneys lent, payable in Spanish milled dollars of the
present current weight, namely, seventeen penny-weight and six grains each, or
the value thereof in current money of the province where the loan is made.

III. The annual meetings of the corporation, appointed by the charter, shall
be alternately held in the provinces of New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania;
and six weeks previous notice of the time and places of all annual meetings,
shall be given by the secretary, in one or more of the public Newspapers,
published in New York, and in Philadelphia. And if an occasional meeting of the
corporation should be found at any time necessary, and the standing committee
of business, to be appointed agreeable to the rules of the society, should
apply in writing to the president of the corporation, to call such meeting at
any particular place within the said three provinces, the president shall call
such occasional meeting at the place requested by the committee, giving such
public notice thereof, by the secretary, as is directed above. And at all such
meetings, whether occasional or stated, any number of members met, not being
less than fifteen, shall have power to make bye-laws, and in general, have all
the powers granted by charter to this corporation, other than the making,
altering or repealing fundamental laws and regulations; provided always, that
when any part of the stock of the corporation is to be disposed of, or any
augmentation of annuities to be made, the same shall be expressed in the
previous public notices hereby directed to be given of such meetings.

IV. The treasurer or treasurers, shall give such security to the corporation
every year, or as often as thereto required, in such sum or sums as the
corporation at any annual meeting may judge sufficient, for the faithful
discharge of the trust reposed, and to be reposed, in him or them; and farther,
he or they shall, at each annual meeting, exhibit his or their accounts to the
corporation, for their inspection and approbation.

AFTER passing the Laws, the following Officers were elected for the ensuing
year.

PRESIDENT. Reverend Mr. Richard Peter's.
TREASURERS. For New York. Rev. Dr. Auchmuty. For New Jersey. Rev. Dr.
Chandler. For Pennsylvania. Francis Hopkinson, Esquire
STANDING COMMITTEE of CORRESPONDENCE, etc. Rev. Dr. Cooper, John Tabor Kempe,
Esquire Daniel Coxe, Esquire John Lawrence, Esquire Rev. Dr. Smith, Samuel Powel, Esquire
SECRETARY. Reverend Mr. Jonathan Odell.

THEN adjourned, to meet tomorrow at 10 o'clock.

At a Meeting of the Corporation, October 11, 1769. Twenty-two Members present.
The following EXPLANATORY RULE was made and agreed to.
WHERE AS in the foregoing Fundamental Rules, etc. of this Corporation, which
were passed yesterday, upon as full and mature consideration, as the time would
admit, there still appear some things, relative to the payments to be made by
the Clergy, whose widows and children are to be entitled to annuities, which
seem to have been tacitly IMPLIED, and which it might nevertheless be better to
EXPRESS fully, that there may be no misapprehension of the sense of the
articles afterward; WHEREFORE, we the Subscribers, being all the Clergy, who
were present at the settlement of the said Fundamental Articles, and who are
the Parties to be bound by them in the matters to be now mentioned, DO hereby
declare, That we apprehend the sense of the Articles to be, that every
Clergyman, who shall become a Contributor, in order that his WIDOW and CHILDREN
may be entitled to an Annuity at his Decease, is to continue the payment of his
yearly Contribution during his life, and not to stop at the end of fifteen
years; the whole calculations being on the principle of payments for life. And
if any Clergyman should die in Arrears of his annual Payments, our sense of the
Articles is further -- that all his Arrears, with the Penalty of one Penny in
the Pound per day, is to be deducted out of the Annuities payable by the
foregoing articles to the WIDOWS and CHILDREN: And, as we declare ourselves to
be as much bound by this explanatory Article, as if it had been included in the
Fundamental ones, so every other Clergyman, who shall become a contributor, in
order that his WIDOW and CHILDREN may be entitled to an Annuity, shall make and
subscribe this Declaration. And we recommend it to the next Annual Meeting,
where a Majority of the whole Corporation shall be met, to give this
Declaration such further Sanction as may be thought necessary.

Signed by the twenty Clergymen who were present.

AN address of thanks to the Honorable Cadwalader Colden, Esquire Lieutenant
Governor of New York, for his grant of a charter, was drawn up, and ordered to
be presented to him, in the most respectable manner, by the members of the
Corporation residing in that province.

THEN adjourned, to meet at New York, the first Tuesday after the feast of St.
Michael, 1770, unless sooner called by the President, agreeable to the Law made
to that effect.

LIST of BENEFACTIONS to this CORPORATION.
AS but one week has intervened since the opening of this Charitable Scheme,
it cannot be expected that the List of Benfactions should yet be large, or
extend beyond a few individuals in the city of Philadelphia. The foregoing
Sermon was the first public notification of the design; and, excepting the
collection at the Church-door, no application has yet been made to benevolent
persons, it being judged best to delay every thing of this nature till the Plan
should be first laid before the world. The thanks of the Corporation are,
however, to be sincerely offered, for the following Benefactions already come
in, viz.

Three Pounds, Pennsylvania Money, make eight Dollars.
Pennsylvania Money. To the Congregation of Christ-Church, Philadelphia, for
their generous contributions at the church-doors, amounting to L 40 10 0 To a
Gentleman, for 6 l. sent by Dr. Smith, 6 0 0 To a Gentleman, for 3 l. by Dr.
Chandler, 3 0 0 To a Gentleman, for 6 l. by Ditto, 6 0 0 To a Gentleman, for 10
l. by Mr. Cook, 10 0 0 To a Lady, for 1 l. by Dr. Smith, 1 0 0 To a worthy and
benevolent Clergyman, a member of the Corporation, for his generous benefaction
paid into the hands of Mr. Treasurer Hopkinson, 200 0 0 The Subscriptions of
the Clergy already entered for the present year, are 141 0 0 L 407 10 0

THE names of the different benefactors, where they are known, are inserted in
the treasurer's books; but are not at present published, as their leave has not
been yet requested for that purpose.

The FORM of a LEGACY To the Corporation for the Relief of the WIDOWS and
CHILDREN of Clergymen in the Communion of the Church of ENGLAND in America.
ITEM. I GIVE to the "Corporation for the Relief of the Widows and Children of
Clegymen in the Communion of the Church of England in America," the sum of
(...) to be raised and paid, by and out of all my ready money, plate, goods,
and personal effects, which by law I can or may charge with the payment of the
same (and not out of any part of my lands, tenements and hereditaments) and to
be applied toward carrying on the charitable purposes, expressed in the
charters granted to the said Corporation, in the provinces of New York,
New Jersey, and Pennsylvania, in America.

N. B. IT will be necessary to observe the above Form in any legacy in
Great Britain and Ireland; but in the Colonies, where Charters are granted to
the Corporation, a legacy in lands, or in money, payable out of the sale or
rent of lands, will be valid; and then the form may be thus --

ITEM. I give to the "Corporation for the Relief of the Widows and Children of
Clergymen in the Communion of the Church of England in America," and to their
successors for ever, (...) acres of land, situated, lying and being in [here
describe the lands] or, if it is money payable out of lands --

ITEM. I give to the Corporation [using the charter style as before] the sum of
(...) to be paid, within (...) after my decease, out of all my effects, goods
and estate whatsoever, whether real or personal, and to be applied toward
carrying on the charitable purposes, expressed in the charters granted to the
said Corporation, in the provinces of New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania.

A BENEFACTION to the Corporation may be sent to either of the Treasurers, or
other Officers, mentioned in the list of officers for the present year.

END.

