A SERMON, PREACHED At the ANNIVERSARY MEETING OF THE PLANTER's SOCIETY, IN THE
PARISH OF ST. DAVID, ON GREAT PE DEE, AUGUST the 7 th, 1769.

ECCL. IV 9. Two are better than one, because they have a good Reward for their
Labor.

Di^^e -- -- -- -- --
-- -- -- -- quem te Deus esse
Jus^it, et humana qua Part locatus es in Re.
Persius Sat. 3. CHARLESTOWN: Printed by CHARLES CROUCH, at his
Printing-Office in Elliott-street. 1769.

ECCL. IV. 9. Two are better than one, because they have a good Reward for
their Labor.


THAT Man is formed for Society, is evident from the Constitution of his
Nature, and the necessary Connections of human Life. -- What a surprising
ELOQUENCE has the GOD OF NATURE given to the Eyes, the Countenance, the Voice,
the Air, and Gesture of Men! How expressive of inward Sentiment and Feeling!
And how wisely calculated to raise corresponding Sentiments and Feelings in the
Breasts of others! And is it not conspicuous that all the Passions have an
Aptitude to communicate strong Emotions to, and to raise similar Passions in
one another? How readily (for Instance) do the Passions of Fear and Hope, Love
and Hatred, Joy and Sorrow, vibrate from one Bosom to another; and awaken the
very same Kind of Passions in many which were felt at first but in one! --
Moreover, we observe amongst Men a Variety of GENIUS -- Some are framed with
peculiar Talents for forming Plans, making Laws, inventing Arts, taking the
Lead in Science and Government; and consequently to refine the Minds, and
polish the Manners; and by that Means to civilize and felicitate human Life.
Others, not so ready to contrive and plan Measures, may be more prompt to
execute -- and though not so eminent for Wisdom, may be as much distinguished by
their Integrity, Love of Freedom, just Regard to Government and the Laws, and
Benevolence of Heart. -- Now, all this was most certainly intended by the
gracious AUTHOR of our Being, to promote the common Safety and common Good of
the human Kind. And as Men are thus formed for social Life, a State of Solitude
must be a State of Insecurity and Misery, while Society affords the highest
Advantages. Upon this Principle, the inspired SOLOMON says in our Text, that
Two are better than One, because they have a good Reward for their Labor." --
But, as where an End is proposed, there are certain Means to be used in Order
to obtain that End; and as We cannot reasonably expect to enjoy the Advantages
of SOCIETY, unless We perform the Duties encumbent upon us as Members of
SOCIETY, I shall

First -- Point out the DUTIES suited to our Station as Members of SOCIETY in
general. Secondly -- Recommend some Measures to the Regard of the PLANTER's
SOCIETY in particular.
First. The DUTIES suited to our Station as Members of SOCIETY in general.

These Duties are a religious Regard to GOD, a hearty Love to our COUNTRY, a
just Regard to the LAWS; and a Promptitude to preserve and defend the
CONSTITUTION.

A religious Regard to GOD, is the Basis of all Order in civil Government, and
the only secure Band of civil Society. Where the DEITY is not regarded, there
is no Conscience, and consequently no just Measure of Good and Evil. All good
Laws are founded in REASON -- GOD is the supreme REASON -- If then there is no
Regard to HIM, the Foundation is demolished, and the Superstructure must tumble
down; consequently remorseless Treason, Rebellion, Injustice, Fraud, and Rapine
would disturb the public Tranquillity, whenever private Passion or private
Interest might please to throw off Restraint.

In a Country of Atheists, or of Men destitute of religious Principles, what
Force could there be in OATHS for the Decision of Controversies? What Sincerity
in an Appeal to GOD? And without Sincerity an OATH becomes, instead of a Means
to promote Justice, and to establish Right, a Cloak for Villainy, an Engine of
Mischief! Now it is justly implied in the Form of an OATH established by our
Laws, that GOD is not only to be religiously regarded, but also that that
Regard should be manifested by a becoming Respect to the GOSPEL of our SAVIOR.
CHRISTIANITY is thereby recommended to Us as the only System of Religion that
can make Us good Men and good Members of SOCIETY -- And that with the highest
Reason -- because it is the GENIUS of the GOSPEL, to recover Us from the
Dominion of Sin; to rectify the Disorders of our Minds; to correct and even to
eradicate our Vices; and to lead us on through all the Stages of Virtue, and
every Class of Duties, to the highest Perfection. It is therefore essential to
our being good Members of SOCIETY, that We cultivate in Ourselves, and promote
in Others, such a religious Regard to the DEITY.

A hearty LOVE OF OUR COUNTRY is another Duty incumbent upon Us as Members of
SOCIETY. This is a Duty of a very extensive Nature; and includes in it all
those Duties which We owe to our Parents, our Children, Brothers, Friends,
Neighbors, and Countrymen in general -- Without an undissembled and active
Benevolence to whom, the human Breast must be as a dark hideous Dungeon -- a
Habitation of the vilest Vermin!

This LOVE OF OUR COUNTRY, is not therefore a mere partial Regard to any
particular Soil or Province, where We first drew our Breath (though that natural
Tie, in Conjunction with moral Ones may, in certain Situations, strengthen our
Attachment) -- but it implies a strong Affection to the COMMUNITY in which
Wedwell, as governed by just and equitable Laws, flowing from a wise and happy
CONSTITUTION; and cemented in all it is Parts by the great Principle of a COMMON
INTEREST.

Such a CONSTITUTION of GOVERNMENT We partake of, who are Members of the
ROYAL-COMMONWEALTH of BRITAIN -- A CONSTITUTION which (when well preserved)
gives Security against the Tyranny of Princes, and against the Licentiousness
of the People -- A Constitution which admits not of Injustice to any, and gives
Freedom and Safety to all -- A CONSTITUTION under which our Lives, our Liberty,
our Property, can never be touched, but by the JUDGMENT OF OUR PEERS, and by
the LAWS of our own enacting. What honest Bosom then does not glow with Love to
the COMMUNITY, being founded in Principles so just and equitable? And what
worthy Heart does not burn with Indignation against it is Enemies? -- In this
Case, Indifference must be highly criminal.

It is our Duty also to pay a due REGARD TO THE LAWS. By the Laws We are not to
understand every Law that may possibly be enacted, (for it is possible that
under Color of Law, We may one Day be called upon to swear Allegiance to some
PRETENDER) but by the Laws, We mean every Law that is regularly passed in
Consistence with the fundamental Laws of the Realm -- especially the GRAND
CHARTER, the BILL OF RIGHTS, the ACT OF SETTLEMENT, and the ancient CUSTOMS --
To such Laws, and their due Execution, We are indebted for our common Safety
and common Happiness. It is therefore the Duty of each Individual to obey the
Laws, and to submit to the civil MAGISTRATES, as the Guardians and Executors of
them. It is from THEM that We expect Protection, as the Conservators of the
public Peace, and as the Guardians of our Freedom; and therefore We owe THEM
the highest Defference in their several Departments, and the best Support in
the Execution of their respective Offices. Without this Regard to the
constitutional Laws, the Community cannot long exist; but must quickly sink
into a lawless Rabble; Anarchy and Confusion would overrun our Country, while
Justice, Mercy, Honor, Truth and Bliss, would forsake our Dwellings!

Another Duty, incumbent on Us all, as Members of Society in general, is a
PROMPTITUDE to preserve and defend the happy CONSTITUTION of our Country -- A
Constitution perhaps the best, because the most equitable, and the least liable
to abuse, of any under the Sun -- wisely balanced, and exactly calculated to
answer all the desirable Ends of Government -- SUCH A SYSTEM ought to be
watched with the greatest Circumspection -- for though it is an Object of
Veneration amongst the wise and good; yet it is an Object of Dislike amongst
the Sons of Avarice and Debauchery, who can never thrive but amidst their
Country's Distresses. And if at any Time Corruption or Violence should attempt
an Encroachment upon it, We ought to resist the Attack, so as to defeat, if
possible, the traitorous Intention -- and this at the Risque of all that is
dear to Us under the Heavens. -- The unmanly, the iniquitous, Doctrine of
passive Obedience and Non-Resistance, is I hope for ever exploded, and banished
these Realms -- so that, however it may lurk in the dark Bosoms of Malevolence,
Selfishness, and Disloyalty, it will ever be ashamed to appear again in any
Part of the British Dominion -- For it is very certain that the PEOPLE are the
natural, the original, FOUNTAIN of HONOR, AUTHORITY, and LAWS. When therefore
their fundamental LAWS are corrupted; when their delegated AUTHORITY is
prostituted to pernicious Purposes; when THEY see the CONSTITUTION of their
Country over-turning; -- are THEY to stand as passive Spectators of the Ruin?
-- Rather it is their Duty to stand forth as the AVENGERS of Injustice, the
RESTORERS of public Virtue; and to bring Tyranny or Treason to condign
Punishment. -- This is a Doctrine (not of Licentiousness, but) of the highest
Loyalty, and the purest Regard to the public Good. For this Doctrine not
admitted, this Duty not practiced upon an Emergency, what Safety has our
SOVEREIGN in his Throne? What Security the PEOPLE in their Rights? -- An
ignorant, or a debauched Mind, cannot perhaps consider this Doctrine, without
the Idea of a lawless Rabble in Arms against lawful Government -- but I am
persuaded that such an Idea is more abhorrent to the sober Advocates for this
Principle, than to those who generally debase it by so gross a Conception. --
It is a Principle on which was founded the GLORIOUS REVOLUTION; and to which
the ILLUSTRIOUS HOUSE OF HANOVER is indebted for its Right to the British Crown
-- which may GOD preserve to the latest Ages.

Having pointed out the Duties incumbent upon Us all, as Members of Society in
general; I am now to recommend some Measures to THIS SOCIETY in particular.

I am sensible that the PLANTER's SOCIETY was originally formed, though on
Principles of Public Virtue, yet, on a limited Plan -- But on particular
Occasions these Principles will certainly excite You to pursue Measures of more
extensive Utility; and where your Country calls, for either Counsel or Action,
You are ever prompt to obey the Call with Alacrity and Cheerfulness, to the
utmost of your Ability. -- I need not inform You, GENTLEMEN, that at this very
Time, Your Country calls for the Exertion of all your Talents -- Not only is
your OWN PROVINCE, but all NORTH AMERICA, and eventually the WHOLE BRITISH
EMPIRE, in Hazard of being plunged into Disgrace and Ruin, by Measures
subversive of Freedom -- You know there have been two Questions lately agitated
in the British Parliament, and resolved against the very first Principles of
the Constitution! The first is, Whether You are Freeholders and Men of
Property, or only Tenants at Will, and the Money in your Purse at your Own, or
at the Command of Others? Secondly -- Whether you shall be subject to the Laws
of the Land, and the Judgment of your Peers, in Matters of Debate, or to a
Court of Admiralty, and absolute Dependants on the Crown? -- It has been
alleged, that these Points are settled by the Parliament of Great Britain, and
that their Determinations should and must be decisive. The BRITISH PARLIAMENT
is an august Body, and We should ever speak of it is Wisdom and Authority with
the Reverence it deserves. But is the British Parliament infallible? Should it,
or can it legally, contradict itself? If LORD CHIEF JUSTICE COKE was alive, HE
would declare that such Determinations, as above hinted at, are void in
themselves: And that for this plain Reason, because they are repugnant to the
GREAT CHARTER of ENGLAND, to the BILL OF RIGHTS, and to many other ACTS OF
PARLIAMENT, which stand unrepealed -- To these capital Laws, British Subjects
may safely appeal: These Laws are our Judges; by their express Determination We
abide. If they should declare that the Law of the Land is as a Nose of Wax, and
Trials by our Peers a dubious or precarious Right, then the Point would be
settled, till We could make our imaginary Freedom real. But here, my
COUNTRYMEN! We stand upon a stable Bottom -- here is a Basis that can never be
removed, but by the total Ruin of the whole Empire -- Which may Heaven
mercifully preserve. But after all -- Is it not Rebellion to oppose an Act of
Parliament? Is it not Treason to fly in the Face of Government? To these
Questions it may be safest to let the learned reply -- Lord CAMBDEN declared
such Acts of Parliament to be contrary to the RIGHTS of AMERICANS -- And such
Opposition, MR. PIT told the House of Commons HE rejoiced in. However, the
Opposition, at present, is rather IN, than AGAINST, Acts of Parliament -- One
Act being contradictory to another. If any Opposition is now made by AMERICANS
-- it is argumentative only -- not an Opposition by a Breach of the Peace; but
by sober Remonstrance, and humble Petition, founded upon the Laws, and our
unalienable, and accustomed Rights. -- But these Remonstrances are not heard --
these Petitions are not answered: We are still plundered of our Property, and
deprived of our Birthrights. Then I earnestly recommend it to You, Gentlemen,
as a Society of Freemen, a Band of Brothers, to give Us the Example in Signing
the AGREEMENT. In that there is no Treason; no Disloyalty; nor any Thing that
savours of Rebellion, even by the severest Implication of Law -- Nothing in
short, but Resolutions to avoid Extravagance, to promote Economy, and to
encourage Industry. This is a Measure, that will answer both private and public
good Purposes. First, it will enable you to pay your Debts. Secondly, it will
operate so as to bring our MOTHER COUNTRY to Right-Reason, and teach Her the
Necessity of a maternal Regard to her virtuous Sons -- which will be no Injury
to HER, but of lasting Benefit to BOTH. -- By this sober, quiet, short, and
easy Measure, We shall convince the World, that We are honest Men, and good
Subjects, paying an equal Regard to the Peace, and to the Welfare of our
Country -- And, We may be confident, that our SOVEREIGN (if rightly informed)
will applaud our Virtue, while HE admires the Dignity of our Behavior; and
will not in future listen to the Calumnies of those Men who attempt to
sacrifice the Royal Repose, the Constitution of their Country, and the Freedom
of Millions, to their unbounded Avarice and Ambition. -- I hope therefore, that
no HONEST MAN in this Assembly, and I am persuaded, that no Member of the
PLANTER's SOCIETY, will refuse to sign his Name to the AGREEMENT.

GENTLEMEN! You will permit me farther to observe, that as your Society was at
first formed upon a Design of Usefulness to this particular Part of your
Country, there are two Objects highly worthy of your Attention. One is the
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE* the Other, a REFORMATION OF MANNERS.

As to the first, viz. The ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE, the Law provides indeed
for the easy Recovery of small Debts and Damages. But the Executors of this Law
are not, all of them, (as it is said) Men of Honor and Honesty, but the
Promoters of Quarrels, and little litigious Suits, amongst their Neighbors:
Plunderers of the Poor, instead of Guardians of Right. Whether so heavy a
Charge is just or unjust, GENTLEMEN, You know. -- I am sure, that no worthy
Magistrate, can suppose it aimed at Him; and as to Others, I leave them to feel
that Remorse which sooner or later will fasten as a Vulture on their Bosoms. --
But if the Charge is just, should not Something be done to remedy this Evil? I
would submit it to the Consideration of THIS SOCIETY, if it would not be proper
to search out Men of this Character -- to lodge Complaints against them, and to
use Endeavors to procure their being struck out of the Commission. I recommend
this Measure, because it is thought in itself a necessary Measure -- And you
will the more readily come into it, as by this Means you will crush Injustice,
and save the honest Poor out of rapacious Hands.

You well know, GENTLEMEN! that it is essential to the due Admin^^^ration of
Justice, that proper Courts be legally established for that Purpose. The
Legislature now waits to hear and to redress your Grievances. Now is your Time,
firmly to unite with your Fellow-Parishoners and Countrymen, in soliciting
Relief. You know that You have a Friend in his HONOR THE LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR,
You have Friends in his MAJESTY's COUNCIL, and in the GENERAL ASSEMBLY -- but
You have Enemies too, that will, if possible, (in Order to promote their own
private Emolument) elude the just Designs of all the Friends of their Country.
-- But do You be steady in the Prosecution of every necessary Means to obtain
the desired End -- be patient -- be spirited -- be united -- and as your Cause
is good, I doubt not but GOD will befriend, and the LEGISLATURE relieve You.

I mentioned REFORMATION OF MANNERS -- This at the first View may seem, though
necessary in itself, yet an Object that does not come within the Plan of your
Institution -- But as you extend your Views in some Cases, where You think it
expedient, so with equal Propriety, You may in others, under the same
Apprehension. Now, You very well know, that the Protection and Blessing of
ALMIGHTY GOD is the best, yea the only, certain Security to our Rights and
Privileges -- If GOD should forsake Us, and resolve to punish Us for our
Crimes, We fall a Prey to the Ambition and Avarice, the Pride and Luxury of
Masters, who will set no Bounds to their Lust; and in Order to keep Us in
abject Slavery, will rule Us with a Rod of Iron -- And what can so directly
tend to bring upon Us those Evils, as our Vices? It was Vice that pulled down
the Vengeance of Heaven upon the Cities of SODOM and GOMORRAH -- upon BABYLON
and NINEVAH -- upon the States of GREECE -- the Empire of ROME -- and every
other People, who have lost their Liberty, their Glory, and Felicity. And as
the same Causes produce the same Effects in the moral as well as the material
World, our Vices will (unless repented of) bring upon us the like Ruin.
Gentlemen! I address You upon this Subject, because, in this Part of our
Province, most of You are elevated in your Circumstances -- above the
generality of your Neighbors -- This, added to your being Members of the
PLANTER's SOCIETY, sets You in a Point of Light, which attracts peculiar Notice
-- -- Your Example then, has considerable Influence, and which I hope will
always be so expressive of a pious Regard to the GOSPEL of CHRIST, and to the
LAWS of GOD, as that We may safely tread in your Steps. And if you will use
your Endeavors to procure an effectual Law for the Suppression of Vagrants The
Legislature wisely confiders that those Persons who have no visible Way of
acquiring an honest Livelihood, are ready to use dishonest Means for that
Purpose -- from which springs up a School of Idleness and Vice, in the very
Heart of the Commonwealth -- but by some Defect or other, Persons of this
Character swarm over the remote Parts of this Country, to the great Injury of
the honest and industrious.
; and to promote the Execution of the Laws for the Regulation of public Houses,
the due Observation of the Sabbath, the Prevention of profane Swearing, and of
other Vices, which are the Reproach and Ruin of our Country, You will deserve
the Applause of every good Man, enjoy the sweet Sensations of a benevolent
Heart, and in all probability see the KINGDOM of Our SAVIOR flourish, and the
Kingdom of Darkness and Sin gradually sink into Ruins -- Which may GOD in Mercy
grant for CHRIST's Sake. Amen.


