OBSERVATIONS ON Several Acts of Parliament, PASSED In the 4th, 6th and 7th
Years of his present Majesty's Reign: AND ALSO, ON The Conduct of the Officers
of the Customs, SINCE Those Acts were passed, AND The Board of Commissioners
appointed TO Reside in AMERICA.

Published by the Merchants of BOSTON.

Printed by EDES and GILL, M,DCC,LXIX.

OBSERVATIONS On several Acts of Parliament, etc.
THE representative body of this people having very fully and repeatedly
remonstrated against these acts as unconstitutional and as infringing the
rights and privileges of the subject, it is unnecessary to add any thing upon
that head; but we shall confine our Remarks to such parts of these acts as
affect the trading interest.

By these acts certain rates and duties are imposed on molasses, sugars, wine,
tea, glass, paper and many other articles, commonly imported into the British
colonies in America, and several leading articles which procured remittances to
Great Britain are now either brought into the class of enumerated articles, or
subjected to the duty, risque and expense of being landed in Great Britain;
which embarrassments on the trade of the colonies must greatly diminish if not
wholly destroy several branches of it, and so far lessen the demand for British
manufactures, great quantities of which are annually imported into this
province, (more than the amount of our exports to Great Britain) for the
payment of which we depend not only upon what is produced among ourselves, but
also upon what is caught out of the sea, or is obtained by a circuity of
commerce abroad. To collect this revenue, the government is at a very great
expense, equal at least (and including the charge of men of war and cutters to
guard the coast, vastly superior) to all the revenue that could be collected,
had our trade been as extensive as it was before those Acts were made, which is
not the case now, and never will be, while they remain in force.

One principal branch of the trade of this province is the fishery, carried on
to the banks, in which there are upwards of three hundred vessels employed,
besides a great number of boats in the bay, and about ninety sail in the
mackrel fishery, the amount the fish these vessels cure, with the pickled fish
and liver oil is upwards of one hundred and sixty thousand pounds sterling per
annum, about two fiths of the bank fish turns out merchantable, and is sent to
Spain, Portugal and Italy, and the nett Proceeds remitted to Great Britain; the
other three fifths being unfit for any market in Europe, is sent with the
pickled fish and mackrel to the islands in the West Indies: And as the English
islands do not consume more than is made by the boats in the bay, being about
one fifth and one fourth of the mackrel and pickled fish, the remaining two
fifths made by the bankers, together with three quarters of the mackrel and
pickled fish is carried to the French and other foreign islands, in return for
which we receive molasses, and some ordinary sugars. -- This valuable branch of
our trade the fishery, almost, if not wholly depends on our trade to the
foreign islands in the West Indies -- As we cannot cure fish for the European
markets separate from the other sort sent there, and as we have no other market
for what is made by the bankers, it will be lost if not sent to the foreign
islands, and this loss must entirely destroy the whole bank fishery.

Another considerable branch of the trade of this province is lumber of all
kinds, also provisions, horses and many other articles suitable for the
West India markets, in which trade there are upwards of an hundred and eighty
vessels annually employed, most of which make two voyages in a year; these
vessels call first at the English islands, and when they are supplied, the
remainder is carried to the foreign islands -- A quantity of oak timber,
staves, and other lumber is sent to Ireland, some to Madera and the Western
Islands, to purchase wines, and some few cargoes are sent to Spain, Portugal
and England, but none to any foreign port to the northward of Cape Finister --
The first cost of these cargoes of lumber being very small, the whole profits
are not more than a bare freight for the vessels, but this freight is a great
encouragement to ship-building, which is another very considerable branch of
trade in this province, wherein there have been upwards of three hundred sail
built in a year, before the late embarrassments were laid on the trade, since
which this number has been reduced at least two thirds, and the tradesmen
formerly employed in this branch of business are now obliged to procure a
livelihood in some manufacture, or starve -- Some of these ships went direct to
Europe with fish, oil, pot and pearl ash, naval stores and lumber, but the
greatest part went to the West Indies with lumber, fish and other articles of
our produce, the proceeds of which, with the freights from thence to England,
together with the vessels, were remitted to Great Britain, to pay for the goods
we received from thence -- and by having timber plenty and building so many
vessels, we became carriers for other parts of America; besides the trade to
the West Indies many of our ships formerly went to Virginia, North and
South Carolina, where they carried large quantities of rum to purchase rice,
tobacco and naval stores, and took in freight for Great Britain, where the
proceeds of the whole, (and indeed of all our trade) centers.

Another considerable branch of our trade is that carried on to Africa, where
we send large quantities of New England rum, not only for our own trade, but to
supply the traders in ships from Great Britain, with whom we exchange this
commodity for other European articles brought out by them suitable for that
trade, by means of which they are enabled to carry on their trade to greater
advantage than they would otherwise do without this necessary article -- And as
the slaves purchased there, are chiefly sold in the West Indies for bills on
London, the proceeds of this trade consequently are remitted to Great Britain.

All these several branches of trade are greatly obstructed by the duties
imposed, and the restrictions to which they are subjected by the aforementioned
acts. -- The duty on molasses, though reduced to one penny per gallon, which at
first sight may appear but small, yet as it is one tenth part of the value
(when brought to market) is really large, and will be a discouragement to a
trade which has insinuated itself into, and is a great spring to every branch
of business among us. -- The fishery, the lumber trade and ship-building, are
greatly promoted by the importation of molasses, and distilling it into rum,
and the trade to Africa wholly depends on this article; so that any act which
has a tendency to obstruct the importation of molasses, must be prejudicial to
Great Britain. -- The former acts imposing duties on molasses, were intended
only as a regulation of trade, and to encourage our own islands; and the duty
was only on foreign molasses: But by these acts, it is imposed on all molasses,
and expressly for the purpose of raising a revenue.

The duty of five shillings per hundred on brown, and twenty-two shillings on
white sugars, is a great burden on our trade to the foreign islands; if we
confine ourselves to molasses, a sufficient returned cargo cannot always be
obtained; and the aforesaid duties upon sugars are so heavy as to render the
import of them so unprofitable, that we cannot pursue a trade by which we
disposed of the superfluous produce of our country.

By these acts we are restrained from exporting sugars to a foreign market,
without first landing them in Great Britain, or obtaining a license from thence
to carry them direct to a foreign market. -- If we go first to Great Britain
and land them there, it will prove so expensive by the delay and charges of
unloading and reshipping, and also of a double freight and insurance, that the
trade cannot be carried on to any advantage, especially in a time of war. -- If
we carry these sugars direct to a foreign market by license from Great Britain,
the difficulties and embarrassments are still greater, as the vessel in which
any sugars are to be shipped, must first go to Great Britain, and the master
enter into bonds there, before a license can be procured, during which the
sugars are to remain in the King's stores here, and after they are delivered in
a foreign port, the vessel must return to Great Britain to cancel the bonds,
before she can proceed on any other voyage -- though the liberty granted to carry
these sugars directly to foreign ports by license, might be intended as an
encouragement to the trade, the regulations and restrictions are such as will
effectually defeat this very design; whereas if we were allowed to export these
sugars (after being stored here under the care of custom-house officers) to
foreign markets in our own vessels, free of duty, it would encourage the
bringing them here, and in time might become a very considerable branch of
trade; and in particular would enable us to employ our fish-ships to better
advantage, as they carry no fish between decks, and consequently might be
partly laden with sugars. But under the present regulations, none will ever be
bro't here in order to be exported to a foreign market in Europe, either in our
own vessels or any other.

Here it may be proper to observe, that should we be allowed the free
importation of foreign sugars even for our own consumption, the trade of G.
Britain would not be injured, but greatly benefitted; for in this case, more of
the sugars made in the English islands might be carried to Great Britain, and
what they did not consume, would be exported from thence to foreign markets,
which would employ a greater number of ships, and thereby increase the commerce
of Great Britain, without lessening that of the Colonies -- and all the sugars
we procured from the French islands, and carried to foreign markets in Europe,
must necessarily lessen their navigation, and increase that of Great Britain.

Formerly we made considerable remittances to Great Britain with sugars the
produce of the English islands, which we received in return for our own produce
sold there: But by the Act of the 6th of his present Majesty, we find such a
distinction made in favor of ourfellow subjects in the islands, that while they
may import British plantation sugars into Great Britain as such, that which is
imported from North America must be deemed French, by which means we are cut
off from an article of export which has been heretofore considerable, and
might be so still, were it not for this regulation.

Logwood and mohogany have been by a circuity of trade the means of large
remittances to Great Britain -- these we have obtained by small cargoes of
provisions produced among ourselves, together with some British manufactures,
by which many of our vessels have been employed; but now by being obliged to
carry them first to England, such heavy expenses will be incurred by reason of
their bulk, and the smallness of their value, as must put an end to this branch
of business, and consequently the trade must fall into the hands of foreigners.

The reasons given for these regulations as mentioned in the act of the 6th of
George the Third, were the more effectually to prevent enumerated goods being
privately carried from the British colonies into foreign parts of Europe in
vessels that cleared out with non-enumerated goods; and also to prevent the
clandestine importation of foreign European goods into said British colonies.
Upon the first of these reasons we would observe, that the great care and
vigilance of the custom-house officers here might answer the purpose, and
effectually prevent any such enumerated goods from being exported to foreign
parts -- With respect to the second, it is difficult to conceive how the
obliging a vessel to stop at England upon an outward-bound voyage, can have any
influence in preventing the importation of illicit Goods upon her return,
especially when sufficient care was before taken to prevent such illicit
importation, by obliging all vessels that have any foreign goods on board to
stop at Great Britain on their return.

Another great embarrassment to the trade of the colonies, is the multiplicity
of bonds required by the aforesaid acts of his present Majesty, in addition to
the bond for enumerated goods, required by an act made in the 12th year of the
reign of Charles the second, the condition of which bond is, that such
enumerated goods shall be landed either in G. Britain or some part of his
Majesty's dominions; and by an act of the 4th of George the 3d, Coffee,
Piemento, Cocoa, Hides, Skins, Pot and Pearl Ash, and several other articles
are added to the list of enumerated goods -- besides which, no master of a
vessel is allowed to take in any non-enumerated goods without first giving
another bond with one surety; the condition of which is, that none of said
non-enumerated goods shall be landed in any port of Europe to the northward of
Cape-Finistere, except in Great Britain; by which we are excluded from carrying
even non-enumerated goods to Ireland, without first calling at some port in G.
Britain. If any iron, or lumber are laden on board any vessel, the master must
give a third bond, on the same condition as that required for non-enumerated
goods; and in case any rum is laden on board, a fourth bond is required, the
condition of which is, that such rum shall not be landed in the Isle of Man.

These bonds the officers of the customs in this port require for all vessels
loading any of these articles, not only for such as are going to Europe, the
West Indies, and other colonies on the continent, but even for coasters going
from one town to another in the same province, and sometimes for vessels under
twenty tons going to another town within the district of the same custom-house
where the bonds are given; so that no lumber can be brought from the place of
its growth in the eastern parts of this province, to this or any other market
for exportation, until such bond is given, though no custom-house officer
reside within 40 or 50 and sometimes 100 miles of the place where the coaster
takes in his lumber: This is a very great embarrassment to the trade of this
province, in which there are a great number of vessels employed in the coasting
business, and upwards of one thousand sail are annually entered and cleared at
the several offices: This restriction appears the more unaccountable, as it is
not known that one single vessel ever carried a cargo of lumber to any foreign
port to the northward of Cape-Finistere; had such a trade formerly been carried
on, the coasting vessels are not capable of prosecuting such a voyage, and the
charge of these bonds and certificates to cancel them, amount annually to a
very large sum. -- Besides these several bonds, every master of a vessel, even
a coaster, is obliged to take out a sufferance and cocket for every article
laden on board; and in case he takes in any goods for which bond is required,
he must have a certificate from the collector of his having given bond for
those articles; and in case he neglects taking such certificate, not only the
goods for which bonds are required, but even the vessel and the rest of the
cargo are forfeited; this has been severely felt by some traders here, who have
lost both vessel and cargo to a very considerable value, only for want of such
certificate, though the cocket for those goods mentioned that bonds were taken,
but the certificate was either mislaid or never delivered by the Collector. --
The sureties in these bonds are likewise greatly exposed, should the master
neglect to send a certificate of the landing the goods for which he has given
bonds, or should the collector refuse or disapprove of the certificate he may
send, as being improper, (though there should be no reason to suspect the goods
were carried to any port they were excluded from,) the sureties may be
prosecuted in the court of admiralty, and obliged to pay considerable costs at
least, if not the whole penalty, as has heretofore been experienced in that
court, and is such an insupportable burden on trade, as will prevent many from
engaging in it.

Before a cocket can be taken out for any goods, and some even of British
manufacture, oath must be made when, by whom, and in what vessel the article
intended to be exported, was imported, this in many cases is impossible, and
will prevent some towns from being supplied with such goods as they want, and
induce others to set up manufactures of their own, and thereby lessen the
consumption of British manufactures in the colonies, which must be severely
felt by the manufacturers in Great Britain.

Another great discouragement to the trade of America is the unlimited power
given to officers of the customs -- The act passed in the 4th year of George
the 3d ordains, That in case any information shall be commenced and brought to
trial in America, on account of the seizure of any ship or goods as forfeited,
wherein a verdict shall be given for the claimer, the defendant if the judge
certifies that there was a probable cause of seizure, shall not be entitled to
any costs of suit whatsoever -- and further in case an action shall be brought
against any officer for seizing any ship or goods, where no information shall
be commenced, or brought to trial to condemn the same, and a verdict shall be
given against the defendant, the plaintiff, besides his ship or goods so
seized, or the value thereof, shall not be entitled to above two pence damages,
nor to any cost of suit. But if the plaintiff shall be nonsuited or
discontinue his action, or if judgment shall be given upon any verdict or
demurrer against the plaintiff, the defendant shall recover triple costs. By
these clauses in this act, and the power and extention of the courts of
vice-admiralty, the whole trade of America lies at the mercy of the officers of
the customs and judge of said court, the former being empowered to seize the
ships or goods of the American merchants at their pleasure; and though they never
prosecute the same, or act ever so arbitrarily or unjustly, the merchant has no
remedy, the officer not being subject to any damage, or even to cost of suit,
while the distressed claimant, though ever so much injured, if he should be
nonsuited or discontinue his action, must pay triple costs. And as the
Governor, as well as the officers of the customs and judge of the admiralty,
are interested in those seizures, it is natural to conclude they will always
encourage and promote the same; and many instances may be produced, where both
vessel and goods have been condemned as forfeited, only for a small mistake or
neglect of the master, and the industrious trader thereby ruined, which
severities are not exercised toward our fellow subjects in Great Britain.

Since the appointment of a board of commissioners to reside in America, the
restrictions and embarrassments on the trade have been greatly increased by the
attendance and delay in entering and clearing of vessels at the collector's
office, where some masters have been obliged to wait two or three days before
they could obtain an entry or permit to unload; the many oaths and certificates
required before any vessel can be cleared out have occasioned the same delay to
our outward-bound vessels.

Another difficulty attending the entry of vessels, particularly from the
West Indies, is the master's being required to make an exact report of their
cargoes on their first arrival (even at any out-ports they may put into by
contrary winds) and denying them liberty to make a post entry. -- In
Great Britain the masters are allowed to make reports from day to day as they
find any goods omitted, but this justice is denied the Americans, and the board
of commissioners have publicly advertised that no allowance for the future
shall be made for mistakes or omissions in the first report, even for
adventures belonging to the seamen; this is an hardship, or rather a cruelty,
as the seamen frequently get aboard more than the masters are acquainted with,
and as the masters purchase their molasses on shore in teirces and shift it
into other casks of their own when bro't on board the vessel, and are often
filling up those casks, its sometimes difficult for them exactly to ascertain
the number and contents of the casks they have filled -- The fees taken at the
collector's office, particularly for coasters, and obliging them to enter and
clear in the same manner as vessels bound on foreign voyages, and to give bonds
for every trifling article they carry for private families, even for a few
pounds of tea or sugar, or a few gallons of rum or molasses purchased of
retailers, for which they must produce certificates on oath in what vessel
these trifles were imported, and by whom the duties were paid, which is often
impossible, are such embarrassments on this branch of business, as if
continued, it must entirely destroy it. -- Formerly the coasters were not
required to take cockets for every trifling article, and the fees both entering
and clearing was only one shilling sterling, whereas the expense now is from
ten shillings to sixteen shillings, which is more ready money than they
sometimes receive for their whole freight; and as they frequently take in only
a few articles, the charge of clearing those articles at the custom-house is
more than the freight. -- The appointment of an almost incredible number of
inferior officers, as tidesmen, boatmen, waiters and others, and requiring the
master to receive and lodge them under deck (without any authority to support
it) is another cause of complaint -- Some of those wretches are persons of such
infamous characters that the merchants cannot possibly think their interest
safe under their care -- The liberty these fellows take of searching vessels
before they are discharged, and sometimes before the master's have reported at
the custom-house, is not only illegal, but impudent, and contrary to the
practice in Great Britain, where the officers never search the hold of any
vessel till the master says she is discharged, and desires the waiter to
certify the same to the custom-house. Another intolerable grievance is the
appointment of officers of the customs on board the men of war, cutters and
other armed vessels, the arbitrary, unlawful and wanton manner in which they
have exercised this authority in this province is unprecedented in any other
part of the British dominions.

Some of these officers by force of arms have entered vessels on the high seas,
and in the harbors, insolently demanded of the masters their papers, broke
open their hatches and searched the hold with lighted candles, even ships from
London, with hemp and powder on board, have been treated in this manner, and
both the lives and properties of his Majesty's loyal subjects thereby greatly
endangered -- Some vessels coming into this harbor before the masters could
reach the custom-house to make report, have been boarded by armed boats from
the Romney, commanded by Captain Corner; one vessel from the West Indies had
her hatches opened and twenty hogsheads molasses hoisted upon deck to search
the hold -- Another vessel with lumber was carried along-side the Romney, her
hold unstowed, and the boards taken on board the king's ship, before the master
was permitted to go to the custom-house to report. -- A vessel from Lisbon
bound to Marblehead, was boarded on the high seas by Mr. Panton, lieutenant of
the Rose, (who was likewise an officer of the customs) with a design to impress
the seamen, who concealed themselves in the hold; upon which Mr. Panton assumed
the custom-house officer, and pretended that he was going to search the vessel
for uncustomed goods, and under this pretense entered the hold and endeavored
to impress the seamen who stood upon their defense, and told the officer upon
his peril not to enter the forehold, upon which they were fired upon, and one
of the seamen was shot through his arm, and another wounded; this brought on an
engagement, in which the Lieutenant was killed, and the vessel brought out of
her way to Boston by the man of war. -- Several other vessels have been seized
in the bay, at the Vineyard and other ports, where they have been obliged by
contrary winds to make a harbor, sent into ports they were not bound for, and
there detained at a great expense, on the trifling pretense that some article
(not on cargo, but belonging to the mariners) was found on board, not specified
in the cockets.

Upwards of 20 sail of men of war, cutters and other armed vessels, purchased
by the board of Commissioners, have been employed this year to cruize on the
trade of this province, without discovering one vessel in an illicit trade,
though their expectations were raised in hopes of plunder, by the unjust and
cruel representations made by wicked and designing men -- Some of the
commanders of the King's ships purchased small vessels on their own accounts,
and sent them into the little harbors and coves where the men of war could not
cruise; and some of these have been disguised as coasters, and every other
method has been used to detect a supposed contraband trade; even the master of
a little cutter purchased a fishing boat on his own account for the same
purpose: But being disappointed of the advantages which were expected to be
reaped from the condemnation of illicit traders, or the prizes as they called
them; they have been induced to take advantage of the mistake and omissions of
the masters of coasting vessels, several of whom have been seized by those
guarda coastas, and two actually condemned for some trifles found on board
without being in the clearance -- They have indeed seized 23 other vessels upon
some trifling pretenses, all of which have been dismissed after being detained
some time at a considerable expense -- The Fishery has likewise been greatly
distressed by the guarda coastas -- Many of our fishermen cure their fish at
Canso and other places in Nova Scotia, at a great distance from any
custom-house; and when the fishing season is over, they take in the fish, they
have curred on shore, and return home; this has been the practice ever since
the fishery was carried on, till the passing of the late acts, and the
appointment of officers of the customs on board the King's vessels, since which
many of the fishing vessels have been seized by these avaricious officers, and
condemned in the court of admiralty for taking in their dry fish without first
having a permit from the custom-house, and giving the bond required for
non-enumerated goods, and the skippers of those vessels are now obliged to make
two trips to Halifax or Louisbourg, first to give bond and take a permit to
load, and when they have taken in their fish, to procure a clearance to screen
their vessels and fish from the jaws of these devouring monsters.

The Commissioners themselves (though by act of parliament they are not entitled
to any share of the forfeitures) appear by the whole tenor of their conduct, to
have been more intent upon making seizures, than upon promoting the revenue;
nor have they shown the least disposition to serve the trade, but have taken
every method in their power to embarrass it, by their directions to the
collectors and other officers of the customs, On the 27th of October 1768, John
Hancock, Esquire Mr. Lewis Gray, Capt. Daniel Malcom, Capt. John Matchet, and
others, were libelled for L.9000 sterling each, and held to bail in L.3000
sterling each, to appear at the Court of Vice-Admiralty, no suspicion of their
aiding and assisting at the landing a few pipes of wine imported in the sloop
Liberty from Madera, more than was reported at the custom-house; the libel
against Mr. Hancock came on the 7th of November, when a vast number of
witnesses were examined upon interrogatories in the tedious method of the civil
law, and no proof appearing against him, the court was adjourned to the next
week, and a new set of witnesses were produced and examined in the same
manner, and to as little purpose; after which the court was several times
adjourned, and other witnesses summoned, even Mr. Hancock's most intimate
friends and acquaintance, so that a great part of the winter was taken up in
attending on the court of admiralty, and examining those witnesses; and after
every method had been tried, and no proof could be procured against him in the
spring 1769, on the publication of the new judge of admiralty's commission, Mr.
Hancock was discharged from this vexatious and unprecedented Libel.

The Libels against Mr. Gray, and others, on the same account, were dismissed
at the same time, without examining any witnesses in the case.

About the same time Capt. Malcom, Capt. Dorrington, and others, were libelled
for L.2400 ster. each, and held to bail in L.800 ster. on suspicion of their
assisting at the landing a few pipes of wine supposed to be imported in the
schooner Friendship from the Western Islands; and as no evidences could be
produced to support the charge in these libels, they were all dismissed at the
same time Mr. Hancock's was.

Other instances of the same kind of proceedings might be produced, but these
will be sufficient to show in what a cruel and vexatious manner the inhabitants
of this province are treated by the Board of Commissioner.


and by their employing persons of the most abandoned characters under them,
some of whom have acted in open violation of the laws; and one in particular,
without the least provocation, fired upon the inhabitants, and by force of arms
rescued a prisoner taken by the King's writ from the hand of justice.

The merchants and traders in the northern colonies, and more particularly in
this province, have been greatly abused by the representations that have been
made to Great Britain, of their importing large quantities of the manufactures
of France, Holland, Hambro' and other parts of Europe, in a clandestine manner,
which are false and malicious; the merchants in this province carry on no trade
with any part of France, except to their islands in the West Indies; and no
instance can be produced of any quantity of manufactures being bro't from
thence. The goods imported from Holland and Hambro' are all entered in England,
and the duties to a considerable amount, annually are paid there -- When the
duty upon molasses was 6 d. sterling a gallon, as there was no appropriation
made of that duty, it was well known in England the officers of the customs
connived at the importation, and their conduct was not disapproved: How far
this will justify such representations, is submitted to the impartial public --
but since the duty on molasses has been reduced, the whole, though grievous, has
been regularly paid.

The merchants do not desire liberty to import any kind of goods that are
prejudicial to the manufactures of Great Britain, nor have they ever yet
complained of their trade being confined to Great Britain for such goods as are
manufactured there, so long as they might be imported duty free.

What the Colonists have a right to expect and hope for, is a repeal of all the
acts imposing duties on any kind of goods imported into the British colonies
for the purpose of raising a revenue in America, as being inconsistent with
their rights as free subjects -- the removal of every unnecessary burden upon
trade, and that it be restored to the same footing it was upon before the act
of the 6th of George the 2d, commonly called the sugar-act -- particularly,

That melasses so necessary to promote every branch of trade, and likewise
sugars, be admitted free of duty.

That the importation of wines from Madera and the Azores may be permitted
agreeable to the act of the 15th of Charles the 2d.

And as the free importation of fruit, wine and oil direct from Spain and
Portugal would be a great encouragement of the fishery, and will no ways
interfere with the manufactures of Great Britain, and the obliging all vessels
with those articles on board to call at some port in Great Britain, being
attended with great expense and delay; and as the acid of of lemmons and
oranges is become almost necessary for the health and comfort of the
inhabitants of North America, and these fruits not being able to endure
repeated transportation, it is hoped the direct importation of wine, oil and
fruit of all kinds may also be permitted.

The taking off the duties on paper, glass and colors, will relieve the trade
of the burdens it labors under -- But should all the revenue acts be repealed,
and the trade relieved from all unnecessary restrictions, and restored to the
footing it was upon before the act of the 6th George 2d, and the indulgences
now mentioned be granted, it would have a happy tendency to unite Great Britain
and her colonies on a lasting foundation -- all clandestine trade would then
cease -- the great expense of men of war, cutters of the commissioners and
other custom-house officers lately appointed, to secure the revenue, might be
saved -- The trade, navigation and fishery would not only be revived, but
greatly extended; and in that case the growth of these colonies would be very
rapid, and consequently the demand for British manufactures proportionably
increased.

The foregoing Observations relate wholly to the revenue acts, and the conduct
of the custom-house officers; but we cannot conclude without mentioning the
great expense and needless trouble accruing to the trade by means of the
Naval-Office.

Since the establishment of Custom-Houses, and the appointment of custom-house
officers, this office is altogether unnecessary, and answers no valuable
purpose.

Upon this head it is proper to observe, that soon after the settlement of
these colonies, the parliament thought it necessary to take some measures for
the regulation of the plantation trade. The act of the 12th of Charles the 2d
for encouraging and increasing shipping and navigation, ordains what
qualifications shall be necessary for vessels trading to the colonies; and
enjoins the Governor, or persons by him appointed, to inspect and take care
that the same be observed, and to take bonds for all vessels lading any of the
commodities in said act enumerated.

Three years after, by the act of the 15th of the same reign, further
regulations and restrictions were made, and every person or persons importing
goods into the colonies obliged to deliver to the Governor of such colony, or
to such person or officer as shall be by him thereunto authorized or appointed,
a true inventory of all such goods, etc. At this time and until ten years
after, no duties were laid by act of parliament upon any commodities in the
plantations, and of consequence no custom-houses had been erected, or
collectors or other custom-house officers appointed or thought of in the
colonies, but the whole care and inspection of trade remained with the
Governor, or the person he appointed naval-officer -- Afterward by the act of
the 25th of the same reign, chap. the 7th, sect. 3. duties being laid on sugars
and sundry other articles, to be paid in the plantations, when carried from one
plantation to another, the several duties so imposed were to be levied and paid
to such collector or other officer in said plantations as should thereafter be
appointed by the commissioners of the customs in England; who did accordingly
appoint collectors and such other officers as occasion required, for that
purpose, who ever since their appointment, it is well known, have had the chief
care and inspection of the trade.

From this account of the matter, it appears that as formerly there were no
custom-houses or custom-house officers in America, the government thought
proper to devolve the care and inspection of the trade upon the Governor of
each colony, or such persons as they should appoint under them for that
purpose, who have been called naval-officers; that upon the establishment of
custom-houses and custom-house officers, the establishment of a naval-office,
or the appointment of naval officers was rendered altogether needless. The
original design of government in the establishment or appointment of either,
was, that the trade might be duly taken care of and inspected, that frauds
might be prevented, and that abuses in trade might be regulated: All these
purposes may be and are effectually answered by the appointment of collectors
and other officers of the customs; therefore the naval office is altogether
useless. As it is a grievous burden, and tends greatly to retard business, and
is a needless expense, without any benefit to the government, or answering any
one valuable purpose, we have just grounds of complaint, and cannot but hope
this office will be dispensed with.

Upon the whole, the trade of America is really the trade of Great Britain
herself: The profits thereof center there. It is one grand source from whence
money so plentifully flows into the hands of the several manufacturers, and
from thence into the coffers of landholders throughout the whole kingdom. It is
in short the strongest chain of connection between Britain and the Colonies,
and the principal means whereby those sources of wealth and power have been and
are so useful and advantageous to her. The embarrassments, difficulties and
insupportable burdens under which this trade has labored, have already made us
prudent, frugal and industrious, and such a spirit in the Colonists must soon,
very soon, enable them to subsist without the manufactures of Great Britain,
the trade of which, as well as its naval power, has been greatly promoted and
strengthened by the luxury of the colonies; consequently any measures that have
a tendency to injure, obstruct and diminish the American trade and navigation,
must have the same effect upon that of Great Britain, and in all probability
PROVE HER RUIN.


