AN HUMBLE ENQUIRY INTO The NATURE of the DEPENDENCY of the AMERICAN COLONIES
upon the PARLIAMENT of GREAT BRITAIN, AND The RIGHT of PARLIAMENT to lay TAXES
on the said COLONIES.

By a FREEHOLDER of SOUTH CAROLINA.

A House divided against itself cannot stand.

When people heard ship money demanded as a right, and found it by sworn judges
of the law adjudged so, upon such grounds and reasons as every standerby was
able to swear was not law, and so had lost the pleasure and delight of being
kind and dutiful to the King, and, instead of GIVING, were required to PAY, and
by a logic that left no man any thing that he might call his own, they no more
looked upon it as the case of one man, but the case of the kingdom, nor as an
imposition laid upon them by the King, but by the judges, which they thought
themselves bound in public justice not to submit to. It was an observation
long ago of Thucydides, That men are much more passionate for injustice than
for violence, because (says he) the one proceeding as from an equal seems
rapine, when the other proceeding from a stranger is but the effect of
necessity. -- When they saw reason of state urged as elements of law, judges as
sharp-sighted as secretaries of state, judgment of law grounded upon matter of
fact of which there was neither enquiry nor proof, and no reason given for the
payment but what included all the estates of the standers by, they had no
reason to hope that doctrine, or the promoters of it, would be contained within
any bounds; and it is no wonder that they who had so little reason to be
pleased with their own condition were no less solicitous for, or apprehensive
of the inconveniences that might attend any alteration. -- History of the long
Rebellion, vol. 1. p. 70, 71. PRINTED in the YEAR M,DCC,LXIX.

[Price Twelve Shillings and Sixpence.]

AN HUMBLE ENQUIRY, etc.
THOUGH few or none claim infallibility in express terms, yet it is very
difficult ever to persuade some men they are mistaken. We generally have so
good an opinion of our own understanding, that insensibly we take it for
granted those that do not think as we do must needs be in the wrong. When
disputes are once heightened by personal prejudice, or the bitterness of party,
it becomes so much the more difficult to the disputants themselves to see their
mistakes, and even to bystanders the truth appears wrapped up in a cloud, and
through the fog and dust of argument becomes almost imperceptible.

These remarks I believe will particularly hold good in the subject now in
agitation between Great Britain and her colonies, a subject however of too
serious a nature to be given up to prejudice, or to be decided by the rage of
party. Every argument pro or con deserves to be most carefully weighed, and he
that sets the whole in the clearest light does the public no inconsiderable
service, and that whether it be by pointing out the justice of the American
claims to Great Britain, or setting such constitutional arguments before the
Americans as must either leave obstinacy inexcusable, or will dispose loyal and
reasonable men to a cheerful acquiescence.

The argument on which the Americans seem to lay the greatest stress is, they
say that it is a principle of the British constitution that no Englishman ought
to be taxed but by his own consent, given either by himself or his
representative. I find it admitted by such as disapprove the American claims,
that no man is bound by any law to which he has not given his consent either
in person or by a representative. Perhaps these two propositions are not
perfectly equivalent; however it seems clear, that he that holds that no man is
bound BY ANY LAW to which he has not personally or by a representative
consented, must also admit, that no man is bound by any law that lays a tax on
him without his consent given by himself or representative. What is true of ALL
laws in general must also. hold true of EVERY law in particular. If no law can
operate upon any man that has not in the above manner given his assent to it,
certainly no such law can be binding upon whole communities, or any
considerable part of the whole nation. In the spirit of the above principle, it
seems essential to law, that it be assented to by such on whom it is afterward
to operate. To suppose, therefore, that a law is binding upon such as have not
given their assent, is to suppose (I argue upon that principle) a law may be
valid and binding at the same time it is confessedly destitute of the very
essential point to make it so; and if the assent of those that are to be
governed by the law is not necessary or essential to the making of it, then
representation is a mere superfluous thing, no better than an excrescence in
the legislative power, which therefore at any convenient time may be lopped off
at pleasure, and without the least danger to the constitution; the governed
then have no part in the legislation at all, the will of those in power,
whoever they be, is the supreme and sole law, and what has been above asserted
to be a constitutional principle seems to me to fall to the ground without
remedy to all intents and purposes.

Supposing, on the other hand, that principle, as is asserted to be
constitutional, then to me, as is further asserted, it seems to be of the very
nature of it, that it be general and hold in all cases. This it does not only
clearly imply, but also fully and strongly express; but yet if so, it would
also seem that no man, or no people, in no case, or by no power whatever, can
be bound to pay a tax to which they have not consented either personally or by
their representatives. Every constitutional principle must be general and hold
in all cases, and I may add in all places too, for it is usually said that the
liberties of an Englishman follow him to the end of the world, much more then
must they follow him over all the British dominions; this is so true, that by
an express law, the children of British parents, though born in a foreign
dominion, are just as much entitled to all British liberties as those who have
been born within the realm.

An inference may possibly hence be drawn, that if so, the British colonies are
subject to none of the acts of the British Parliament, ( scil. because they
never assented to them neither in person nor by representative) and therefore
must be considered as independent of the legal or parliamentary power of
Great Britain. I confess I should be sorry to see America independent of
Great Britain, and if any of the arguments the Americans make use of imply an
independency on the mother state, I should shrewdly suspect there must be some
fallacy couched under an otherwise specious appearance. The sum and strength of
this inference I conceive lies thus: The British legislature must be the
supreme power in all the British dominions, and if so, all the British
dominions ought to pay obedience in all cases to all the laws in which they are
mentioned that may be enacted by the British Parliament, and to refuse
obedience in any such case is to declare themselves an independent people.

I freely own I have not heard any thing stronger said in favor of taxation by
the British Parliament, and I think this argument is highly deserving the most
serious consideration. Every good man would wish to hear the voice of
dispassionate reason before he forms his judgment in any debate. Vulgar
prejudices may sway vulgar minds, but a wise man is neither carried away by the
torrent of power, nor the blast of popularity. I would endeavor therefore to
consider this argument with all the can our and impartiality I am capable of; I
would do it with a mind open to conviction, and with steadiness sufficient to
follow truth wherever she may lead me.

To have a clear view how far this argument may affect the present question
between Great Britain and her colonies, it will be necessary carefully to state
the relation which they bear to one another; without this we shall never have a
precise and determinate idea of the matter. The argument I think is made up of
two propositions, viz.

The Parliament of Great Britain is the supreme legislature in all the British
empire.

All the British dominions therefore ought to pay obedience thereto in all
cases and to all the laws in which they are mentioned, and to refuse obedience
to any such is to declare themselves an independent people.

Before I proceed to take a distinct view of each of these propositions, I
repeat, that they are said to be built upon a constitutional principle, and
that this principle must be general and hold in all cases; this must
undoubtedly be admitted, for what enters into the very essence of the
constitution must doubtless operate as far as the constitution itself. Let us
now proceed to consider every part of these two propositions distinctly, and
this must infallibly lead us to form a sound judgment of the whole.

The kingdom of GREAT BRITAIN consists of two parts, north and south, or
England and Scotland, united since 1707 into one kingdom, under the name of
Great Britain. This union has not been so full and absolute, as to put both
kingdoms in all respects upon a perfect equality; but though the legislature is
the same, yet the laws and the administration of justice are not the same in
every instance. The same legislature making laws that affect only the one or
the other of these kingdoms, and even laws made to be binding upon both, do not
affect both alike, of which the difference in raising the supplies by land tax
is a very full and striking proof, this could not be the case if the union
between the two kingdoms was so entire and absolute, as for instance between
England and the principality of Wales.

The BRITISH EMPIRE is a more extensive word, and should not be confounded with
the kingdom or Great Britain; it consists of England, Scotland, Ireland, the
Islands of Man, Jersey, Guernsey, Gibraltar, and Minorca, etc. in the
Mediterranean; Senegal, etc. in Africa; Bombay, etc. in the East Indies; and
the Islands and Colonies in North America, etc. As England, strictly so called,
is at the head of this great body, it is called the mother country; all the
settled inhabitants of this vast empire are called Englishmen, but individuals,
from the place of their nativity or residence, are called English, Scotch,
Irish, Welsh, Americans, etc.

Scotland and Ireland were originally distinct kingdoms and nations, but the
colonies in America, being settled upon lands discovered by the English, under
charters from the crown of England, were always considered as a part of the
English nation, and of the British empire, and looked upon as dependent upon
England; I mean, that before the union of the two kingdoms, (and very few
colonies have been settled since) they depended on England only, and even now I
suppose are rather considered as a dependence upon England than of the two
kingdoms united under the name of Great Britain. Were it not for the union,
which incorporates the two kingdoms, the colonies never would have depended on
that part of Britain called Scotland, and by the terms of the union I apprehend
England has not given up or brought her colonies under the dominion of
Scotland, but though dependent on Great Britain, they still remain what they
always were, English colonies.

All the inhabitants of the British empire together form the BRITISH NATION,
and that the British Parliament is the supreme power and legislature in the
British nation I never heard doubted.

By the English constitution, which is that which prevails over the whole
empire, all Englishmen, or all that make up the British empire, are entitled to
certain privileges indefeasible, unalienable, and of which they can never be
deprived, but by the taking away of that constitution which gives them these
privileges. I have observed that the British empire is made up of different
kingdoms and nations, but it is not the original constitution of Scotland or
Ireland, but of England, which extends and communicates its privileges to the
whole empire. This is an undeniable principle, and ought never to be lost out
of sight, if we would form a sound judgment on the question now to be
considered.

From the consideration above admitted, that the British Parliament is the
supreme legislative power in the whole British empire, the following conclusion
has been drawn; the colonies (and the same I suppose is meant of all the
British empire, of which the colonies are a part) are bound by and subject to
all the laws of the British Parliament in which they are mentioned, or are
subject to none of any kind whatsoever.

Before this can be properly discussed, it must be observed, that Great Britain
has not only a Parliament, which is the supreme legislature, but also a
constitution, and that the now Parliament derives its authority and power from
the constitution, and not the constitution from the Parliament. It may also be
very fairly inferred hence, that the liberties of Englishmen arise from and
depend on the English constitution, which is permanent and ever the same,
whereas the individuals which compose the Parliament are changed at least once
every seven years, and always at the demise of a king.

The Parliament of Great Britain is the supreme legislature in the British
empire. It must be so either absolutely or agreeable to the constitution; if
absolutely, it can alter the constitution whenever it sees fit; if absolutely,
it is not bound by the constitution, nor any thing else; if agreeable to the
constitution, then it can no more make laws, which are against the
constitution, or the unalterable privileges of British subjects, than it can
alter the constitution itself. Supposing a Parliament, under some of the
arbitrary reigns of the last century, should have made a law, that for the
future the king's warrant should be sufficient to lay a tax on the subject, or
to oblige him to pay ship money, it would have been an act of the supreme
legislature, but it may safely be doubted, whether the nation would have
thought it constitutional. I conclude therefore, that the power of Parliament,
and of every branch of it, has its bounds assigned by the constitution.

If the power of the Parliament is limited by the constitution, it may not be
improper next to enquire, whether the power of the British Parliament affects
all the subjects of the British empire in the same manner.

If the power of the British Parliament affects all the subjects of the British
empire in the same manner, it follows, that all the laws made by the British
Parliament are binding alike upon all those over whom this power extends, or in
other words, that all the subjects of the British empire are bound not only by
those laws in which they are expressly mentioned, but every law by the
Parliament made, for what need is there to mention every individual of those
for whom the law is made in general, every subject therefore of the British
empire, upon this supposition, must be bound by every law of the British
Parliament, unless expressly excepted.

Those that hold the subjects of Great Britain, living without England or
Scotland, are bound by every law in which they are mentioned, seem also clearly
to hold, that the same persons are not bound by such laws in which they are not
mentioned. Thus the alternative, that the subjects of the British empire must
be subject to all or none of the laws of the British Parliament, is limited
even by those who plead for an universal submission. He that is only bound to
obey some laws, cannot be said to be bound by all laws, as, on the contrary, he
that is bound to obey all laws, is excused in none.

I suppose, before the union with Scotland, none would have scrupled to call
the English Parliament the supreme legislature of all the British empire,
though Scotland was still an independent kingdom, and by the union Scotland and
its Parliament was not swallowed up and absorbed by England and its Parliament,
but united with the kingdom, and the Parliaments also of the two kingdoms
united in one general legislature. The ecclesiastical laws and constitution
also of each kingdom remains as it was before, i. e. entirely different from
each other.

Perhaps it may not be amiss to conceive, that the authority of the British
Parliament extends over the whole British nation, though the different
respective subjects are not altogether alike affected by its laws: That, with
regard to national trade, the power of making it most beneficial to the head
and every branch of the empire is vested in the British Parliament, as the
supreme power in the nation, and that all the British subjects every where have
a right to be ruled by the known principles of their common constitution.

Next, it may be proper to take a nearer view how far, and in what manner, the
acts of Parliament operate upon the different subjects of the British empire.

ENGLAND doubtless is the first and primary object of the British Parliament,
and therefore all laws immediately affect every resident in England; and of the
king himself it has been said, Rex Angliae in regno suo non habet superiorem
nisi Deum and legem. Proceedings at law I take to be the same in England and
England's dependencies.

SCOTLAND is united with England, and therefore there is a different operation
of the laws that subsisted before and those that have been made since the
union, and even these do not affect Scotland as of themselves; but in
consequence of and in the terms of the union between the two nations, the union
makes no alteration in proceedings at law, nor does it take away any private
property.

IRELAND is a distinct kingdom, and has been conquered from the native Irish
two or three times by the English; it has nevertheless a Parliament of its
own, and is a part of the British empire. It will best appear how far the
British Parliament think Ireland dependent upon Great Britain, by inserting, A
Bill for the better securing of the Dependency of Ireland. The act was as
follows: Whereas attempts have lately been made to shake off the subjection of
Ireland unto, and dependence upon the imperial crown of this realm, which will
be of dangerous consequence to Great Britain and Ireland. And whereas the House
of Lords in Ireland, in order thereto, have, of late, against law, assumed to
themselves a power and jurisdiction to examine, correct and amend, the judgment
and decrees of the courts of justice in the kingdom of Ireland; therefore, for
the better securing of the dependency of Ireland upon the crown of
Great Britain, may it please your Majesty, that it may be enacted, and it is
hereby declared and enacted, by the King's most excellent Majesty, by and with
the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in
this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, That the
said kingdom of Ireland has been, is, and of right ought to be, subordinate
unto, and dependent upon the imperial crown of Great Britain, as being
inseparably united and annexed thereunto, and that the King's Majesty, by and
with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons of
Great Britain, in Parliament assembled, had, has, and of right ought to have,
full power and authority to make laws and statutes of sufficient force and
validity to bind the people and kingdom of Ireland.

And be it farther enacted, by the authority aforesaid, That the House of Lords
of Ireland have not, nor of right ought to have, any jurisdiction to judge of,
affirm, or reverse any judgment, sentence, or decree, given or made in any
court within the said kingdom, and that all proceedings before the House of
Lords upon any such judgment, sentence, or decree, are, and are hereby declared
to be utterly null and void to all intents and purposes whatsoever.

The occasion of this bill was an appeal brought 1719 from the House of Peers
in Ireland to the House of Peers in England. A PIT was the first that spoke
against it in the House of Commons, because, as he said, in his opinion it
seemed calculated for no other purpose than to increase the power of the
British House of Peers, which in his opinion was already but too great. The
Duke of Leeds protested against it in the House of Lords, and gave fifteen
reasons to support the claim of the House of Peers in Ireland. The bill however
passed, though Mr. Hungerford, Lord Molesworth, Lord Tyrconel, and other
members, endeavored to show, that Ireland was ever independent with respect to
courts of judicature. Some proposals have several years ago been made to
incorporate Ireland with Great Britain, but without any effect.

The Islands of Guernsey and Jersey* though in ecclesiastical matters
considered as a part of Hampshire, are under the direction of an Assembly
called the Convention of the States of Jersey, etc. The Isle of Man has lately
been annexed to the crown, but their own Manks laws still obtain in the island.

The British colonies and islands in America are not the least important part
of the British empire; that these owe a constitutional dependence to the
British Parliament I never heard they denied; though of late they have
frequently been charged with it, these charges have not been grounded upon any
declaration of theirs of the kind, their very petitioning, petitions and
resolutions, manifestly speaking the very reverse; but their aversion to
certain new duties, laid upon them for the sole purpose of raising a revenue,
have been made a handle of against them, and they have as good as been charged,
that they declare themselves an independent people. These insinuations the
Americans are apt to look upon as being neither very fair nor very friendly;
however at present I would only consider what kind of dependence is expected
from the American colonies. An act of Parliament has fixed that of Ireland; a
later act of the same power has also fixed that of America, though, as will
appear from the comparison, not altogether on the same footing. The act is
entitled, An Act for the better securing the Dependency of his Majesty's
Dominions in America upon the Crown and Parliament of Great Britain, and runs
thus:

Whereas several of the Houses of Representatives in his Majesty's colonies and
plantations in America have of late, against law, claimed to themselves, or to
the General Assemblies of the same, the sole and exclusive right of imposing
duties and taxes upon his Majesty's subjects in the said colonies and
plantations, and, in pursuance of such claim, passed certain votes, resolutions
and orders, derogatory to the legislative authority of Parliament, and
inconsistent with the dependency of the said colonies and plantations upon the
crown of Great Britain, may it therefore please your most excellent Majesty,
that it may be declared, and be it declared, by the King's most excellent
Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons, in the present Parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same. That the said colonies and plantations in America have
been, are and of right ought to be, subordinate unto and dependent upon the
imperial crown and Parliament of Great Britain, and that the King's Majesty, by
and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons, of Great Britain, in Parliament assembled, had, has, and of right
ought to have, full power and authority to make laws and statutes of sufficient
force and validity to bind the colonies and people of America, subjects of the
crown of Great Britain, in all cases whatsoever.

And be it further declared and enacted, by the authority aforesaid, That all
resolutions, votes, orders and proceedings, in any of the said colonies or
plantations, whereby the power and authority of the Parliament of Great Britain
to make laws and statutes as aforesaid is denied, or drawn into question, are,
and are hereby declared to be utterly null and void to all intents and purposes
whatsoever.

This is the standard of dependence which the Parliament of Great Britain has
fixed for the British colonies on the 18th of March, 1766. The Stamp Act was
repealed the same day, and the opinion of several noblemen who protested
against that repeal was, that this declaratory bill cannot possibly obviate the
growing mischiefs in America, where it may seem calculated only to deceive the
people of Great Britain, by holding forth a delusive and nugatory affirmance of
the legislative right of Great Britain, whilst the enacting part of it does no
more than abrogate the resolutions of the House of Representatives in the
North-American colonies, which have not in themselves the least color of
authority, and declares that which is apparently and certainly criminal only
null and void. I presume I may venture to affirm, that in and by this act, the
Parliament did not mean to set aside the constitution, infringe the liberties
of British subjects, or to vindicate unto themselves an authority which it had
not before, was known to have, and would always have had, though this act had
never been made. I also find, that, in order to overset any act, law,
resolution, or proceeding, of the colony Assemblies, nothing seems necessary,
but that the Parliament should declare it null and void to all intents and
purposes whatsoever. And it seems pretty clear, that the same power that can
disannul any act by a simple declaration, with one single stroke more, can also
annihilate the body that made it.

The remark already made, that though all the different parts of the British
empire are in a state of dependence upon the Parliament of Great Britain, yet
that the nature and degree of dependence is not exactly alike in the respective
different parts of the same, will receive new strength and light, if we compare
the act for better securing the dependency of Ireland with that for better
securing the dependency of the colonies. Both acts, though at different times,
have been made by the same authority, and for a similar purpose, and none can
better tell us what kind and degree of dependency the Parliament expects and
requires of its dependents than the Parliament itself.

The Irish is entitled in very general words, for the better securing the
dependency of Ireland.

The title of the American law is more explicit; Ireland's dependency is
mentioned, but the dependency of the Americans is more clearly expressed, and
said to be upon the crown and Parliament of Great Britain. America seems to owe
two dependencies, one to the crown, and one to the Parliament.

The preamble of the Irish bill brings no less a charge than an attempt to
shake off subjection unto and dependence upon the imperial crown of
Great Britain.

The preamble of the American bill brings no such accusation, but only, that
the Americans have claimed an exclusive right to lay on taxes on his Majesty's
subjects within the colonies, and passed votes and resolutions derogatory to
the legislative power of Parliament, and inconsistent with the dependency of
the said colonies and plantations upon the crown (the word and Parliament is
not made use of in this place) of Great Britain. The principal differences
between these bills seems to me to lie in this, that Ireland is said to be
subject to and dependent only on the crown of Great Britain, whereas America
throughout is declared subject, at least dependent and subordinate, not only to
the crown, but also to the Parliament of Great Britain, and then Ireland is
only declared dependent upon, and subordinate to, in very gentle terms, whereas
the right of making laws to bind the Americans is expressed in these very
strong, most extensive terms, IN ALL CASES WHATSOEVER.

Time was when the dependency of the colonies upon England was spoke of exactly
in the terms made use of for Ireland; the charter of this province says, "our
pleasure is, that the tenants and inhabitants of the said province be subject
IMMEDIATELY to the crown of England, as depending thereof forever;" but by the
late law all America is said to be dependent on crown and Parliament. This
alteration seems to me by no means immaterial, but to imply a change both in
the subjection expected from the colony and in the authority to which the
colony owes dependency and subordination. In Parliament, King, Lords, and
Commons, constitute the supreme power; but as each of these has its own
distinct unalienable right, and incommunicable prerogatives, rights, or
privileges, so I cannot but conceive dependency upon the crown and dependency
upon crown and Parliament are things not exactly alike. If (as asserted in the
charter) the colonies at some time or other were only dependent on the crown,
and now are subordinate unto and dependent upon crown and Parliament, it should
seem both the authority on which they depend, and the nature of their
dependency, has undergone some alteration; neither does this appear to me a
trifling alteration, and it seems to me at least if so it must needs make some
alteration in the system of government and obebience.

Hitherto all appeals from the colonies, after passing through chancery in
America, have been made to the King in council; this I conceive must have been
in consequence of the dependency of the colonies immediately upon the crown;
but perhaps for the future appeals will not be carried to the King in council,
but to the King and Parliament.

The crown has hitherto had a right of a negative upon all American laws, and
they were obliged to be passed in America with a saving clause; but if, as is
asserted in the declaratory bill, the King has a right and power to make laws
to bind the Americans, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons of Great Britain, assembled in Parliament,
then probably the same authority must also concur to repeal the laws made in
America, whereas the crown hitherto repealed any law made in America without
asking or waiting for the consent of Lords and Commons.

It appears also, by a late act suspending the Assembly of New York, that the
parliamentary authority also extends to suspend, which is but another word for
proroguing or dissolving (or annihilating) Assemblies; all which has hitherto
been done by the crown without the interfering of Parliament: But that the
crown has a right of proroguing or dissolving the Parliament itself by its own
authority I suppose will not be denied. I cannot dismiss this subject without
observing, that even the declaratory bill speaks of the Assemblies in America
as Houses of Representatives. If it is allowed that they are represented in
America, unless they are represented doubly, they cannot be represented any
where else; this strikes at the root of virtual representation, and if
representation is the basis of taxation, they cannot be taxed but where they
are represented, unless they are doubly taxed, as well as doubly represented.

It is evident upon the whole, that a much greater degree of dependency and
subordination is expected of America than of Ireland, though, by the way,
Ireland, in the preamble of their bill, is charged with much greater guilt than
America; nay, the words in ALL CASES WHATSOEVER are so exceeding extensive,
that, in process of time, even hewing of wood, and drawing of water, might be
argued to be included in them.

It was necessary to state the authority claimed by Parliament over America as
clear and full as possible; with regard to the Americans it must be owned, when
they profess to owe dependency and subordination to the British Parliament,
they do not mean so extensive and absolute a dependency as here seems to be
claimed, but that they think themselves in a constitutional manner dependent
upon and in subordination to the crown and Parliament of Great Britain, even
those votes, resolutions, and proceedings, which are disannulled by the House
of Commons and the declaratory bill, most fully and cheerfully declare.

It has indeed been said, that unless they are subject to all the British acts
in which they are mentioned, they are subject to none of any kind whatsoever,
and consequently to be considered as independent of the legal and parliamentary
power of Great Britain; but I should think it might be as fairly and safely
concluded, that while the Americans declare themselves subject to any one law
of the British legislature, it cannot be said they declare themselves
independent, or not subject to any law whatever.

In so delicate and important a matter, may I be permitted to observe, that the
measure of power and of obedience in every country must be determined by the
standard of its constitution. The dispute seems to lie between the Parliament
and colonies; the Parliament will certainly be the sitting judges; I will not
take upon me to say that the Americans may not look upon Parliament as judge
and party; however, it is very possible for a judge to give a most righteous
sentence, even where he himself is deeply interested, but they that are
sufferers by the sentence will ever be apt to wish that he had not been party
as well as judge.

From what has been said hitherto, the due and constitutional authority of the
British Parliament appears clear, and it does not less so I hope, that the
subordination to and dependency on the British Parliament is not exactly the
same in all the respective parts of that extensive empire; perhaps this will
appear with still greater evidence by taking a particular view of the subject
of taxation.

Any unlimited power and authority may lay on the subjects any tax it pleases;
the subjects in that case themselves are mere property, and doubtless their
substance and labor must be at their disposal who have the disposal of their
persons. This is the case in arbitrary governments; but the British empire is
an empire of freemen, no power is absolute but that of the laws, and, as has
been asserted, of such laws to which they that are bound by them have
themselves consented.

Did the power and authority of the British Parliament in point of taxation
extend in the same manner over all its dependencies, e. g. the same over
Scotland as over England, over Ireland in the same manner as over Scotland,
over Guernsey and Jersey as over Ireland, etc. then the very same act which
lays a general tax would lay it also at the same time upon all over whom that
authority extends. The laws of every legislature are supposed to extend to and
be made over all within their jurisdiction, unless they are expressly excepted.
Thus an excise law extends to all the British kingdom, because it is a public
law; but acts have frequently been made to lay on a penny Scots on beer, which,
being for a local purpose, cannot operate on the whole kingdom. The same I
believe may be said with regard to the method of recovering small debts; it
seems absurd to say, that any supreme legislature makes an unlimited law which
at the same time is designed not to be binding upon the greatest part of the
subjects within that empire. Was it ever known that the land tax being laid on
the whole united kingdom, the bishopric of Durham, and the manor of
East-Greenwich, were not also supposed to be included? and if any part within
the immediate jurisdiction, and equally dependent on the same legislature,
should be designed to be excused from, or not liable to pay a general tax,
would it not be absolutely necessary that such a place should be expressly
excepted? If, because America is a part of the British empire, it is as much
so, or in the same manner is a part of it, as is the bishopric of Durham, or
the manor of East-Greenwich, nothing can be plainer than that it must be
affected by every tax that is laid just in the same manner and proportion as is
the bishopric of Durham, or manor East-Greenwich. This has not been the case,
nor thought to be the case hitherto. Ireland and America have not been called
upon to pay the British land tax, malt tax, nor indeed any tax in which they
have not been expressly mentioned; the reason of which I presume must be,
either that the British Parliament did not look upon them as any part of the
kingdom of Great Britain, or else did not think them liable to any tax in which
they were not expressly mentioned. If any subjects of the British empire are
not liable to any or every tax laid on by the British Parliament, it must be
either because they are not liable by the constitution, (as not being
represented) or because they are excused by the favor of Parliament; if they
are not liable by the privileges of the constitution, their not being compelled
to pay is no favor, the contrary would be oppression and an anticonstitutional
act; if they have been hitherto excused by the lenity of the British
Parliament, it must be owned the Parliament bore harder on those who were made
to pay those taxes than on those who by their lenity only were excused.

The noble Lords who protested against the repeal of the Stamp Act observe, it
appears to us, that a most essential part of that authority, ( sc. the whole
legislative authority of Great Britain, without any distinction or reserve
whatsoever) the power of legislation, cannot be properly, equitably, or
impartially exercised, if it does not extend itself to all the members of the
state in proportion to their respective abilities, but suffers a part to be
exempt from a due share of those burdens which the public exigencies require
to be imposed upon the whole: A partiality which is directly and manifestly
repugnant to the trust reposed by the people in every legislature, and
destructive of that confidence on which all government is founded.

If in the opinion of these Noblemen, therefore, it is partiality to suffer any
part of the state to be exempt from a due share of those burdens which the
public exigencies require should be imposed upon the WHOLE, it would also seem
to be a species of partiality, to lay a burden on ANY PART of the state which
the other parts of the same state are not equally bound to bear. Partial
burdens, or partial exemptions, would doubtless affect those that are burdened
or exempted in a very different manner; but if not extending alike to the
whole, must still be looked upon as partial. And if this partiality is
inconsistent with the trust reposed BY THE PEOPLE in every legislature, it
would also seem that the legislature could not lay any burdens but as entrusted
by the people who chose them to be their representatives and a part of the
legislature. We may hence also learn what is to be expected, if every other
part of the British empire, England and Scotland only excepted, have hitherto
been exempted from the taxes paid in England, which it must be owned are very
heavy, by mere favor; or, as some seem to express it, " flagrant partiality
and injustice;" their being indulged time immemorial will not be deemed a
sufficient plea to excuse them always, but with an impartial hand the very same
taxes that now obtain in Great Britain will be laid upon Ireland, America,
Jersey, Guernsey, the Mediterranean, African and East India settlements, and,
in short, on every individual part of the British empire. Whether a design to
do this be not ripening apace I will not take upon me to say, but whenever it
does, it must make some alteration in the policy of the mother and infant
state, nay in the system of the whole British empire.

There are several parts of the British empire that pay no tax at all; this I
take to be the case of Gibraltar, Minorca, Newfoundland, East-Florida, and all
the African and East India settlements, etc. The reason is, that all these
places have no legislature of their own, and consequently none to give or
dispose of their property; had these places been taxed by Parliament, there
might however this reason been given, that having no representatives within
themselves, and having never contributed any thing to the public burdens,
though they all receive protection, perhaps greater than the American colonies,
the Parliament supplied that detect; but this cannot be urged against the
colonies, who both have legislatures, and also contributed to the public
burdens, and that so liberally, that even the crown and Parliament thought they
had exerted themselves beyond their abilities, and for several years gave them
some compensation. I may mention those parts of the British empire as striking
instances, that where there is no representation, taxation has not been
thought of, and yet Newfoundland, which is not taxed at all, is certainly as
much represented in Parliament as all the colonies, which are designed to be
doubly taxed.

By the constitution taxes are in the nature of a free gift of the subjects to
the crown; regulations of trade are measures to secure and improve the trade of
the whole nation. There is no doubt but regulations may be made to ruin as well
as to improve trade; yet without regulations trade cannot subsist, but must
suffer and sink; and it seems no where more proper to lodge the power of making
these regulations than in the highest court of the empire; yet a man may trade
or not, he may buy or let it alone; if merchandises are rated so high that they
will not suit him to purchase, though it may be an inconvenience, yet there is
no law to compel him to buy; to rate the necessaries of life, without which a
man cannot well do, beyond their real value, and hinder him at the same time
from purchasing them reasonably of others, is scarce consistent with freedom;
but when duties are laid on merchandises not to regulate trade, but for the
express and sole purpose of raising a revenue, they are to all intents and
purposes equal to any tax, but they can by no means be called the free gift of
those who never helped to make the law, but, as far as in them lay, ever looked
upon it as an unconstitutional grievance.

If taxes are a free GIFT of the people to the crown, then the crown has no
right to them but what is derived from the GIVERS. It may be absolutely
necessary that the subject should give, but still he that is to give must be
supposed the judge both of that necessity, and how much he may be able and
ought to give upon every necessary occasion. No man can give what is not his
own, and therefore the constitution has placed this right to judge of the
necessity, and of what is to be given, in the Commons as the representatives of
all those who are to give, in vesting a right in them to give public supplies
to the crown; it did not, could not mean to invest them with any power to give
what neither belongs to them, nor those whom they represent; and therefore, as
no man constitutionally "owes obedience to any law to which he has not assented
either in person or by his representative;" much less does the constitution
oblige any man to part with his property, but freely and by his own consent;
what those who are representatives are not willing to give, no power in
Great Britain has any right violently to take, and for a man to have his
property took from him under pretense of a law that is not constitutional,
would not be much better than to have it took from him against the express
consent of those whom he constitutionally made his representatives.

It is held a maxim, that in government a proportion ought to be observed
between the share in the legislature and the burden to be borne. The Americans
pretend to no share in the legislature of Great Britain at all, but they hope
they have never forfeited their share in the constitution.

Every government supposes rule and protection from the governors, support and
obedience from those that are governed; from these duly tempered arises the
prerogative of the crown and the liberty of the subject; but he that has not a
right to his own has no property, and he that must part with his property by
laws against his consent, or the consent of the majority of the people, has no
liberty. The British constitution is made to secure liberty and property;
whatever takes away these takes away the constitution itself, and cannot be
constitutional.

To form a clear judgment on the power of taxation, it must be enquired on what
right that power is grounded. It is a fundamental maxim of English law, that
there is a contract between the crown and subjects; if so, the crown cannot lay
on any tax, or any other burden, on the subject, but agreeable to the original
contract by authority of Parliament; neither can the Lords properly concur, or
the Commons frame a tax bill for any other purpose but the support of the crown
and government, consistent with the original contract between that and the
people.

All subjects are dependent on and subordinate to the government under which
they live. An Englishman in France must observe the laws of France; but it
cannot be said that the dependency and subordination in England is the same as
dependency and subordination in France. In governments where the will of the
sovereign is the supreme law, the subjects have nothing to give, their ALL is
in the disposal of the government; there subjects pay, but having nothing of
their own cannot give; but in England the Commons GIVE and GRANT. This implies
both a free and voluntary act, and that they give nothing but their own
property.

Though every part of the British empire is bound to support and promote the
advantage of the whole, it is by no means necessary that this should be done by
a tax indiscriminately laid on the whole; it seems sufficient that every part
should contribute to the support of the whole as it may be best able, and as
may best suit with the common constitution.

I have before observed the different degree of dependency on the mother state;
I shall now review the same again, with a particular regard to imposing or
paying taxes, and if a material difference has always obtained in this
respect, it will confirm my assertion, that every branch of the British empire
is not affected by the tax laws of Great Britain in the self same manner.

The Parliament has a right to tax, but this right is not inherent in the
members of it as men; I mean, the members of Parliament are not (like the
Senate of Venice) so many rulers who have each of them a native and inherent
right to be the rulers of the people of England, or even their representatives;
they do not meet together as a court of proprietors to consider their common
interest, and agree with one another what tax they will lay on those over whom
they bear rule, or whom they represent, but they only exercise that right which
nature has placed in the people in general, and which, as it cannot
conveniently be exercised by the whole people, THESE have lodged in some of
their body chosen from among themselves, and by themselves, for that purpose,
and empowered for a time only to transact the affairs of the whole, and to
agree in their behalf on such supplies as it may be necessary to furnish unto
the crown for the support of its dignity, and the necessities and protection of
the people.

It would be absurd to say, that the crown has a right to lay on a tax, for as
taxes are granted to the crown, so in this case the crown would make a grant to
itself, and hence the bill of rights expressly asserts, that the levying of
money for or to the use of the crown, by pretense of prerogative, without grant
of Parliament, for a longer time or in any other manner than the same is or
shall be granted, is illegal; hence also there is a material difference between
money bills and all other laws. The King and Lords cannot make any amendment in
money bills, as the House of Lords frequently does in all others, but must
accept or refuse them such as they are offered by the Commons, the
constitutional reason of which is very obvious, it is the people only that
give, and therefore giving must be the sole act of those by whom the givers are
represented. The crown cannot take till it is given, and they that give cannot
give but on their own behalf, and of those whom they represent; nay even then
they cannot give but in a constitutional manner; they cannot give the property
of those they represent without giving their own also exactly in the same
proportion; every bill must be equally binding upon ALL whom they represent,
and upon every one that is a representative.

Every representative in Parliament is not a representative for the whole
nation, but only for the particular place for which he has been chosen. If any
are chosen for a plurality of places, they can make their election only for one
of them. The electors of Middlesex cannot choose a representative but for
Middlesex, and as the right of sitting depends entirely upon the election, it
seems clear to demonstration, that no member can represent any but those by
whom he has been elected; if not elected he cannot represent them, and of
course not consent to any thing in their behalf. While Great-Britain's
representatives do not sit assembled in Parliament, no tax whatever can be laid
by any power on Great-Britain's inhabitants; it is plain therefore, that
without representation there can be no taxation. If representation arises
entirely from the free election of the people, it is plain that the elected are
not representatives in their own right, but by virtue of their election; and it
is not less so, that the electors cannot confer any right on those whom they
elect but what is inherent in themselves; the electors of London cannot confer
or give any right to their members to lay a tax on Westminster, but the
election made of them doubtless empowers them to agree to or differ from any
measures they think agreeable or disagreeable to their constituents, or the
kingdom in general. If the representatives have no right but what they derive
from their electors and election, and if the electors have no right to elect
any representatives but for themselves, and if the right of sitting in the
House of Commons arises only from the election of those designed to be
representatives, it is undeniable, that the power of taxation in the House of
Commons cannot extend any further than to those who have delegated them for
that purpose; and if none of the electors in England could give a power to
those whom they elected to represent or tax any other part of his Majesty's
dominions except themselves, it must follow, that when the Commons are met,
they represent no other place or part of his Majesty's dominions, and cannot
give away the property but of those who have given them a power so to do by
choosing them their representatives.

The Parliament has the sole right to lay on taxes, and, as has been observed
in Parliament, it is not the King and Lords that GIVE and GRANT, but this is the
sole act of the Commons. The Commons have the right to do so either from the
crown or people, or it is a right inherent in themselves. It cannot be inherent
in themselves, for they are not born representatives, but are so by election,
and that not for life, but only for a certain time; neither can they derive it
from the crown, else the liberty and property of the subject must be entirely
in the disposal and possession of the crown; but if they hold it entirely from
the people, they cannot hold it from any other people but those who have chosen
them to be their representatives, and it should seem they cannot extend their
power of taxing beyond the limits of time and place, nor indeed for any other
purpose but that for which they have been chosen. As the Commons in Parliament
cannot lay any tax but what they must pay themselves, and falls equally on the
whole kingdom of England, so, by a fundamental law, they cannot lay but such a
part of the general tax on some part of the united kingdom. The principality of
Wales was never taxed by Parliament till it was incorporated and represented,
and, poor as it is, it pays now considerably larger than Scotland, which is as
big again. When England is taxed two millions in the land tax, no more is paid
in Scotland than 48,000 l. and yet to lay a higher land tax on North Britain
the British Parliament cannot, it cannot without breaking the union, that is, a
fundamental law of the kingdom. All the right it has to tax Scotland arises
from and must be executed in the terms of the union. While Scotland was yet a
separate kingdom, it was once debated in Parliament, whether a subsidy should
first be granted, or overtures for liberty first be considered; when the
Queen's Ministry insisted on the former, a member urged, that it was now plain
the nation was to expect no return for their expense and toil, but to be put to
the charge of a subsidy, and to lay down their necks under the yoke of slavery,
etc. Another member said, that he insisted for having a vote upon the question
which had been put: That he found as the liberties of the nation were
suppressed, so the privileges of Parliament were like to be torn from them, but
that he would rather venture his life than that it should be so, and should
choose rather to die a freeman than live a slave. Some pressed for the vote,
adding, that if there was no other way of obtaining so natural and undeniable a
privilege of the Parliament, they would demand it with their swords in their
hands.

See Annals of Queen Anne for 1703, page 76. These were no American speakers.




The Islands of Guernsey, etc. are not taxed by the British Parliament at all,
they still have their own States, and I never heard that the British Parliament
ever-offered to hinder them to lay on their own taxes, or to lay on additional
ones, where they are not represented.

Ireland is a conquered kingdom, the greater part of its inhabitants Papists,
who in England pay double tax. The Romans always made a difference between
their colonies and their conquests, and as reasonable, allowed greater and
indeed all common liberties to the former. Ireland has been conquered twice
again upon the natives since its first conquest, nevertheless it hitherto had
its own legislature; if the Parliament of Great Britain claims a right to tax
them, they never yet have made use of that right, and seeing for ages past they
enjoyed the privilege of having their own property disposed of by
representatives in a Parliament of their own, it is very natural to suppose,
that they think themselves entitled to these things, and the more so, because,
in the very bill that determines their dependency, they are not said to be
dependent on the British Parliament, nor yet on crown and Parliament, but only
on the crown of Great Britain.

I would now proceed to take a distinct view of the point in debate between
Great Britain and her colonies.

It seems to be a prevailing opinion in Great Britain, that the Parliament has
a right to tax the Americans, and that, unless they have so, America would be
independent of Great Britain.

And it seems to be a prevailing opinion in America, that to be taxed without
their consent, and where they are not and cannot be represented, would deprive
them of the rights of Englishmen, nay, in time, with the loss of the
constitution, would deprive them of liberty and property altogether.

It is easily seen, that this is a very interesting subject, the consequences
in each case very important, though in neither so alarming and dangerous to
Britain as to America. With regard to Great Britain, if it should not prove so
as is claimed, the consequence can only be this, that then no tax can be laid,
or revenue be raised, on the Americans, but where they are represented, and in
a manner which they think consistent with their natural rights as men, and with
their civil and constitutional liberties as Britons. The dependency of America
upon Great Britain will be as full and firm as ever, and they will cheerfully
comply with the requisitions of the crown in a constitutional manner. The
question is not, whether the Americans will withdraw their subordination, or
refuse their assistance, but, whether they themselves shall give their own
property, where they are legally represented, or, whether the Parliament of
Great Britain, which does not represent them, shall take their property, and
dispose of it in the same manner as they do theirs whom in Parliament they
actually represent. The Americans do not plead for a right to withhold, but
freely and cheerfully to give. If 100,000 l. are to be raised, the question is
not, shall they be raised or no? but shall the Parliament levy so much upon the
Americans, and order them to pay it, as a gift and grant of the Commons of
Great Britain to the King? or, shall the Americans also have an opportunity to
show their loyalty and readiness to serve the King by freely granting it to the
King themselves? It is not to be denied the Americans apprehend, that if any
power, no matter what the name, where they are not represented, has a right to
lay a tax on them at pleasure, all their liberty and property is at an end, and
they are upon a level with the meanest slaves.

England will not lose a shilling in point of property; the rights and
privileges of the good people of Britain will not be in the least affected,
supposing the claim of the Americans just and to take place; whereas every
thing dreadful appears in view to the Americans if it should turn out
otherwise. The crown cannot lose; the Americans are as willing to comply with
every constitutional requisition as the British Parliament itself can possibly
be. The Parliament cannot lose, it will still have all the power and authority
it hitherto had, and ought to have had, and when every branch of the
legislature, and every member of the British empire, has a true regard to
reciprocal duty, prerogative and privilege, the happiness of the whole is best
likely to be secured and promoted.

The Americans most solemnly disclaim every thought, and the very idea of
independency; they are sometimes afraid they are charged with a desire of it,
not because this appears to be the real case, but to set their arguments in an
invidious light, and to make them appear odious in the sight of their mother
country. This is not a dispute about a punctilio, the difference in the
consequence is amazingly great; supposing America is not taxed where not
represented, and supposing things are left upon the same footing in which with
manifest advantage to Britain and America they have been ever since Britain had
colonies, neither the trade nor authority of Britain suffers the least
diminution, but the mischief to the colonies is beyond all expression, if the
contrary should take place. If they are not to raise their own taxes, all their
Assemblies become useless in a moment, all their respective legislatures are
annihilated at a stroke; an act passed by persons, most of whom probably never
saw, nor cared much for America, may destroy all the acts they ever passed, may
lay every burden upon them under which they are not expected immediately to
sink, and all their civil and religious liberties, for which their forefathers
went into this wilderness, and, under the smiles of Heaven, turned it into a
garden, and of immense consequence to the mother country, will, or may be at an
end at once. Probably the present Parliament or generation would never carry
matters to this length, but who knows what might be done in the next? The first
settlers of the American wilds never expected that would come to pass what we
have seen already. It seems as if some evil genius had prevailed of late; had
these new duties been laid on payable in England, at least the expense of a
Board of Commissioners, and of the swarms of new officers, might have been
prevented; but it looks as though some men wished that America might not only
be borne hard upon, but also be made to know and feel that their liberty and
property lay at the mercy of others, and that they must not flatter themselves
to enjoy them any longer than the good pleasure of some who would willingly
take away what they never did give. I have endeavored heartily to state the
question, let us now endeavor to view the claim made on each side as calmly
and impartially as possible.

It Is said the British Parliament has a right to tax the Americans. If this
proposition is incontrovertible, it must certainly be built on such a basis and
such clear principles as will be sufficient to dispose loyal and reasonable men
cheerfully to acquiesce in it. There are some points in government which
perhaps are best never touched upon, but when any question once becomes the
subject of public debate, strength of reason is the sole authority that with
men of reason can determine the matter.

If the Parliament of Great Britain have a right to tax the Americans, it must
either be the same right in virtue of which they have a right to tax
Great Britain, and be vested in them by the same power, or it must be a
distinct right either inherent in themselves, or vested in them by some other
power.

The right of the Commons of Great Britain to lay on taxes arises, as I
conceive, from their having been chosen by the people who are to pay these
taxes to act in their behalf and as their representatives. There may be other
qualifications necessary, that a man be a Briton born, subject of the King,
possessed of a certain estate, etc. but none is so absolutely necessary as
election. He that has been a representative had a right to refuse or concur in
any tax bill whilst a member, but if he is not chosen again in a following
Parliament, he has no right whatever to meddle in the matter; this proves that
the power is originally in the people, and the legislative capacity of the
whole House, and of every member, depends upon their free election, and is of
force no longer than for the time for which they have been elected; this being
elapsed, the trust reposed in them entirely ceases, it absolutely returns to
the body of the people; in that interval during which the people are
unrepresented, any power their representatives might have is entirely and
solely in the people themselves, no tax can be laid on, nor any law to bind the
people be formed, for this plain reason, because there are no persons qualified
for the purpose. The people have not representatives assigned, but choose them,
and being so chosen, the rights of the people reside now in them, and they may,
but not before, act in their behalf. Now, when the crown issues writs of
election, it is not to empower the electors to choose representatives for
America, nor yet for all Great Britain, but only for some certain place
specified in the writ; and when the electors of Great Britain choose
representatives, their meaning also is not to choose representatives for their
fellow subjects in America, or any where else, but for themselves. In
Great Britain English electors cannot elect in behalf of Scotland, and Scotch
electors cannot in behalf of England; and for the same reason neither Scotch
nor English can elect any for America. These electors do not represent the
Americans, nor are they their proxies to vote in members in their behalf;
neither can British electors give any instructions to British representatives,
or invest them with any power to dispose of the rights and property of any of
their fellow subjects without the kingdom of Great Britain. It seems not
unreasonable then to conclude, that the right which the elected acquire by
their election to pass tax laws binding upon their electors does not at the
same time give them a right to represent and lay on taxes on those who never
invested them with any such power, and by whom they neither were nor could be
elected. If the Americans themselves are not received as voters in the
bishopric of Durham, manor of East Greenwich, or any place mentioned in their
charters, and the same liberty and privileges with those places therein secured
unto them, if they are not allowed to choose any representatives for themselves
in the House of Commons, it seems natural, that what they have no right to do
themselves, none can have a right to do for them, and so no body can choose or
send a representative for them to any place where they are not allowed to sit
or be represented. If so, the electors of Great Britain never in fact elected
representatives for America, nor could these electors possibly convey any power
to give away property where they have no property themselves. The electors do
not represent America, neither their representatives by them elected; the
electors cannot dispose of the property of America, therefore they cannot give
a power so to do unto others. In England there can be no taxation without
representation, and no representation without election; but it is undeniable
that the representatives of Great Britain are not elected by nor for the
Americans, and therefore cannot represent them; and so, if the Parliament of
Great Britain has a right to tax America, that right cannot possibly be
grounded on the consideration that the people of Great Britain have chosen them
their representatives, without which choice they would be no Parliament at all.

If the Parliament of Great Britain has a right to tax the Americans distinct
from the right which they derive from their electors, and which they exercise
as the representatives of the people of Great Britain, then this right they
must hold either from the crown, or from the Americans, or else it must be a
native inherent right in themselves, at least a consequence of their being
representatives of the people of Great Britain.

It is plain that the colonies have been settled by authority and under the
sanction of the crown, but as the crown did not reserve unto itself a right to
rule over them without their own Assemblies, but on the contrary established
legislatures among them, as it did not reserve a right to lay taxes on them in
a manner which, were the experiment made in England, might be thought
unconstitutional, so neither do I find that a reserve of that kind was made by
the crown in favor of the Parliament, on the contrary, by the charters all the
inhabitants were promised the enjoyment of the same and all privileges of his
Majesty's liege subjects in England, of which doubtless not to be taxed where
they are not represented is one of the principal. As to any right that might
accrue to Parliament from any act or surrender of the Americans, I believe it
has never been thought of; they have a profound veneration for the British
Parliament, they look upon it as the great palladium of the British liberties,
but still they are not these represented, they have had their own legislatures
and representatives for ages past, and as a body cannot be more than in one
place at once, they think they cannot be legally represented in more than one
legislative body, but also think, that by the laws of England Protestants ought
not to be doubly taxed, or, what they think worse, taxed in two places.

If therefore this right of taxing the Americans resides in the Commons of
Great Britain at all, it must be an inherent right in themselves, or at least
in consequence of their being representatives of the people of Great Britain.
The act for better securing the dependency of the colonies, which I have
inserted at large, evidently seems to tend this way. That the colonies were
thought at the disposal of Parliament one might be led to think, because by
that act, from the simple authority of the crown, which they were till then
subject to by their charters, they were now declared to be subordinate to and
dependent (on the joint authority) of crown and Parliament. Yet, concerning
this act, I would only observe, that however it may determine the case from
that day, it cannot be the ground on which the subordination of the colonies
originally WAS or now can be built; for it declares not only, that the colonies
ARE AND OUGHT TO BE, but also that they ALWAYS HAVE BEEN, subject to crown and
Parliament. A law binds after it is made, it cannot bind before it exists, and
so surely it cannot be said, that the colonies have always been bound by a law
which is above a hundred years posterior to them in point of existence. It is
also a little difficult to reconcile this law with prior charters; our Carolina
charter makes our province subject immediately to the crown, and near a hundred
years after a law is made to declare, that this was not and must not be the
case, but that the Americans always were and ought to be subject to crown and
Parliament. Perhaps this has not been so seriously considered as it may
hereafter, but neither this nor any law can be supposed to be binding ex post
facto, or contrary to our fundamental constitution. Montesquieu observes, that
the British constitution (which God preserve) will be lost, whenever the
legislative power shall be more corrupted than the executive part of the
legislature.

And after all, in this very law, the Americans are allowed to be represented
in their own Assemblies, and to lay on duties and taxes, though not
exclusively; but whether America, or any part of the British empire, should be
liable to have taxes imposed on them by different legislatures, and whether
these would not frequently clash with one another to the detriment of crown and
subjects, I leave others duly to consider.

It is said, if America cannot be taxed by the British Parliament, then it
would be independent of Great Britain. This is now a very popular cry, and it
is well if many join in it only because they know no better. This is not, will
not, cannot be the case. America confessedly has not been thus taxed since it
was settled; but no body in Britain or America ever dreamed that America was
independent. In England the people cannot be taxed when the Parliament does not
sit, or when it is dissolved; are they then therefore independent. Scotland
cannot be taxed in the same degree as England; is it therefore independent?
Ireland and Jersey have their own legislatures, and so tax themselves; will you
call them independent? All those parts of the British empire that have no
Assemblies pay no taxes at all, neither among themselves, nor to Great Britain;
but it will not therefore be said, that they are independent. The Parliament
itself claims a right to refuse supplies till their grievances are heard and
redressed, this is looked upon as a constitutional remedy against any
encroachments by the crown, and has very often been made use of in former
reigns, and yet the Parliament neither claimed nor were charged with a desire
of independency. Those who so freely charge with a desire of independency, and
even treason and rebellion, would do well to consider, that this charge,
heinous as it is, reflects greater disgrace on those who unjustly make it, than
on those on whom it is unjustly made. A man of honor would not easily forgive
himself whenever he should discover that he made so rash a charge against two
millions of people, as innocent, loyal, and well affected to their King and
country, as any of his fellow subjects or himself possibly can be. There never
was an American Jacobite, the very air of America is death to such monsters,
never any grew there, and if any are transported, or import themselves, loss of
speech always attends them. The loyalty of the Americans to their King has not
only been ever untainted, it has never been as much as suspected. There is a
difference between independency and uneasiness. In the late reign, the people
in England were uneasy at the Jew Bill, and it was rapidly repealed; in the
present, the Cider Act was an odious measure, and immediately altered, and that
without any disgrace or diminution of parliamentary authority. If there has
been any appearance of riot in America, perhaps it may hereafter appear at
whose instigation, the law was ever open, and even overbearing odious
Custom-House Officers might have been redressed, if they had thought fit to
apply for a legal rather than a military remedy. In England it is possible
Majesty itself has met with indignities which have not been shown in America
even to those men to whom the nation in general is indebted for the present
uneasiness, and it is not improbable, that, after all that has been said and
done, the Americans will be found an exception to the general rule, that
oppression makes even a wise man mad: An ancient rule, the truth of which has
been experienced in England oftener than in America. The opinion of the
Americans is, that to be taxed where they are not represented would deprive
them of the rights of Englishmen, nay, in time, with the loss of the
constitution, might and must deprive them of liberty and property altogether.
These it must be owned are gloomy apprehensions; two millions of people are so
thoroughly prepossessed with them, that even their children unborn may feel the
parents impressions; should there be any real ground for them, the Americans
can hardly be blamed; they sit uneasy under them; they can no more help their
uneasiness, than deny the blood which glows in their veins, or be angry with
the milk that was their first nourishment. This is not a dark abstruse point,
but seems plain and essenttial to the very being of liberty. The sole question
is, Is it, or is it not, the right of an Englishman not to be taxed where he is
not represented? Can you be tired of being represented, O Britons! Is it
consistent with the constitution you so justly boast of to be thus taxed? Then
representation is not essential to your constitution, and sooner or later you
will either give it up or be deprived of it. A borough that does not exist
shall send two representatives, a single county, neither the largest nor
richest, shall send forty-four members, and two millions of souls, and an
extent of land of eighteen hundred miles in length, shall have taxes laid on
them by such as never were nearer to them than one thousand leagues, and whose
interest it may be to lay heavy burdens on them in order to lighten their own.
And are these, who are thus taxed, unrepresented, unheard and unknown,
Englishmen, and taxed by Englishmen? Do these enjoy what the charters most
solemnly ensure them, the same and all the privileges of the subjects born and
resident within the realm? I must doubt it.

Let those who make light of American grievances give a plain answer to this
plain question, Are the colonies to be taxed by Parliament represented in
Parliament? if they are, by whom, or since when? if not, once more, Is it, or
is it not, the right of Britons not to be taxed where not represented? Here the
whole matter hinges, and surely the question is not so impertinent but a civil
answer might be given before a mother sends fire and sword into her own bowels.
When constitutional liberty is once lost, the transit is very short to the loss
of property; the same power that may deprive of the one may also deprive of the
other, and with equal justice; those that have not liberty enough to keep their
property in reality have no property to keep. Some that look no further build
right upon power, and insist the Parliament can do so. If power is all that is
meant very like it may, so it may alter the constitution. If a stately tree
should take umbrage at some diminutive shrubs, it can fall upon and crush them,
but it cannot fall upon them without tearing up its own roots; it can crush
those within reach, but its own branches will take off the weight of the
impression, permit the shrubs to send forth new shoots, while there is no great
probability that the envious oak will return to its former stand and vigor.
Ce'st une chose a bien considerer, (this ought to be well considered first)
said Moliere's Malade imaginaire, when his quack proposed to him to have one of
his arms cut off, because it took some of the nourishment which in that case
would center in the other, and make it so much the stronger. If every Assembly
in America is suspended, the consequence must be, that the people are without
their usual legislature, and in that case nothing short of a miracle seems
capable to prevent an anarchy and general confusion. No power can alter the
nature of things, that which is wrong cannot be right, and oppression will
never be productive of the love and smiles of those that feel it.

The Parliament can crush the Americans, but it can also, and with infinitely
greater certainty and ease, conciliate their affections, have the ultimate gain
of all their labors, and by only continuing them the privileges of Britons,
that is, by only doing as they would be done by, diffuse the blessings of love
and concord throughout the whole empire, and to the latest posterity; and which
of these two is the most eligible, it is NOW for you, O Britons! to consider,
and in considering it, majores vestros cogitate and posteros, think on your
ancestors and your posterity.

Those whom God has joined together, (Great Britain and America* Liberty and
Loyalty) let no man put asunder: And may peace and prosperity ever attend this
happy union. FEB. 1, 1769.


