ADDITIONAL OBSERVATIONS TO A SHORT NARRATIVE OF THE Horrid MASSACRE in BOSTON,
PERPETRATED In the Evening of the 5th of March 1770.

Printed by ORDER of the Town of Boston. MDCCLXX.

THE extraordinary conduct of the Commissioners of the Customs since the 5th of
March, and their perseverance in it, make it necessary to bestow a few
observations upon it; and upon diverse matters, with which it seems to be
connected The Copies of this Narrative, sent to England and other Parts,
conclude with the foregoing page. Since they were sent, it has appeared
necessary to add a few pages to the remaining Copies: to do which an
opportunity has been given by the restraint laid on the publishing of the said
Narrative here. The reason of that restraint will appear by the following Vote
of the Town, passed at the Town-Meeting held the 26th of March, namely, The
Committee appointed to prepare a true State of Facts, relating to the execrable
Massacre perpetrated on the Evening of the 5th Instant, in order that the same
be transmitted to Great Britain, having accordingly reported, and the Report
being accepted by the Town and ordered to be printed: And whereas the
publishing of the said Narrative with the Depositions accompanying it, in this
County, may be supposed by the unhappy Persons, now in Custody for Trial, as
tending to give an undue Bias to the minds of the Jury, who are to try the
same. Therefore voted, That the Committee reserve all the printed Copies in
their Hands, excepting those to be sent to Great Britain, till the further
Order of the Town.

Attest, WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.


.

The said Commissioners (excepting Mr Temple) have all retired from the town:
and we find, on particular enquiry, they have not held a meeting of their board
since the 9th of March. How they have disposed of themselves since that time we
shall here relate.

Mr Robinson is gone to England: He sailed the 16th of March, and went not only
without the leave but, as it is said, contrary to the minds of his superiors,
signified to him from home. None but the few, entrusted with the secret, knew
any thing of his going till after the departure of the vessel in which he went.

Mr Paxton retired to Cambridge, four Miles from Boston, and for the most part
has continued there. He has diverse times however visited the town since that
retiring.

Mr Hulton sometime ago purchased a place at Brooklyn, five Miles from Boston,
and has ever since resided there.

Mr Burch, with his wife, has retired to Mr Hulton's who, together with Mr
Burch (leaving their wives behind them) are now on a tour to Portsmouth, in the
province of New Hampshire, where the last Account from thence left them. It is
now above six weeks since a board of Commissioners was held: and it is utterly
uncertain when there will be another.

From their first establishment here, to the 11th of June, 1768, they held
their boards regularly four days every week. They then retired on board the
Romney man of war, and from thence to the castle: for what purpose, their
letters and memorials lately published have sufficiently informed the world.
From their re-establishment in Boston in November 1763, to the 5th of March,
1770, they held their boards in the same regular manner. Since that time there
have been but two board meetings, the last of which was on the 9th of March.

Now what do all these maneuvers since the 5th of March indicate? Is it
possible to suppose they indicate any thing less than a design to take occasion
from the outrages and murders committed on the evening of that day by the
soldiers (assisted perhaps from the custom-house) to represent the town in a
disadvantageous light? And does not their former conduct render this highly
probable? -- Besides, it is a fact, that depositions have been taken in a
secret manner, relative to that unhappy affair, to the prejudice of the town;
and it is no way improbable that Mr Robinson is gone home with memorials and
letters from the Commissioners and others, accompanying such depositions.

By some escapes, as well as by what the circumstances above mentioned make
probable, a pretty good judgment may be formed of the substance of those
Memorials, Letters, and Depositions, namely, that the Custom-house was attacked
-- the revenue chest in danger, but saved by the firing upon the mob -- The
King's troops compelled to leave the town -- the commissioners thence obliged
for their safety to quit it also -- the consequent impossibility of their
holding boards -- the detriment thence arising to the revenue and his Majesty's
service -- all government at an end, and the Province in a state of rebellion.

If these be, either in whole or in part, the subjects of the dispatches sent
home, it is very proper a few observations should be made upon them.

The Custom-house attacked -- a falsehood. The people drawn into Kingstreet,
were drawn thither by the cry of fire, and the outrages of the Soldiers, which
occasioned it. From the first appearance of the people in Kingstreet, to the
time of the firing upon them, there had not passed fifteen minutes. It might
with as much truth be affirmed, that they made an attack upon the Custom-house
in London, as upon the Custom-house in Boston: of which latter there was not
even a pane of glass broken.

The Revenue Chest in danger -- a falsehood. It is not probable the chest is
kept at the Custom-house: but if it be, there was, and is, at least as much
danger of it from some of the out-door people employed under the Commissioners,
as from any body else. It is certain that some of them are of an infamous
character.

The troops compelled to quit the town -- a falsehood. They quitted the town by
the orders of their Commanding Officer, in consequence of a request from the
Lieutenant Governor, who was advised by the council to pray the said Officer to
remove the troops. This request and this prayer was obtained by an application
from the town to the Lieutenant Governor. Into what times are we fallen, that
the government of the province is reduced to the humiliating condition of
making such a prayer!

But supposing the troops had been compelled vi and armis to quit the town. It
would have been a measure justifiable in the sight of GOD and man. When the
Soldiers* sent hither for the declared purpose of assisting the Civil
Magistrate to keep the peace, were themselves in a remarkable manner the
breakers of the peace -- When, instead of assisting, they insulted him; and
rescued offenders of their own corpse from justice -- when they frequently
abused the inhabitants in the night -- when they had entered into a combination
to commit some extraordinary acts of violence upon the town; and in consequence
of it, on the evening of the Massacre, attacked the inhabitants wherever they
met them; afterward firing upon, and killing and wounding a number of them.
When all this had been done, and more threatened, it was high time they should
be removed from the town. If there had been no other means of getting rid of
them, the inhabitants would have had a right by that law of nature, which
superceeds all other laws, when they come in competition with it -- the law of
self-preservation -- to have compelled them to quit the town. This law is
radical in our nature, indelible from it, and uniformly operating, where it can
operate, to the removal or destruction of every thing incompatible with it; and
is abrogable by no other lawgiver than GOD himself, the great author of it.
Therefore, although the resisting the King's troops in any thing they have a
right by law to do, may be adjudged treason, yet when they act contrary to law,
especially in so outrageous a manner as in the present case, and retain a
disposition to repeat it, whereby the lives of the King's subjects are in
danger, they then cease to be the King's troops* that is, they are not the
King's troops for any such purpose, but so far become traitors; and on the
failure of other means of riddance from them, which the time and circumstances
may make eligible and are lawful, they may (by the principles of all law, as
well as by the great law abovementioned, into which those principles are
resolvable) be resisted and expelled: and not to do it, where it can be done,
is a species of treason against the constitution, and consequently treason in
an equal degree against the King, and all his subjects.

The Commissioners obliged for their safety to quit the town -- If one falsehood
can be more so than another, this is the greatest yet mentioned, and is as
ridiculous as it is false. Their conduct and such a declaration by no means
agree. Would they in that case occasionally visit the town? Would they trust
themselves in the environs of it? Could they think themselves safe at Cambridge
and Brooklyn? Could they think themselves safe any where in the province, or
indeed in America? Must they not know, if any evil were really intended them,
it might easily overtake them any where, and every where on this side of the
Atlantic? Some other reason than their safety must therefore be looked for to
account for their retiring, and discontinuing their boards. A similar
proceeding of theirs in June, 1768, and their Letters and Memorials, lately
published, give occasion at least to conjecture what that reason may be. Is it
not probable it was to corroborate the said depositions, and thence induce
administration to think it necessary, not only that troops already here should
be continued, but that a further number should be sent to strengthen and
support them? If this measure cannot be effected, and should the Commissioners
be so unfortunate as to remain here unattacked in the absence of the troops, it
might naturally be thought they could have remained here without them in 1768;
and therefore that they had put the nation to a very great expense, for no
other purpose than further to alienate the affections of the Americans, and to
give them an additional reason to wish themselves independent of it: And hence
the Commissioners might have cause to expect a national resentment against
them. -- However injurious to us the effects of such policy may be, we cannot
but applaud it (on the principles of the Machiavilian system) as it stands
related to themselves. If they thought their own existence in danger,
considered as Commissioners, how natural was it to use the means to support it?
And what fault could be found with the means, if those principles justified
them? Why need they trouble their heads about consequences that would not
affect themselves? or, if they would, and such existence appeared precarious
without those means, was it not necessary they should be used, and the
consequences disregarded? -- If the means be successful to the end for which
they seem designed, it requires no prophetic spirit to foretell that the
consequences may be -- bad enough. Whether the present Commissioners, or any
Board of Commissioners at all (whose appointments are fully equal to any
benefit the Nation or Colonies are likely to reap from them, and whose
usefulness hitherto may be valued by some of the negative quantities in
algebra) are things of importance enough to hazard those consequences, or any
ill consequence at all, is humbly submitted to the wisdom of administration to
determine.

The consequent impossibility of their holding boards -- This impossibility was
of their own creating. If they had continued in town (from whence they had not
the least reason to depart, unless to answer purposes they would choose to
conceal) they might have held their boards as usual.

The detriment thence arising to the Revenue, and his Majesty's service -- If
any such detriment has arisen, the fault is their own. His Majesty's service is
a cant term in the mouths of understrappers in office. Many of them either do
not know the meaning of it, or abuse it to answer their own corrupt purposes.
It is used to express something distinct from the service of the people. The
King and People are placed by it in opposite interests. Whereas, by the happy
constitution we are under, the interest of the King is the interest of the
people, and his service is their service: both are one, and constitutionally
inseparable. They who attempt to separate them attempt to destroy the
constitution. Upon every such parricide may the vengeance both of King and
People descend.

Government at an end -- This has been the cry ever since the stamp act
existed. If the people saw they were going to be enslaved; if they saw Governor
Bernard (from whom they had a right to expect that he would do nothing to
promote it) was zealous and active to rivet the chains; and that his
government, in its principles and conduct, tended to the establishment of a
tyranny over them, was it unnatural for them in such a case to reluct? was it
unreasonable to refuse an acquiescence in such measures? Did an opposition to
them indicate a disregard to government? If government, in the true idea of it,
has for its object the good of the governed, such an administration could not
be called government: and an opposition to it by no means included an
oppo^^^^^^ to government. From such an opposition has arisen ^^^^^^ry, that
government is at an end. The sooner such government is at an end the better.

When a people have lost all confidence in government, it is vain to expect a
cordial obedience to it. Hence irregularities may arise, and have arisen. But
they will cease, when the true ends of government are steadily pursued. Then,
and not till then, may it be expected, that men of weight and influence will
exert themselves to make government respected. Nay, such exertions will then be
needless, for mankind cannot help respecting what is in itself respectable,
especially when it is at the same time so promotive of their own good as good
government is.

The province in a state of rebellion -- Into this state its enemies, on both
sides of the Atlantic, have been endeavoring to bring it. When they could not
make it subservient to their interest and views; and when their measures had
raised a spirit of opposition to them, that opposition was made the lucky
occasion to represent the province in a state of rebellion, or verging toward
it. To justify such a representation the more fully, they endeavored to drive
it into that state: whereby in the end they might hope to gratify both their
malice and avarice: their malice, by injuring it most essentially; and their
avarice, by the subjection of it to their tyranny and pillage. But nothing can
be more false than such a representation: nothing more foreign from this people
than a disposition to rebellion. The principles of loyalty were planted in our
breasts too deep to be eradicated by their efforts, or any efforts whatever:
and our interest co-operated with those principles.

It is humbly hoped his Majesty will not be influenced, by such
representations, to think unfavorably of his faithful subjects of this
province: and that hope is grounded upon their innocence: of which they have
the highest evidence in their own consciousness; and of which they have given
their adversaries no other cause to doubt, than what arises from an opposition
to their measures. Measures, not only ruinous to the province, but hurtful to
Great Britain, and destructive of the union, and commercial intercourse, which
ought always to subsist between her and her Colonies.

The foregoing Observations appeared necessary to vindicate the Town and
Province from the aspersions so unjustly cast upon them. The few that follow
refer to the present and future state of Great Britain and her Colonies.

HOW happy is Britain with regard to situation, and and many internal
circumstances; and in her connection with her Colonies!

Separated from the rest of the world, and possessed of so large a naval force,
she is secure from foreign invasions: her government (well administered) is the
best existing; her manufactures are extensive, and her commerce in proportion.
To the two latter the Colonies have in a considerable degree contributed. By
these means she has risen to her present opulence and greatness, which so much
distinguish her among the powers of Europe. But however great and opulent she
may be, she is capable of being still more so; and so much so, that she may be
deemed at present in a state of minority, compared with what she will one day
probably be, if her own conduct does not prevent it. The means of this
greatness are held out to her by the Colonies; and it is in her power, by a
kind and just treatment of them, to avail herself of those means.

The Colonists are husbandmen, and till lately have manufactured but a small
part of their clothing, and the other articles with which they had been usually
supplied from Great Britain. But they have been taught by experience they can
supply themselves; and that experience (which has been forced upon them) has
demonstrated most clearly, that they have within themselves the means of living
conveniently, if not with elegance, even if their communication with the rest
of mankind were wholly cut off. This, however, could not be an eligible state:
but no one entitled to and deserving the liberties of an Englishman, can
hesitate a moment to say, that it would be preferable to slavery; to which the
Colonists have apprehended themselves doomed, by the measures that have been
pursued by Administration.

If the Colonists might be permitted to follow their inclinations, with which
at the same time their interest coincides, they would be husbandmen still, and
be supplied as usual from Great Britain. The yearly amount of those supplies
(as appears by the exports from Britain) is very considerable The value of the
exports from Britain to the Colonies in 1766, which was less than in 1765,
stood thus: To New Englund L 409,642 New York 330,829 Pensylvania 327,314
Virginia and Maryland 372,548 Carolina 296,732 L 1,737,065


This is taken from The Present State of the Nation: in which there is an
account of the said exports for the years 1765 and 1766 only.

Now, supposing the observation just, that the Colonists (whose number by the
said Pamphlet is estimated two millions) double every twenty years, and the
exports from Great Britain to the Colonies should increase in that proportion,
the value of the said exports and the number of the Colonists, at the end of
five such periods after 1766, will stand thus: Value of Exports.
In 1766 L 1,737,065 for two millions of Colonists, 1786 3,474,130 for four
millions, 1806 6,948,260 for eight millions, 1826 13,896,520 for sixteen
millions, 1846 27,793,040 for thirty-two millions, 1866 55,586,080 for
sixty-four millions of Colonists.


The last mentioned numbers are so large, that it is likely the principles on
which they are formed may be called into question. Let us therefore take only
one quarter part of those numbers; and then the value of exports from Britain
to the Colonies, in 1866, will be more than thirteen millions sterling for
sixteen millions of Colonists. It is highly probable, by that time there will
be at least that number of Colonists in the British Colonies on this continent.
Now, in case there be no interruption of the union and harmony that ought to
subsist between Great Britain and her Colonies, and which it is their mutual
interest should subsist and be maintained, what good reason can be given why
such exports should not bear as great a proportion to the number of the
Colonists as they do at this time? If they should, the value of such exports
(which will be continually increasing) will be at least thirteen millions per
annum. A sum far surpassing the value of all the exports from Great Britain at
this day.

In what proportion so vast a trade with the Colonies would enlarge the other
branches of her trade; how much it would increase the number of her people, the
rents and value of her lands, her wealth of every species, her internal
strength, her naval power, and particularly her revenue (to enhance which in a
trifling degree has occasioned the present uneasiness between her and the
Colonies) are matters left to the calculation and decision of the political
arithmeticians of Great Britain.


, and might be in future in proportion to the increase of the Colonists. Their
increase is rapid: they are daily emigrating from the old towns, and forming
new ones; and if they double their numbers every twenty years, as it is said
they will continue to do, so long as they can form into families by procuring
the means of subsistence at an easy rate, which probably will be the case, till
America shall be well peopled, there will be in a short time a prodigious
addition to his Majesty's subjects; who, if not compelled to manufacture for
themselves, will occasion a proportionable demand for the manufactures of Great
Britain. If it be considered too, that America, from its different soils and
climates, can raise perhaps all the productions of other countries in the same
latitudes: which being remitted in exchange would most of them be rough
materials for Britain to manufacture; what a fund of wealth and power will
America be to her! Her inhabitants, of every denomination, by finding
employment, and the consequent means of subsistence, will greatly increase; and
her trade and navigation be in proportion. She might then view with
indifference the interdiction of her trade with other parts of the world;
though she would always have it in her power, from the superiority of her naval
force, which such a trade and navigation would enable her to support, to do
herself justice, and command universal respect.

Connected with her Colonies, she would then be a mighty empire: the greatest,
consisting of people of one language, that ever existed.

If these observations be not wholly visionary, and a mere reverie, they
possibly may not be unworthy the consideration of Parliament: whose wisdom will
determine, whether any revenue whatever, even the greatest that America could
possibly produce, either without or with her good will, would compensate the
loss of such wealth and power; or justify measures that had the least tendency
to bring them into hazard: or whether for such a revenue it would be worth
while to hazard even the present advantages, resulting to Great Britain from an
union and harmony with her Colonies.


