THE SENTIMENTS AND PLAN Of the Warren ASSOCIATION

GERMANTOWN: Printed by CHRISTOPHER SOWER, 1769.

On the eighth day of September. A. D. 1767 a considerable number of baptist
ministers and brethren met at Warren in Rhode Island Government to consult
about the expediency of an association, and the manner of conducting it to the
advantage of the churches. The issue of the meeting was, Adopting the
sentiments and platform of the western association; and thereon forming
themselves into a like body to be known by the name of the Warren Association.
The churches that incorporated that year were the church of Warren, of
Haverhil, of Bellingham and Middleborough. The next year four more joined them
viz the church of Boston, of Sutton, of Leicester and of Ware. This year 1769
four more were added viz the church of Sturbridge, of Enfield, of Wilbreham and
of Montague.

Sentiments touching an Association
1 That such a combination of churches is not only prudent but useful, as has
appeared even in America by the experience of upwards of 60 years. Some of the
uses of it are -- Union and communion among themselves -- maintaining more
effectually the order and faith once delivered to the saints -- Having advice
in cases of doubts, and help in distress. Being more able to promote the good
of the cause -- and becoming important in the eye of the civil powers, as has
already appeared in many instances on this continent 2. That such an
association is consistent with the independency and power of particular
churches, because it pretends to be no other than an Advisory council, utterly
disclaiming superiority, jurisdiction, coercive right, and infallibility 3.
That an association should consist of men knowing and judicious, particulary in
the Scripture. The reasons are obvious; such men are the fittest to represent
communities who profess the Scriptures to be the only rule of faith and
practice in religious matters, and who expect that every advice, opinion, or
direction they receive from an association be scriptural. They should be
skilful and expert in the laws of their God as counselors are in the laws of
the land, for that is the ground of the churches application to them.

Plan of the Association
1. The association to consist only of messengers chosen and sent by the
churches. These messengers to be their ministers (for a reason given in
sentiment the 3,) together with some judicious brethren. Their expenses to be
borne by the churches which send them.

2, With the messengers the churches send letters addressed to the association.
In these letters mention is made of the names of the messengers, and their
authority to act for their churches; also of the state of the churches touching
their peace-their increase by baptism; and by letters dismissive and
commendatory from other churches -- touching their diminution by death,
excommunication, and dismission to other churches, and the present number of
members. If any questions are to be put to the association -- any advice to ask
-- or business to propose, these are to be expressed in said letters.

3. All matters to be determined in this association by the suffrage of the
messengers, except what are determinable by Scripture -- such matters are never
put to the decision of votes. All that speak are to address the moderator, who
is to take care that none be interrupted while speaking, and that no other
indecorum take place.

4. Churches are to be received into this association by petitions, setting
forth their desire to be admitted -- their faith -- order -- and willingness to
be conformable to the rules of the associated body. When a petition is read,
and the matter ripened for a vote; the moderator states the question, suffrage
being given in favor of the petition, the said moderator declares that such a
church is received into the association, in token of which he gives the
messengers the right hand of fellowship, and bids them take their seats.

4. The association to meet annually at Warren on Tuesday next after the first
Wednesday in September at two a clock in the afternoon; and to continue till
business be finished. It is to be opened with divine service -- after which a
moderator and clerk are chosen -- the letters from the churches are read -- the
names of the messengers are written, that they may be called over at after
meetings -- then business is attended to, and minutes thereof made -- A
circular letter to the churches is prepared and signed, and a copy of it sent
to every church, containing the minutes of the association; the states of the
churches; when and by whom vacancies are to be supplied; who to preach the next
association sermon, and whatever else is needful for the churches to know.

5. A connection to be formed and maintained between this association and that
of Philadelphia by annual letter and messengers from us to them and from them
to us.

6. The faith and order of this association are expressed in a confession put
forth by upwards of a hundred congregations (in Great Britain) in the year
1689; and adopted by the association of Philadelphia in 1742. Some of the
principles in said confession are -- The imputation of Adam's sin to his
posterity -- The inability of man to recover himself -- Effectual calling by
sovereign grace -- Justification by imputed righteousness -- Immersion for
baptism, and that on profession of faith and repentance -- Congregational
churches, and their independency -- Reception into them upon evidence of sound
conversion etc.

NB. The above mentioned Confession of faith may be had at Philadelphia in
sheets, for 7 coppers a piece, and bound for 15 coppers. Also the baptist
Catechism, for 4 coppers; and Norcott on baptism for 5 coppers.


