REMARKS ON Zenger's TRIAL, Taken out of the Barbados Gazette's; FOR THE
BENEFIT OF The STUDENTS in LAW, AND OTHERS IN NORTH AMERICA.

BARBADOS, Printed: NEW YORK, Reprinted by H. GAIN, Bookseller and Stationer,
at the Bible and Crown, in Hanover-Square, 1770.

REMARKS ON Zenger's TRIAL. Taken out of the Barbados GAZETTE'S; for the
Benefit of the Students in Law, and others in North America N. B. These Remarks
are annexed to Zenger's Trial published in the 9th Volume of State Trials, and
at the End of the Title, refers to the following Notes, (viz.)

These Remarks were written by two eminent Lawyers in one of our Colonies in
America, immediately after the Publication of the Trial of Mr. Zenger, which it
seems had been industriously spread over that Part of the World, before it
reached England!

As the Doctrines contained in that Trial, or rather in the Speech of Mr.
Hamilton, are of so new a Cast, and so absolutely contradictory to all the
Resolutions, and Judgments, that have been settled and established for so many
Ages, and by Judges of the highest Reputation, and most unquestionable
Characters for their Integrity, Virtues, and Abilities; it could not be
imagined, so wild, and idle an Harangue, could have had any Weight, or have met
with (...) Reception here (i. e. in England) where the Laws, relating to
Libels, have been so often canvassed, and are generally so well understood; and
therefore the Person, to whom these Remarks were sent, never thought of making
any other Use of them, than to satisfy his own Curiosity, and that of his
Friends.

But seeing to his great Surprise, that this extraordinary Declamation, has
been mentioned with (...) Air of Applause, and Triumph, in several Newspapers,
as striking out some new Lights, with Regard to the Doctrine of Libels, and
upon the Credit of that Recommendation, the whole Trial not only twice printed
here, but retailed out in Scraps, in the public Newspapers; whereby many well
meaning People may be deceived, and led into wrong Notions, concerning the Laws
of their Country in this Point: He has thought fit to communicate these Remarks
to the public, in order to remove any Mistake, or Errors, that Persons may fall
into, for want of an adequate Judgment in these Matters; and the rather,
because if such false Opinions, should happen to influence the Conduct of
Practice of any, the Consequences may be very dangerous; it being an
established Maxim in our Law, that neither Ignorance, nor Mistake, is an Excuse
to any one who has broke it, from the Penalty of it


. PART I.
Ille crucem, pretium secleris tulit, hic diadema.

Juvenal.
Mr. Keimer,
IT has been a common Remark among those who have observed upon the capricious
Dispensations of Fortune, that great Events are often produced by Instruments
that are not seemingly adequate; nay, that the same apparent Causes have quite
contrary Effects, and the Road that leads one Man to Wealth, Honor, and Power,
sometimes carries another to Poverty, Infamy, and Ruin. Hence comes that
confused Distribution of Axes and Coronets, Halters and Ribbons; which History
displays by numerous shocking Examples, and thus it is, that Fate seems to play
at Cross-Purposes with Mankind; or to speak in Scripture Phrase, in this Sense
as well as many others, the Wisdom of this World is Foolishness.

I find myself drawn into these grave Reflections, Mr. Keim^, by reading the
Trial of John Peter Zenger, at New York, upon an Information for printing and
publishing a Libel. This Piece, it seems, has been lately printed there, and
was put into my Hands the other Day, by a Friend who has both a general
Acquaintance and a Correspondence with the northern Colonies, as a rare
Production, containing many Things new and surprising. And in Truth, I must say
it affords a lively Specimen, in Miniature, of the Justness of the foregoing
Remarks; I mean that Part of it which is attributed to Andrew Hamilton, Esquire of
Philadelphia, Barrister at Law; together with the Sequal, describing the
munificent Behavior of the Citizens in Common Council assembled, to the
learned Gentleman, for his singular Performance on that Occasion.

I must at the same Time assure you, that if Zenger's Trial had been printed by
Order of the Court that tried him, or from a Copy taken by a private Hand at
the Trial, or by any other Means that excluded Mr. Hamilton's Approbation or
Privity, I should have enjoyed my own Opinion, without troubling you or any
Body else about it, and had the Charity to resolve all the Extravagancies that
occur throughout his Declamation, into a right Discernment of the People he
talked to, and a Dexterity in captivating them, which had its Effect in the
Acquittal of his Client. But when a Gentleman of the Bar takes the Pains to
write over a long Discourse (he being the only Lawyer of either Side who gave
the Printer his Notes) in order to send it abroad through the World, as a
Specimen of his Abilities, Sentiments, and Principles; as a solemn Argument in
the Law, fit to see the light and abide the Test in all Places, and above all,
as a Task of Duty, Zeng. Trial, P. 39. 41.
which he thought himself bound to perform, even by going to the utmost Parts
of the Land for the Purpose; and all this, without Fee or Reward, under the
Weight of many Years and great Infirmities of Body: When a Barrister, I say,
thus becomes a Volunteer for Error, and presumes to obtrude bad Law and false
Reasoning upon the Sense of Mankind, because the sage Magistrates of New York
have put their Seal to it; I think myself at Liberty, without using any other
Apology, to exercise the judging Privilege of a Reader, since the Gentleman
himself has put me into the Possession of it.

In doing this, I shall not in the least gratify a vain Itch of Writing, for
there are no extraordinary Talents necessary for refuting gross Absurdities;
but I shall have the honest Merit of endeavoring to undeceive such of my
Fellow Subjects in the Plantations as may; from the late uncommon Success of
the Doctrine, mistake the Liberty of the Press for a License to write and
publish infamous Things of their Superiors, and of all others, at their
Pleasure, provided they write and publish nothing but what is true. In the next
Place, I would preserve, as far as I am able, the Dignity of the Profession of
the Law in these remote Parts of the British Dominions; and prevent its learned
Professors in England, who probably will see the renowned Piece above mentioned
(if we may judge from the Industry used in dispersing it) from suspecting that
all their American Brethren use the like Arts to gain Popularity and honorable
Rewards. The former, having the Advantage of going daily to the great School of
Law at Westminster, are already apt enough to think meanly of the
Accomplishment of the latter, who are far removed from Instruction; and their
Opinion must be strongly confirmed in this Respect, if such a Rhapsody as was
uttered at New York, should not only be applauded and rewarded publicly there,
but printed and scattered in Reams through the other Colonies, without being
followed by a suitable Animadversion.

Neither will it he amiss to take some Notice in this Place of the Quackery of
the Profession in general, without any particular Application, as it has been
practiced with vast Success in some of our Colonies. You will often see (if
common Fame may be trusted) a self-sufficient enterprising Lawyer, compounded
of something between a Politician and a Broker, who making the Foibles of the
Inhabitants his Capital Study, and withal taking Advantage of the Weakness of
his Judges, the Ignorance of some of his Brethren, the Modesty of others, and
the honest Scruples of a third Sort (without having any of his own) becomes
insensibly an Oracle in the Courts, and acquires by Degrees a kind of Dominion
over the Minds as well as the Estates of the People. An Influence never to be
obtained but by the help of Qualities very different from Learning and
Integrity. Where ever such a Man is found, the Wonder is not great, if from a
long Habit of advancing what he pleases, and having it received for Law, he
comes in Time to fancy, that what he pleases to advance is really Law.

Give me Leave, therefore, to bespeak two or three of your Papers, during this
short Vacation between our Monthly Courts, that I may heartily examine this now
System of Libels lately composed and propagated on the Continent; P. 41. 42.
the Discovery of which cost the good City of New York, Five Ounces and a Half
of Gold, a Scrip of Parchment, and three Latin Sentences. I promise myself your
Compliance the rather, because I have known it frequently observed that your
Gazette is chiefly employed in conveying just Notions of Government, Liberty
and the Laws. My Intention is to consider Things, not Persons, having no other
Knowledge of the Gentleman principally concerned than what is derived from the
Paper now before me; and being wholly a Stranger to the Merit of those Disputes
that gave Rise to the Prosecution of this Printer.

Much less shall I turn Advocate for any lawless Power in Governors. God forbid
I should be guilty of such a Prostitution, who know by Experience of what Stuff
they are commonly made; the wrong Impressions they are apt to receive of
themselves and others; their Passions, Prejudices and Pursuits; though when all
reasonable Allowances are made for certain Circumstances that attend their
Mission from Home and their Situation abroad, a considerate Person may be
tempted to think -- it is well they are no worse than they are.

I am your constant Reader, and humble Servant, Anglo Americanus.
Bridge-Town, June 24, 1737.
From the Barbados Gazette, No. 439. Remarks on Zenger's Trial.
IN considering the Defense made for the Defendant (Mr. Zenger, by his Council
Mr. Hamilton) upon not guilty pleaded to an Information for printing and
publishing a Libel, it is not to the Purpose to enquire how far the Matters
charged in the Information are in their Nature Libellous, nor whether the
Innuendos are properly used to apply the Matters to Persons, Things, and
Places. It is only necessary to examine the Truth of this single Proposition,
upon which the whole Defense is grounded, and to which the several Parts of it
refer; namely, that the several Matters charged in the Information, are not and
cannot be libellous because they are true in Fact.

This is the Cardinal Point, upon which the learned Gentleman's whole Argument
turns, Zeng. Trial. P. 17, 18, 30.
and which he lays down over and over, as the first Principle that governs the
Doctrine of Libels; and accordingly he confesses the Printing and Publishing of
the Papers laid in the Information, and puts it upon the King's Council to
prove the Facts contained in them to be false; alleging at the same Time, that
unless that were done, the Defendant could not be guilty; but if the same were
proved to he false, P. 21. 22.
he would own the Papers containing them to be Libels. To this, it seems, the
Attorney General, answered, that a Negative is not to be proved; and the latter
replied in these Words, which I choose to set down that I may not be thought to
do him wrong. P. 22.
-- I did expect to hear that a Negative cannot be proved; but every Body knows
there are many Exceptions in that general Rule: For if a Man is charged with
killing another, or stealing his Neighbor's Horse; if he is innocent in the
one Case, he may prove the Man said to be killed to be still alive; and the
Horse said to be stolen, never to have been out of his Master's Stable, etc.
And this I think is proving a Negative. Now I must think, in my turn, that it
is strange a Gentleman of his Sagacity, who owns he was prepared for the
Objection, could not yet hit upon some of those many Exceptions which every
Body knows. For he does no more than give two Instances of one Affirmative
being destroyed by another that infers a Negative of the first, at which Rate
most Negatives may be proved, and then the old Rule may be discarded. Thus if
it is shown that a Man is alive, it follows clearly that he was not killed; and
if a Horse is proved to have been always in his Master's Stable (for this is
what must be understood of his being never out of the Stable) it certainly
follows that he could not be stolen. So that, according to this new Scheme of
Proof, he who is accused of killing a Man, or stealing a Horse, is to be put
upon proving that he did not kill or steal; because it is possible that such
Proof may be had sometimes: And so in the principal Case, if a Question arises
whether a certain Magistrate has done particular Acts of Injustice or not, the
Method is to show that he did not do such Acts, not that he did them. I have
touched upon this, not for its Importance, but as a Specimen of the learned
Barrister's Manner of reasoning, and of the Spirit with which he sets out from
the beginning.

At length, however, he takes the Onus probandi upon himself, and rather than
the Thing should go unproved, generously undertakes, P. 24.
at his Client's Peril, to prove the Matters charged in the Information as
libellous, to be true. But I would be glad to know, by the Way, how this
undertaking Gentleman could have proved the Truth of diverse Facts contained in
the Paper which the Defendant published, supposing the Court had been so much
over seen as to let him into a Proof of this Sort. Could he prove, for Example,
that Judges were arbitrarily displaced and new Courts erected, in the Province
of New York, without Consent of the Legislature? For I am credibly informed,
there never was a Pretense or Surmise of more than One Judge being displaced,
or more than One Court erected under Mr. Cosby's Administration, both which
happened upon one and the same Occasion. Now I would not have this esteemed a
captious Exception, when I have to deal with a Man of Law, who must or ought to
know, that if such a Justification as he offered were at all allowable, it
ought to be full and express, so as to leave no Room for a Libeller to multiply
and exaggerate Facts, at his Pleasure, when he is disposed to traduce Persons
in Authority; there being a manifest difference between a single Act of Power
without or against Law (from which perhaps few Governments have been free) and
an habitual Abuse of Power in repeated Instances of the same Species. I would
further ask, how he could prove that the Law itself was at an End, and that
Trials by Juries were taken away when a Governor pleased; for if I mistake not,
he was, at that Time speaking to a Jury in a regular Court of Law, and in a
Prosecution which the Governor had much at Heart (as the Gentleman himself
insinuates) and would have been highly pleased to convict his Client, yet would
not attempt it but in the ordinary Course of Trial by a Jury, and then too
could not find a Jury that would convict him. I think I am warranted in putting
these Questions, even by the Authority of the Barrister himself, P. 30, 31.
who says -- Truth ought to govern the whole Affair of Libels, and yet the
Party accused runs Risque enough, even then; for if he fail of proving every
Tittle he has wrote, and to the Satisfaction of the Court and Jury too, he may
find to his Cost, etc.

But for the present, I will suppose Mr. Hamilton was able to prove all these
Things; nay that the Jury knew them all to be true. I will go further and
allow, that Juries in criminal Cases may determine both Law and Fact, when they
are complicated, if they will take such a Decision upon their Consciences
(which is almost the only Point in which I can have the Honor of agreeing with
him) yet after all these Concessions, the main Question rests still between us,
viz. Whether a Writing can be a Libel, in legal Acceptance, if the Matter
contained in it be true. He is pleased indeed, to express his Dislike of
infamous Papers, even when they are true, if levelled against private Vices and
Faults; and in this Case he calls them base, P. 27. 28.
unworthy, scandalous, unmanly and unmannerly. But surely it might be expected,
when a Point of Law was in Question, that he would have told us whether they
were lawful or unlawful, innocent or criminal, since these last are the only
Epithets that were relative to his Subject, though the first might have their
Weight in a Sermon or moral Essay. But it is plain, he was aware of the
Consequence of being explicit upon this Head: for had he owned such Writings to
be lawful because true, he would have alarmed the common Sense of Mankind, by
opening a Door for exposing at Mercy, the Frailties, Vices, Defects and
Misfortunes of every Person high and low, which must inevitably destroy the
Peace of Families, and beget ill Blood and Disorders. If on the other Hand, he
had acknowledged such Writings to be unlawful inasmuch as they concerned
private Miscarriages and Transactions; but that every Man might write as much
Truth as he pleased about the Administration of the Government, not only by
pointing out Faults and Mistakes, but by publishing his own Comment and
Inferrences in order to fill the Minds of the People with all the Jealousies
and Apprehensions his Imagination can form; it must have shocked Men of
Understanding to be thus told, that the Law had provided against private
Quarrels and Breaches of the Peace occasioned by virulent Writing, but had
taken no Care to prevent Sedition and public Disturbances arising from the
same Cause.

His favorite Position, however, was to be maintained at all Events; and
therefore when the Chief Justice rightly instructed him, P. 22.
that he could not be admitted to give the Truth of a Libel in Evidence, that
the Law was clear that he could not justify a Libel; for it is never the less a
Libel though it is true; the discerning Gentleman was pleased to understand by
the word justify, a Justification by Plea, as it is in the Case of an
Indictment for Murder, or an Assault and Battery; there (says he) the Prisoner
cannot justify but plead not guilty: yet in Murder, he may prove it was in
Defense of his Life, his House, etc. and in Assault and Battery, he may give in
Evidence that the other Party struck first, and in both these Cases he will be
acquitted.

If the Party in either Case is acquitted, the Reason is I presume, because the
Matter given in Evidence amounts to a Justification in Law of the Fact charged
on him, and is equivalent to a Confession and Avoidance in pleading. In like
Manner, if Truth be a sufficient Justification of a Libel, the Defendant will
be acquitted upon proving the Contents of his Paper to be true. P. 25.
Now let it be observed, that the Words of the Book which the Chief Justice
relied on are these -- It is far from being a Justification of a Libel, that
the Contents thereof are true, since the greater Appearance there is of Truth
in any malicious Invective, so much the more provoking it is. That this is good
Law, I hope I shall be able to show fully hereafter, as I shall show, in the
mean Time, that it is an express Authority against the well-read Barrister, P.
22.
who declares, he has not in all his reading met with an Authority that says,
he cannot be admitted to give the Truth in Evidence, etc.

He seems to take it for granted (and I shall not dispute it with him now) that
Matter of Justification cannot, in any Case, be pleaded specially to an
Indictment of Assault or Murder; but the Party is to take Advantage of it in
Evidence upon not Guilty pleaded. Let it be so; yet still this Matter must be a
sufficient Justification, or the Party can have no Benefit from it any way: In
an Action of Assault and Battery, where the first Assault must be pleaded
specially; the Matter of Justification is just the same, as in an Indictment
for the same Offense, where it must be given in Evidence upon the General
Issue. I ask them, whether the first Assault is a Justification in an
Indictment of Assault and Battery; If the Barrister should answer negatively,
such Answer is against all Sense, for the Party, is acquainted by Virtue of the
Justification only. If he should answer Affirmatively, he is inconsistent with
himself, for he has but just Affirmed that when the Book says, Truth is no
Justification, it must be understood of a Justification by Plea, by which he
must mean that nothing else is a Justification but what is pleaded, or he must
mean nothing at all. For the Words of the Book are -- it is far from being a
Justification, etc. it is not said -- you are far from being at Liberty to
plead it in Bar. In Truth, the Author is not there speaking of the Forms and
Rules of Proceedings upon Libels, 1 Hawk. Chapter 73. S. 5. 6. 7.
but upon the Substance and the Nature of the Crime, what shall and what shall
not excuse or justify it. This is manifest from the Reason subjoined to
support his Assertion, viz. Since the greater Appearance there is of Truth,
etc. which is a solid Reason grounded on the Wisdom of the Law, which punishes
Libels, even against private Persons, as Public Offenses, because they provoke
Men to Acts of Revenge and Breaches of the Peace. I hope it will not be said, a
Libel is less provoking, because the Truth of it is to be given in Evidence
than if it was to be pleaded in Bar.

But all this is Star-chamber-Doctrine, with the Barrister, and the very
Mention of that Court serves him for an Answer to every Thing, for which he has
no other Answer; because the Memory of that Tribunal is justly detested on
account of many illegal and exorbitant Proceedings. No, this is the Authority
of Mr. Sergeant Hawkings (though he uses Marginal References to some
Star-Chamber-cases) whose Name is too great to receive any Addition from this
Paper, and who after a long and studious Search in the Crown-Law, laid down
this Proposition for Law at the Time he wrote his Book; and I believe it will
appear, in the Sequel that he was not mistaken. And now I come to join Issue
with the Barrister upon this Point, whether Mr. Sergeant or he is in the right;
or in other Words whether Falsity in Fact be essential to a Libel, so that the
Truth of the Fact may be given in Evidence to prove. P. 28.
Writing to be no Libel.

He maintains the Affirmative of the Question, both from what he understands to
be the Authorities in the Case, and from the Reason of the Thing. All which
shall be considered in their Order.

Barbados Gazette, No. 440. Remarks on Zenger's TRIAL, continued.
THE Authorities cited by Mr. Hamilton to support the Proposition formerly
stated, consist principally of four Cases, which I shall consider in the Order
as they were produced.

The first is the Case of John de Northampton, 18 Ed. III. Zeng. Trial, P. 23.
3 Inst. 174. which he observes does not appear to have been a Case upon an
Information, but that he has good Grounds to say it was upon an Indictment.
This is what I shall not contest with him, because it is not material, or
indeed easy to be determined, without seeing the Record; though I conceive there
are Grounds to say it was not upon an Indictment, as was the Case of Adam de
Ravensworth, mentioned by Lord Coke in the same Chapter. The Case, however,
stands thus; John de Northampton, an Attorney of the King's Bench wrote a
Letter to one Ferrers, one of the King's Council, that neither Sir William
Scot, Chief Justice, nor his Fellows the King's Justices, nor their Clerks, any
great Thing would do by the Commandment of our Lord the King, etc. which said
John being called, confessed the Letter, etc. Et quia praedictus Johannes
cognovit dictam literam per se scriptam, Roberto de Ferrers, qui est de
concilio Regis, quae litero continet in se nullam veritatem: Proetextu cujus
Dom. Rex ergo Curium and Justiciarios suos habere posset indignationem, quod
esset in scandalum Justic. and Curiae. Ideo dictus Johannes committitur, etc.
Here says the Barrister, by this Judgment it appears the libellous Words were
utterly false, and there the Falsehood was the Crime, and is the Ground of the
Judgment. For my own Part, I can neither see Truth nor Falsehood in the Words at
the Time they were wrote, for they refer to a future Contingency that might or
might not be as he said; and in this Respect, they were the same as if the Man
had said, the Roof of Westminster Hall would fall upon Sir William Scot, and
his Fellows. Besides, the Words taken by themselves have no ill Meaning; for I
imagine it will be allowed that most of the great Things which Judges do, as
Judges, are such as ought neither to be done nor left undone by the King's
Commandment. Where then was the Offense? The Record, I think, shows that in the
following Words; proetextu cujus Dom. Rex ergo Curiam and Justic. suos habere
posset indignationem, etc. Idoe dictus Johannes committitur, etc. It is
observeable, that the Author of this Letter was an Attorney of the Court, and
by the Contents thereof he presumes to undertake for the Behavior of the
Judges in some great Matters that concerned their Office. The Letter was
addressed to a Person who was of the King's Council and might possibly
communicate the Contents of such a Letter to the King; the Consequence of which
might naturally be that; Dom. Rex habere posset indignationem ergo Curiam, etc.
for great Things were some Times done, in those Days, by the Kings Commandment,
and the Judges, besides, held their Posts at Will and Pleasure.

The Words, quoe litera continet in se nullam veritatem, were therefore proper
for the Judges to insert, in Order to acquit themselves to the King; but they
are no more the Ground of the Judgment than these other Words; qui est de
Concilio Regis, both being only incidental Clauses that come in by way of
Description: For it is not said; quia litera praedicta continet in se nullam
veritatem. After all, I would not have this Construction of the Case, plain and
natural as it is, pass merely upon my own Credit; for I shall show that this
Case was so understood by one of the greatest Lawyers of his Time, before Lord
Coke's 3d Inst. appeared in the World.

21. Jac. B. R. Tanfield v. Hirom, Godb. 405, 6.

The Plaintiff brought an Action upon the Case against the Defendant, for
delivering of a scandalous Writing to the Prince, etc. Noy for the Plaintiff
cited, 18 Ed. III. a Letter was sent to Ferrers, one of the King's Council, the
Effect of which was, that Scot, Chief Justice, and his Companions of the same
Bench, would not do a vain Thing at the Command of the King; yet because he
sent such a Letter to the King's Council, although he spoke no Ill, yet because
it might incense the King against the Judges, he was punished. If no Ill was
said, will it be pretended that the Falsehood of what was said could be a Reason
for punishing a Man? Is it not ridiculous to say that the Falsehood of innocent
or insignificant Words can be Criminal? This Book therefore follows the Record
of Northampton's Case, and says; because it might incense the King against the
Judges, he was punished; which is almost a Translation of praetextu cujus, etc.
which was the Ground of the Judgment, Idio Committitur.

The next Case which the Barrister called to his Aid, is that of the Seven
Bishops; State Trials, vol. 4. and here he relies on a Flourish of one of the
Council for the Bishops, and a dubious Expression of one of the Judges,
separated from the Rest of his Discourse.

Sir Robert Sawyer, it is true, says both the Falsity of it (the Libel) and that
it was malicious and seditious, are all Matters of Fact, which they (the King's
Council) have offered to the Jury no Proof of, etc. This I must confess, proves
one Point to which the Barrister adduced it, P. 23.
viz. That he was not the first who insisted, that to make a Writing a Libel,
it must be false. And when I have allowed this, I may almost venture to say, it
is the only Point he does prove from the Beginning to the Ending of his long
elaborate Speech. Let me, however, oppose to this the Reply of Sir Thomas
Powis, in these Words; whether a Libel be true or not, as to the Matter of
Fact; was it ever yet permitted in any Court of Justice to be made a Question;
whether the Party be punishable for it? And therefore I wonder to hear these
Gentlemen say, that because it is not a false one, therefore it is not a Libel.
Fol. 382.

Mr. Justice Powel also does say; that to make it a Libel, it must be false; it
must be malicious; and it must tend to Sedition. Upon which Words of this
learned and worthy Judge, I would not presume to offer any Comment, except that
which other Words of his own afford, that plainly show in what Sense he then
spoke. His subsequent Words are these: They (the Bishops) tell his Majesty it
is not out of Averseness to pay all due Obedience; nor want of Tenderness to
their dissenting Fellow Subjects; but because they do conceive the Thing that
was commanded them, was against the Law of the Land; they say, they apprehend
the Declaration is illegal, because it is founded on a dispensing Power. I do
not remember in any Case in all our Law, that there is any such Power in the
King; and the Case must turn upon that. In short, if there be no such
dispensing Power in the King, then that can be no Libel, which they presented
to the King, which says that the Declaration, being founded upon such a
pretended Power, is illegal. So that the Judge put the whole upon that single
Point, whether it be true that the King had such a dispensing Power, or not;
which is a Question of Law, and not of Fact; and accordingly the Judge appeals
to his own Reading in the Law, not to Witnessess or other Testimony, for a
Decision of it. In Truth the Petition of the Bishops is not capable of having
Falsehood or Truth applied to it in any other Sense, there being nothing else
affirmed or denied in it, but that they thought they could not do what was
commanded them, because it was against the Law. This was the Behavior; these
were the Sentiments of that upright Judge, that gained him so much Honor among
all good Men, as the Barrister takes Notice, not any Opinion of his, that the
Contents of a Libel must be false in Fact, to make it a Libel; P. 24.
as he would unfairly insinuate.

Sir Samuel Barnardiston's Case is the third that is touched upon; and here too
the Gentleman finds nothing that can be strained to his Purpose, but the
Defendant's Council insisting on the want of Proof to the Malice and seditious
Intent of the Author. He seems to have forgot that the same Gentleman insisted
also to have it proved, that the Defendant was a Person of a turbulent and
unquiet Spirit, because these Words were set forth in the Information, and he
takes no Manner of Notice how all this was answered; which I must now do for
him, in the Words of the Court; Certainly the Law supplies the Proof, if the
Thing itself speaks Malice and Sedition. As it is in Murder; we say always in
the Indictment, he did it by the Instigation of the Devil: Can the Jury, if
they find the Fact, find he did it not by such Instigation? No, that does
necessarily attend the very Nature of such an Action or Thing. So in
Informations for Offenses of this Nature, we say, he did it falsely,
maliciously, and seditiously, which are the formal Words; but if the Nature of
the Thing be such as necessarily imports Malice, Reproach, and Scandal to the
Government, there needs no Proof but of the Fact done; the Law supplies the
rest. How shall any Man prove another Man's Malice, which is a Thing that lies
only in a Man's Mind? How should any Man know that I am malicious against the
Government, but by my Actions? These Words, indeed, were pronounced by the
Chief Justice Jefferies, who was then the Mouth of the Court; but though he was
really an intemperate Judge (or a Monster, as the Barrister in his
Bar-Language, delights to call him) yet I may safely refer it to all Men of
Law, whether these Words could have discredited the best Mouth that ever spoke
upon that Bench. State Trials, Vol. 3. 939.

An Instance of this Sort may not be impertinent, where a Chief Justice (who
was no Monster) addresses himself to a Jury, that was trying a Libel, in this
Manner; I will not repeat the Particulars to you, only something to what the
Defendant has said, that you may not be misled. He says it does not appear that
he did it maliciously or knowingly. There are some Things that you that are of
the Jury are not to expect Evidence for, which it is impossible to know but by
the Act itself; Malice is conceived in the Heart; no Man knows it, unless he
declares it. As in Murder, I have Malice to a Man; no Man knows it. I meet this
Man and kill him; the Law calls this Malice. If a Man speak scandalous Words
against a Man in his Calling or Trade; he lays his Action, Malice; though he
cannot prove it but by the Words themselves; you may see, there is Malice
supposed to a private Person in that Slander, much more to the King and the
State. State Trials, Vol. 2. 537.

Tutchin's Case, the Barrister does not properly cite, but endeavors to answer
as a Case urged against him by the King's Council; and therefore I shall
observe upon it in another Place.

But the Case of Cases is still behind, which he reserved for the last, P. 24.
to make the Point clearer on his Side, than all the rest put together could
do. It is Fuller's Case. State Trials, Vol. 5. 441, 6, 7, 8; and it deserves
Notice, that although Fuller was charged with writing a Libel, yet that was not
the Gist of the Information. He was in Truth prosecuted for being a Cheat and
Imposter, by Order of the House of Lords, as the King's Council declare in the
Opening.

The Information accordingly sets forth, That W. F. intending the late King
William and his Subjects to deceive; and to get several great Sums of Money
fraudulently and deceitfully from the said King; concerning a Correspondency
between diverse Officers and Subjects of the said late King, and the late King
James falsely pretended to be had; did write and print a Libel, entitled,
Original Letters, etc. with the Deposition of T. J. and T. F. Esqrs, proving
the Corruption lately practiced in this Nation; and the said W. F. afterward
did publish, utter, and for Truth affirm the said several false and scandalous
Libels, without any lawful Authority; whereas in Truth the said T. J. did not
depose upon his Oath, as is contained in the said false and scandalous Libel;
but the said scandalous Libels are false, feigned, and altogether contrary to
the Truth, etc. Here it is manifest he was accused of a Cheat, in forging the
Correspondence and the Depositions just mentioned, with a Design of getting
Money by his pretended Discovery. And hence it comes, that the Judge very
properly asks him, have you any Witnesses? If you take upon you to write such
Things as you are charged with, it lies upon you to prove them true, at your
Peril. How came you to write those Books that are not true? If you have any
Witnesses produce them. Thus said, and thus did that great Man, Lord Chief
Justice Holt; P. 24.
but not upon a Trial of the like Kind with Mr. Zenger's, as his Council would
have it thought. For in this Case the Cheat and the Imposture was the Offense,
which consisted wholly in the Falsity; that is, in affirming such Things for
Realities, when they were naught but Fictions. On the contrary, had he been
able to prove those Letters and those Depositions to be authentic, the
Discovery would have been valuable, and might entitle him perhaps to Favor and
Protection, instead of Punishment; however irregular he was in taking such a
Method to publish Matters of that high Consequence. After this, let the learned
Barrister, in all his Reading, show an Information or Indictment for a Libel,
where the Falsity is assigned in Form with an ubi revera, as the Foundation of
the Offense; which is done in Fuller's Case; and then I will acknowledge that
the Questions put here by Lord Holt, would have been proper upon the Trial of
his Client.

This is the Sum of the Barrister's Law-Cases. And is it not high Time to ask,
whether such gross Misrepresentations of the Books can proceed from Ignorance
or Disingenuity? Be that as it will; it might certainly be expected, that a
Proposition advanced with so much Assurance, by a Man of Years and Reading,
should have been supported by some One Authority in Point, rather than by a
Series of low Prevarication and Quibble. Could he not find in all the
Book-Cases and Trials at large concerning Libels (which are sufficient of
themselves to make a large Volume) one example of Proof being received to the
Truth or Falsity contained in a libelious Writing? Indeed there is nothing like
it to be found; though the Occasions have been many, where such Proof might be
had, if it were proper; nay where the Truth of the Thing was notorious to all
Men, and yet no Question ever moved concerning it. This shall fully appear in
the Sequel.

Barbados Gazette, No. 441. Remarks on Zenger's Trial, continued.
IF any Thing can be necessary further to expose Mr. Hamilton's Doctrine of
Libels, after answering his own Cases, it is only to subjoin some others that
will show how much he is mistaken in almost every Thing he has offered on the
Subject. I shall therefore mention a very few, that will bear a particular
Application to his crude Notions; without entering into a Multitude of others,
to overload this Paper, and tire the Reader.

16 Car. 2. The King, v Pym. 1 Sid. 219. B. R.

Pym was indicted at Exeter, for a Libel, which he delivered to a Parson to be
published in Church there, and was to this Effect; You are desired to bewail
the Sodomitry, Wickedness, Whoredom, Lewdness, that is of late broken out in
this formerly well-governed City, that God would turn their Hearts from
committing those Wickednesses which go unpunished by the Magistrates. Pym
confessed the Indictment, and was fined 100 l. He afterward brought a Writ of
Error, and assigned for Error that this was no Offense, because though he says,
go unpunished by the Magistrate, yet he does not say that the Magistrate knew
of it; and Wickedness unknown cannot be punished. It was answered by the Court,
that this contains Matter of great Scandal to the Government of the City, for
it makes the late Government better than the present, etc. Hide, Twisden,
Keiling, Windham, Just.

I have pitched upon this Case, because the Barrister is fond of comparing the
Plantations to large Corporations; Zeng. Trial. P. 20.
and he will find here that even those are not left to the Mercy of Libellers,
although they do not put in a Claim to the sacred Rights of Majesty: And that a
Misbehaviour of this Kind to the Magistrates of a Corporation, P. 21.
is not entirely innocent, because it is not to be judged of, or punished, as a
like Undutifulness would be to our Sovereign.

This Case was adjudged about four Years after the Restoration, when the Memory
of the preceding Usurpation was fresh in every Body's Mind. It is strange
therefore Mr. Pym did not put himself on his Trial at Exeter, for it is evident
beyond Contradiction to the People of that Age, from their own Knowledge, as it
is now to us from History, that the Wickedness specified in the Libel was
restrained by a stricter Hand before, than after the Restoration. But this
notorious Truth, it seems did not avail Mr. Pym. 22. Car. 2. the King. v.
Saunders. Raym. 201. B. R.

Information for writing a scandalous Libel to H. Rich. who was indebted to
him, and kept him out of his Money three Years, by obtaining a Protection, and
at length getting into the Prison of the King's Bench. Saunders wrote him a
Letter, wherein he tells him, That if he had any Honesty, Civility, Sobriety,
or Humanity, he would not deal so by him; and that he would one Day be damned,
and be in Hell for his Cheating; and cited several Places of Scripture to make
good his Allegations. The Defendant was found Guilty, and moved in Arrest of
Judgment, that the Substance of the Letter is not scandalous but impertinent
and insignificant, etc. Cur. The Letter is provocative, and tends to the
incensing Mr. Rich. to break the Peace. The Court adjudged the Letter
scandalous, and fined him forty Marks. Keiling, Twisden, Rainford, Moreton,
Just.

I would entreat the clear-sighted Barrister, to look carefully into the Words
of this Libel, and try if he can discover any Truth or Falsehood in them that
was capable of Proof; and I must remark upon both these Cases, that though they
were adjudged in the Reign of K. Charles II. yet neither of them was upon a
State Prosecution, or at a Time when the Spirit of Plots and Factions, had
infested the Courts of Justice; but they remain unquestionable Authorities at
this Day.

State Trial, Vol. 5. The Case of Tutchin is strong against him; a Case
adjudged since the Revolution, before that learned and upright Judge Sir John
Holt; and plainly shows the Fallacy that runs throughout his whole Argument.

The Points insisted on by this Chief Justice, in his Charge to the Jury, were
these; To say that corrupt Officers are appointed to administer Affairs is
certainly a Reflection on the Government If People should not be called to an
Account for possessing the People with an ill Opinion of the Government, no
Government can subsist; now you are to consider, whether these Words I have
read to you, do not tend to beget an ill Opinion of the Administration of the
Government; to tell us that those that are employed know nothing of the Matter,
and those that do know are not employed. Men are not adopted to Offices, but
Offices to Men, out of a particular Regard to their Interest, and not to their
Fitness for the Places. This is the Purport of these Papers. If this was the
Purport of the Papers, and so criminal as has been just said; it is amazing,
surely, that Mr. Tutchin did not offer to prove the Truth of these Allegations,
and thereby take out their Sting. Could not he possibly think of as many
corrupt or incompetent Officers, Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Military, in
England, preferred by Interest rather than Merit, as there were Judges displaced
and Courts erected in New York? Or if he was restrained by the hard hearted
Judge, from desporting himself in this pleasant and spacious Field, could he
not apply to the private Knowledge which the Jurors (as well as the Rest of
Mankind) had of these Matters? For I imagine it will be allowed, that if no
Instances of this Sort could be shown at the Time of Tutchin's Trial, it was
the only Period within the Memory of Man, or the reach of History, that wanted
the like.

But the Misfortune was, the poor Man was not blessed with such skilful Council
as is to be had in Philadelphia, to think of these good Things for him;
otherwise you might have heard an alert Advocate (after returning Thanks to his
Lordship for nothing) address himself to the Jury in this or the like eloquent
Strain; P. 25.
then, Gentlemen of the Jury it is to you we must appeal for Witnesses to the
Truth of the Facts we have offered and are denied the Liberty to prove; the Law
supposes you to be summoned out of the Neighborhood where the Fact is alleged
to be committed; and the Reason of your being taken out of the Neighborhood
is, because you are supposed to have the best Knowledge of the Fact that is to
be tried. And were you to find a Verdict against my Client, you must take upon
you to say the Papers referred to in the Information, and which are proved to
be written and published by us, are false, scandalous and seditious. You are
Citizens of London, honest and lawful Men; and the Facts which we offer to
prove were not committed in a Corner; they are notoriously known to be true.
And as we are denied the Liberty of giving Evidence to prove the Truth of what
we have published, I will beg Leave to lay it down as a standing Rule in such
Cases, that the suppressing of Evidence ought always to be taken for the
strongest Evidence, and I hope, it will have that Weight with you. Lay your
Hands upon your Hearts, Gentlemen, and recollect. Do none of you know; nay, do
not all of you know certain Persons, who shall be nameless, that have been
lately promoted by Favor and Interest, to Places of Trust and Profit both in
Church and State, Army and Navy; whom you must know and believe in your
Consciences to be ill Men, and no way qualified for such Preferment; as my
sagacious Client has most seasonably remonstrated to the Neighbors, by Virtue
of that Right which every free born Subject has of publishing his Complaints,
when the Matters so published can be supported with Truth? P. 17, 29.
But is Lord Holt asleep all this Time; can any reasonable Man, who has but
common Notions of Judicature, imagine that this great Judge would suffer such
Trash as this to be thrown out in any Court where he sat in Judgment? But what
must he have said if the Libeller before him had offered to prove, that the Law
itself was at an End; that Trials by Juries were taken away when a Minister
pleased; that no Man could call any Thing his own, or enjoy any Liberty longer
than those in the Administration would condescend to let him do it? Would he
have said that these Things did not tend to possess the People with an ill
Opinion of the Government, and that Governments might well subsist, though Men
should not be called to an Account for publishing the like? Or would he have
said, it was no Matter what Opinion the People had of the Government, nor
whether it subsisted or not, provided these Assertions were true; and so have
discharged the Man as a Publisher of precious and useful Truths to put the
Neighbors on their Guard?

But here also the Barrister lays hold of a Random-Question, put by one of the
King's Council to Mr. Montague, who was for the Defendant and was then touching
upon the Affairs of the Navy. Says the former, will you say they are true? Now
the latter had hinted as much as that these Things were true; but did it with
that Caution which a Man of Skill uses, when he would say something in Support
of a lame Cause, but don't care to press an Impropriety too far. For that
learned Gentleman was very sensible, that if he had presumed to insist expressly
on the Truth of the Matters contained in his Clients Papers, a severe Reprimand
was the best Thing that could have befallen him. His Words are these; no Body
can say, that we never had any Mismanagements in the Royal Navy; and whenever
that has happened the Merchants of England in all probability have suffered for
it. But does the Judge, in his Charge to the Jury, vouchsafe to give this
Matter any Answer, or so much as to mention it? Lord Holt, did not usually pass
by material Things that were offered in Defense of Persons tried before him;
yet in this Case he makes no Question or Scruple about the Truth or Falsehood of
Tutchin's Papers, although they contained many Things which his Lordship, the
Jury, and all the World knew to be ****. This candid Judge, however, puts the
Merits of the whole upon the Scandal of the Government, and the evil Tendency
of such Writings. And therefore I must once more call upon the Northern
Barrister to show a single Instance where Witnesses have been produced by
Council, and admitted by the Court to prove the Truth of a Libel. When he does
this, it will deserve Consideration; but till then he may talk by the Hour
without any Meaning.

I could mention some Cases of a more modern Date, that have been adjudged in
Westminster Hall, when this wild Doctrine was not so much as thought of, and
when it would not have been altogether useless had it been practicable; but I
have chose to mention such only as are reported, that the Books may speak for
themselves, and Judge between us.

But this Lawyer seems to be above having his Points of Law decided by
Authorities of the Law; and has something in Reserve, which may serve to
overthrow not only what has been offered in this Paper, but even all the Books
of the Law. This is what he calls the Reason of the Thing, but is truly and
properly a Sketch of his own Politics; which leads me to show that the true
Reason of the Thing here, agrees with the Law, and consequently both these are
against this expert Master of Law and Reason.

From the Barbados Gazette, No. 442. Remarks on Zenger's Trial, continued.
THE Reason of the Thing, as well as it can be collected from a Heap of
Particulars huddled together without Order and Method, may be reduced to the
three following Heads.

1. The Form of an Information for a Libel, and the Necessity of knowing the
Truth or Falsehood of its Contents, in order to direct the Judges in awarding
arbitrary Punishment.

2. The Right every Man has of publishing his Complaints, when the Matters so
published can be supported with Truth.

3. The Necessity there is of using this Right, in the Plantations especially,
by Reason of the Difficulty of obtaining Redress against evil Governors by any
other Means.

1. It will not be improper to premise, under the first Head, that a Gentleman
of the Law, who takes upon him to pronounce so magisterially, as the Northern
Barrister has done concerning Libels, ought to have considered well the Nature
and Extent of his Subject. It might be expected that he is not unknowing in any
Part of Learning necessary to fix his Idea of a Libel And yet the present Case
would appear to be quite different. This learned Gentleman might have informed
himself by reading some of the ancient Laws before the Conquest, that when the
Falsity of virulent Writings and Speeches was taken into the Description of the
Crime, there was a specific Penalty annexed, viz. Cutting out the Offenders
Tongue. Lamb. Sax Laws. But this Severity seems to have fallen into Disuse
under the Norman King's; and accordingly Bracton; who wrote in the Reign of
Henry III. gives a Description of these Offenses as they were understood in his
Days, wherein Falsity is neither expressed nor implied. These are his Words;
Fit autem injuria, non solum cum quis pugno percussus fuerit, (...), vuneratus,
vel fustibus coesus; verum cum ei Convitium dictum fuerit, vel de eo factum
Carmin famosum and hujusmo^^. Fol. 155. Indeed here is no mention of Libeis
against the King or the State; the Reason of which seems plainly to be, that
Offenses of this Sort were considered as a Species of Treason, not only in that
Age, but in several Ages after, notwithstanding the Statute of 25 Ed. III. and
though they have by happy Degrees dwindled into Misdemeanors, yet no body except
the Barrister will say they are come to have a greater Indulgence from the Law,
than the like Offenses against private Persons. How far therefore Bracton's
Acceptance of a Libel has prevailed ever since, must be submitted upon what
has been offered in the preceding Part of the Remarks.

Here the Barrister threws in a shrewd Question, arising from the Form of the
Information, Zeng. Trial. P. 21.
which charges the Libel to be false This Word FALSE, say he, must have some
Meaning, else how came it there? I hope Mr. Attorney will not say he put it
there by Chance; and I am of Opinion his Information would not be good without
it. By way of Answer to this, I must take leave to put a Question or two in the
same Strain. Suppose a Man brings an Action of Trespass, for violating his
Wife, and he fairly sets forth the Truth of the Case. viz. That the Defendant,
by amorous Addresses, Letters, Presents, etc. did gain the Consent of the
Plaintiff's Wife, and at length debauched her, I would ask, whether an Action
of Trespass thus laid can be supported? I fancy not; and yet this is a more
just Account of the Matter, than when vi and armis, viz. Swords, Staves,
Knives, etc. are introduced as Instruments of invading this tender Part of our
neighbors Property. Suppose further, a Man kills another whom he never saw or
heard of before; and he is accused of Murdering him of Malice fore thought. How
come such Words to be put into an Indictment for a Fact so circumstanc'd? They
must have some Meaning; surely they are not put there by Chance; and I am of
Opinion the Indictment would not be good without them. Why, there is this short
Answer to be given to all these childish Questions. There are many Words used
in Pleadings of most kinds, sometimes for Aggravation, sometimes for
Comprehension, often in Compliance with ancient Usage, which are not
traversable, and many Times are incapable of Proof. The Form of Indictments and
Informations follows the Nature of the Fact, and sets it out in its worst
Dress; and if the Fact is made appear to be unlawful, all the hard Names are
supplied by Implication of Law. This is not all, P. 23.
quoth the Councellor; it is said that Truth makes a Libel the more provoking;
well, let us agree for once that Truth is a greater Sin than Falsehood; yet as
the Offenses are not equal, and as the Punishment is arbitrary; is it not
absolutely necessary that they should know whether the Libel is true or false,
that they may by that Means be able to proportion the Punishment; for would it
not be a sad Case, if the Judges, for Want of a due Information, should chance
to give as severe a Judgment against a Man for writing or publishing a Lie, as
for writing or publishing a Truth? Now is it not a sad Case that he should Want
to be told, that human Laws don't strictly regard the moral Pravity of Actions,
but their Tendency to hurt the Community, whose Peace and Safety are their
principal Objects; so that by this Standard only are Punishments measured. If
this profound Sophister is of another Opinion, let him give a Reason why it
should be a greater Crime in our Law for a Man to Counterfeit a silver Shilling
than to cut his Father's Throat.

2. The Right of remonstrating or publishing just Complaints, the Barrister
thinks the Right of all Freemen: And so think I, provided such Remonstrances
and Complaints are made in a lawful Way. But when he comes to explain, it is
not a Court of Justice, it is not an House of Representatives, it is not a
Legislature that is to be troubled (as he phrases it) with these Things, Who
then I pray, is to be troubled with them; P. 29.
for the King it seems is out of the Question? Let the Barrister speak for
himself; they have a Right (says he) publicly to remonstrate the Abuses of
Power, in the strongest Terms, to put their Neighbors upon their Guard, etc.
and in another Place he speaks of it as a Hardship, if a Man must be taken up
as a Libeller, for telling his Sufferings to his Neighbor. Now though I wish and
hope, as earnestly as he can do, that a free People may never want the Means of
uttering their just Complaints, and of redressing their Wrongs too, when their
Complaints are not heard; yet I always thought these Things were better
understood than expressed in a Court of Law; and I shall probably remain in
that Opinion till the learned Gentleman can produce something from the Common
or Statue Law, to show that a British Subject has a Right of appealing
publicly to his Neighbors (that is, to the collective Body of the People)
when he is injured in his Person, Rights, or Possessions. When I am assured
that he can do this, I promise him I shall not grudge a Voyage to that Country,
P. 39.
where Liberty is so well understood and so freely enjoyed, that I may receive
the important Discovery from his own instructive Mouth.

I know the Law Books assert the Right of Complaining to the Magistrates and
Courts of Justice, to the Parliament, to the King himself; but a Right of
complaining to the Neighbors is what has not occurred to me. After all, I would
not be thought to derogate, by any Thing I have said or shall say, from that
noble Privilege of a free People, the Liberty of the Press. I think it the
Bulwark of all other Liberty; and the surest Defense against Tyranny and
Oppression. But still it is a Two-edged Weapon, capable of cutting both Ways,
and is not therefore to be trusted in the Hands of every discontented Fool or
designing Knave. Men of Sense and Address (who alone deserve public Attention)
will ever be able to convey proper Ideas to the People, in a Time of Danger,
without running counter to all Order and Decency, or crying Fire and Murder
through the Streets, if they chance to awake from a frightful Dream. But I must
again urge, that these Points are not fit to be discussed in a Court of
Justice, whose Jurisdiction is circumscribed by positive and known Laws.
Besides, they take Place properly in a sovereign State which has no Superior on
Earth; and where an injured People can expect no Relief but from an Appeal to
Heaven. This is far from being the Case of Colonies; and therefore I come to
show, under the third Head, that the Barrister's Reason of the Thing in no
other than Reason inverted, which possibly may help the Project of a Demagogue
in America, but can never be reconciled to the Sentiments of a Lawyer, or the
Principles of a Patriot, considered as a Subject of Great Britain.

3. I have hitherto been taught to believe that when a brave and free People
have resorted to measures unauthoris'd by the ordinary Course of the Laws; such
Measures have been justified by the extraordinary Necessity of the Case, which
excluded all other Means of Redress. And as far as I understand the
Constistitution, and have heard Accounts of the British Colonies, such a Case
cannot well happen, and has never yet happened among them. But here the
Barrister is ready to ask, how must we behave when we are oppressed by a
Governor, in a Country where the Courts of Law are said to have no coercive
Power over his Person, and where the Representatives of the People are, by his
Intrigues, made Accomplices of his Iniquity? Certainly it cannot be a new
Discovery to tell this Lawyer; that as the Governor is a Creature of the Crown,
so the most natural and easy Course is to look up to the Hand that made him.
And I imagine it may be affirmed (without catching an Occasion of offering
Incense to Majesty) that if one half of the Facts contained in Zenger's Papers
and vouched for true by his Council, had been fairly represented and proved at
home, Mr. Cosby would not have continued much longer in his Government; and
then the City of New York, might have applied to itself the Inscription of the
Gold-Box; P. 44.
demersae leges, temefacta libertas, hae tandem emergunt; with greater
Propriety and Security, than could possibly be derived from the impetuous
Harrange of any Lawyer whatsoever. I am the more emboldened to say thus much,
because though it is my Lot to dwell in a Colony where Liberty has not always
been well understood, at least not freely enjoyed, yet I have known a Governor
brought to Justice within these last twenty Years, who was not only supported
by a Council and Assembly, besides a numerous Party here, but also by powerful
Friends at Home; all which Advantages were not able to screen him from Censure,
Disgrace, and a Removal from the Trust he had abused.

It is not always necessary that particular Persons should leave their Affairs
and Families in the Plantations to prosecute a Governor in Westminster Hall,
unless their Fortunes are equal to the Expense. For it is seldom seen that the
Violence of a bad Governor terminates in private Injuries; in as much as he
cannot find his Account in any Thing less than what is of a general and public
Nature. And when this is the Case, I hope none of our Colonies are, even at
this Time, so destitute, but that they can find the Means of making a regular
Application to their Sovereign, either in Person or in his Courts at
Westminster, as their Case may require.

But the wild Inconsistency that shines through most Parts of this Orator's
Speech, P. 28.
is peculiarly glaring in that Part of it now before me. The Remedy which he
says our Constitution prescribes for curing or preventing the Diseases of an
evil Administration in the Colonies, I shall give in his own Words; has it not
been often seen (and I hope it will always be seen) that when the
Representatives of a free People are, by just Representations or Remonstrances,
made sensible of the Sufferings of their Fellow Subjects, by the Abuse of Power
in the Hands of a Governor, they have declared (and loudly too) that they were
not obliged by any Law to support a Governor who goes about to destroy a
Province or Colony, etc. One would imagine, at first Sight, that this Man had
the same Notion, with the Rest of Mankind, of just Representations and
Remonstrances to the Representatives of a free People, which has ever been
understood to be by Way of Petition or Address directed and presented to them
in Form; in which Case it is hoped that they, being moved by the Complaints of
the People, will stretch forth their Arms to help them. But alas! P. 29.
We are all mistaken; for he tells us, in the same Breath, that the right Way
is by telling our Sufferings to our Neighbors, in Gazettes and Newspapers;
for the Representatives are not to be troubled with every Injury done by a
Governor; besides they are sometimes in the Plot with the Governor, and the
injured Party can have no Redress from their Hand; so that the first Complaint
(instead of the last Resort) must be to the Neighbors, and so come about to
the Representatives through that Channel.

Now I would be very glad to know, what the Neighbors can do toward effecting
the desired Reformation, that will be attended with so good Success and so few
ill Consequences, as a regular Application to his Majesty would be. It would be
pleasant, doubtless, to hear this Politician speak out, and explain himself at
large, upon this Subject. I confess it surpasses my Comprehension to conceive
what the Neighbors, inspired with weekly Revelations from the City Journalist,
can do with their Governor or Assembly, unless it be to reform them by those
persuasive Arguments which the Major vis never wants good Store of. If this be
the Patriot's Meaning, his Words may possibly be understood; but without this
Meaning they are mere Jargon.

In a Word; I shall agree with the Barrister (and so take my Leave of him) that
the Liberty of exposing and opposing arbitrary Power, P. 39.
is the Right of a free People; and he ought at the same Time to admit that,
The order of Things and the Peace of Society require that extraordinary Means
should not be used, for this Purpose, till the Ordinary have failed in the
Experiment. The supreme Magistrate of an independent Kingdom or State, cannot
always be controlled by the one, and then the other is justified by that
Consideration. But in Colonies, that are from their Creation subordinate to the
Mother Country, there is no Person who is not controulable by regular and well
known Methods of proceeding; and consequently there can be no absolute
Necessity of flying to Extremities, at least in the first Instance. From all
which, I conceive, it follows, that local Considerations upon which the
Gentleman lays so great Stress, conclude directly against him; and I hope the
Security which the British Constitution affords to every Man's Person,
Property, and Reputation, as well as to the public Tranquillity, is not
lessened by any Distance from the Fountain of Power and Justice; but that a
Libel is a Libel, and punishable as such in America as well as in Europe.

I am sensible, there is a Freedom of Expression used in these Papers, of which
I should disapprove in the common Cases of Controversy; but I found my self
under a Necessity of showing no Respect to the Performance under Consideration,
unless I were to forfeit the little that might be due to the Remarks. For though
a Lawyer is free, nay obliged by the Duty of his Profession, to make the most
of the Cause he espouses, (his real Sentiments being suspended for that Time,
by Reason of the Biass under which he acts) yet when he draws his private
Opinion into the Debate, and interests his Passions in the Success of it, he
then departs from his Character, and becomes a Party rather than an Advocate.
In short, there is an Air of self Sufficiency and Confidence mixed with the
whole Lump, enough to give a Disrelish even to good Sense and good Law, but is
Nauseous beyond all bearing, when neither of these is found: Among Lawyers, I
was sure this Lawyer deserved no Answer, and yet an Answer seemed
indispensible, not only for the Reasons given at my setting out, but also in
order to save many well meaning People from reverencing a Piece of Buffoonry,
that had been thrust into the World with so much florid Conceit and a Gold-Box
tagg'd to the End of it. A Piece, wherein the whole commonplace of popular
Declamation (equally adapted to all popular Occasions) is exhausted, and the
holy Scriptures brought in to season his Jokes. But as this last seems designed
only for a Sally of Wit and Humor, I shall not offer to detract from its
Merit; considering too it had so happy an effect as to set the good People a
laughing, when they heard the Word of God, most ingeniously burlesqu'd in a
Christian Court. A Piece that hardly shows the Author to have been serious when
he pronounced it, or his wise Benefactors when they rewarded him; but that his
solemn Professions of Principle and Duty compel a charitable Mind to suspect
his Knowledge rather than his Sincerity, P. 41, 42.
and Citizens are over thought to be in earnest when they part with their Gold
and show their Learning.

Mr. KEIMER,
I Ought to make an Apology to you and your Readers, for trespassing so long
upon your Papers and their Patience; both which might have been better
employed. But I flatter myself with the Hopes of having some Allowance made for
an honest though weak Attempt to rescue the Profession of the Law, and the
Interest of lawful Liberty, from the Disgrace thrown upon both, in One of our
Sister Colonies. This is the Truth, and let it be my Excuse.

I am yours, etc. ANGLO AMERICANUS.
Bridge-Town, July 20, 1737.
REMARKS ON Zenger's TRIAL. Taken out of the Barbados GAZETTE, No. 446, etc.
PART II.
-- Alike the Crime, the Event
Was not alike; --
PHILLIPS.
SIR,
IT must be mortifying, no doubt, to a Person who has received peculiar Marks
of public Approbation, to be told, that the very Act which procured it was so
far from being commendable, that it really deserved a severe Censure; and one
would the rather decline such an Office, how just soever the Occasion, because
it cannot be done without condemning at the same Time, the Judgment of those
whose Sufferage had been thus unworthily obtained. But when the Laws are openly
perverted, and Courts of Justice, with an Air of Gravity, droll'd out of their
established Rules by such whose Profession supposes them Ministers of Justice,
and when this too shall be dignified with Applause, and made highly
meritorious; I conceive neither good Nature, nor the Solemnity of public Seals
should restrain an honest Pen from exploding the Practice, in Order as well to
stop the Progress of its evil Effects, as to prevent the like Attempts for the
future.

Virtue and Merit, it is most certain, ought to be encouraged, especially by
all in Authority; but when that which is merely counterfeit shall gain Esteem,
stand in the Room of what is truly genuine, and be actually loaded with the
Rewards thereof, it does not only frustrate the Original Intention of such
Rewards, but likewise give Countenance to the Impostor, and furnish him with
still further Means of vending his false Wares, in Prejudice of the Public. Now
this, with all due Submission, I take to be the Case of the Corporation in
North America, with Regard to the Honors they were lately pleased to confer on
a noted Barrister in those Parts, for his supposed Services in the Affair of
Zenger the Printer, whose Trial has been so plentifully dispersed here, and in
other Places. Aggregate Bodies, we find may be mistaken, and too often are, as
well as private Men; and when they do err, it is of the more dangerous
Consequence, on Account of the Extent of their Power and Influence. The
Province in general of New York, or the City in particular might, for ought I
know, have sufficient Cause of Complaint, in some Respects, against their then
Commander in Chief and his Administration; but it is to be considered that as
there never was one absolutely free from Faults, so it is the great Privilege
of the Inhabitants of every British Government that a proper Channel is chalked
out, in all such Events, and a Way open for Relief. The Method therefore which
the Constitution prescribes ought to be strictly pursued, and any illegal
Deviation is not only inconsistent and unjustifiable in itself, but has,
besides, a Tendency to introduce Mischiefs more to be dreaded even than those
that were sought to be redressed. It is the Law which must be the Standard of
Right and Wrong; and whoever has recourse to any other Aid, or knowingly
advises thereto, in the Case of particular Grievances, cannot action a true
Principle of public Spirit, but must be influenced by unworthy Motives, and is
always more or less an Enemy to the Community, according to his Situation, and
in Proportion to the Talents he happens to possess. If Mr. Zenger then will
avowedly publish seditious Libels against the Government under which he lives,
and his Council will offer to support him by Artifices unbecoming the long
Robe, and advancing Propositions manifestly contrary to Law; as the former
deserves to be punished by it, so the latter I humbly presume to say, whatever
he may claim from his Client, ought not to be paid his Wages by any Set of Men
who owe their Being to the Law, and cannot exist without it.

But I shall not scruple to acknowledge here, and I do it on no superficial
Observation, that there cannot be a more pernicious Creature in a distant
Colony, than that of a Practitioner of the Law, with much Assurance, little
Knowledge, and no Morals; a Character not unheard of in more than one of his
Majesty's Plantations, and which yet I would by no Means apply to Mr. Hamilton,
any otherwise than may appear to be just from the Performance he has, it seems,
taken so much Pains to publish to the World. The judicious Remarks already made
upon it, by Anglo-Americanus, will hardly leave Room for any Thing to be added
that is very material, and therefore I shall content myself with a few
Gleanings only, and make some cursory Reflections thereon, whilst they afford
me an Opportunity of bearing my Testimony also against what I think the most
undecent Behavior at least, if it may not be called the boldest Outrage that
ever was exhibited from the Bar without a suitable Chastisement.

Whoever has enquired into the Doctrine of Libels, and the Reason of their
Punishment will perceive that they take their Degrees, as they affect private
Persons, particular Magistrates, or are aimed against the Government itself;
and I may venture to say that no Lawyer of Reputation will deny, but what is
set forth in the Information against John Peter Zenger was of this last Kind,
and that too, conceived in the grossest Terms, such as will not admit of a
different Construction, or of any other meaning than what is put upon them by
the Prosecutor for the Crown. Now I am sensible that great Allowances are with
good Reason made to Council in the Heat of Argument, and when supposed to be
animated with a laudable Zeal for their Clients. Nor has it been usual to
correct them for every harsh and hasty Expression, provided they keep within
Bounds, and stick to that which is their Duty without running into Matters that
have no Relation to the Issue, and cannot fairly serve the Side they espouse.
Yet, as the Lord Chancellor Notingham occasionally said, Council should not
speak as if they would abet the Guilt of their Client rather than Advocate for
their Innocence. And since your ingenious Correspondent, has clearly evinced
that the Truth of a Libel cannot be given in Evidence, that it is no
Justification, on the general Issue, and conseqently no proper Defense to a
Charge of that Nature; of all which Mr. Hamilton could not, (or ought not to
have been ignorant) it is worthy of Consideration whether he did not involve
himself in his Client's Crime, and partake of his Guilt, by declaring in the
most public Manner, that the Facts published in the Newspapers, and contained
in the Information, were true, and offering to prove them to be so before a
Court which had no Power to redress the Grievances complained of. 4 Co. 14.
Hob. 266, 7.

Sir Bartholomew Shower, I remember in his Argument in the Case of the King
against Berchet and al. asserts, that in all Cases of Contempts to a Court, no
Presentment is necessary, no not so much as to convict; for if done in Facie
curiae, a Record may be made of it, and a Punishment judicially inflicted, and
that executed immediately. Show. Rep. 110. And agreeable hereto, we find that
in a late Case of the King against Thorogood. Trin. 9 Geor. primi, the
Defendant having made an Affidavit in C. B. and appearing on Summons, confessed
that he made it, and that it was false; whereupon the Court recorded his
Confession, and ordered that he should be taken into Custody and stand in the
Pillory, etc. which was executed accordingly the last Day of the Term. Mod. Ca.
in Law and Eq. 179, 180. This is the more remarkable because it was in the
Court of Common Pleas, which has ordinarily no Jurisdiction in Criminal Cases
-- May it not from hence be inferred (I hint it with a due saving to all the
just Privileges of the Bar) that the Court at New York might well have recorded
some of the most seditious Expressions in Mr. Hamilton's Rhapsody, and
committed him for the same, etc. If they had, I doubt the Blame must have
centered in himself, and his own Conduct; of which therefore he might then have
had leisure to repent, as well as of his long Journey to so ill a Purpose.

But it will not be amiss perhaps, for Example Sake, to give an Instance of
what has been done on the like Occasion with that before us; and to this End I
shall cite a Case in the Court of King's Bench, many Years after that of the
Star Chamber was at an End, and which in the Words of Sir Thomas Raymond, was
as follows; Memorandum, June 18, 1680. Mr. Nathaniel Reading having been
convicted (before Justices of Oyer and Terminer by Virtue of a special
Commission) for endeavoring to persuade Bedlow, who was a Witness against the
Nobleman imprisoned in the Tower of London, to forbear his Prosecution of them;
and he the said Mr. Reading having had Judgment executed upon him by being set
in the Pillory, and fined 1000 l. and imprisoned for the same, but his Fine
since pardoned by the King, came this Day into Court, and demanded that an
Information which he there brought in his Hand might be received by Mr. Astrey
against the Commissioners who condemned him, of which my Brother Jones and
Brother Dolben were two, and that the Information may be filed. But the Court
did declare that he was in the wrong Way to exhibit any Information in this
Manner, and did cause his Words, whereby he did accuse the two Judges of
Oppression to be recorded; and for these Words, and for that he was infamous by
having been in the Pillory, the Gentlemen at the Bar did pray that his Gown
might be pulled over his Ears, he having been formerly a Practiser at the Bar,
which was ordered and executed in Court; and he was also condemned in Court to
pay the King 500 l. and to lie in Prison till he paid it. Raym. Rep. 376. The
Trial of this Gentleman, referred to here, may be seen in the State Trials,
vol. 2. p. 253. on which Occasion the Lord Chief Justice North made a Speech
aggravating the Defendant's Offense, as he was a Council, one who ought to be a
Man of Knowledge; and a Minister of Justice to assist the Court wherein he
pleaded. He said, he thought the Court ought to show a more than ordinary
Severity against such an one; and that it is a great Credit and Benefit to the
Profession, that the Members of it for such Offenses, should be dealt with more
Severity than we should deal in other Cases. Id. p. 374, 5. Far be it from me
to make any invidious Comparison here betwixt the present Practiser in
Pennsylvania and the quondam one in Westminster Hall, though they are both
celebrated, the one in the Trial of Mr. Zenger, and the other in that of his
Own. It may however be noted that the Latter was said to be artful and
affectedly eloquent, and to have strove to lead the Judges out of the Way,
while he was told by the Chief Justice that his Defense was artificial, because
'twas nothing to the Purpose; and by another of the Judges, that he disgraced
his Profession by making so weak a Defense. But without adverting to any
particular Beauties in the modern Performance, this is certain that Counselor
Reading lost the Bar Gown by his Art, and Counselor Hamilton got a Gold-Box of
five Ounces with the Freedom of the City of New York, by his. A pregnant
Instance of the Capriciousness of Fate, and of the Justness of your late
Correspondent's Observation at the Entrance to his excellent Remarks!

The Gentlemen of the Bar (as indeed it might well be expected from their
Education and the Nature of their Business) have been remarkable, for observing
the Regard that is due to all in Authority with the utmost Delicacy; and in
Return, have always been used with suitable Respect. But that the Lawyer of
Philadelphia may see the Courts of Justice in former Ages, as well as of late
Years, did not spare the unruly Members of the Profession, any more than
others, for a much less faulty Behavior than that of the leading Council in
Zenger's Trial, I will refer him to a Case which happened, Mich. 13. Eliz. Rot.
39. when Henry Blaundford a Counselor at Law was committed to the Fleet, and
fined for falsely reporting the Opinion of the Lord Lecester, and Secretary
Cecil with these Words, Humanum est errare. And that even Noblemen met with the
like Treatment, on such Occasions, will appear from the Case of Lord Stourten,
who, 19 Hen. VIII. was committed by the Court, and fined for saying these
Words, I am sorry to see Rhetoric rule where Law should.

Before I proceed, I will mention one Case more, purely to show how dangerous
it is to afford any unlawful Helps to Persons on their Trials in Criminal
Prosecutions, even though it be merely by way of private Instructions, when such
Instructions are to be publicly made use of, and import Scandal to the
Government. It is the Case of the King against Aaron Smith, Mic. 35. Car. 2. in
B. R. This Term (says the Book which has the Allowance of all the Judges) Aaron
Smith was brought into Court, being formerly convicted on a Trial at Bar for
delivering to Stephen College, being upon his Trial at Oxford for High Treason,
a Paper of Instructions full of scandalous Reflections, upon the King and
Government; as that they might as well have hanged him at Tyburn, as he came
by, as brought him thither only to murder him in a little more Formality. For
which the Court gave Judgment that he should pay a Fine of 500 l. stand on the
Pillory twice, and be of the good Behavior for a twelve Month. Skin. Rep. 124.
I shall only observe this Case was on an Information, so much enviegh'd against
by Zenger's Counsel, and yet I never heard it censured at all, as was that of
poor College, I own, with too good Reason.

It is now Time to take Notice, that there is amidst a Heap of Jargon and
Absurdities, one obvious Mistake which runs throughout Mr. Hamilton's
ostentatious Harangue, and that is in Relation to the Court of Star Chamber. He
would suggest that because that Court was abolished by Act of Parliament, on
Account of some insufferable Abuses that had crept into it, all the Cases that
had been adjudged there, on Informations for Libels, were consequently of no
Authority. Whereas the Judgments given there, in Matters properly cognizable
before them, which Libeling especially was, are allowed to be good Law at this
Day, and are constantly quoted, as such, in the Court of King's Bench. Indeed
it is said that the Reason of disallowing the Star Chamber Court, was because
their Authority was before and now is in B. R. and consequently that Court
unnecessary, Comb. 36. So the Lord Chief Justice Holt declared that B. R.
possessed all the lawful power the Star Chamber had, Id. 142. And that the Court
of Star Chamber was taken away, because the Crimes were punishable here, 5.
Mods 464; which is likewise intimated by the Statute itself. Now though I am as
well satisfied, perhaps, with the taking away of the Court of Star Chamber,
considering the Occasion that had been given, as our northern Barrister can
possibly be, and should equally rejoice, I hope, at the redressing any other
public Grievance; yet I cannot, with him, condemn by the Lump, and argue, that
because that Court did some Things amiss, therefore it did nothing right. At
this Rate, every Court that had, or has a Being, may be in Danger of the same
Epithets he loves to bestow on that we are speaking of; and it may as well be
supposed, that because a certain Set of Citizens, not unknown to Mr. Hamilton,
lately did a very silly Thing, they therefore never did a wise one. For which
Reason I presume it will not be altogether impertinent to produce the
Sentiments of that Oracle of the Law, Sir Edward Coke, concerning the Court of
Star Chamber. It is (says he) the most honorable Court, our Parliament
excepted, that is in the Christian World, both in Respect of the Judges, and of
their honorable Proceedings according to their just Jurisdiction, and the
ancient and just Orders of the Court. For the Judges of the same are the
Grandees of the Realm, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord
President of the King's Council, the Lord Privy Seal, all the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and others of the King's most honorable Privy Council, and the
principal Judges of the Realm, and such other Lords of Parliament as the King
shall name. And they judge upon Confession, or Deposition of Witness. And the
Court cannot sit for hearing of Causes, under the Number of eight at the least.
And it is truly said Curiae Camerae Stella^ae, si vetustatem spectemus, est
antiquissima, si dignitatem honoratissima. This Court, the right Institution
and ancient Orders thereof being observed, does keep all England in quiet."
Conformable hereto, a late learned Writer, who has advanced to the highest Post
in the Law in a neighboring Kingdom to that of our Mother Country, and wherein
he died has a Paragraph, which I believe will give us a truer Account of the
Court itself, and the Abolishment of it, than what is to be learnt from our
Barrister's Speech at New York, and therefore I will insert it here. Disc.
concerning Treasons and Bills of Attaind. P. 94. Printed Anno 1716.
The Court of Star Chamber, whilst kept within due Bounds, was certainly of the
greatest Use to preserve the Peace and Security of the Kingdom; and perhaps was
the only Court which by its ordinary and proper Jurisdiction, could effectually
prevent and punish Riots, Perjuries, and other Misdemeanors of the highest
Nature. But being made use of by the Court to support Proclamations and Orders
of State, and to vindicate illegal Commissions and Monopolies, that Extension
of their Power became a Grievance insupportable, and the Nation was never easy
till that Court was entirely suppressed by Act of Parliament. The House of
Commons were so eager in their Zeal to destroy what they called a Court of
Inquisition, that though the Bill was of so great Consequence, yet they sent it
up to the Lords, with only once reading it, and without its being ever
committed, which was a Thing, perhaps never before heard of in Parliament. Cla.
V. 1. 223.

I need only add on this Head that the Crime of Libelling is the same now as it
was while the Court of Star Chamber subsisted, and the Nature of the Offense
the same then, as now; a Crime that must necessarily be punished, as long as
there are States and Communities established in the World. And our assuming
Barrister will not find an Author that treats of the Crown Law since the
Statute of 16 Chapter 1. Chapter 10. any more than before, but makes use of the Cases
adjudged in the Star Chamber generally as good Law, and of equal Authority in
those Matters with such as were afterward adjudged in the King's Bench. Some
indeed are justly liable to Exception in the former, as we have also known too
many in the latter, particularly during the next succeeding Reign of Chapter 2.
none whereof are, however, God be praised, to be met with, or heard of since
the glorious and happy Revolution in 1688, which I trust has for ever excluded
all Partiality and Oppression from Westminster Hall.

But the learned Lawyer of Philadelphia, declares that he has not in all his
reading, met with an Authority that says we cannot be admitted to give the
Truth in Evidence upon an Information for a Libel. I don't know what this
Gentleman's reading may be; but if he had read some of the Cases above
mentioned which could not well escape him, it might reasonably have been
expected he would have taken Warning, been a little more cautious, and not have
ventured to incur the Penalties which others before him had so justly suffered.
By all his Reading, he would insinuate, I suppose, that he had read all; and if
that was true, it might well be thought he had read to very little Purpose, who
could make so ill an Use of it; or think it a Duty on him to go to the utmost
Part of the Land, to propagate Doctrines and Principles diametrically opposite
to, and just the Reverse of what he must have read. We shall soon discover that
the Barrister's Reading is not quite so extensive as he would have it imagined.
But it is previously to be observed that if there were no such Authority in
terminis as that he calls for, a Man who reads with any tolerable Understanding
would of Course infer the same Thing, when all the Books on the Subject of
Libels lay it down as a Rule, which they unanimously do, that it is not
material whether the Libel be true or false. For if that be not material, to
what end should the Truth be offered in Evidence? Or how should it be rejected
before, it was offered which undoubtedly is the Reason that there have been no
late Instances of that Sort. It might suffice therefore to undertake as often
as this well-read Lawyer produced a Precedent of its being demanded from the
Bar to give Evidence of the Truth of a Libel, to show that it was as often
denied by the Court. And though I admit it has been attempted before, on Trials
for Libels of the less enormous Kinds, yet he is probably the only one that has
done it in any Case within these 100 Years. However if we would find an
Instance of that Sort, we must necessarily have Recourse to the Proceedings of
the Court where that Crime was usually punished. The Star Chamber Reports then
may satisfy Mr. Hamilton, that Term Pase. 7 Car. 1. there was the Case of
Coston, Gent. v. Hitcham Mil Servien. ad legem, as follows. The Defendant the
Morning before he went to the Sessions, being a Justice of the Peace, received
scandalous and libellous Articles against the Plaintiff, carried them to the
Sessions in his Pocket, and in open Court, in disgrace of the Plaintiff, pulled
them out, and said you shall see what a lewd Fellow this is, and not fit to
speak in this Place, and then cause the said libellous Articles to be read in
the public Sessions. And the Plaintiff then desiring a Copy of them and to be
tried upon them, the Witnesses to prove them being noted in the Margin, the
Defendant did not suffer him to have a Copy or to be tried there upon, nor took
any Course that he might at the next Sessions, or at any Time after be
questioned for them, but took the Articles again out of the Sessions and
carried them away. And after, further to disgrace the Plaintiff in his Practice
(being an Attorney) sent the said Articles to Mr. Justice Harvey at the
Reference of a Cause to him, which Caston attended; and a Jury having given a
Verdict against the Defendant, he sent for the Jurors and questioned them about
their Verdict, and told them they were a Company of Fools, and that if there
had been but one wise Man among them their Verdict had not been so And for
these Offenses he was committed to the Fleet and fined 200 l. In this Cause,
the Defendant would have had Witnesses to prove the Matter of the said
scandalous Articles to be true, but that was disallowed by the Court. Rushw Col
vol. 3. P. 36. in Append. This I presume the Barrister when he is serious will
allow to be in Point, though it happened not to fall in the Way of his Reading.
He cannot object surely that it does not appear to be on an Information
preferred by an Attorney General, since it is a much stronger Case than if it
had. For if the Court would not receive such Evidence in a Cause depending on
the Complaint of a petty Solicitor for being libelled, and this too preferred
against a Justice of Peace, a Knight and a Sergeant at Law, a fortiori, they
would never admit it on an Information exhibited by his Majesty's
Attorney General against a private Person for libelling the Government.

There was also as I have learnt, diverse Years before, viz. Mich. 2 Jac. the
Case of Peter B^e^eton Clerk, for writing a scandalous Letter to Loyd Register
of the Bishop of St. Asaph, and sent to himself, who was therein charged with
Bribery and Extortion in his Office, for which libellous Letter the Defendant
was sentenced, though as the Book has it, he would have undertaken to prove the
Contents of the Letter to be true. Here then are two Precedents of what the
Barrister himself had never met with in all his Reading; the one in a Case for
Libelling a practicing Attorney, and the other of the Register of a Bishop's
Court; but I believe I may defy this Gentleman if he were to read as many more
Years as he has done, to produce a third where the Offense under Prosecution,
being of the highest Degree, and levelled at the Government, like that for
which he was so zealous an Advocate, the Council for the Defendant dared to
offer Evidence of the Truth of it. On the contrary, if he had dipped into the
Lord Chief Justice Keling's Reports, Fol. 23. (before he left his Chambers) he
would have there found it resolved by the whole Court that though a Counselor at
Law may plead his Client's Cause against the King, yet if under Color of that,
he takes upon him to vent Sedition, he is to be punished.

It is no Wonder indeed, if our Barrister should be unapprized of Brereton's
Case, it not being (at least to my Knowledge) in Print; and you perceive I was
under no Necessity of mentioning it, being before provided with an Authority to
my Purpose. But it is reported as above, in Part II. Consid. 12.
Sir Thomas Mallet's M. S. Treatise of the Court of Star Chamber, a Copy
whereof has fallen into my Hands by the Favor of a Friend. And since I have
named this Work, I shall, with his Leave take a Paragraph out of it, which I Am
persuaded will not be deemed unsuitable to the present Debate, after hinting
that the Book seems to be wrote in the Time of James I. when the Doctrine now
revived, and so tenaciously advanced by Mr. Hamilton, is said to have been long
before exploded as a gross Error. There are (says Sir Thomas) two gross Errors
crept into the World concerning Libels; the one that it is no Libel if the
Party put his Hand unto it; and the other that it is not a Libel if it be true;
both which have been long since exploded out of this Court. For the first, the
Cause why the Law punishes Libels, is for that they tend to raise the Breach
of the Peace, which may as well be done, and more easily when the Hand is
subscribed, then when it is not. And for the other, it has been ever agreed
that it is not the Matter, but the Manner which is punishable. For libelling
against a common Strumpet is as great an Offense as against an honest Woman,
and perhaps more dangerous to the Breach of the Peace; for, as the Woman said,
she should never grieve to be told of her red Nose if she had not one indeed.
Neither is it a Ground to examine the Truth or Falsehood of a Libel, because it
is sub Judice, whether it be a Libel or not; for that takes away Subjectum
Questionis, and determines it to be no Libel, by admitting the Defendant to
prove the Truth, and the Defendant in that Case ought to plead a Justification
and Demur in Law; but if he plead not guilty, the Question is gone, whether it
be a Libel or not. Thus, according to this Author's Opinion, who if I mistake
not, was one of the Justices of the Court of King's Bench in his Time, Mr.
Hamilton, could he really have persuaded himself that the Matters charged in
the Information were not libellous, as he insists they are not, would have
discovered more Accuracy in his Profession, as well as Candor in his Practice,
by advising his Client to Demur to it, whereby he would have admitted no more
than what was avowed at the Trial on the general Issue. Then indeed it would
have fairly come before the Court to be considered whether the Papers were
libellous or not, and he as Counsel for the Defendant, might regularly have
been heard to it. He would then have been at Liberty to exert his uncommon
Talents, manifest his extraordinary Reading, his superior Genius and great
Skill in Language, and in explaining the true import of Words, without so
directly flying in the Face of every Authority, and opposing all the Cases that
ever were adjudged concerning Libels, before he was born, and since. But, alas!
That would not have answered the Intention of our eloquent Barrister. He would
not then have had it in his Power to use his Arts, and play his Game with a
Dozen honest Men of as good natural Understandings perhaps, though not of equal
Experience and Cunning with himself. If he had gone that way to Work, he would
have had no chance for the Prize. Vain had been his Expedition, and lost,
entirely lost, all his Labor. In a Word, if the Learning and Integrity of the
Bar only were required, he might as well have stayed at home, where, if I am
rightly informed, their are Instances in Abundance of the blessed Effects of
Mr. Hamilton's well-known Principles.

This sagacious Gentleman begs Leave to observe, that Informations for Libels,
is a Child, if not born, yet nursed up and brought to full Maturity in the
Court of Star Chamber: But what is particularly to be inferred from this shrewd
Observation, he does not at present tell us. If the Star Chamber was the Court
where Crimes of this Nature were generally punished, according to its ordinary
and proper Jurisdiction, as it certainly was, how should it be otherwise than
that Informations for Libels must be met with there? And considering the
Antiquity of that Court, it is more than probable the Crime was first prosecuted
and punished in it. But what then? Is the Legitimacy of the Child (if I may be
allowed to carry on the Metaphor) therefore to be called in Question? Or its
Education the less honorable? I might put our witty Barrister in Mind, that
what I have mentioned is the very Reason why the spurious Brat he is so fond
of, which was never brought to full Maturity, nor ever will, first appeared in
the Star Chamber, though it has not been heard of since in any other Court till
very lately at New York, I mean that of making Falsehood to be essential to a
Libel, and claiming a Right to give Evidence of the Truth of it by Way of
Justification.

He must however intend by the foregoing Passage to impeach the Legality of
Informations qua such (which by some Words that drop from him many Pages after,
would seem to be what he aims at) or as they relate only to Libels; and in
either Case he will again betray the Scantiness of his Reading and Knowledge in
the Law. As to informations in general, it has been incontestibly proved that
this Method of Proceeding is no Way contrarient to any Fundamental Rule of Law,
but agreeable to it. That it was the constant Usage and had the Approbation of
the Judges and Lawyers of all Ages, and in all Reigns. Show Rep. 106, to 125.
And in the Case of the Information against Seventy poor Persons for a Riot in
pulling down Fences, etc. 2 W. and M. (which probably may be the same) it was
said by Lord Chief Justice Holt, that the Lord Chief Justice Hales complained
of the Abuse of Informations, but not that they were unlawful; -- That he
should not come now and impeach the Judgment of all his Predecessors; -- That
the Star Chamber was not set up by the Statute of Hen. 7. but was at Common
Law, and Informations were accordingly brought in that Court and others. And
the whole Court were of Opinion that Informations lay at common Law, 5 Mod.
463, 4. Now this I take to be as good an Authority as the extrajudical Opinion
of those anonymous great Men who Mr. Hamilton says, have boldly asserted that
the Mode of Prosecution by Information is a national Grievance, and greatly
inconsistent with the Freedom which the Subjects of England enjoy in most other
Cases; nor can one forbear observing, en passant, that he seems much more
disposed, where there is no Danger at least, to follow the Example of bold,
than of wise and judicious Men.

This then being a legal Course of Proceeding in Criminal Cases, and for all
public Offenses, it must undeniably be as proper in the Case of Libels as in
any others. And Sir B. Shower in reckoning up the several Crimes that were
cognizable in the Court of Star Chamber, includes Libels among the rest, for
which he says, There were always Informations in the Star Chamber and
King's Bench, Show. 119. I am the more free in borrowing what I do from that
eminent Practiser, on the Subject of Informations, because he had studied it
well, and taken more than usual Pains therein; and as the Judgment afterward
given by the Court of King's Bench was pursuant thereto, so it seems to have
put a Period in Westminster Hall to all Cavils against that Mode of Prosecution.

If the Barrister means notwithstanding to suggest moreover, that Informations
for Libels are but of modern Date, or little longer Standing then about the
Time of the Expiration of that Court, where he supposes they had their Origin,
let him be further refuted by the abovementioned Sir Thomas Mallet, who wrote
professedly on the Court of Star Chamber, and may be supposed to be pretty well
acquainted with his Subject. He tells us, that Treatise of the Court of
Star Chamber, ubi supra.
In all Ages Libels have been severely punished in this Court, but most
specially they began to grow frequent about 42 and 43 Eliz. when Sir Edward
Coke was her Attorney General. And, treating of the Antiquity of that Court he
makes it very probable, Id. 1 Part, 4th Consid.
It was the most ancient of any Court of Justice, and the Mother Court of the
Kingdom; wherein he does not differ from Sir Edward himself, in his 4th Inst.
64, already quoted. Now 'twas while this consummate Lawyer it seems was
Attorney General to the renowned Queen Elizabeth, that Informations for Libels
began to be most frequent, or in Mr. Hamilton's elegant Style, when the Child
was brought to full Maturity: And it is readily submitted to all who are versed
in our History and Constitution, whether that Period will be any Disparagement
to the Offspring.

But if Informations for Libels in particular were one of the Grievances of
that Court, nay the chief, as the Barrister would labor to make his Hearers
believe, how came they to be practiced after the Abolishment of it? Or what
will he say to the Case of the King against Darby, which was an Information
exhibited against the Defendant, being an Attorney of the Common Pleas, for
defamatory Words only of Sir John Key, a Justice of Peace, concerning the
Exercise of his Office? The Words were, as they are set forth in Comb. 65. Sir
John Key is a Buffle-headed Fellow, (a pretty Thing to be proved in Court!)
understands not Law, and is not fit to discourse it with me; he has not done
Justice to my Client. There it was argued for the Defendant on a Demurrer, (and
I choose to recite it because of the Concessions of his Council against our
Northern Advocate) That an Information would not lie for scandalous Words
spoken only of a particular Person, because he might have an Action on the Case
to recompense him in Damages. It Is true such a Proceeding might be warranted
for Libels, or for dispersing defamatory Letters, because by such Means the
public Peace might be disturbed, and Discords fomented amongst Neighbors,
which might at last be a public Injury: But there is no such Thing alleged in
this Case, only Words in common Discourse, for which an Action on the Case
might lie, but no Information. On the other Side it was insisted, That this
Information was founded on sufficient Matter, because the Prosecution is not
only as it respects the Person of Sir John Key, but it relates to him as he is
a public Magistrate, and who is subordinate to the Government, and therefore
such defamatory Words are a Reproach to the supreme Governor, by whom
Magistrates are entrusted and from whom they derive their Authority; and it
will not be denied, but that Words reflecting on the public Government are
punishable at the Suit of the King by an Information. -- And for this Reason
the Court held that an Information would lie, and thereupon gave Judgment
against the Defendant, and fined him an Hundred Marks. Carth. 14, 15.

Mr. Hamilton, who would seem to be more knowing than his Neighbors in many
Things, affects to be more ignorant than every Body, of what constitutes a
Libel; and therefore although he pretends freely to acknowledge there are such
Things as Libels, yet he insists at the same Time, that what his Client is
charged with, is not one; and if it be not, I will as freely acknowledge there
can be no such Thing. He desires the Attorney General to favor them with some
Standard Definition of a Libel, by which it may be certainly known whether a
Writing be a Libel, yea, or not. And what is this for? Why truly to shorten the
Dispute. But what Dispute does he speak of? The only Point that could admit of
Dispute had been given up before by his confessing the Matters in Issue, and
the Prosecutor's Witnesses, being thereupon discharged. As to what he requires,
either there was such a Definition to be met with in the Books, or there was
not; if there was, he ought to have known it; if there was not, why should he
desire Mr. Attorney to favor him with one? Yet after he had been indulged
beyond Measure, and a Definition was produced from a good Author, who besides
refers to several others that are unquestionable, all which conclude against
his Client; is this loquatious Advocate contented? No. There are two Words to
that Bargain, as he had said before. He makes it a Foundation for further
Disputes, and according to his wonted Ingenuity and Candor throughout his
Reverie calls the concurrent Sense of our Books, Mr. Attorney's Rule, and Mr.
Attorney's Doctrine.

But what certain Standard Rule, quoth he, have the Books laid down, by which
we can certainly know whether the Words are malicious? Whether they are
defamatory? Whether they tend to a Breach of the Peace? And are a sufficient
Ground to provoke a Man, his Family or Friends to Acts of Revenge? etc. Now
these Queries methinks do not so well become the Mouth of an Advocate as they
might that of his Client, when abandoned to his own Defense in a desperate
Cause. But I answer, no Rules certainly can be of Use to those, who are
determined to act without any, or in Opposition to all Rules, in which Class
our Northern Barrister must be placed, if we are to frame a Judgment of him
from the Share he bore in this Trial. The Rule laid down in our Books
concerning Libels (I speak of Libels in the strict Sense) according to the
Definition of Mr. Sergeant Hawkins referred to in the Trial, and which alone
concerns the present Case, is founded on the Reason of the Thing; and is the
same which is to be observed in other Matters that depend upon the Construction
of Words and Writings, which are Signs only, or Images of Ideas intended to be
conveyed to the Understandings of the Reader. There may indeed, be diverse Rules
applied according to the Circumstances of the Case, and this among the Rest,
that where Words are capable of two Senses, the one faulty, the other innocent;
the latter is to be taken, provided such a Construction may be made without
violence to their natural Import and Meaning. From whence it will follow, that
the same Cases may happen that are doubtful and do not come under any Standard
Rule, on all which Occasions honest and upright Judges will incline to the
favorable Side; there may be others again so clear and evident, that a Man
must resign his Reason, or resolve to sacrifice his Conscience that does not
discern, or will not allow them to be Libellous. But in none of these Cases can
it come properly to be a Question before the Jury whether a Libel or not on the
Plea of not Guilty, though it might afterward be so, before the Court in Arrest
of Judgment. By what has been said, there appears to be Latitude enough for a
skilful Pen, (who notwithstanding must do it at his Peril) to lash public and
private Vices, to caution the People against Measures that may be hurtful to
them, or to remonstrate against the evil Practices even of those in Power,
without being always exposed to the Penalties of the Law. Such a Liberty of
writing and printing under due Restrictions, I own Englishmen ought not, and I
hope never will be deprived of, and where this is dextriously done, it would be
ridiculous for private Persons to put the Cap on their own Heads, and no less
impolitick for those in high Stations to apply every Thing to their
Administration. When such a Work is undertaken by able Hands, and with a
generous View of serving the Public, it is always laudable, and often very
useful; but to succeed herein, requires a Capacity and Talents, not to be
discovered in Mr. Zenger's Newspapers, or his Council's Speech.

I perceive my Letter is unawares run to a great Length, by the Quotations that
are interspersed, and which yet I am sensible is the least exceptionable Part
of it. I shall therefore take Notice but of one Thing more in this matchless
Harangue, which indeed ought not to be forgot, because it is made the Basis and
Foundation of the whole; and that is concerning the Right of Freemen to
complain when they are hurt. This our Lawyer often asserts in general Terms,
with some Variation only of the Expression. As to which, I would ask, whether
by it he Means a Right to remonstrate and complain in a legal Way, or a Right
in all Cases to appeal to the People by seditious and scandalous Libels? If the
former, no Body ever denied it, and what he said was not ad idem; so that he
was fighting with the Air, and quarrelling without an Adversary. If the latter,
he dishonored his Gown by advancing what is notoriously repugnant to all Laws
human and divine. It was ruled in the Court of B. R. Trin. 16. Car. That although
a Bill be preferred in the Star Chamber against a Judge for Corruption, or any
other for any great Misdemeanour, yet if the Plaintiff will tell the Effect of
his Bill in a Tavern, or any open Place, and by that Means scandalize the
Defendant, the same is punishable in another Court. March Rep. 76, 77. So in
the Case of Hole and Mellers, 28 Eliz. in C. B. it was said by the Court, that
although the Queen is the Head and Fountain of Justice, and therefore it is
lawful for all her Subjects to resort unto her ad faciendum Querimoniam, yet if
a Subject, after the Bill once exhibited, will divulge the Matter therein
comprehended, to the Disgrace and Discredit of the Person intended, it is good
Cause of Action, 3 Leon. 138. And to the same Purpose, in a much later Case,
viz. that of Lake and King, reported in many of our Books, to which Mr.
Sergeant Hawkins refers, it seems agreed, as he observes, that whoever delivers
a Paper full of Reflection on any Person in Nature of a Petition to a Committee
of Parliament, to any other Person except the Members of Parliament, may be
punished as the Publisher of a Libel, in Respect of such a dispersing thereof
among those who have nothing to do with it. 1 Hawk. Chap. 74. Sect. 12.

But our forward Barrister, aged and infirm as he represents himself (which
compared with his Conduct is the keenest Satyr that could be suggested of him)
ought to be further instructed, that even where Complaints are to the King
himself, they must be made in a proper and regular Manner, a Decency is to be
observed, and a Regard always had to the Characters and Stations of the Persons
against whom such Complaints are made. In 13 R. 2 Rot. Parliament, No. 45. The
Commons desired they might not be troubled for any Matter that should be
contained in Petitions to the King, and the King answered, let every Man
complain, so it be with Law and Reason. It is lawful therefore, no doubt, as it
has been resolved for any Subject to petition to the King for redress in an
humble and modest Manner, where he finds himself aggrieved by a Sentence or
Judgment; for access to the Sovereign must not be shut up in Case of the
Subjects Distresses. But on the other Side, it is not permitted under Color of
a Petition and Refuge to the King to rail upon the Judge or his Sentence, and
to make himself Judge in his own Cause by prejudging it before a Rehearing.
Hob. 220. Yet Sir Rowland Flaxing was committed, and deeply fined for reporting
to the King, that he could have no Indifferency before the Lords of the
Council. 7 Feb. 18 Hen. 8. So likewise in the Time of Hen. 7. Sir Richard
Terrets was committed, fined, sent to the Pillory, and adjudged to lose both
his Ears, for his slanderous Complaint exhibited to the King in a written Book
against the Chief Justice Fitz-James. Which Cases are cited by Chief Justice
Montague, in the Case of Wraynham, (who was severely punished for an Offense of
the same Nature) as may be seen in the State Trials, Vol. 7, P. 102. To these
may be added, Jeffe's Case in the King's Bench, Mich. 5 Car. Jeffe was indicted
for exhibiting an infamous Libel directed to the King against Sir Edward Coke,
late Chief Justice of the King's Bench, and against the said Court, for a
Judgment given in the said Court in the Case of Magdalen College, affirming
the said Judgment to be Treason, and calling him therein Traitor, perjured
Judge, and scandalizing all the Professors of the Law. He fixed this Libel upon
the great Gate at the Entrance of Westminster Hall, and in diverse other Places;
and being hereupon arraigned, prayed that Counsel might be assigned him, which
was granted, and he had them, but would not be ruled to plead as they advised,
but put in a scandalous Plea, and insisting upon it, affirmed he would not
plead otherwise. Whereupon it was adjudg'd he should be committed to the
Marshal, and that he should stand upon the Pillory at Westminster and
Cheapside, with a Paper mentioning the Offense, and with such a Paper be
brought to (...) the Courts of Westminster, and to be continued in Prison,
until he made his Submission in every Court, and that he should be bound with
Sureties to be of good Behavior during his Life, and pay a Thousand Pounds
Fine to the King. Cro. Car. 175, 6.

What now shall we say, or what must be thought of one who while he pretends to
great Reading and a thorough Knowledge of these Things, could yet in the Face
of a Court, and in Defiance of its Authority, and indeed of all Authority,
presume to justify the Publication of the most audacious Libels against that
very Government under which he was breathing the Sedition! A Person, who as a
Counselor at Law, boasting at the same Time of having seen the Practice in
very great Courts, would dare to call such Publication, addressed to the
People, The just Complaints of a Number of Men who suffer under a bad
Administration! Some of the Words charged in the Information, and which Mr.
Hamilton offered to prove, are, That the Law was at an End. I cannot tell what
Proof he had to give of this Fact, but surely if his Doctrine were to prevail,
it must soon be the Case; and for my own Part, I will confess, I have not
hitherto heard of any Thing in that Province, which looked so much like it, as
that such a Behavior should not only go unpunished, but be attended with
public Munificence and Applause. The Truth is, this Gentleman, though styled a
Barrister at Law in the Order of the Common Council of the City of New York,
and which Title therefore I have likewise given him; seems notwithstanding,
instead of maintaining that Character, in the Trial before us, to be rather
possessed with a Fit of Knight Errantry, and to have sallied out from
Philadelphia to the other Province, with a full Resolution to encounter every
Thing that was Law, and to level all to the Ground that stood in his Way. --
Let the Reader then be Judge upon the whole, whether he comes within the
Description of that mischievous Animal, I mentioned toward the Beginning of
these Sheets.

After all, I flatter myself, it will not be imagined, that I was stimulated to
these hasty Animadversions by a Principle of Envy to Mr. Hamilton, or any
Disrespect to those who were pleased to patronize his Performance, since they
are utter Strangers to me, and probably will ever remain so. On the contrary,
they may believe me, when I declare, that if the One had really merited, what
the Others were of Opinion he did, I should with much more Pleasure have
signified my Approbation of the Conduct of both, than I now take in showing my
Dislike. It Is on this Score, Mr. Keimer, that I cannot conclude, without
publicly returning my Share of the Thanks, that are due from the Fraternity to
your late Correspondent, the polite Author of the Remarks, who has done Justice
to the Bar by five Pap^^^^, which in my humble Apprehension, are worthy (...)
any Gentleman at it, either here, or else whe^^.

I am, Yours, etc. INDUS BRITANNICUS.
Bridge-Town, July 29, 1737.

