A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED On Saturday, the 10th Day of August, 1769, AT THE
FRIENDS Meeting House, IN BEEKMAN's PRECINCT, Duchess County, In the Province
of NEW YORK.

BY THE CELEBRATED RACHEL WILSON, (One of the People called Quakers.)

To a numerous Audience of different Persuasions.

Taken in short Hand, from the Mouth of the Speaker, by one of the Audience.

NEW YORK: Printed. NEWPORT, Rhode Island: Re printed, and Sold, by SOLOMON
SOUTHWICK, in Marlborough Street, 1769.

ADVERTISEMENT to the READER.
THE Publisher of the following Discourse, being only an accidental Auditor,
when it was delivered, and entirely unknown to the Author, would not have taken
the Liberty to publish it without her Con^ent, if he had had either an
Opportunity of asking it, or a Doubt, in Case he had asked it, that it would
have been refused: But being fully persuaded that the same Spirit of Piety and
Benevolence, by which the Words were conceived and uttered, for the Benefit of
the Hearers, would have induced the Preacher, if she had been applied to, to
consent to the Publication, and thereby make the Benefit more extensive: he
therefore concludes, she will not be displeased with, but rather approve of,
the Publication of her Discourse; especially as, if the Publisher may judge of
others by himself, it will have the same good Effect upon the Readers, that she
intended it should have upon the Hearers, when she delivered it.

The Publisher may, by some, be though blamable for thus exposing an extempore
Discourse, delivered without Notes, or any Regard to grammatical Niceties of
Expression; but I doubt not, the Reader will be kind enough to excuse any
little Improprieties he may discover of this Sort, though I confess, if there are
any that need an Apology, they have escaped my Notice.

The Language is indeed plain, and the Words, such as are in common Use,
intelligible to the meanest Capacity; but in my Opinion, the most common Words,
that clearly express our Meaning, are the best, and it was their being so, that
made them the most common. The Sentiments in the following Discourse, are just
and important; the Language expresses those Sentiments, with Clearness,
Strength, and Solemnity; and as they seem to flow with Sincerity and Warmth
from the Heart, will be likely to reach the Heart; for she practically seems to
have improved the following Lines of Advice to a Preacher, -- It Is not enough
that what you say is true,
To make us feel it, you must feel it too;
Show your self warmed, and that will Warmth impart,
To every Hearer's sympathizing Heart. --


A DISCOURSE On the Duties and Importance of Religion, the unspeakable
Advantages arising from (...) and the great Danger of Delay: Addressed to
Children and Servants, People in General, and Preachers of the Gospel.
ISAIAH, XE Chap. 6 and 8 Verses. The Voice said cry: And he said what shall I
cry? All Flesh is Grass, and all the Goodliness thereof as the Flower of the
Field. The Grass withers, the Flower fades: But the Word of our God shall
stand for ever.
THE soul that has its thoughts fixed upon God, -- firmly relying upon God for
help, upon its Maker for protection and countenance, through all the changes of
this mortal life, is certainly happy beyond any finite comprehension. The
divine image, when grafted in the soul, utterly excludes all vain and
ostentatious thoughts of our own sufficiency; a confidence in which would be
inconsistent with the character of a Christian, as well as repugnant to the
express command of God, given to the prophet, to debase the creature, and exalt
the Creator.

My mind has been not a little affected, while sitting in this meeting. -- How
unfit the very best of us are, to render our Maker meet and acceptable service,
appears from that express command given to the prophet Isaiah, where the Lord
says, cry; the prophet answers, what shall I cry. Cry that all flesh is grass,
and all the goodliness there of as the flower of the field. The grass withers
and the flower ^a^^^^h: But the word of the Lord endures for ever. That all
flesh is grass and the goodliness thereof, is an awful truth: How short is the
interval between the cradle and the tomb! If so, as most certainly it is, ought
we not, my friends, to try diligently, -- to try the sincerity of our faith,
while here below; and live in a holy and reverential fear of that God, who,
when he fees fit, can make the stoutest heart tremble? The fear of the Lord is
the beginning of Wisdom. The soul that truly relies upon God for help, let me
say it, and that from a blessed experience, it will find a present help in time
of trouble. I know it, and therefore I can speak it. That love which passes
all understanding, and was so manifestly displayed in the redemption of
mankind, has lost none of its efficacy; God is the same, yesterday, to day, and
for ever; and if we sincerely look unto him for aid, renouncing all sufficiency
of our own, and set our faces Sion ward (for there is no enjoyment here -- to
expect any thing else but disappointment, is to deceive ourselves. To think of
real happiness, in a state of finite existence, is mere delusion,) I say, if we
earnestly look up unto him, who is able and willing to save to the uttermost;
we shall have that comfortable assurance, that one day or other, sooner or
later, we shall be uninterruptedly happy: Sooner or later, my dear friends, we
must all die: Death, when he comes, will make no distinction, he will show no
d^^^^^ence, but where his errand is, there will he execute it. H^^^ have we
seen an affectionate husband removed (...) an affectionate wife, an
affectionate wife (...) husband! Methinks here (...) may be ready to say, ah!
(...) and how soon God only knows; yet I am not without hope, that my
melancholy would, in some measure, be alleviated by the dutifulness of my
children. I would it were so; and I am concerned to speak to you, youths, --
that you would hear the commandment of the Lord, and render all due obedience
to your parents, -- that your days may be long in the land, which the Lord your
God has given you; let your readiness to obey, and your eagerness to execute
their reasonable commands, be as a staff to their age, and as balm to their
declining nature. Methinks the language of some parents has affected me very
much; to hear them lament how disobedient and refractory their children are.
That since the time they had first the reins in their own Hands, and removed
from under their governance, they have despised their counsels, and would none
of their reproof; and that if their commands were enforced, till their children
were constrained to an absolute compliance therewith; with what reluctance they
obeyed, and how tardy they were in performing so reasonable a service.

O! That youth would seriously consider, and render to their parents, the
tribute of obedience; for this is well pleasing to the Lord: It will be for
their present, as well as future welfare. The wise man says, My son hear the
instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother, for they
shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy neck. The
(...) of obedience is better than all burnt-off (...). The Lord says of the
house (...) Because ye have obeyed the commandment of Jonadab, your father, and
kept all his precepts, and done according unto all that he has commanded you:
Therefore, thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Jonadab, the son of
Rechab, shall not want a man to stand before me for ever.

This promise was in consequence of their obedience; and will not this same
blessing descend upon the obedient, even in this our day? My dear friends, God
is the same, yesterday, to day, and for ever* And oh! that his grace may be
influential on all of us, to will and to do of his good pleasure; on the other
hand, where a child is stubborn and refractory to its Parents; such
disobedience not only brings down with it the judgments of the Lord, but never
can admit peace of mind in this Life; much less can it afford you any
reasonable hopes of happiness hereafter; for, there is no peace says my God to
the wicked. He that honors me, I will honor; and he that despises me,
shall be lightly esteemed: Nay, such is the Almighty's just abhorrence of
disobedient children, that as a punishment to such, we real, The eye that
mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the
valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it; whereas a life
spent in a way conformable to the will and pleasure of the Almighty, will
insure to us peace here, and obtain the plaudit of well done, when time shall
be no more. How earnestly do I wish, that every youth, not only those who are
more immediately under the tuition of their pare^^^ but those who are arrived
to mature years, would consider this. My dear friends, to live in rebellion; is
living in open defiance to God and his laws. There is no real, solid
contentment to be had, but by living a life agreeable to the will of our
heavenly father; who has promised, that those who honor him, he will honor,
and those that despise him, shall be lightly esteemed; and whoever thou art,
who art any ways stubborn, obstinate and perverse to thy parents, let me tell
thee, -- Thou can never experience any real happiness, but from an entire
subjection to the will of God. Children obey your parents in the Lord, faith
the apostle, 'for this is well pleasing to God.' O! how many youths are there,
(I make no doubt, though I hope none within the audience of my voice,) who when
their parents have rebuked them for their good, though with expressions of the
utmost tenderness, have slighted or despised the reproof? How unseasonable have
they reckoned the admonition! I don't like to come till my present amusements
are over, think they, whatever be the consequence, I Will not quit my diversions
till I see sit; my companions like it best, they will perhaps deride me, if I
leave ^^em, therefore I am determined to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, come what will. If such is the case, as we have too much reason to fear
it frequently is; the fault then does not lie in your tutors, but in
yourselves. Though I have known many to blame others, when indeed the fault was
really in themselves. O consider the shortness of life, and the certainty of
death. All flesh is grass, and all the goodness thereof is as the flower of the
field, the grass withers, and the flower fades, but the goodness of God
endures forever. One day or other, we must all appear before the awful judge
of quick and dead, to answer for the deeds done in the body, whether they be
good or whether they be evil; and O! that we may learn, every one of us, so to
number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom; then let us turn
inward, and narrowly examine our ways, scrutinize thoroughly into our own
hearts, and see if every thing is right within; let us deny ourselves every
gratification that would, otherwise, divert our thoughts from that which is our
highest good. -- It is much to be wished, that all who really love their
children, would endeavor, by all the means in their power, to cultivate their
morals, and secure for them their immortal interests; to bring them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord, (like one that I heard of, who, on his
deathbed, very affectionately exhorted his children to make his God their God)
and then you will have great reason to expect in them an useful and unblamable
conduct, through the whole course of their lives; thus by endeavoring to
conduct their minds into an early knowledge of Christ, what a reciprocal
advantage will it be from the one to the other? Every thing would go on with
that good harmony and understanding that it would visibly carry it is own reward
along with it; there ^^^uld be no more eye-servants, as men-pleasers, but all
in singleness of heart, as unto Christ, serving God, from the heart, every one
cheerfully and willingly performing his duty, in the station whereunto it had
pleased God to call them, and servants would become really valuable to their
masters and mistresses. If God was in truth made the ultimate end of all our
aims, the first and the last of each day's thoughts, what manner of persons
should we then be, in all holy conversation and godliness? None would be
chargeable with purloining, or breach of trust in affairs committed to their
management, but every thing would be done in such a manner, as consists with
knowing that one day we must give an account.

Many I know are apt to complain, and say, the fault lies sometimes in their
masters and mistresses; I grant it, but this is not a case so general as the
contrary; I should rather suppose, good servants would make good masters. I
would not be misunderstood, as laying the stress wholly upon children and
servants; but I would be understood thus, that while all act agreeably to their
respective characters, and consistently with their duty, every thing they take
in hand will undoubtedly prosper; they will have joy in this life, and a
comfortable assurance of a better one to come; for the God of heaven delights
in such, they will die in his favor, and have the plaudit of Well done thou
good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a little, thou shall be
made ruler over much. And now, my friends. I would speak to you all in an
unlimited sense. Let us get above the delusive amusements of this world. Let us
get as well through this (...) as we can, that we may arrive at those
^^joyments in store for us, which will yield a full and complete satisfaction.
What can we think of the pleasures of this world, but that they are below the
care of us who are born to so great expectation? All flesh is grass, and the
goodliness thereof as the flower of the field. Thus must we think of innocent
delights; they are frail, transitory, and uncertain: We are immortal. -- The
pleasures of this life, should not divert our attention from the one thing
needful; these are unworthy objects of our desires; fit to be used, but too
mean to be courted; proper for our diversion, but never good enough to become
our business.

Let us, my brethren, earnestly set about the great work of our salvation while
it is day. O! listen to that small still voice that whispers peace to the
conscience! Don't let us refuse to obey the Lord any longer, or great will be
our condemnation: To live disrespectful and unmindful of an earthly parent, is
certainly a temper of mind very different from that of a christian; and how
much greater want of gratitude does it argue, to live unmindful of that being,
by whom we live and move, and have every blessing we enjoy? Shall I forget the
God of my salvation? Shall I render him no expressions of thankfulness? Yes,
and my life shall ^^eak his praise in the language of devout obedience. My dear
friends, it is very improbable I shall ever have an opportunity of seeing you,
or any of you, again: Cleave unto the Lord, and serve him with a perfect heart
and willing mind, lest the Lord of hosts should swear in his wrath, that such
abusers of his long-sufferings shall never enter into his rest. -- Evil habits
are soon apt to get rooted and ingrain'd in the disposition; by that means we
contract as it were a familiarity with sin, and with Solomon's fools, learn to
make a mock of it, till by degrees our consciences are hardened, and not to be
touched by any soft impression: My fear is, that many of you, by a long course
of wickedness, have so accustomed yourselves to that which is sinful, that evil
habits have grown insensibly upon you: Evil habits steal imperceptibly upon us;
to the truth of this, experience daily witnesses. With how much pain and
uneasiness do men bring themselves to do the things, which in a little time,
they glory and take pride (...), or at least grow easy and contented under; and
so become like those of whom it is said, they have drunken up iniquity, as the
ox drinks up water.

My friends, the moment you give yourselves up to sin, you give yourselves out
of your own power; you lay a restraint upon reason, and set the passions free:
Upon the whole, there is great reason to fear, that sin, if once we indulge it,
should get the better of and destroy our resolution of repentance; and, Oh my
friends! I wish you would reason calmly upon these things. Enter into this
debate with your own hearts, and consider what danger you are in; a few moments
cannot be too much to spend in so weighty an affair; and whenever you retire to
these cool thoughts, may the father of mercies influence those moments of your
life, upon which all eternity depends: Most people are apt to say, "I have now
such and such business to do, and will not bestow a serious thought upon
religious matters until the morrow;" -- when, alas! we know not whether we
shall ever (...) the light of another day. -- O! that all who love their own
souls, would seek the Lord, while happily he may be found; before that day
comes, when the heavens being as brass, and the earth as iron, shall be wrapped
up like a scroll: We have had repeated warnings, and that again and again, to
repentance, to depart from sin, and Satan that grand and potent adversary of
mankind. Let us ret^^n unto our divine Lord, in whom is no variableness nor
shadow of turning; he is an undivided fountain, thither let us repair: He
gives unto all men liberally, and upbraideth not; many and manifold are the
blessings that God has in store for them that fear him. He who has fixed in his
mind a just notion of God, will find his way to peace, be the darkness about
him ever so thick. It is a great misfortune for a person to know much of
religion, and little of God; such a person's religion must either be his plague
or his contempt; it must appear to him either ridiculous or terrible; and let
him take it which way he will, he will find a terror in it at last. It is in
vain therefore to seek for satisfaction till we know God; till we can witness
to our hearts, that we know him in whom we have trusted: This will make our
religion become an holy and reverential fear, unmixed with terror and
confusion; it will make our knowledge in religious matters become a wisdom unto
salvation, and preserve to us that true freedom of mind, to which, as well the
scoffers of the age, as the superstitious, are mere strangers.

And further, friends! don't let us entertain wrong notions of God; that is,
don't let us consider him in his attribute of justice only, nor his darling
one, that of mercy; but let us consider him as a God, who himself has said, I
will visit the iniquities of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and
fourth generation of them that hate me, and will show mercy unto thousands of
them that love me and keep my commandments. There are too many, now a days, who
forget the plain parts of scripture, (of which there are enough for every man
to profit withal) and from a want of understanding the more obscure ones, are
too apt to think irreverently of the Deity, and so grow entirely negligent with
respect to the great work of their salvation. -- But, my friends, the word of
God is plain to every man who has the light of reason, that without holiness,
no man shall see the Lord; this is the foundation of all religion. Surely no
one need be at a stand how to act with respect to God, his neighbor and
himself. God has promised his assistance to all who endeavor to serve him; and
surely there can be no difficulty in understanding this. When we read, that all
who in any manner injure their neighbors and fellow creatures, shall perish
everlastingly; we perceive that the crimes and the punishments are so
inseparably connected, that, being conscious of the crimes, we see no way to
escape the punishment.

But, when on the other hand, we consider, that unto whomsoever much is given,
of him shall much be required; we are too apt to infer from thence, that unto
whomsoever little is given, of him shall little be required; and so conclude,
that all our imperfections, of what kind soever, are well secured; and so we
think, whoever errs, be it for want of understanding, or the outward means of
knowledge, or through passion and prejudices, that such want the light, and are
to be considered as those to whom little is given. I say, my friends, this is
one way the lukewarm have to lull their consciences to sleep, as it were: But
still conscience returns, and proves that they have had the light, in many
instances in which they have been great offenders. -- Surely, the state of such
people plainly answers to our Lord's likening the kingdom of Heaven to a man's
traveling into a far country, who called his own servants, and delivered unto
them his goods: And to one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another
one, to every man according to his particular ability, and straightway took his
journey. Then he that had received the five talents, went and traded with the
same, and by a prudent management made them other five talents. And he that had
received two, gained also other two. But he that received one, went and hid his
Lord's talent. And when their Lord came to reckon with them, he that had
received five talents, came and said, Lord thou deliveredst unto me five
talents; behold I have gained beside them five talents more. His Lord said,
well done thou good and faithful servant; thou have been faithful over a few
things, I will make thee ruler over many things: Enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord. He that had received two talents, gained beside them other two: He
likewise had the answer of, Well done thou good and faithful servant, thou have
been faithful over a little, I will make thee ruler over much. But the other
came, we are told, saying, Lord, behold here is thy pound, which I have kept
laid up in a napkin: For I feared thee, because thou art an austere man: Thou
take up that thou laidst not down, and reapest that thou did not sow. But
his Lord's reply was, Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked
servant; thou knew that I was an austere man, taking up that I laid not
down, and reaping that I did not sow; wherefore then gave not thou my money
into the bank, that at my coming I might have required mine own with usury.
Here then we see is no excuse; -- it is in vain to plead ignorance, for there
is given unto every man, to profit withal. No one shall be condemned by a law
he knew nothing of; every one shall stand or fall by the light that was given
him; it being true of every action, what the apostle has affirmed of
almsgiving, It shall be accepted according to that a man has, and not
according to that he has not. Upon the whole, my friends, it appears from
scripture, that every man has the light of reason to direct him, knowing thus
much, That without holiness no man shall see the Lord. -- And since morality is
founded upon that reason which is a common gift to mankind, every man must
answer for the use of his reason: And therefore where reason shows him the
difference of good and evil, if he chooses the evil, he is without excuse. And
since there is given unto every one to profit withal, let us instantly set
about improving the talents that God has given us; nay, even though it were but
one, for it shall be accepted according to that a man has, and not according
to that he has not: Neither let us, my friends, look with envy on those above
us, who may be endowed with greater gifts than we; or contemptuously on those
below us; but let each act up to the light of reason, which we have given us,
and we shall do well. It Is an old received maxim, in my country, that evil
thinkers are generally evil doers: And the case is so general indeed, every
where, that methinks there needs not much to be said to prove it. I could wish,
that all the difference amongst us, was only, which should live a life most
consistent with the character of a christian.

I am concerned to admonish each and every of you, to seek the Lord while he
may be found. Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him,
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon him. But then, my friends, we are
not to plead any merit in ourselves, nor stand up, and, with a self-sufficient
temper, think to vindicate or justify ourselves for our own righteousness,
which is as filthy rags, and can stand us in no stead before the eyes of a
perfectly pure and holy God. Oh friends! the day is coming, when all that is on
the earth shall be as stubble: Then the scoffers, who mock at sin, and make
their game of the serious and devout; -- those, who, instead of giving all
diligence to make their calling and election sure, have trampled upon the
frequent admonitions given them to a better life; will wish they had employed
their time to a better purpose. -- But it will be too late! -- For when once
the master of the house has shut to the door, in vain we shall stand without
and knock. Alas! are we not stupid? Are we not senseless to the last degree, to
live thus in open rebellion against the best of beings, when, for ought we
know, the next minute we may be called, we may be summoned to appear, all
guilty as we are, before an injured God, in whose presence no impure thing can
enter? Every man's work shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare it.
There is no other way to secure to ourselves the favor of the Lord, but by a
timely repentance; and repentance is the gift of God: Ask it of God, saying, we
are unworthy servants, and he will give it you; he will send none away that
thus come unto him, nay, he delights in such; don't let thy sins, though heinous
as they may be, retard thee one moment from supplicating for mercy. Christ
says, I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: He came 'to
seek and to save that which was lost;' for as he says himself. what man of
you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, does not leave the ninety
and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he find it?
And when he has found it, he lays it on his shoulders, rejoicing. And when
he comes home, he calls together his friends and neighbors, saying unto
them, rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost. I say unto
you, that likewise joy shall be in Heaven, over one sinner that repents, more
than over ninety and nine just persons who need no repentance. So we see here
is a promise of life everlasting, provided we repent: We have only to repent,
and live. Oh* then, let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon
him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon him.

The very end and design of Christ's coming, was to abolish sin, and bring in a
new and complete satisfaction, a new and sufficient righteousness; which he
did, by offering himself a ransom for sinners, and suffering in their stead,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

O! that there was, from this moment, a death unto sin, and a new life unto
righteousness. -- Finally, my brethren, since Christ Jesus has stood in the
place of sinners, has become sin for us, who knew no sin, that we may be made
the righteousness of God in him* Then let there be, from this moment, a death
unto sin, and a new life unto righteousness. Let us listen to the apostle's
admonition. Walk not in chambering and wantonness, in strife and envying, but
put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts thereof. God has given us appetites, and made it part of our
trial to govern and restrain them within their proper channels; and to indulge
these appetites beyond measure, would be the highest ingratitude to our
heavenly benefactor. Let us look to the glory and immortality which is placed
before us, the everlasting mansions, prepared for those who serve their master
in holiness and newness of life, and keep themselves unspotted from the world:
Then, let us view the vast variety of temptations which are so apt to fix us
down to this world, and interrupt all our hopes of a better.

From these considerations, what more powerful arguments can there be imagined,
to prevail with us, to abstain from fleshly lusts, than this; that we are
strangers and pilgrims on earth, and look for another, even an Heavenly
habitation, whose builder and maker is God. Let us then instantly bid adieu to
all unlawful, worldly delights, which are so apt to enslave and captivate the
heart of man. Let us instantly set about the great work of our salvation, while
it is day, that is, while we have the blessed opportunity. Let us say, with the
apostle, The world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. Let us instantly
beg of God, to lead us into the way, the truth and the light. Oh! that his holy
spirit may guide you into all truth. The scripture says, It is God that
works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure. The apostle
positively renounceth all sufficiency of his own, he will have no merit imputed
to the creature; 'not I,' says he, but Christ that dwells in me. All human
accomplishments are no more than dross or dung, when compared to the excellency
of the knowledge of Jesus Christ.

If there was really a thorough change in our natures; if there was really a
longing, an earnest longing after God, what universal charity would then abound
among all ranks of people? Ministers would have that care and sincere love for
their flock, as knowing that one day they must give an account. In short, my
friends, were we to consider the great and almighty Being, as he really is, the
Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last! I say, my friends, were we to make
this God our God, the First and the Last of each day's thought; what manner of
persons should we then be in all holy conversation and godliness? Our lives
would be such as would bespeak us a peculiar, chosen people, zealous of good
works.

The day is hastening, when all that we see now, will be no more! Then let us
secure to ourselves an everlasting inheritance; and inheritance among the first
born, whose names are written in Heaven.

The day is hastening, when that awful doom will take place, -- He that is
holy, let him be holy still, and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still!
This is an alarming thought, and well deserves our attention.

Methinks I am concerned to speak it again and again in your ears, that you all
earnestly attend to the one thing needful; that you press forward toward the
mark of the 'prize of our high-calling in Christ Jesus.' It will not do to be
lukewarm, to be listless and careless in an affair of the utmost consequence,
and especially since we know, It is appointed unto all men once to die.

Methinks it argues a depravity of understanding, as well as the greatest
impiety, to make no provision for another world, whither we are all hastening.

Here is no abiding place. -- Give all diligence, I beseech you, to secure to
yourselves an interest in Christ, before that day come, when proclamation will
be made, That time shall be no more. All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness
thereof as the flower of the field. The grass withers, and the flower fades,
but the word of the Lord endures forever. This was the prophet's declaration.
Every thing relating to human life will cease, the world itself will come to an
end.

Be wise then betimes, lest that day come upon you when you think not, and in
an hour when ye are not aware: O! 'buy the truth, and sell it not;' like the
merchant our Lord speaks of, who when he had found the costly pearl, the pearl
of great price, he immediately sold all that he had, (he denied himself of
every gratification that might otherwise divert his thoughts from that which
was his chiefest good) that he might purchase that field where the invaluable
pearl lay.

Most men live as though they were never to die.

There is either a total neglect, or a general carelessness, with regard to
spiritual things, in every thing they do; but this is certainly bad, -- it is
shocking to the last degree, to live regardless of futurity; to live thus
unmindful of that being who has set a day in the which he will judge the world!
A tribunal, at which every created being must appear, there to answer for the
deeds done in the body! And, my friends, I will ask you this plain question: Is
not this a matter that well deserves our attention? Is it not a consideration
sufficient, of itself, to draw off our attention from the vain and trifling
amusements of this transitory life, and engage ourselves in the pursuit of the
one thing needful, the pearl of great price, which will visibly carry it is own
reward along with it? The grave is the land where all things (of temporal
concernment) are forgotten: Let us give all diligence to have our lamps
trimmed, that if sickness should attack us, and death stare us in the face, we
may say, with resignation, cheerfulness and triumph, O death! where is thy
sting? O grave! where is thy victory? All flesh is grass, and all the
goodliness thereof as the flower of the field, the grass withers, and the
flower fades, but the word of the Lord endures forever.

Eternity is at hand, behold he that comes, will come; and will not tarry. Let
our lives be such, that when our Lord comes to reckon with us, we may be able
to render him a just and true account. And indeed by conducting ourselves in
the path of religion and virtue, and where only true joy is to be found, our
lives will be influential of the lives of others: Example is better than
precept, it would speak to them thus, 'you follow us, as we follow God.'

O that ministers might have a watchful care over their flocks! O, that their
lives may be a transcript and pattern of what they teach. Finally, my brethren,
let me advise you to live as becomes christians: There would be that harmony,
that content and satisfaction, that the world's applause cannot give, nor it is
censure take away.

God has promised his peace to all who seek it: It is a peace which far
surpasses all human understanding. My peace I leave with you, my peace I give
unto you; not as the world gives, give I unto you

But then, my dear friends, we can never expect this peace, if we live in a
course of wickedness; for, there is no peace, says my God, to the wicked: He
that honors me, I will honor, and he that despises me shall be lightly
esteemed. Neither must we content ourselves with thinking that by thus
departing from the most enormous crimes, God will be thus satisfied. No, this
is a mistaken notion: God is not to be mocked; he says, My son, give me thine
heart.

There must be an utter destruction of Amaleck, or God is not satisfied, it is
not doing our duty in part, that will avail us; we must give up every thing,
every darling sin, that most easily besets us. That for the fire to the fire,
and that for the hammer to the hammer. God is of purer eyes than to behold
iniquity. He will not dwell in an unclean temple. Let us narrowly inspect into
our ways, and scrutinize into our own hearts, and see if every thing be right
within; and if so, it will be readily manifested by our lives and
conversations. Oh! my friend, whoever thou art, that is within the audience of
my voice, let me entreat thee to make God thy friend; for, after death, comes
the judgment, -- on each of us! I would also, that ministers give all diligence
in their callings, for if we fall, we fall not alone. Cry aloud, and spare not;
tell my people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins. -- Our
business (as preachers) is to preach repentance to all, without respect to
persons, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear. If we act
counter to this, if we, for fear of it is hurting our temporal concerns, neglect
to preach with that plainness that ought ever to distinguish a gospel minister,
-- Let me tell thee, whoever thou art, that neglectest to strike at the root of
sin, and do thy duty but in part, thou will receive Readiness condemnation; who,
notwithstanding his express order from God, was to make an utter destruction of
Amaleck, yet spared what was best, agreeable to his own fond inclination: we
read, he saved the best of the sheep and oxen, and Agag.

But, however merciful this may appear, in Readiness sparing Agag, his foolish
pity and compassion to the captive king, was ill timed, when God's will was
otherwise. I don't want to go through with every proof that could be brought in
support of what I have been endeavoring to enforce: Let us only act agreeable
to the will and pleasure of our maker, and what he orders to be done, to do it
with cheerfulness and alacrity as unto a faithful Creator. I can say truly,
that he who th^s approves himself, is worthy of all honor. Finally, my
brethren, let us instantly sacrifice every darling sin that may seem to stand
in our way to glory. Let us give up every thing; -- 'that for the fire to the
fire, and that for the hammer to the hammer.' Don't be drudges to the Devil any
longer. Hard taskmasters, sin and Satan are: But our God, whom we serve, is no
austere nor hard master. His unbounded mercy has in this our day lost none of
it is efficacy; he requires nothing without giving suitable abilities.

O! that we may all gather the manna, the blessed manna, the which he who
eats shall even live thereby. Let me utter it in your ears again and again,
All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof, as the flower of the field;
the gr^^^ withers, and the flower fades, but the word of the Lord endures
for ever. Let me exhort every one of you, with a heart full of compassion, that
you seek the Lord while he may be found; and before that time come, when these
blessed opportunities, which we now have, for repentance and reconciliation,
will be offered no more.

FINIS.

