AN ACCOUNT OF THE OBSERVATION OF VENUS Upon the SUN, The Third Day of June,
1769, AT PROVIDENCE, in New England. With some Account of the Use of those
Observations.

By BENJAMIN WEST.

The Course of Nature is the Art of GOD.

PROVIDENCE: Printed by JOHN CARTER, at Shakespeare's Head.

M,DCC,LXIX.

To the HONORABLE Stephen Hopkins, ESQUIRE, Member of the PHILOSOPHICAL
SOCIETY in the City of Philadelphia, and CHANCELLOR of the COLLEGE in the
Colony of Rhode Island.
SIR,
AS your Honor was pleased to accompany, and assist us the whole time that we
were preparing for the observation of the TRANSIT OF VENUS; and considering
with what alacrity our work went on, when encouraged by your actuating genius;
and that your Honor must be very sensible of the great pains which were taken,
in order that our work might be rendered as accurate as possible; I think
myself bound in duty to publish the following account of our observation under
your patronage. -- Much might be said with respect to your Honor's superior
abilities in mathematics and natural philosophy; but, without flattery, these
are the least of your acquirements, when compared with your profound skill in
civil police, and the wise government of a people.

Your Honor very well knows, that these observations of the Transit of Venus
give the solution to a problem, that is not only curious in itself, but at once
opens to our view, and gives us a deeper insight into the amazing works of God.
-- From these observations we expect to discover the distance of the Earth, the
Planets and Comets, from the Sun; and consequently their magnitudes and
quantity of matter will be known, as also their proportion of light and heat.
-- These things being once known, Astronomers in future will be able, from the
like observations, to discover whether the Earth and Planets approach the Sun,
or recede from him; and whether the Sun be diminished by its constant expense
of light and heat. From a knowledge of all these things, methinks we shall have
such a demonstration of the existence of a GOD, who made and governs all
things, that even the reformed atheist must tremble when he reflects on his
past conduct. -- I am

Your Honor's most obedient, And most humble Servant, BENJAMIN WEST.

VENUS upon the SUN.
THE TRANSIT OF VENUS OVER THE SUN'S DISK, the third day of June, 1769, did
much engage the attention of the Astronomers in all the polite nations of
Europe, not barely because it was a rare phenomenon, but because the noblest
problem in all the celestial science is thereby expected to be resolved; to
wit, that of discovering the Sun's horizontal parallax.

Kepler "Kepler was a native of Wittemburgh, in Germany; be flourished in the
beginning of the sixteenth century; was Mathematician and Astronomer to three
Emperors; was the first who discovered the elliptic orbits of the planets, and
that the squares of their periodic times are as the cubes of their mean
distances from the Sun, and explained the general phenomenon of solar eclipses."
, when he had constructed his Rudolphine tables (upon the observations of Tycho
Brahe, a Danish nobleman) soon saw that the planets Venus and Mercury, at their
inferior conjunctions with the Sun, would sometimes appear to pass retrograde
over his disk. From his tables he predicted two transits of Venus to happen,
one in the year 1631, the other in 1761, in a book he published in 1629,
entitled, "Advice to Astronomers." Kepler did not live to the year 1631. In
1639 a transit of Venus happened, which, according to those tables, was to be
invisible, and that which he predicted to happen in 1631 was looked for at
Paris, by Gassendus, but none was to be seen. All this was owing to the
imperfection of Kepler's numbers.

When our English Astronomer, Mr. Jeremiah Horrox, came upon the stage, though
a youth of but 20 years of age, yet his ingenuity and strength of reason were
such, that he was able from his own observations to point out the errors in
Kepler's tables, and immediately set himself to work in making such other
observations as enabled him greatly to correct Kepler's numbers. By these
numbers, thus corrected, he predicted the before mentioned transit, which
happened the 24th of November, 1639. -- He expected the conjunction would be at
3 h. 57 m. P. M. with 10 south latitude. He waited with eager desire for the
moment to see his prediction verified, and so extraordinary a phenomenon as
that of Venus on the Sun. The day arrived, and agreeable to his expectation he
saw Venus wholly entered upon the Sun at 3 h. 15 m. P. M. -- The place of his
observation was at Hool, about 15 miles to the northward of Liverpool. Mr.
William Crabtree, of Manchester (an Astronomer, and particular friend to Mr.
Horrox) was also looking for the transit, and first saw it at 3 h. 35 m; the
Sun being in a cloud was the reason that he did not see it sooner. By a
comparison of their observations they were found to coincide very well. This
ingenious friend to Astronomy (Mr. Horrox) died the third of January, 1640-1,
at the age of 25 years.

He has taken his towering flight aloft,
To mingle with his Stars. --
It seems the grand discovery which was to be made from these transits, was not
intended for Mr. Horrox, but was reserved for some future genius. Accordingly
we find a paper in the Philosophical Transactions, No. 348, wrote by the
learned Doctor Halley "Dr. Halley was born the 29th of November, 1656, in the
parish of St. Leonard, Shoredich. He had an uncommon skill in plane and
spherical trigonometry, and all the various parts of mathematics, before he was
17 years of age. -- At 19 he published a geometrical method of finding the
aphelia and eccentricity of the planets; the want of which before was an
opprobrium to Kepler's hyporhesis. -- He discovered the time in which the Sun
revolves on its axis by its maculae. He was author of the geometrical method of
constructing solar eclipses, by which the parallactic method was superseded. In
the year 1676 (at 20 years of age) he was sent at the cost of the government to
St. Helena, in the South Seas, with letters of recommendation from King Charles
the 2d to the East India Company, to make observations of the fixed stars about
the South Pole. -- In 1678 he was made Master of Arts, and chosen a Fellow of
the Royal Society. -- In 1684. from observation, he thought the forces of the
planets toward the sun decreased as the squares of their distances inversely;
but not being able to demonstrate it, he applied to Mr. NEWTON, at Cambridge,
who gave him ample demonstration of the truth of what he suspected. About this
time he showed a method of finding the elevation of mountains, steeples, etc.
by the barometer. -- In 1686 he explained why the water in the Mediterranean
Sea never rises any higher, although the current is continually setting in at
the Straights mouth, besides a large supply of water from nine large rivers and
many small ones. The solution of this phenomenon gave the society so much
satisfaction, that he received their orders to prosecute the enquires. -- In
1699 he set out on a voyage in a ship, of which he had the command, in order to
make observations of the variation of the compass; and after traversing the
Atlantic Ocean into both hemispheres, as far as the weather would admit him to
go, and having touched at many coasts and islands, he arrived at England in
September, 1700; and from his observations he published a general chart,
showing at one view the variation of the compass in all those seas where the
English navigators were acquainted. -- In 1703 he was appointed Savilian
Professor of Geometry at Oxford, in room of Dr. Wallis, deceased, and had the
degree of Doctor of Laws conferred upon him by that university. -- In 1713 he
was made Secretary to the Royal Society, in room of Sir Hans Sloan. -- In 1717
he wrote the paper in which he showed the method of investigating the Sun's
parallax by the Transit of Venus over the Sun's disk. -- Upon the death of Mr.
Flamstead, in 1719, Dr. Halley was appointed to succeed him by his Majesty King
George the first. -- Queen Caroline honored him with a visit at the Royal
Observatory, and being pleased with the polite reception she met with, and
considering he had formerly served the crown under commission of Captain of the
Navy, she obtained of his Majesty for him a grant of his half-pay for that
commission during his life. -- In the space of nine years (half of one plenian
period) he observed the right ascension of the Moon, as she passed the
meridian, 1500 times, which was a greater number of observations than were made
by Flamstead, Tycho Brahe, and Hevelius, together. When the Emperor, Peter the
Great, visited England, upon discoursing with Dr. Halley on Ship-Building, the
Arts and Science, etc. he was so well pleased with the Doctor, that he made him
one of his intimate friends during his stay in England. -- In Doctor died the
14th of January, 1741-2; and since his death, in 1752, were published his
astronomical tables, for computing the (...) of the Sun, Moon, Planets, and
Comets: They were supplied with precepts by Mr. Gael Morris."
, our late Royal Astronomer, upon this matter; wherein the Doctor shows, that
by observations made of Venus on the Sun, the distance of the Sun from the
earth may be found to the five hundredth part of the whole. I shall take the
liberty in this place to quote some of the Doctor's own words (as we find them
translated into English in the before mentioned transactions) upon this subject.

The Doctor, after a previous introduction, says, about 40 years ago, when I
was at the island of St. Helena, where I was employed in observing the fixed
stars which surround the South Pole, I had an opportunity of observing Mercury
passing over the Sun's disk, which I did with the greatest diligence. I
obtained most accurately, with an excellent tube of 24 feet, the moment in
which Mercury, entering the Sun's limb, was seen to touch it within; and, in
like manner, the moment in which, at going out, he touched the Sun's limb,
making an angle of inward contact. Whence I was sure of the interval of time,
in which the whole body of Mercury appeared at that time within the disk of the
Sun, and that without the error of one second of time. For the thread of the
solar light, intercepted between the obscure limb of the planet, and the bright
limb of the Sun, slender as it was, appeared to strike the eye, and in striking
the eye, the denticle made in the limb of the Sun by the entrance of Mercury
vanished, as that made by his going out began as it were in a moment. When this
was known, I was immediately assured, that the Sun's parallax might be truly
determined from this kind of observations, if only Mercury being nearer the
earth should have a greater parallax from the Sun. For this difference of
parallaxes is so very small, that it is always less than that of the Sun which
we enquire after. Wherefore Mercury, though often to be seen within the Sun,
will not be thought very proper for this business.

There remains therefore the Transit of Venus over the Sun's disk; her parallax
being almost four times as big as that of the Sun's, will make very sensible
differences between the spaces of time in which Venus will be seen to pass over
the Sun, in the different regions of our earth. Now from these differences, if
observed after a due manner, I say the parallax of the Sun may be determined
within a small part of a second. In such observations, the Doctor says,
nothing more is necessary than faithful observators, good telescopes, and
common clocks, regulated to the revolutions of the heavens, and that the times
be reckoned from the total ingress of Venus within the Sun's disk, to the
beginning of its egress from the same; that is, when first the opaque globe of
Venus begins to reach the lucid limb of the Sun; which moments, as I know by my
own experience, may be obtained to a second of time.

The Doctor then proceeds to mention the transit of 1761, and to make some
curious calculations thereon; represents it as a suitable opportunity for the
before mentioned observations; and being fully convinced of the certainty of
this method of discovering the parallax of the Sun, seriously recommended it to
the Astronomers that should be then living, with all the power and elocution of
an orator, not to slip so favorable an opportunity of promoting the science of
Astronomy; wishing them all possible success, and that the magnitudes of the
celestial orbs being then determined within more exact limits, may reward them
with perpetual fame and glory.

The Doctor's credit was too great in the astronomic world, not to be taken
proper notice of; and as this learned piece of his was wrote many years before
the transit of 1761, and the Astronomers since his day having had time to fully
weigh and consider the matter, found his reasoning too cogent to let pass,
without due notice, what he had so earnestly urged upon them.

In consequence of which we find, at the approach of the transit of 1761, the
Astronomers of almost every civilized nation in Europe, emulously engaged in
this affair, of so much importance to science, His late Majesty, King George
the second, and the French King, though in the midst of a vehement war, yet
(from a sense of the utility of those observations) found time to consider of
the matter, and each contributed largely toward carrying so noble a design
into execution; neither was the Empress of Russia inactive on this singular
occasion.

In England, it was observed at Greenwich by the Rev. Dr. Bliss, the then Royal
Astronomer; at Savile-House, in London, by the late Mr. Short, in presence of
their Royal Highnesses the Duke of York, Prince William, and Prince Henry.
Messieurs Ellicott and Dollond observed it at Hacney; and Mr. Canton at
Spital-Square, London. It was likewise observed at Leskeard, in Cornwall, by
the Rev. Mr. Richard Haydon. Abroad it was observed at Paris, in France, by Mr.
De la Land; and by Mr. Ferner, at Conflans. It was observed at Torneo, in
Lapland, almost under the arctic circle, by Mr. Hellant; and this was the
farthest north that observation was made. At Stockholm, the capital of Sweden,
it was observed by Mr. Wargentin; and at Harnosend, in Sweden, by Mr. Gister.
In Asia observation was made at Tobolsk, the capital of Siberia, by Mr. Chapp,
a French Astronomer, sent thither at the request of the Academy of Sciences at
Petersburgh, and under the protection of the Czarina. At Madrass, or Fort St.
George, in the East Indies, it was observed by the Rev. Mr. Hirst, under
direction of the East India Company of London. Observation was also made at
Calcutta, near the mouth of the Ganges, by Mr. William Magee; this was the
farthest east. It was observed at the Cape of Good Hope, by Mr. Mason; and
would have been observed at St. Helena (had not the intervention of clouds
prevented) by Astronomers sent to those places, at the expense of his Majesty
King George the second. It was observed nowhere farther south than at the Cape
of Good-Hope. In America, it was only observed at St. John's, in Newfoundland,
by JOHN WINTHROP, Esquire F. R. S. at the expense of the Massachusetts colony; and
this was the farthest west.

These, and many more observations, to the number of forty odd, being
collected, were submitted to Mr. Short, F. R. S. who duly examined them, and
with incredible assiduity and labor solved the difficult problem; and found
the Sun's parallax, on the day of the transit, to be 8, 55; the Sun being then
nearly at his greatest distance from the earth. The parallax being always in a
reciprocal proportion to the distance of the Sun, it follows from thence that
the parallax, when the Sun is at a mean distance, is 8, 68 The horizontal
parallax of the Sun being known, the distance of the Sun from the earth is
found by the following proportion.

As tang. of 8, 68 5,6241119 is to 1, 0 so is radius tang. 45 10,0000000 to
23763 semidiameters of the earth. 4,3758881

From the latest measurements, a mean semidiameter of the earth is found to be
3957 miles. Then 23763x3957=94030191 miles the distance of the Sun.


.

By this observation of Venus passing over the Sun, a certain principle in
Astronomy was settled, which Dr. Halley, from certain observations, suspected
did obtain in the planetary system, which is, that the nodes in the primary
planets have a slow motion in antecedentia, or contrary to the order of the
signs. From whence Astronomers were ascertained that Venus would again transit
the Sun's disk the third day of June, 1769. I say ascertained, because,
according to the old hypothesis of the immobility of the nodes, it was
doubtful; and by Dr. Halley's calculations Philo. Trans. page 436, Lowthrop's
Abridgment.
upon that hypothesis, the center of Venus, as she passed by the Sun, would
appear to be in contact with its north limb. The Doctor said, if at the transit
in 1761 the nodes should be found to go backwards, then it might be expected,
that at the transit in 1769, the body of Venus would appear wholly within the
orb of the Sun; and would afford a much better opportunity for investigating
the Sun's parallax. -- What difficulties in science are too great to be
surmounted, when pursued by men of interest and understanding!

And now that nothing might be wanting to render the observations of this
transit as perfect as possible, we hear that ample preparations were seasonably
made, and skilful Mathematicians dispersed into those distant regions of the
earth, to make observation, where the transit was attended with the most
favorable circumstances. So that whatever was wanting to render the
observations in 1761 complete, was now to be fully supplied. We are informed
that several observators were sent into the South Seas, by the Royal Society in
London, in order to get an observation where the whole duration of the transit
was shortest; and that the Empress of Russia sent several companies into those
parts of her empire, where the visible duration was of the greatest length. The
King of France did likewise send observers into foreign parts; but as yet we
know not to what particular places.

It remains now to give an account of the preparations that were made in
PROVIDENCE, for the observation of this transit. In doing of which I shall be
as particular as possible, that the reader may the better judge of the merit of
our work.

When it became more generally known that there would be a Transit of Venus in
1769, and the advantages which were like to accrue to Astronomy, and
consequently to Navigation and Chronology, from proper observations of it, Mr.
JOSEPH BROWN, Mr. BROWN is a gentleman of a solid, active genius, strongly
turned to the study of mechanics and natural philosophy, which has induced him
to construct and furnish himself with as curious and complete an apparatus for
electrical experiments, as any perhaps in America; and of which he well knows
the use. -- Reading Mr. Winthrop's account of the transit in 1761, was what
first occasioned him to send for a telescope, fitted in the manner Mr. Winthrop
there describes; afterward, taking notice of the application of the American
Philosophical Society to the Assembly of Pennsylvania, for an apparatus for
observing the Transit of Venus, he found the orders he had sent were
incomplete: He then advised with the author, as mentioned, and thereupon
ordered a micrometer to be added. -- Mr. Brown's expense, in this laudable
undertaking, was little less than One Hundred Pounds sterling, besides near a
month's time of himself and servants, in making the necessary previous
experiments and preparations.
, a very respectable merchant of Providence, being very desirous, if possible,
to obtain an observation of it, was pleased to advise with me, concerning an
apparatus suitable for such an observation, and to know if we should be able to
observe the transit with the necessary precision for answering the important
design?

As the proposal was new, and unexpected, my answer was not direct; as it
required some time to consider of it. At length I gave him my opinion
concerning an apparatus proper for such an occasion; and that I thought we
could observe the transit with that accuracy as would render it worthy of
notice, provided we could have such an apparatus as was described. My answer
gave him so much satisfaction in the matter, that he immediately sent his
orders to his correspondent in London, to procure the instruments; his orders
were accordingly executed with fidelity and dispatch; they arrived in
Providence about one month before the transit. -- Our apparatus was made by
Messieurs WATKINS and SMITH, London; it consisted of a three feet reflecting
telescope, with horizontal and vertical wires for taking differences of
altitudes and azimuths, adjusted with spirit-levels at right angles, and a
divided arch for taking altitudes; a curious helioscope, together with a
micrometer of a new and elegant construction, with rack motions, and fitted to
the telescope. -- Such a noble disposition in Mr. BROWN for promoting useful
knowledge, certainly merits the applause of the public; and, in justice to him,
I must acknowledge, our work could not have been done with equal accuracy, had
it not been for his skill and contrivance therein. -- Besides the before
mentioned instruments, we had a sextant belonging to the government, made in
Newport, by Mr. BENJAMIN KING, under the direction of JOSEPH HARRISON, Esquire now
Collector of his Majesty's Customs for the port of Boston; its limb was divided
to five miles, and by a vernier index to five seconds And here we must not
forget the Honorable ABRAHAM REDWOOD, Esquire of Newport, who, in order that
Newport and Providence might both be supplied with a sextant, for this singular
occasion, ordered one made at his own cost, for the use of the Rev. Dr. STYLES.
-- I am sensible Mr. Redwood, for so public spirited an action, will receive
the thanks of every wellwisher to science.
. -- We had two good clocks, one of which was made in Providence, by Mr. EDWARD
SPALDING.

We had nothing to learn respecting the apparatus, excepting our new
catadioptric micrometer, which, I have lately learned, is of DOLLOND'S
construction; not having any author by us, from which we could get the use of
that curious instrument, we were obliged to have recourse to experiments. --
When the micrometer was fixed upon the telescope, it was found by trial, that
objects could not be seen with the same focal distance as when it was off, but
were obliged to screw up the small speculum nearer to the eye; for which there
is an optical reason. -- From whence it was concluded, that objects should
always be observed in the most distinct point of view, the same with the
micrometer on as when it was off. The next thing to be done was to find the
apparent diameter of an object (or the angle subtended at the eye by two
objects) by this instrument. In order to this, we stretched a cord, as straight
as possible, one thousand feet in length; which was measured several times
over, in order to avoid mistake. At the end of the cord was set two circular
objects, made of white paper, in a line perpendicular to the cord, and exactly
ten feet apart; standing at the other end of the cord, and by opening the
micrometer, we could bring the two images into an exact coincidence, or could
make one of the images appear like two, and by bringing their limbs into
contact, the distance of their centers was shown on the scale, to the five
hundredth part of an inch. Now from the rules of trigonometry, the angular
distance of the two objects was 34 22, 58; from thence it was known, how many
inches and parts of an inch were answerable to that angle. These experiments
were repeated every fair day (for no other was suitable for these observations)
till we could many times going find the diameter of a body to a second of a
degree. -- From these observations we were enabled to make a table for the
micrometer, as far as the scale extended. -- These experiments were carried yet
farther, for, by looking at two bodies whose distance from each other was
known, we could tell their distance from the place of observation, to a
critical exactness; and this was proved by accurate mensuration. These were
certainly very diverting experiments to an inquisitive mind! -- The gentlemen
who assisted us through these experiments, and likewise in the rest of our
work, were the Honorable STEPHEN HOPKINS, Esquire Mr. MOSES BROWN, Dr. JABEZ
BOWEN, A. M. JOSEPH NASH, Esquire and Capt. JOHN BOROUGH.

The regulation of our clocks, being of the utmost consequence in this affair,
was what next commanded our attention. In this part of the work, we endeavored
to arrive at as great a degree of certainty as the nature of the case would
admit. -- Several workmen, who were equal to the undertaking, were employed in
laying a platform, of seasoned pine plank, as smooth and level as art could
make it: This was secured from rain, or other moisture, that it might not warp
when exposed to the Sun. We examined this platform three times a day (when the
weather would admit of it) with a very long level, made for that purpose, in
order to keep its position from altering. On the south side of the platform,
and exactly perpendicular to it, we erected a style ten feet high; this was
likewise examined three times a day. We next perforated a piece of board, into
which was fixed the glass of a scioptic ball, so that the center of the glass
was exactly in the center of the perforation; this board was so cut, and let in
at the top of the style, that it turned upon an axis, in such a manner, that
the center of the glass did not alter its position. The Sun's rays were
transmitted through the lens upon the platform, where they were formed into a
bright spot, and very distinctly defined. From the center of the lens was let
fall a perpendicular upon the platform; from that point, as a center, was drawn
a great number of concentric circles, for taking correspondent shades, in order
to trace a meridian line; and, as our wishes would have it, the weather proved
favorable for this work. When the line was drawn The magnetic needle, being
placed on this exact meridian line, was found to differ from it 6 westward. --
That our observations might be as useful as possible, notice was given
beforehand to the people (whose curiosity was excited by the preparations) that
on the day before the transit, when the Sun came on the meridian, a cannon
would be fired, which being done, most of the inhabitants marked meridian lines
in their windows, or on their floors.
, I found, from calculation, it reclined 3 in time, east of the true meridian;
this error arose from the increase of the Sun's declination, between the times
of forenoon and afternoon shades; this small equation of 3 was allowed for in
regulating the clocks.

As we were willing to have every corroborating circumstance to prove our work,
we made use of another method, which seems to be most approved of by all the
celebrated Astronomers in Europe and America; this was the method of
corresponding altitudes of the Sun, forenoon and afternoon. The sextant and
reflector were both employed in this business for several days preceding the
transit (and the day following) in order to ascertain the going of the clocks.
In the last method (as in that of corresponding shades) the equation of time,
answerable to the increase of declination, ought by no means to be neglected.
Through the whole process we conducted with the utmost caution, that no errors
might escape our notice. We found, upon the whole, a surprising agreement in
these two methods of regulating clocks; they were seldom found to differ a
single second. -- In short, as truth was the point we aimed at, nothing was
omitted by which it might be obtained.

Being in this readiness, the morning of the third of June was ushered in with
that serenity the business of the day required; all was calm, and not a cloud
to be seen. The gentlemen concerned in the business convened very early at the
place of observation, to see that every thing was in order; and at the sight of
such a morning, the gladness of their hearts was visibly expressed, by a
pleasant aspect upon their countenance.

At noon we examined the going of the clocks, as the Sun passed the meridian,
and found them very regular.

We began to look for the first contact of Venus with the Sun, at least 15
minutes before the time given by calculation, to get as early a sight of it as
possible. -- Venus was first perceived by making a dent upon the superior limb
of the Sun at 2h. 29m. 43sec. P. M. apparent time. But, as it is likely the
exterior contacts will be given different, by different observators, they can
be of but little consequence in this affair. -- The greatest attention was
given to the interior contact; this was at 2h. 46m. 35sec. apparent time At the
moment of interior contact, the Sun's altitude was taken, with the sextant, by
Mr. MOSES BROWN, and by the style by Capt. JOHN BOROUGH; and both gave the
time with the clocks within two seconds. -- The total ingress was not so
inslantaneous as I did expect it would be, but the bright cusps of the Sun, as
they encompassed Venus, were much more obtuse, and there seemed to be a faint
junction of their limbs for at least 4; the moment this penumbral ligament
broke, I proclaimed the time; at first I suspected the telescope was not
adjusted to a proper focus; but afterward, by looking at the solar spots, etc.
I was convinced of the contrary. During the time we saw Venus upon the Sun, she
appeared to be surrounded by a ring of a yellowish countenance; its width was
about one tenth of the diameter of Venus. We saw nothing that might be taken
for satellite.
. From a mean of a number of good observations, the apparent diameter of the
Sun was 31 40, 66, and that of Venus 58, 66; though I could not make it myself
more than 58, which was the same we found it about a fortnight before the
transit. The proportion of their diameters was nearly as 1 to 33. The nearest
approach of their centers, at the middle of the transit, was taken with the
micrometer, and found to be 10 5.

The following TYPE will give the reader some idea of the appearance of Venus,
at her several stages on the Sun.



In the figure, the circle Z E N C is the disk of the Sun, and S its center;
the obscure line Z S N a vertical passing through the Sun's center; E S C the
ecliptic in its position at the middle of the transit; A a M X the orb of
Venus; A is Venus at her first contact; a the interior contact; M the middle of
the transit; and X her place at sunsetting.

The proportion of the distances of the Sun and Venus from the earth, at that
time, was as 3,5143 to 1; then (allowing the Sun's parallax to be the same it
was found the 6th of June, 1761) the parallax of Venus was 30, 04; the
difference of their parallaxes 21, 49. The angle between the visible way of
Venus and the ecliptic, 8 34 17; and the angle made by the axis of the ecliptic
and equator, 7 3 7; their sum, 15 37 24, was the angle between the axis of the
visible way of Venus, and the earth's axis. The transit line, from total
ingress to the middle of the transit (measured in time by the visible motion of
Venus) was 2h. 55 36; but Venus was more accelerated in her orbit (by parallax
in longitude) at the middle of the transit, than at total ingress; this
difference of acceleration was 1 33; therefore from the total ingress to the
middle of the transit was 2h. 54 3.

Thence I conclude, that the h. When I calculated this transit. I supposed the
longitude of our place to be much less than we have since found it by
observation -- By correcting that error, the error, in calculation will appear
to be inconsiderable.
First contact was at 2 28 0 app. time. Interior contact 2 46 35 Middle of the
transit 5 40 38

Venus's parallax in longitude, at the middle of the transit, was 18, 7; this
was passed over by Venus's visible motion in 4 44; so that the middle of the
transit, as seen from the center of the earth, was at 5h. 43 8 mean time. The
true conjunction was 23 21 before the middle of the transit, as seen from the
earth's center; consequently the true conjunction was at 5h. 19 45, mean time.
At which time, the place of the Sun and planet was 11 13 27 3; and the
geocentric latitude of Venus 10 19, 8 north. But her heliocentric latitude was
4 6, 51; and by the rules of spherical trigonometry, the ascending node of
Venus was 1 9 23, 5 in consequence of the Sun, or in 11 14 36 26, 5.

From the foregoing calculation it appears, that the mean motion of Venus is 37
forward of what it stands in Dr. HALLEY'S tables, and her ascending node 2 41.

It is probable Dr. HALLEY'S solar numbers need some correction likewise; the
following may not be far from truth, viz. add to Dr. HALLEY'S mean motion of
the Sun, for any year of the Christian era, 25, and to the apogee 6 18; for
each century after 1700 add 14, 666 to the mean motion, and to the apogee 3 53;
then by making use of the Parisian According to the Parisian hypothesis, the
eccentricity of the earth's orb is 1680 parts, of which the mean distance of
the earth from the Sun is 100,000.
equation of the Sun's center, his place may be had within a small matter of
truth.

By taking the mean of a number of observations, the latitude of our
observatory was found to be 41 50 41 north The latitude of the place being of
great consequence, and the sextant and style not giving it exactly alike, the
persevering Mr. BROWN contrived to make use of the micrometer as a lens, which
he placed on his house, twenty-seven feet high, and exactly perpendicular to a
center on a horizontal platform below, on which was drawn a meridian line; the
Sun's image on this platform was seen to move very sensibly. -- By this the
latitude was finally determined. The Sun's meridian altitude, being taken for
several days by this long style, the latitudes thence found did not differ from
each other more than 15 seconds. -- At the time this was done, we had seen no
account that a glass had been made use of, as here described; but since this
went to the press, we learn from Dr. LONG'S astronomy, that he found the
latitude of Cambridge, in England, by the same method.
. The longitude was obtained by observing the emersions of Jupiter's
satellites, compared with the corresponding observations made at Cambridge, in
New England, by Mr. WINTHROP, which he was so kind as to favor us with; and
for which we return him our sincere thanks. -- Providence was found to be 16 in
longitude west from Cambridge; Mr. WINTHROP has hitherto found the longitude of
Cambridge to be 71 0 west from the Royal Observatory at Greenwich; so that the
longitude of Providence is about 71 16 from the Royal Observatory.

It is to be hoped the Commissioners, sent abroad to observe that interesting
phenomenon, were favored with a suitable air for that purpose, as there will
not be another opportunity, for making the like observations of Venus, for more
than a century to come. The next transit of Venus will be in the month of
December, in the year 1874, at the ascending node; and that will be succeeded
by another, at the same node, in 8 years after it; then there will pass 122
years without a transit, which will bring it to the year 2004, in the month of
June.

I shall now give the reader a short account of the parallax herein mentioned,
and how the planets are affected thereby.

The horizontal parallax of the Sun is that angle at the Sun's center, which is
included between two lines supposed to be drawn, one from the Sun's center to
the center of the earth, the other from the Sun's center to the surface of the
earth. Or, in other words, it is the angle, under which the semidiameter of the
earth would appear to an eye, at the center of the Sun. -- The way that
parallax affects the Sun and Planets is, it makes them appear below their true
places in the heavens, except they be in the zenith of the observer; in that
case, parallax has no effect at all; and the reason is, because the observer is
in that right line which joins the centers of the earth and planet. Parallax
may affect the planets places several ways; as if the observer should view the
planet upon a vertical, cutting the ecliptic at right angles; in this case,
parallax will affect its place in respect to latitude only; but if the observer
be situated in the plane of the ecliptic, it will then alter its place, in
respect to longitude only; and if the planet be viewed in an oblique position,
with respect to the ecliptic, parallax will affect its place both in longitude
and latitude. -- The horizontal parallaxes of the planets are to each other in
a reciprocal proportion to their distances; that is, the planets which are
nearest have the greatest parallax, and those which are most remote, the least.
-- Thence it follows, if two planets are viewed together, that which is nearest
will appear just so much below the other, as what the difference of their
parallaxes is. -- The nearer a planet is to the horizon of the observer, the
greater is its parallax, and in the horizon it is the greatest possible; and is
then called the horizontal parallax.

Hence comes the method of investigating the Sun's parallax, from observations
of Venus on his disk. At the time of the transit, the third day of June, Venus
was much nearer to the earth than the Sun was, and, of consequence, was much
more affected by parallax. -- This effect was produced in a twofold manner, in
respect to us in the northern regions of our earth. -- First, Venus was
depressed upon the Sun, by parallax in longitude, bringing her to a conjunction
with the Sun sooner to our point of view, than to a spectator at the center of
the Earth; in the second place, she was carried nearer to the center of the
Sun, by parallax in latitude, thereby lengthening the transit-line; both which
effects conspired to accelerate the time of first interior contact. Now to an
observer in Great Britain, parallax had a still greater effect, by what is said
before: -- That is, some minutes passed after the contact was formed to the
observer there, before it was seen by us. -- Now the difference of longitude,
between the two places of observation, being accurately known, the effect of
parallax, between the two places, is likewise known; for the difference of
longitude, by these observations, while considerably less than the true
difference.

The method of calculating the Sun's parallax, from these observations, is by
trial; the parallax will be supposed of that quantity, which the observations
found it in 1761; hence the total effect of parallax, at each place of
observation, must be computed; and if it should be the same as given by
observation, it will prove the assumption to be just; but if, by observation,
it should be greater or less than by calculation, the Sun's parallax will turn
out to be greater or less in the same proportion. -- When the Sun's parallax is
known, the distance of the earth, and of all the planets, from the Sun, will be
known likewise.

FINIS.

