Mr. COOKE'S ELECTION-SERMON, May 30, 1770.

A SERMON PREACHED AT CAMBRIDGE, IN THE AUDIENCE OF HIS HONOR THOMAS
HUTCHINSON, ESQUIRE LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR AND COMMANDER IN CHIEF; THE HONORABLE HIS
MAJESTY'S COUNCIL, AND THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, OF THE PROVINCE
OF THE Massachusetts Bay in New England, MAY 30th, 1770.

BEING THE ANNIVERSARY FOR THE ELECTION OF HIS MAJESTY'S COUNCIL FOR THE SAID
PROVINCE.

BY SAMUEL COOK, A.M. Pastor of the Second Church in CAMBRIDGE.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY EDES AND GILL, PRINTERS TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES. MDCCLXX.

In the House of Representatives, May 30, 1770.
RESOLVED, That Mr. Gardner of Cambridge, Mr. Remington, and Mr. Gardner of
Stow, be a Committee to return the Thanks of this House to the Rev'd Mr. Samuel
Cook, for his Sermon preached Yesterday before the General Court, being the
Day of the Election of Counselors; and to desire of him a Copy thereof for the
Press.

Attest. Samuel Adams, Clerk.

An ELECTION-SERMON.
2 SAMUEL XXIII. 3, 4. -- HE that rules over Men, must be just, ruling in the
fear of GOD.

And he shall be as the light of the morning when the sun rises, even a
morning without clouds: as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear
shining after rain.


THE solemn introduction to the words now read, Respectable Hearers, is
manifestly designed to engage your attention and regard; -- as given by
inspiration from God, -- and as containing the last -- the dying words, of one
of the greatest and best of earthly rulers; -- who by ruling in the fear of
God, had served his generation according to the Divine will. -- Transporting
reflection! -- when his flesh and his heart failed, and his glory was consigned
to dust.

From this, and many other passages, in the sacred oracles, it is evident, that
the supreme Ruler, though he has directed to no particular mode of civil
government, yet allows and approves of the establishment of it among men.

The ends of civil government, in Divine revelation are clearly pointed out --
The character of rulers described, -- and the duty of subjects asserted and
explained. And in this view, civil government may be considered as an ordinance
of God; and when justly exercised, greatly subservient to the glorious purposes
of divine providence and grace. -- But the particular form is left to the
choice and determination of mankind.

In a pure state of nature, government is in a great measure unnecessary;
private property in that state is inconsiderable, men need no arbiter to
determine their rights, -- they covet only a bare support, -- their stock is
but the subsistence of a day, -- the uncultivated deserts are their
habitations, -- and they carry their all with them, in their frequent removes
-- they are each one a law to himself, which in general, is of force sufficient
for their security, in that course of life.

It is far otherwise when mankind are formed into collective bodies, or a
social state of life; -- here, their frequent mutual intercourse, in a degree,
necessarily leads them to different apprehensions, respecting their several
rights, even where their intentions are upright. -- Temptations to injustice
and violence increase, and the occasions of them multiply, in proportion to the
increase and opulence of the society.

The laws of nature, though enforced by Divine revelation, which bind the
conscience of the upright, prove insufficient to restrain the sons of violence,
who have not the fear of God before their eyes.

A society cannot long subsist in such a state -- Their safety, -- their social
being depends upon the establishment of determinate rules or laws, with proper
penalties to enforce them; to which individuals shall be subjected: -- The
laws, however wisely adapted, cannot operate to the public security, unless
they are properly executed; -- The execution of them, remaining in the hands of
the whole community, leaves individuals to determine their own rights, and in
effect, in the same circumstances, as in a state of nature.

The remedy in this case is solely in the hands of the community.

A society emerging from a state of nature, in respect to authority, are all
upon a level, -- no individual can justly challenge a right to make, or execute
the laws, by which it is to be governed, but only by the choice, or general
consent of the community. -- The people, the collective body, only have a
right, under God, to determine who shall exercise this trust for the common
interest, and to fix the bounds of their authority.

And consequently, unless we admit the most evident inconsistence, those in
authority, in the whole of their public conduct, are accountable to the
society, which gave them their political existence.

This is evidently the natural origin, and state of all civil government, --
the sole end and design of which is, not to ennoble a few, and enslave the
multitude, but the public benefit, -- the good of the people, -- that they may
be protected in their persons, and secured in the enjoyment of all their
rights, -- and be enabled to lead quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness
and honesty.

While this manifest design of civil government, under whatever form, is kept
in full view; the reciprocal obligations of rulers and subjects are obvious,
and the extent of prerogative and liberty, will be indisputable.

In a civil state, that form is the most eligible which is best adapted to
promote the ends of government, -- the benefit of the community; -- reason and
experience teach that a mixed government is most conducive to this end.

In the present imperfect state, the whole power cannot with safety be
entrusted with a single person; nor with many, acting jointly in the same
public capacity.

Various branches of power, concentring in the community from which they
originally derive their authority, are a mutual check to each other, in their
several departments, and jointly secure the common interest: This may indeed,
in some instances, retard the operations of government, but will add dignity to
its deliberate counsels, and weight to its dictates.

This, after many dangerous conflicts with arbitrary power, is now the happy
constitution of our parent state. -- We rejoice in the gladness of our nation*
-- may no weapon formed against it prosper -- may it be preserved inviolate
till time shall be no more.

This, under God, has caused Great Britain to exalt her head above the nations
-- restored the dignity of royal authority -- and rendered our Kings truly
benefactors.

The Prince upon the British throne can have no real interest distinct from his
subjects; his crown is his inheritance -- his kingdom his patrimony, which he
must be disposed to improve, for his own, and his family's interest -- his
highest glory is to rule over a free people, and reign in the hearts of his
subjects -- The Peers who are lords of parliament, are his hereditary council.
-- TheCommons, elected by the people, are considered as the grand inquest of
the kingdom; and while incorrupt, are a check upon the highest offices in the
state.

A constitution thus happily formed and supported, as a late writer has
observed, cannot easily be subverted, but by the prevalence of venality in the
representatives of the people.

How far septennial parliaments conduce to this, time may further show. -- Or
whether this is not an infraction upon the national constitution, is not for me
to determine.

But the best constitution, separately considered, is only as a line which
marks out the enclosure, or as a fitly organized body without spirit or animal
life.

The advantages of civil government, even under the British form, greatly
depend upon the character and conduct of those to whom the administration is
committed.

When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice; but when the wicked
bears rule, the people mourn.

The Most High, therefore, who is just in all his ways -- good to all -- and
whose commands strike dread, has strictly enjoined faithfulness upon all those
who are advanced to any place of public trust.

Rulers of this character, cooperate with God, in his gracious dispensations
of providence, and under him, are diffusive blessings to the people: -- and are
compared to the light of the morning, when the sun rises, even a morning
without clouds.

By the ruler in the text, is intended not only the King as supreme; but also
every one in subordinate place of power and trust, whether they act in a
legislative or executive capacity, or both: -- In whatever station men act for
the public, they are included in this general term -- and must direct their
conduct by the same upright principle.

Justice as here expressed, is not to be taken in a limited sense, but as a
general term, including every quality necessary to be exercised for the public
good, by those who accept the charge of it.

Justice must be tempered with wisdom, prudence and clemency; otherwise it will
degenerate into rigor and oppression.

This solemn charge given to rulers, is not an arbitrary injunction imposed by
God; but is founded in the most obvious laws of nature and reason.

Rulers are appointed for this very end -- to be ministers of God for good. --
The people have a right to expect this from them, and to require it, not as an
act of grace, but as their unquestionable due. -- It is the express or implicit
condition, upon which they were chosen, and continued in public office, -- that
they attend continually upon this very thing.

Their time -- their abilities -- their authority, by their acceptance of the
public trust, are consecrated to the community, and cannot, in justice, be
withheld; -- they are obliged to seek the welfare of the people, and exert all
their powers to promote the common interest.

This continual solicitude for the common good, however depressing it may
appear, is what rulers of every degree have taken upon themselves; and in
justice to the people, -- in faithfulness to God, they must either sustain it
with fidelity, or resign their office.

The first attention of the faithful ruler will be to the subjects of
government, in their specific nature; -- He will not forget that he rules over
Men -- Men, who are of the same species with himself, and by nature equal --
Men who are the offspring of God, and alike formed after his glorious image --
Men of like passions and feelings with himself, and as men, in the sight of
their common Creator of equal importance -- Men who have raised him to power,
and support him in the exercise of it -- Men who are reasonable beings, and can
be subjected to no human restrictions, which are not founded in reason; and of
the fitness of which they may be convinced -- Men, who are moral agents, and
under the absolute control of the High Possessor of heaven and earth; and
cannot, without the greatest impropriety and disloyalty to the King of kings,
yield unlimited subjection to any inferior power -- Men whom the Son of God
has condescended to ransom, and dignified their nature, by becoming the son of
man.

Men, who have the most evident right, in every decent way, to represent to
rulers their grievances, and seek redress.

The people forfeit the rank they hold in God's creation, when they silently
yield this important point, and sordidly, like Issachar, couch under every
burden wantonly laid upon them.

And rulers greatly tarnish their dignity, when they attempt to treat their
subjects otherwise than as their fellow-men, -- Men who have reposed the
highest confidence in their fidelity; and to whom they are accountable for
their public conduct. -- And in a word, Men, among whom they must, without
distinction, stand before the dread tribunal of heaven.

Just rulers therefore in making and executing the laws of society, will
consider who they are to oblige, and accommodate them to the state and
condition of men.

Fidelity to the public, requires that the laws be as plain and explicit as
possible; that the less knowing may understand and not be ensnared by them --
while the artful evade their force.

Mysteries of law and government may be made a cloak of unrighteousness.

The benefits of the constitution, and of the laws, must extend to every
branch, and each individual in society, of whatever degree; that every man may
enjoy his property, and pursue his honest course of life with security.

The just ruler, sensible he is in trust for the public, with an impartial
hand, will supply the various offices in society: -- his eye will be upon the
faithful -- merit only in the candidate, will attract his attention.

He will not, without sufficient reason, multiply lucrative offices in the
community; which naturally tends to introduce idleness and oppression.

Justice requires, that the emoluments of every office, constituted for the
common interest, be proportioned to their dignity, and the service performed,
for the public: -- Parsimony in this case, enervates the force of government,
and frustrates the most patriotic measures. A people therefore for their own
security, must be supposed willing to pay tribute to whom it is due, and freely
support the dignity of those under whose protection they conside.

On the other hand, the people may apprehend they have just reason to complain
of oppression and wrong, and to be jealous of their liberties, when subordinate
public offices are made the surest step to wealth and ease.

This not only increases the expenses of government, but is naturally
productive of dissipation and luxury -- of the severest animosities among
candidates for public posts, -- and of venality and corruption; the most fatal
to a free state.

Rulers are appointed guardians of the constitution, in their respective
stations; and must confine themselves within the limits by which their
authority is circumscribed.

A free state will no longer continue so, than while the constitution is
maintained entire, in all its branches and connections. -- If the several
members of the legislative power become entirely independent of each other, it
produces a schism in the body politic; and the effect is the same, when the
executive is in no degree under the control of the legislative power, -- the
balance is destroyed, and the execution of the laws left to arbitrary will.

The several branches of civil power, as joint pillars, each bearing its due
proportion, are the support, and the only proper support of a political
structure, regularly formed.

A constitution which cannot support its own weight, must fall -- It must be
supposed essentially defective in its form or administration.

Military aid has ever been deemed dangerous to a free civil state; and often
has been used as an effectual engine to subvert it.

Those, who in the camp, and in the field of battle, are our glory and defense;
from the experience of other nations, will be thought, in time of peace, a very
improper safeguard, to a constitution, which has Liberty -- British Liberty,
for its basis.

When a people are in subjection to those, who are detached from their fellow
citizens, -- under distinct laws and rules -- supported in idleness and luxury
-- armed with the terrors of death -- under the most absolute command -- ready
and obliged to execute the most daring orders -- What must! -- what has been
the consequence! -- Inter arma silent leges. --

Justice also requires of rulers, in their legislative capacity, that they
attend to the operation of their own (...) repeal whatever laws, upon an
impartial review, they find to be inconsistent with the laws of God -- the
rights of men -- and the general benefit of society.

This the community has a right to expect. And they must have mistaken
apprehensions of true dignity, who imagine they can acquire or support it, by
persisting in wrong measures; and thereby counteracting the sole end of
government.

It belongs to the all-seeing God alone, absolutely to be of one mind. It is
the glory of man, in whatever station, to perceive and correct his mistakes.

Arrogant pretenses to infalibility in matters of state or religion, represent
human nature in the most contemptible light.

We have a view of our nature in its most abject state, when we read the
senseless laws of the Medes and Persians, or hear the impotent thunders of the
Vatican.

Stability in promoting the public good, which justice demands, leads to a
change of measures, when the interest of the community requires it; which must
often be the case in this mutable -- imperfect state.

The just ruler will not fear to have his public conduct critically inspected;
but will choose to recommend himself to the approbation of every man. -- As he
expects to be obeyed for conscience sake, he will require nothing inconsistent
with its dictates; and be desirous that the most scrupulous mind may acquiesce
in the justice of his rule.

As in his whole administration, so in this, he will be ambitious to imitate
the supreme Ruler -- who appeals to his people, Are not my ways equal?

Knowing therefore that his conduct will bear the light, and his public
character be established by being fully known -- He will rather encourage than
discountenance a decent freedom of speech, not only in public assemblies, but
among the people.

This liberty is essential to a free constitution, and the ruler's surest guide.

As in nature we best judge of causes by their effects -- So rulers, hereby --
will receive the surest information of the fitness of their laws, and the
exactness of their execution, -- the success of their measures -- and whether
they are chargeable with any mistakes, from partial evidence or human frailty
-- and whether, all acting under them, in any subordinate place, express the
fidelity, becoming their office.

This decent liberty the just ruler will consider not as his grant, but a right
inherent in the people, without which their obedience is rendered merely
passive.

And though, possibly, under a just administration, it may degenerate into
licentiousness, which in its extreme, is subversive of all government; yet the
history of past ages, and of our nation, shows, that the greatest dangers have
arisen from lawless power.

The body of a people are disposed to lead quiet and peaceable lives -- and it
is their highest interest to support the government under which their quietness
is ensured -- They retain a reverence for their superiors, and seldom foresee
or suspect danger, till they feel their burdens.

Rulers of every degree, are in a measure above the fear of man; but are
equally with others under the restraints of the Divine law.

The Almighty has not divested himself of his own absolute authority, by
permitting subordinate government among men -- He allows none to rule,
otherwise, than under him, and in his fear. -- And without a true fear of God,
justice will be found to be but an empty name.

Though reason may in some degree investigate the relation and fitness of
things, yet I think it evident, that moral obligations are founded wholly in a
belief of God and his superintending providence.

This belief deeply impressed on the mind, brings the most convincing evidence,
that men are moral agents, -- obliged to act, according to the natural and
evident relation of things -- and the rank they bear in God's creation -- That
the Divine will, however made known to them, is the law by which all their
actions must be regulated, and their state finally determined.

Rulers may in a degree be influenced to act for the public good, from
education -- from a desire of applause -- from the natural benevolence of their
temper: But these motives are feeble and inconstant, without the superior aids
of religion. They are men of like passions with others, and the true fear of
God only, is sufficient to control the lusts of men; and especially the lust
of dominion -- to suppress pride -- the bane of every desirable quality in the
human soul -- the never-failing source of wanton and capricious power.

So did not I -- said the renowned governor of Judah -- because of the fear of
God.

He had nothing to fear from the people: -- His commission he received from the
luxurious Persian court, where the voice of distress was not heard -- where no
sad countenance might appear. -- But he feared his God. -- This moved him to
hear the cries of his people, and without delay, redress their wrongs. -- He
knew this was pleasing to his God, and while he acted in his fear, trusted he
would think upon him for good.

This fear does not intend, simply, a dread of the Almighty, as the supreme
Ruler and Judge of men -- but especially, a silial reverence, founded in esteem
and superlative love implanted in the heart: -- This will naturally produce a
conformity to God in his moral perfections -- an inclination to do his will --
and a delight in those acts of beneficence which the Maker of all things
displays throughout his extended creation.

This fear of God is the beginning, and also the perfection of human wisdom.

And though dominion is not, absolutely, founded in grace; yet a true principle
of religion must be considered as a necessary qualification in a ruler.

The religion of Jesus teaches the true fear of God, and marvellously
discloseth, the plan of Divine government; --

In his gospel, as through a glass, we see heaven opened -- the mysteries of
providence and grace unveiled -- Jesus sitting on the right hand of God, -- to
whom all power is committed, -- and coming to judge the world in righteousness.

Here is discovered to the admiration of angels -- the joy of saints, and the
terror of the wicked; the government of the man Christ Jesus, founded in
justice and mercy; which in his glorious administration meet together in
perfect harmony.

The scepter of his kingdom is a right scepter; he loves righteousness and
hates wickedness.

And though his throne is on high -- prepared in the heavens; yet he makes known
to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glorious majesty of his kingdom. --
By him kings reign, and princes decree justice, even all the nobles and judges
of the earth. -- His eyes are upon the ways of men -- His voice which is full
of majesty, to earthly potentates, is, be wise now, O ye kings; be instructed,
ye judges of the earth -- serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice in your exalted
stations with submissive awe -- embrace the Son, lest he be angry, and ye
perish from the way.

The christian temper, wro't in the heart by the Divine Spirit, restores the
human mind to its primitive rectitude, -- animates every faculty of the soul --
directs every action to its proper end -- extends its views beyond the narrow
limits of time, and raises its desires to immortal glory.

This makes the face of every saint to shine; but renders the ruler, in his
elevated station, gloriously resplendent.

This commands reverence to his person -- attention to his counsels -- respect
to the laws -- and authority to all his directions. -- And renders an obedient
people easy and happy under his rule.

Which leads to the consideration of the last thing suggested in the text, viz.
The glorious effects of a just administration of government.

And he shall be as the light of the morning when the sun rises, even a
morning without clouds -- as the tender grass springing out of the earth, by
clear shining after rain.

This includes, both the distinguishing honor and respect acquired by rulers of
this character; and the unspeakable felicity of a people thus favored of the
Lord.

Justice and judgment are the habitation of the throne of the Most High; and he
delights to honor those who rule over men in his fear -- He has dignified
them with a title of divinity -- and called them in a peculiar sense, the
children of the Highest.

And we are not to wonder, that in the darker ages of the world, from
worshipping the host of heaven, the ignorant multitude were led to pay divine
honors to their beneficent rulers -- whom they esteemed as demigods.

The light of Divine revelation has dispelled these mists of superstition and
impiety, and opened to the pious ruler's view, the sure prospect of unfading
glory in the life to come: -- And in the present state he is not without a
reward.

To find that his conduct meets with public approbation, -- that he is
acceptable to the multitude of his brethren, greatly corroborates his internal
evidence of his own integrity and impartiality, -- and especially, of his
ability for public action. -- And which is the height of his ambition in this
state of probation, -- enlarges his opportunity of doing good.

The shouts of applause, not from sordid parasites, but the grateful, -- the
artless multitude, the pious ruler receives as the voice of nature -- the voice
of God. -- This is his support under the weight of government, and fixes his
dependence upon the aid of the Almighty, in whose fear he rules.

How excellent in the sight of God and man, are rulers of this character!

Truly the light is good, and a pleasant thing it is to behold the sun -- Thus
desirable -- thus benign, are wise and faithful rulers to a people. The
beautiful allusion in the text naturally illustrates this.

The Sun, as the center of the solar system, connects the planetary worlds, and
retains them in their respective orbits: They all yield to the greater force of
his attractive power, -- and thus with the greatest regularity observe the
laws, impressed upon the material creation.

The Ruler of the day, as on a throne, shining in his strength, nearly
preserves his station, and under the prime agent, directs all their motions --
imparting light and heat to his several attendants, and the various beings
which the Creator has placed upon them. His refulgent rays dispel the gloomy
shades, and cause the cheerful light to arise out of thick darkness, and all
nature to rejoice.

The Planets, with their lesser attendants, in conformity to their common head,
mutually reflect with feebler beams their borrowed light, for the common
benefit; and all, in proportion to their distance and gravity bear their part,
to support the balance of the grand machine.

By this apposite metaphor, the Divine Spirit has represented the character and
extensive beneficence of the faithful ruler -- who with a God-like ardor
employs his authority and influence, to advance the common interest.

The righteous Lord, whose countenance beholds the upright, will support and
succeed rulers of this character: And it is an evidence of his favor to a
people, when such are appointed to rule over them.

The natural effect of this is quietness and peace, as showers upon the tender
grass, and clear shining after rain.

In this case a loyal people must be happy, and fully sensible that they are so
-- while they find their persons in safety -- their liberties preserved --
their property defended, -- and their confidence in their rulers entire.

The necessary expenses of government will be born by the community with
pleasure, while justice holds the balance, and righteousness flows down their
streets.

Such a civil state, according to the natural course of things, must flourish
in peace at home, and be respectable abroad -- private virtues will be
encouraged, and vice driven into darkness -- industry in the most effectual
manner promoted -- arts and sciences patronized -- the true fear of God
cultivated, -- and his worship maintained.

This, -- this is their only invaluable treasure. -- This is the glory, safety
and best interest of rulers -- the sure protection and durable felicity of a
people. -- This, through the Redeemer, renders the Almighty propitious, and nigh
unto a people in all they call upon him for.

Happy must the people be, that is in such a case -- Yea, happy is the people
whose God is the Lord.

But the affairs of this important day demand our more immediate attention.

With sincere gratitude to our Almighty Preserver, we see the return of this
Anniversary; and the leaders of this people assembled, (though not according to
the general desire, in the city of our solemnities) -- to ask counsel of God;
and as we trust, in the integrity of their hearts, and by the skillfulness of
their hands, to lead us in ways of righteousness and peace.

The season indeed is dark; but God is our sun and shield.

When we consider the days of old, and the years of ancient time, -- the scene
brightens, -- our hopes revive.

Our Fathers trusted in God, -- He was their help and their shield.

These ever memorable worthies, nearly a century and an half since, by the
prevalence of spiritual and civil tyranny, were driven from their delightful
native land, to seek a quiet retreat in these uncultivated ends of the earth.

And however doubtful it might appear to them or others, whether the lands they
were going to possess, were properly under the English jurisdiction; yet our
ancestors were desirous of retaining a relation to their native country, and to
be considered as subjects of the same prince.

"They left their native land, with the strongest assurances, that they and
their posterity should enjoy the privileges of free natural-born English
subjects; which they supposed fully comprehended in their charter. The powers
of government therein confirmed to them, they considered as including English
liberty in its full extent.

And however defective their charter might be in form, a thing common in that
day, -- yet the spirit and evident intention of it, appears to be then
understood.

The reserve therein made of passing no laws contrary to those of the parent
state, was then considered as a conclusive evidence of their full power, under
that restriction only, to enact whatever laws they should judge conducive to
their benefit.

Our Fathers supposed their purchase of the aboriginals, gave them a just title
to the lands -- that the produce of them by their labor, was their property,
which they had an exclusive right to dispose of -- that a legislative power,
respecting their internal polity, was ratified to them -- and that nothing
short of this, considering their local circumstances, could entitle them or
their posterity to the rights and liberties of free, natural-born English
subjects.

And it does not appear but that this was the general sentiment of the nation,
and parliament.

They did not, then, view their American adventurers, in the light ancient Rome
did, her distant colonies; as tributaries, unjustly subjected to arbitrary
rule; by the dread or force of her victorious arms -- But as sons, arrived to
mature age -- entitled to distinct property, -- yet connected, by mutual ties
of affection and interest, and united under the common supreme head. --

The New England Charter, was not considered, as an act of grace, but a
compact, between the Sovereign and the first patentees.

Our Fathers plead their right to the privilege of it, in their address to King
Charles the second; -- wherein they say -- "It was granted to them, their
heirs, assigns, and associates for ever; not only the absolute use and
propriety of the tract of land therein mentioned; but also full and absolute
power of governing all the people of this place, by men chosen from among
themselves, and according to such laws as they shall from time to time see meet
to make and establish, not being repugnant to the laws of England -- They
paying only the fifth part of the oar of gold and silver, that shall be found
here -- for and in respect of all duties, demands, exactions and services
whatsoever". And from an apprehension, that the powers given by the crown to
the four commissioners sent here, were in effect subversive of their rights and
government -- they add, -- "We are carefully studious of all due subjection to
your Majesty, and that not only for wrath, but for conscience sake."

"But it is a great unhappiness to be reduced to so hard a case, as to have no
other testimony of our subjection and loyalty offered us but this, viz. to
destroy our own being, which nature teaches us to preserve; or to yield up our
liberties, which are far dearer to us than our lives -- and which, had we any
fears of being deprived of, we had never wandered from our fathers houses into
these ends of the earth -- nor laid out our labors and estates therein."

But all their humble addresses were to no purpose.

As an honorable historian observes -- "At this time Great Britain, and
Scotland, especially, was suffering under a prince inimical to civil liberty:
And New England, without a miraculous interposition, must expect to share the
same judgments." And indeed of this bitter cup, the dregs were reserved for
this people, in that and the succeeding happily short, but inglorious reign.

Our Charter was dissolved, and despotic power took place.

Sir Edmund Andros -- a name never to be forgotten -- in imitation of his Royal
Master, in wanton triumph, trampled upon all our laws and rights. -- And his
government was only tolerable, as it was a deliverance from the shocking
terrors of the more infamous Kirk.

Sir Edmund at first made high professions of regard to the public good -- But
it has been observed, -- "that Nero concealed his tyrannical disposition more
years than Sir Edmund and his creatures did months."

But the triumphing of the wicked is often short.

The glorious revolution, under the Prince of Orange, displayed a brighter
scene to Great Britain, and her colonies. And though no part of its extended
empire did bear a greater part in the joy of that memorable event than this
province, yet it was then apprehended we were not the greatest sharers in the
happy effects of it.

I trust we are not insensible of the blessings we then received, nor
unthankful for our deliverance from the depths of woe.

We submitted to the form of government established under our present Charter
-- trusting, under God, in the wisdom and paternal tendeness of our gracious
Sovereign -- That in all appointments reserved to the crown, a sacred regard
would be maintained to the rights of British subjects; -- and that the royal
ear would always be open to every reasonable request and complaint.

It is far from my intention to determine whether there has been just reason
for uneasiness or complaint on this account -- But with all submission, I
presume the present occasion will permit me to say, -- That the importance of
his Majesty's Council to this people appears in a more conspicuous light, since
the endeavors which have been used, to render this invaluable branch of our
constitution, wholly dependent upon the chair.

Should this ever be the case, which God forbid -- Liberty here will cease. --
This day of the gladness of our hearts, will be turned into the deepest sorrow.

The authority and influence of his Majesty's Council, in various respects,
while happily free from restraints, is momentous: our well-being greatly
depends upon their wisdom and integrity.

The concern of electing to this important trust, wise and faithful men,
belongs to our Honored Fathers now in GeneralAssembly convened.

Men of this character we trust are to be found, and upon such, and only such,
we presume will the eye of the electors be this day.

It is with pleasure that we see this choice in the hands of a very respectable
part of the community, and nearly interested in the effects of it.

But our reliance, Fathers, under God, is upon your acting in his fear.

God stands in the assembly of the mighty, and perfectly discerns the motives
by which you act -- May his fear rule in your hearts, and unerring counsel be
your guide.

You have received a sure token of respect, by your being raised to this high
trust; -- but true honor is acquired only by acting in character.

Honor yourselves, Gentlemen, -- Honor the council board -- your country --
your king -- and your God, by the choice you this day make.

You will attentively consider the true design of all civil government; and
without partiality, give your voice for those you judge most capable and
disposed to promote the public interest. -- Then you will have the satisfaction
of having faithfully discharged your trust -- and be sure of the approbation of
the Most High.

The chief command, in this province, is now devolved upon one of distinguished
abilities, who knows our state, and naturally, must care for us -- One, who in
early life has received from his country the highest tokens of honor and trust,
in its power to bestow. And we have a right to expect, that the higher degrees
of them conferred by our gracious Sovereign, will operate through the course of
his administration, to the welfare of this people.

His Honor is not insensible, that as his power is independent of the people,
their safety must depend, under providence, upon his wisdom, -- justice, and
paternal tenderness, in the exercise of it.

It is our ardent wish and prayer, that his administration may procure ease and
quietness to himself, and the province. -- And having served his generation
according to the Divine will, -- he may rise to superior honors in the kingdom
of God.

When the elections of this important day are determined -- what farther
remains to be undertaken for the securing our liberties -- promoting peace and
good order -- and above all -- the advancement of religion -- the true fear of
God through the land, will demand the highest attention of theGeneralAssembly.

We trust the fountain of light, who gives wisdom freely, will not scatter
darkness in your paths -- and that the day is far distant, when there shall be
cause, justly to complain -- The foundations are destroyed; what can the
righteous do?

Our present distresses, Civil Fathers, loudly call upon us all, and you in
special, to stir up ourselves in the fear of God -- Arise, this matter
belongs unto you, we also will be with you, be of good courage and do it.

Whether any other laws are necessary for this purpose; or whether there is a
failure in the execution of the laws in being, I presume not to say. -- But
with all due respect, I may be permitted to affirm, that no human authority can
enforce the practice of religion with equal success to your example.

Your example, Fathers, not only in your public administrations, but also in
private life, will be the most forcible law -- the most effectual means to
teach us the fear of the Lord, and to depart from evil.

Then, and not till then, shall we be free indeed -- being delivered from the
dominion of sin, we become the true sons of God.

The extent of the secular power, in matters of religion, is undetermined; --
but all agree, -- that the example of those in authority, has the greatest
influence upon the manners of the people.

We are far from pleading for any established mode of worship; but an operative
fear of God -- the honor of the Redeemer, the everlasting King -- according to
his gospel.

We whose peculiar charge it is to instruct the people, preach to little
purpose, while those in an advanced state, by their practice say -- the fear of
God is not before their eyes. -- Yet will we not cease to seek the Lord, till
he come and rain down righteousness upon us.

I trust, on this occasion, I may, without offense -- plead the cause of our
African slaves; and humbly propose the pursuit of some effectual measures, at
least, to prevent the future importation of them.

Difficulties insuperable, I apprehend, prevent an adequate remedy for what is
past.

Let the time past more than suffice, wherein we, the patrons of liberty, have
dishonored the christian name, -- and degraded human nature, nearly to a level
with the beasts that perish.

Ethiopia has long stretched out her hands to us -- Let not sordid gain,
acquired by the merchandise of slaves, and the souls of men -- harden our
hearts against her piteous means. When God arises, and when he visits, what
shall we answer!

May it be the glory of this province -- of this respectable General Assembly
-- and we could wish, of this session, to lead in the cause of the oppressed.
-- This will avert the impending vengeance of heaven -- procure you the
blessing of multitudes of your fellow men ready to perish -- be highly approved
by our common Father, who is no respecter of persons* -- and we trust, an
example which would excite the highest attention of our sister colonies.

May we all, both rulers and people, in this day of doubtful expectation, know
and practice the things of our peace -- and serve the Lord our God without
disquiet, in the inheritance which he granted unto our fathers.

These adventurous worthies, animated by sublimer prospects, dearly purchased
this land with their treasure. -- They and their posterity have defended it
with unknown cost, Be it far from me, O Lord, said the (...) that I should do
this; is not this the blood (...) that went in jeopardy of their lives?
therefore (...) it. -- Will not the like sentiments rise (...), thrust into our
possessions? -- (...)
-- in continual jeopardy of their lives -- and with their blood.

Through the good hand of our God upon us, we have for a few years past been
delivered from the merciless sword of the wilderness, and enjoyed peace in our
borders -- and there is in the close of our short summer the appearance of
plenty in our dwellings; but from the length of our winters* our plenty is
consumed, and the one half of our necessary labor is spent in dispersing to
our flocks and herds, the ingatherings of the foregoing season: And it is known
to every person of common observation* that few -- very few, except in the
mercantile way, -- from one generation to another, acquire more than a
necessary subsistence, and sufficient to discharge the expenses of government,
and the support of the gospel -- yet content, and disposed to lead peaceable
lives.

From misinformations, only, we would conclude, recent disquiets have arisen --
they need not be mentioned -- they are too well known -- their voice is gone
out through all the earth -- and their sound to the end of the world. -- The
enemies of Great Britain hold us in derision -- while her cities and colonies
are thus perplexed.

America now pleads her right to her possessions -- which she cannot resign,
while she apprehends she has truth and justice on her side.

Americans esteem it their greatest infelicity, that through necessity, they are
thus led to plead with their parent state -- the land of their fore-father's
nativity, whose interest has always been dear to them Their losses, and private
expenses, in watches, guards and (...) defense, and from continual alarms -- in
^ their former wars -- have greatly exceeded the public charges.
-- and whose wealth they have increased by their removal, much more than their
own.

They have assisted in fighting her battles, and greatly enlarged her empire --
and God helping, will yet extend it through the boundless desert, until it reach
from sea to sea.

They glory in the British constitution, and are abhorrent, to a man, of the
most distant thought of withdrawing their allegiance from their gracious
Sovereign, and becoming an independent state.

And though with unwearied toil, the colonists can now subsist upon the labors of
their own hands -- which they must be driven to, when deprived of the means of
purchase, -- yet they are fully sensible of the mutual benefits of an equitable
commerce with the parent country; and cheerfully submit to regulations of
trade, productive of the common interest.

These their claims, the Americans consider, not as novel, or wantonly made,
but founded in nature -- in compact -- in their right as men -- and British
subjects -- The same which their forefathers the first occupants made, and
asserted, as the terms of their removal with their effects into this wilderness
It is apprehended, a greater sacrifice of private interest to the public good,
both of Great Britain and the Colonies, has at no time been made, than that of
the patriotic merchants, of this, and all the considerable colonies, by their
non-importation agreement -- And whatever the effects may be, their names will
be remembered with gratitude to the latest generations, by all true friends to
Britain and her Colonies.
-- and with which the glory and interest of their King, and all his dominions,
are connected.

May these alarming disputes be brought to a just and speedy issue -- and peace
and harmony be restored.

But, while in imitation of our pious forefathers, we are aiming at the
security of our liberties; we should all be concerned to express, by our
conduct, their piety and virtue. And in a day of darkness, and general
distress, -- carefully avoid every thing offensive to God, or injurious to men.

It belongs not only to rulers -- but subjects also, to set theLord always
before their face, and act in his fear.

While under government, we claim a right to be treated as men; -- we must act
in character, by yielding that subjection which becomes us as men.

Let every attempt to secure our liberties be conducted with a manly fortitude;
but with that respectful decency, which reason approves, and which alone gives
weight to the most salutary measures.

Let nothing divert us from the paths of truth and peace, which are the ways of
God -- and then we may be sure that he will be with us as he was with our
fathers -- and never leave nor forsake us.

Our Fathers, where are they? -- They looked for another and better country,
that is an heavenly. They were but as sojourners here; and have long since
resigned these their transitory abodes, and are securely seated in mansions of
glory. -- They hear not the voice of the oppressor.

We also are all strangers on earth; and must soon, without distinction, lie
down in the dust; and rise not, till these heavens and earth are no more.

May we all realize the appearance of the Son of God, to judge the world in
righteousness; -- and improve the various talents committed to our trust; that
we may then lift up our heads with joy -- and through grace, receive an
inheritance which cannot be taken away -- even life everlasting.

AMEN.

