Mr. Tucker's TWO SERMONS ON THE Gospel Condition of Salvation, AND THE Nature
and Necessity of the Father's drawing such as come unto Christ.

The two following SERMONS, ONE, ON THE Gospel Condition of Salvation; AND THE
OTHER, On the Nature and Necessity of the Father's drawing such as come unto
Christ, WERE PREACHED TO THE First Congregational Church and Society IN
NEWBURY-PORT, April 9. 1769. And are now published at the Desire of many of the
Hearers, To whom they are INSCRIBED.

By JOHN TUCKER, A. M. Pastor of the First Church in NEWBURY.

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed by T. and J. FLEET, for BULKELEY EMERSON in
Newbury-Port, 1769.

SERMON I. The Gospel Condition of Salvation.
MARK XVI. 15, 16. AND he said unto them, go ye into all the World, and preach
the Gospel to every Creature.

HE that believes and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believes not
shall be damned.


SALVATION being a matter of the greatest importance to men, it certainly
concerns them to be well satisfied (if such satisfaction can be obtained) what
is the condition of their being saved; or what are the terms on which
forgiveness of sin, and eternal life, are offered to them by Jesus Christ.

And although some have differed greatly about these, yet, such difference,
cannot, I apprehend, be justly owing to any obscurity, respecting this affair,
in the word of God, but must have had its rise from other causes.

It cannot be justly supposed, but that the infinitely wise and good God, would
make a matter of such general concernment, and of such high importance to every
one, so clear and plain, as that the weak and less intelligent, as well as
others, should be able, with due attention and care, to form a proper judgment,
and not be liable to any fatal mistakes.

And our blessed Savior, in the words I have now read (which contain a solemn
charge to his apostles, who were to be the first publishers and preachers of
the Gospel) has declared in the plainest manner; and in a manner, as I
conceive, perfectly agreeable to the general tenor of the Gospel, what is the
condition of salvation; -- what are the qualifications required of every one,
who enjoys the Gospel, necessary to their being saved: -- of which
qualifications, being the real subjects, they shall undoubtedly obtain
happiness; but without which, they cannot rationally hope for this, but may
expect to perish in their sins.

Several things worthy of special notice, might be justly considered from the
text; Two other Discourses besides this, were preached to my own People, upon
this Text.
but what I design, in the present discourse is, to set before you, in as plain
and intelligible a manner as I can, the condition of salvation, as this is here
pointed out to us. And this I take to be A BELIEF OF THE GOSPEL, with A
PROFESSED and PRACTICAL REGARD to IT.

-- Preach the Gospel to every creature. He that believes -- beliveth what?
The Gospel which is preached to him -- He that believes (THIS) and is
baptized, shall be saved. -- And, that hereby is intended, not only "a belief
of the Gospel," but also "a professed and practical regard to it," will appear
with sufficient evidence, by considering

FIRST, the design and intention of Baptism, as to believers. And,

SECONDLY, by comparing several of the Evangelists together, respecting the
subject in the text.

FIRST. Let us consider the design and intention of christain Baptism, as to
believers.

And it seems manifest, from the scripture account of Baptism, that one main
intention of adult persons submiting to that rite, was an open, public
profession, or declaration of their faith in Christ, or his Gospel: -- their
professedly receiving him for their divine master and lord, and declaring
themselves his disciples and followers.

As a public sign, it was equivalent to their making, with their mouth, and
openly before the world, a profession of the christain religion; -- of their
belief of its doctrines; -- of their repenting of, and renouncing their sins;
-- of their resolutions to live agreeable to the sacred rules of the Gospel;
and, in that way, to seek salvation by Jesus Christ. In a word; it was their
visible, and public admission into the christian church.

Agreeably we are thus informed, that upon Peter's preaching the Gospel to a
great multitude -- They that gladly received his word were baptized; and the
same day there were added unto them, i. e. to the disciples, -- to the church
of Christ, about three thousand souls; Acts ii. 41.
concerning whom it immediately follows, that -- they continued steadfastly in
the apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in
prayers. Thus, by submiting to that sacred rite, they became professedly the
disciples of Christ, and joined in communion and fellowship with the apostles.

And that persons baptism was thus, by an apt and proper sign, their profession
of christanity and of their discipleship to Jesus, seems evident from Paul's
words, where he reproves the Corinthians for their divisions; and saying, one
and another, 1 Cor. i. 13.
I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, etc. Is Christ divided? (says he) was Paul
crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul? They were baptized
in the name of Christ; not of Paul, nor Apollos, nor Cephas; and ought
therefore to have called themselves only after him. Their baptism, in his name,
was a profession of their faith in him, as crucified for them, and of their
being his disciples and followers.

To the like purpose are these words of the same apostle to the Galatians --
Gal, iii. 27.
As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. i. e. ye
have professedly put on his religion: -- ye have declared yourselves his
disciples, and engaged to live according to his doctrines. For, that the
phrase, putting on Christ, is significative of persons submission, and
obedience to him, as their divine master and lord; -- of their mortifying their
corrupt lusts, and living in all holiness, according to the Gospel, appears
from the apostle's exhortation in another place -- Romans xiii. 13. 14.
Let us walk honestly as in the day; (says he) not in rioting and drunkenness;
not in chambering and wantonness; not in strife and envying: But put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts
thereof.

When it is said therefore in the text, He that believes and is baptized shall
be saved, by this we are not to understand simply, a belief of the Gospel, and
submiting to the rite of Baptism, but such a firm and operative belief of its
doctrines, as leads a person readily and openly to declare himself a disciple
of Jesus Christ, -- professedly to repent of, and to forsake his former sins,
and to devote himself to the practice of religion and godliness, as taught and
enjoined upon him by the Son of God.

So much as this, seems to be fairly included in the text; and to be there
meant, by a person's believing and being baptized, as necessary to his being
saved. And that this practical regard to the Gospel is included in the
condition of salvation, will farther appear, if now,

SECONDLY, We compare several of the Evangelists together, with respect to this
point.

Mark, as we have already taken notice, represents Christ, when committing a
solemn charge to his Apostles, as the preachers of his Gospel, as declaring
this to be the condition of salvation, viz. A belief of the Gospel, with
Baptism. -- He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. Luke speaks of
this matter thus. Luke xxiv. 46* 47.
And said unto them (i.e. Christ said to his Apostles) Thus it is written, and
thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day: And
that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name, among all
nations beginning at Jerusalem. But, it cannot be justly supposed but that
these two Evangelists, when speaking of the same time, and treating of the same
subject, meant to say, in substance, the same thing; or to point out one and
the same way to happiness. For although Mark speaks of Faith and Baptism as the
condition of salvation; and Luke expressly mentions neither of these, but
speaks only of Repentance and Remission of Sins, as to be preached in Christ's
name among all nations, yet it is not at all necessary to suppose, but that
they are perfectly agreed, in giving the sense and intention of our Savior's
words to them, and in pointing out the way to happiness by him.

For, Repentance, as produced by the Gospel, necessarily supposes faith, and
every other qualification of the real Christian. No man, under the Gospel, and
as moved and influenced by it, truly repents of his sins, without believing the
Gospel: Repentance is necessarily connected with this Faith, as it proceeds
from it.

And he that, upon believing the Gospel, truly repents of his sins, will
readily comply with whatever the Gospel requires of him: Because repentance, as
it implies real sorrow for his past sins, so it supposes he is now resolved
upon a better life: -- As it implies his being really grieved for all past
disobedience to God, so it supposes him to be now determined upon a ready and
universal obedience to his will, so far as he is acquainted with it: this is
essential to the nature of true repentance.

The true penitent then, under the Gospel, is the real Christian: -- One who is
disposed to comply with whatever he sees, and is convinced the Gospel requires
of him. Baptism therefore, as a rite of divine institution, he will readily
submit to, as a declaration of his faith in Jesus Christ, -- of his choice of
him, under the character of a Savior; and in acknowledgment of his being his
disciple, and determined to live according to his sacred laws. Agreeably, to
the convinced Jews, when they enquired of Peter Acts ii. 38.
what they should do (i. e. to be saved) he said -- repent ye and be baptized
every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins. He
that sincerely repents, will be ready to be baptized, i. e. he will be willing
to make profession of the religion of Jesus Christ; -- to appear as one of his
disciples, and will aim at living agreeable to the holy rules and precepts of
the Gospel. And he that does this, will obtain the remission of his sins, and
eternal life.

To believe the Gospel therefore, and to be baptized, in Mark, which is there
made the condition of a person's being saved, must mean the same with
repentance, in Luke, which is there the condition of the same blessedness; i.
e. of the remission of sins, and so, of a person's being in favor with God, and
an heir to happiness through Christ: Or these qualifications, as the condition
of salvation, mutually imply each other. So that these two Evangelists, when
declaring the mind of our blessed Savior, point out one and the same way to
happiness, viz. such a belief of the Gospel as is productive of, and attended
with, a sincere and hearty disposition to obey it in all things. Matthew's
account of this matter is somewhat different from both these. He represents
Christ's charge to his Apostles in this manner -- Matt. xxviii. 19, 20.
Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you.

But here we have the same Condition of Salvation; or the same qualifications,
as before, are required in the subjects of it. For, a belief of the Gospel is
manifestly here supposed, otherwise it would be absurd to imagine persons would
be baptized. But then, besides their being taught, -- their believing the
gospel, and being baptized, they were to observe all things whatsoever Christ
had commanded. i. e. to yield a ready and universal obedience to the Gospel.
This must imply repentance, as well as faith; -- a forsaking of all former
sins, and a careful and conscientious discharge of all christain duties. Upon
the whole therefore, we may justly conclude, as I said at first, that the
condition of salvation by Jesus Christ is this, -- "A belief of the gospel,
with a professed and practical regard to it."

And this, we shall find, if we properly attend to the Gospel, is agreeable to
the whole tenor of it. However some particular passages, taken abstractedly,
may seem to point out another way to heaven; and have been sometimes
misimproved, and abused to bad purposes in religion, yet the Gospel, viewed in
the whole of it, and as containing one consistent, harmonious scheme of
Religion, abundantly declares this to be the condition of salvation by Jesus
Christ, agreeable to those passages from St. Paul, who well understood the
Gospel, and who speaks of it under the character of the Grace of God -- Tit.
ii. 11, and on.
The Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared to all men. Teaching
us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world; looking for the blessed hope, and
the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ: who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people zealous of good works.

Improvement.
WHAT has been offered upon the present subject may be of important use to us
in several respects. It shows us FIRST, that to believe in Christ, and to
believe the Gospel, must mean the same thing; because both are represented, in
different places, as the condition of salvation.

To believe the Gospel is thus represented in my text; and to believe in
Christ, is often mentioned, in this manner, elsewhere. Thus says our Savior
himself -- John iii. 16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes IN HIM should not perish, but have everlasting life.

And what is it to believe in Christ, but to believe the gospel account of him?
-- that he is the Son of God? -- that he is the Savior of the world, etc. He
that believes in Jesus Christ, as the Gospel reveals and represents him, must
be supposed to believe in him under the character of a Savior; -- to receive
his doctrines as divine truths; -- to trust in him, as the great sacrifice of
atonement for sin; and to submit himself to the government of his sacred laws.
Without this, a man is not a true believer in Christ; or what Faith soever he
may have, it will be of no advantage, as to the important purpose of Salvation.

And is not this the character of him who believes the Gospel? -- I mean, in a
saving sense. He believes, and is baptized: i. e. openly professes the
christian religion; -- acknowledges Jesus Christ for his Lord and Redeemer; --
owns himself his disciple, and aims at living agreeable to his divine
instructions and precepts.

So that, he who believes the Gospel, or who believes in Jesus Christ, so as to
be saved, is no other than the real Christian, who pays an hearty, practical
regard to the Gospel. He who does this will undoubtedly be saved.

Groundless therefore, and to no purpose, unless to darken religion, and
perplex the minds of Christians, seems to be what has been sometimes said about
Faith as justifying and saving: As that the particular act of faith which
justifies, has main respect to Christ, in his priestly office; or that it is a
laying hold on Christ's righteousness; or a relying upon his merits, etc. Or
again, That saving Faith is a person's believing that Christ died for him in
particular; and that his own sins are forgiven for Christ's sake, and the like.

For, no one act of faith justifies more than another, any farther than it has
a religious or moral influence on the temper and life of the believer; -- any
farther than it leads him to repent of his sins, and engages him in a practical
regard to the Gospel. He who has this faith, or whose faith has this effect
upon him, will, according to the Gospel scheme, have his sins forgiven, be
justified and saved. Not, indeed, on account of any particular act of faith, or
any thing else, in himself, meritoriously considered (for pardon and salvation
are of free, unmerited grace) but being thus qualified, God, of his rich and
abundant mercy, through Jesus Christ, will, according to the Gospel, forgive
his sins, and grant him eternal life.

And how strongly soever any man may be persuaded that Christ died for them in
particular, and that their own sins are forgiven for his sake, if they have not
a faith that purifies their hearts and lives from sin, and engages their
obedience to the Gospel, they are, undoubtedly, in their hopes of happiness,
deceiving themselves with vain and groundless imaginations.

SECONDDY. By what has been offered upon the present subject, we may determine
what we must always understand by the words, faith or believing, when mentioned
in scripture, as the condition of salvation. Hereby we are not to understand
merely, or simply, a belief of the Gospel; but such a belief of it; -- such a
firm persuasion of the truth and importance of the doctrines contained in it,
as proves influencial on the temper and life, and engages the believer's
practical regard to whatever the Gospel requires.

It is true; faith and works, or faith and obedience, are, in their nature,
clearly and sufficiently distinguished from each other: and they are often
spoken of by way of distinction from one another in the Gospel. But then, as
both these are manifestly included in the Condition of salvation, it is
obvious, that when one of them, only, is mentioned, as such condition, the
other must be supposed to attend it, or be included in it.

Thus, when it was said, that Heb. v. 9.
Christ is the author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him; by those
that obey him, we must understand those who believe as well as obey the gospel;
for, such obedience is the fruit and effect of faith, and cannot be supposed
without it. So again; it is written -- Rev. xxii. 14.
Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the
tree of life, etc. These must necessarily be supposed to believe in Christ, or
to believe the Gospel, as a Revelation from God, as such faith is the very
principle of this obedience to divine commandments.

And, on the other hand; when faith only or believing is spoken of as the
condition, or grand requisite to salvation, such faith is to be understood in a
large sense; -- as the principle of good works; or as virtually including in
it, obedience to the Gospel.

It is a faith, which, agreeable to what we have heard, involves with it,
repentance of sin; -- a ready profession of the christian religion, and a
practical regard to whatever Christ has commanded.

Needless therefore, and without any just foundation, seems to be the
distinction which some have made, -- that, though obedience is necessary to prove
a man's faith to be true and genuine; and necessary to his being finally saved,
yet faith alone justifies, and puts him in favor with God. For, that faith
which is sufficient to justify, must, I conceive, if continued in, be
sufficient to save any man. For, what is his being justified, but his having
his sins forgiven; -- his being judicially acquitted of guilt, and so delivered
from an obligation to punishment? And if a man is thus forgiven; -- if his
guilt is removed, and he is delivered from an obligation to punishment; -- if
he has a faith which entitles him to these privileges, or blessings, will it
not, if continued in, be sufficient to save him? Will God condemn any whom he
does not look upon as guilty; and punish any whom he forgives, and frees from
obligation to punishment? It should seem therefore, either that a man may be
saved as well as justified, without obedience to the Gospel, or else that the
faith by which he is justified, must virtually include such obedience in it.

But it is plain from the word of God, that repentance, and other acts of
obedience to the Gospel, are as really a condition, or are a part of the
condition of persons being forgiven, or justified, as faith itself is. Acts
iii. 19.
Repent ye -- and be converted that your sins may be blotted out -- Is it not
manifest from this, that without repentance and conversion their sins would not
be blotted out? So likewise as to our obeying the Gospel in forgiving such as
trespass against us. Matt. vi. 14, 15.
If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will forgive you; but
if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
trespasses.

Upon the whole then, we may justly conclude, that faith or believing, as the
condition of salvation, comprehends the whole of religion. Not faith, simply
considered, but faith with its proper effects and fruits; -- as producing
repentance, and a good life. And this is agreeable to those passages from St.
James (who, it may be presumed, was no more of an Arminian, or of any other
kind of heretic, than any man may safely be.) James 2.24.26.
Ye see then, how that by works a man is justified and not by faith only -- For
as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also.
Let it be our concern that we have this faith which is influencial and
operative; and productive of that sincere and universal obedience to the
Gospel, which is necessary to complete the christain's character, and to give a
title to salvation through Jesus Christ.

THIRDLY. The subject we have been upon, deserves the particular and serious
consideration of all those, who neglect a personal, public profession of the
christian religion, and a practical regard to the whole of it.

Baptism, in a state of infancy, seems, by no means, to come up to the
intention of Baptism in the text. The Gospel was preached to the adult, or to
those who were come to the exercise of reason; and not to infants who were
incapable of understanding, and believing it. These, i. e. the adult, upon
their believing, were baptized; which was a public profession of the christian
religion, or of their being the disciples of Christ.

Infants, we suppose to have been, and no doubt were, baptized by the Apostles:
But then, their Baptism was not in consequence of their having believed, and so
a personal declaration of their faith and discipleship: But they were baptized
as the children of believers; -- their Baptism, under the Gospel, succeeding in
the place of circumcsiion, under the jewish dispensation. It was therefore no
personal act of their's, -- neither is it now. I cannot see therefore how such
as continue in their infant state, as to Baptism, can satify themselves that
they come up to what the Gospel requires of them, as the condition of their
being saved.

True; They do not deny, or renounce their Baptism. But this seems far from
being sufficient, to their sustaining the proper and complete character of
christians; and indulging a well-grounded hope of salvation. In order to this,
it seems necessary, that they should do something, equivalent, in the intention
of it, to their submitting to Baptism, as their own personal act: i. e. that
they should personally and publicly recognize and own their Baptism, and
acknowledge themselves the disciples of Jesus Christ, by an open profession of
his religion, and a practical regard to whatever he has commanded.

While they neglect this, and, in consequence hereof, neglect another special
and express ordinance of the Gospel, viz. that of the Lord's Supper, how do
they appear as Christ's disciples? -- How do they do whatsoever Christ has
commanded them? And if they do not so much as aim at this; -- if they knowingly
neglect what the Gospel plainly requires of them, how can they satisfy
themselves, that they comply with the condition of salvation?

I would recommend these things to the serious consideration of all such as
they more especially concern; I mean, to all such as neglect a public
profession of religion, and coming to the Lord's table. I am far from a
disposition to upbraid any of their faults; but you will suffer me to say, in a
spirit of love, that this is verily a fault, and a defect in your christian
character, much to be lamented. Let me beseech you to think seriously of these
things; -- to consider and realize what the Gospel requires of you; -- what is
your duty, and what your interest.

Whenever you enter soberly into religion's views and meditations, with respect
to yourselves (which I hope you, at least, sometimes do) this defect in your
character, as christians, -- as the disciples of Jesus Christ, must certainly
give you great uneasiness. Will you not then, aim at having this uneasiness
removed, and obtaining some good hope of salvation, by endeavoring to get over
all difficulties and discouragements, and to stand perfect and complete in all
the will of God? This I heartily wish for you, that you may so own and confess
Christ now before men, as that hereafter he may confess and own you before his
Father which is in heaven.

TO CONCLUDE. Let us all be concerned to study the Gospel more, and to regard
and practice the duties of it better. The more we acquaint ourselves with this
divine scheme of religion, the more excellent, and important it will appear to
us: -- the more free from perplexing difficulties; -- the more clear and
intelligible; -- a doctrine according to godliness; -- a scheme of religion
worthy of God to teach, and of us to receive, to believe, and practice.

And, O, let us see to it, that we do not satisfy and content ourselves, with
any thing short of what we are convinced the Gospel requires of us, in order to
our being saved. This is an affair of infinite consequence, and justly claims
the deep concern of every one. And if on clear and sufficient grounds, we are
persuaded we have the qualifications and character of Christ's true disciples,
then may we safely, and to our unspeakable comfort, trust in him, as our
Redeemer and Savior, and, through him, hope for the mercy of God, and for
eternal life.

SERMON II. The Father's drawing, necessary to our coming unto Christ.
JOHN VI. 44. NO man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me draw
him. --


IF we consider men as rational and moral agents, these two things appear to me
absolutely necessary to their receiving the doctrines, and embracing the
religion of the Gospel; and to the propriety of their being addressed by the
ministers of Christ, in the great affair of their salvation: -- One is, that
they are able to understand what the Gospel teaches; and the other, -- that
with such divine aid and assistance, as they may hope for and depend upon, if
they are not criminally wanting to themselves, they are capable of doing what
the Gospel requires, as the condition of their happiness.

If they understand not what the Gospel teaches, it can be, while this is the
case, of no manner of use to them: And, admitting they understand, yet if they
believe themselves incapable (all things considered) of doing what the Gospel
requires, it comes to much the same.

For, if a man is ever so fully assured, as to the condition of salvation, yet*
if he is persuaded, at the same time, that the performing this condition, is
wholly out of his power, it is much the same to him, as if he knew nothing of
such condition. Why should he be solicitous, or concern himself in the matter,
if he believes he can do nothing that will turn to any account?

And it seems not materially to alter the case, for a man to believe he may be
saved, if he believes, at the same time, that, if he is saved, this must be by
his having the condition of salvation wrought in him, or by his being qualified
for happiness, through the irresistible operation of a foreign cause, which is
not at all within his reach; and under whose operation and influence, he is to
be merely passive.

Under such a persuasion, what room, or ground is there for rational concern,
or the least attempt toward any religious exertion? To be sure, a man, thus
persuaded, can have nothing at all to do; and ought not, as a rational being,
to think of doing any thing; and for these plain reasons, -- because he really
believes he can do nothing; and because, if any thing is done in him, and for
him, he believes it will be by a cause, or agent, whose operation he can
neither help forward, nor resist. -- If this foreign active cause is to operate
upon him, it will do so, and nothing, from him, can hinder it; -- if it is not
to operate, he can do nothing to engage, or procure its operation.

Sentiments of this kind, being obviously inconsistent with moral agency in
men, and destructive of all rational concern, and endeavors to obtain
salvation, it becomes us, I conceive, to consider well, whether they have any
just foundation in the word of God, from whence we pretend to collect our
religious opinions.

To enquire whether they have any foundation in reason, would be to offer an
affront to the reason of mankind, as they appear. at first view, to be
irrational and absurd. But they claim, I mean, some claim for them, sufficient
suffrage from sacred Scripture; and reason must submit to Revelation. But a
concern for the honor of God, -- of religion, and for our own happiness, may
well lead us to enquire, whether passages of Scripture, which are supposed to
teach* and support such sentiments, may not be fairly and justly understood, in
a sense more honorary to the Deity; -- more agreeable to the general tenor of
his word, and more favorable to the interest of religion, and the happiness of
men.

An opinion of the nature and complexion of those I have hinted at, is supposed
to be taught in those words of our blessed Savior I have now read.

No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me draw him.

By the Father's drawing here is supposed to be meant, an inward, irresistible
operation, or influence of the Spirit of God upon the soul, whereby a sinner is
drawn to Christ; i. e. brought to believe in him so as to be saved. Without
this irresistible operation, or influence, all other means of grace and
salvation, it is supposed, will avail nothing: And with this, I should think,
there could be no occasion for any thing else. But,

That we may enter into the true meaning of the text, and receive and entertain
those religious sentiments it may fairly and justly teach us, it may be proper
to consider particularly, FIRST, What is to be understood by persons comcoming
to Christ. SECONDLY, What -- by the Father's drawing such as come to him: from
whence it may appear, THIRDLY, How no man can come to Christ, unless drawn by
the Father; and what is to be understood by this. Let us consider


FIRST, What is to be understood in the text, by persons coming to Christ. And
by this, I apprehend, is intended their believing on him, as the divinely
constituted and appointed Savior: -- their receiving his doctrines as the
truth of God, and heartily embracing that religion which he taught; -- their
coming to him as his disciples, and submitting themselves to the rule and
government of his sacred laws. For, by this coming to him must be understood
their complying with the condition of salvation by him. Thus the 40th verse
seems to be parallel or similar to the text. And this is the will of him that
sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and believes on him, may have
everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day. And in the text. No
man can come unto me, except the Father which has sent me draw him, and I will
raise him up at the last day. In another place Christ thus blames the
unbelieving Jews. -- John v. 40.
Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life. There it is manifest, that
by their coming to him, was intended their complying with the condition of
salvation; or doing what was necessary in order to their obtaining eternal
life. i. e. their believing in him, and receiving him as the Savior.

But what may put the matter beyond doubt, that coming to Christ, in the text,
means the same with believing in him, is his using these as equivalent terms in
another part of the context. Ver. 35.
And Jesus said unto them. I am the bread of Life: he that comes to me shall
never hunger; and he that believes on me shall never thirst. By this then, we
are to understand persons believing in Christ, as the promised Messiah and
Savior: -- their receiving him as the Son of God: -- their receiving his
doctrines as divine truths, and entering heartily upon that religious and godly
life which he taught: -- For this, and nothing short of this, is represented as
the condition of salvation by him.

Let us now consider, SECONDLY, What may be understood by the Father's drawing
such as come to Christ.

And by this, I conceive, may be meant, in general, his offering to their minds
proper instruction, evidence, and motives, to persuade and prevail with them to
believe in Christ, and receive him for their Savior. That this is the meaning
of the text, may appear from what immediately follows, by way of explication
and support of it. It is written in the Prophets, and they shall be all taught
of God. Every man therefore that has learned of the Father, comes unto me.
But how should men be taught of God? How should they hear and learn of the
Father, concerning Christ, so as to come to him? Undoubtedly by that revelation
he has made, especially by his Son; and by that evidence he has given, that he
is the true Messiah and Savior.

And lest the Jews, to whom Christ now addressed himself, should imagine, that
he spoke of persons being immediately taught of God, as by some secret
impression or operation upon their minds, he directly added, -- Not that any
man has seen the Father, save he which is of God (meaning himself) he has
seen the Father. Plainly intimatiing, that the manner in which God taught men,
was by his Son, whom he sent into the world for this end; -- to declare his
mind and will; and to show them the way to life and happiness. For it ought
farther to be observed, that the prophecy refered to by our Savior, manifestly
related to the Compare Jer. xxxi. 31. and on, with Heb. viii 8. and on.
Gospel; -- to the time when God would send forth his Son, as a glorious light
into the world; to teach men the knowledge of the truth, and to show them the
way of Salvation.

By God's drawing such as come to Christ, or believe in him, we may understand
therefore,

First, his instructing and enlightening their minds by the truths of the
Gospel; -- by the doctrines revealed, and published by his Son.

For, Christ came into the world by appointment and commission from the Father;
and acted in his ministry, by authority from him. Hence he said, -- John (...)
My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. And again, John xiv. 2^.
The word which you hear, is not mine, but the Father's which sent me.

And there appears a manifest propriety, both of sense and language, in saying
"the Father draws men to Christ by the doctrines which he taught." In like
manner St. Paul speaks of false teachers, Act. xx (...)
who should speak perverse things to draw away disciples after them: i. e. to
induce men to believe and confide in them as their instructors and guides, and
to become their followers.

The doctrines which Christ taught in his Father's name, evidently tended to
lead men to him; -- to prevail on them to believe in him, and to become his
disciples, in as much as they pointed him out, agreeable to many ancient
prophecies and predictions, as the true Messiah, and Savior; -- as they set
before them the purest and best religion in the world, and strongly recommended
it to their faith and practice: -- as they taught men the true and only way to
forgiveness and favor with God, and set before them a most powerful motive, to
lead and engage them to embrace his religion, the hope, -- the high and
important hope, of eternal life and blessedness.

Doctrines of this nature, were directly and excellently fitted to draw men to
Christ; -- to persuade and prevail with them to believe in him, and to become
his disciples and followers. And accordingly Christ blamed the Jews, for their
infidelity, and refusing to come to him, when they had those scriptures in
their hands, which testified of him. John v. 39, 40.
Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are
they which testify of me. And ye will not come unto me that ye might have life.

Peter and his brethren acted a different part, being convinced and persuaded
that Christ was sent from God, and taught the way to life and blessedness.
Thus, when some forsook him, Context ver. 68, 69.
Jesus said, will ye also go away? Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall we
go? thou have the words of eternal life, and we believe and are sure that thou
art the Christ, the Son of the living God. The doctrines which he taught had a
prevailing influence upon them: convinced hereby that he was the Christ, -- the
promised Savior, they were drawn and engaged to him, and would not forsake him
like others. He had the words of eternal life; to whom then should they go, but
to him, for so great a blessing?

But again, Secondly, God may be considered as drawing such as come to Christ,
by the many miracles Christ wrought in his name, as evidence of his divine
mission.

Though the doctrines Christ delivered were, from the nature of them, a clear
and good evidence, that he was a teacher sent from God, yet they were not the
only, nor the most powerful proof of his divine mission, and that he was,
indeed, the Son of God, and the Savior of the world: And accordingly, he more
generally, and constantly appealed to the works which he did, -- to the
miracles which he wrought, as evidence of this. Thus, to the Jews who said to
him, John x. 24, 25.
if thou be the Christ, tell us plainly. He answered, -- I have told you, and
ye believed not: the works that I do, in my Father's name, they bear witness of
me. So again, John xiv. 11.
Believe me, that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else believe me
for the very work's sake. And upon this ground he thus blamed the Jews for not
believing in him. John xv. 24.
If I had not done among them the works, which none other man did, they had not
had sin (i. e. they would not have been blame worthy for not believing in him)
but now (says he) they have both seen and hated, both me and my Father. i. e.
They had seen the manifest power of God, and the strongest evidence of Christ's
divine mission, in the miracles which he wrought, and yet believed not in him;
and were therefore inexcusable.

And the Apostle John tells us, that the very end of committing an account of
his miracles to writing, was this, that men might believe in him, as the Son of
God. -- John xx. 30, 31.
Many other signs truly did Jesus, in the presence of his disciples, which are
not witten in this book; but these are written, that ye might believe that
Jesus is the Christ, and that believing ye might have life through his name.

Now, by all this it appears, with what propriety God may be considered as
drawing men to Christ, by the miracles which he wrought. These served, not only
to awaken and engage their attention to his doctrine, but directly and
powerfully to convince them, that he was, as he declared himself to be, the Son
of God; -- that he was sent into the world by the Father; -- that God was with
him; -- that he owned him in what he did; and that his doctrines were the
truths of God.

What more powerful arguments could have been made use of by a gracious God, to
draw men to Christ? i. e. to convince and satisfy them that he was the Savior?
and to prevail with them to believe in him, as such? And agreeably Christ said
-- John xii. 32.
And, I, if I be lifted up from the Earth, will draw all men unto me. His
meaning seems to be, that by the manner of his suffering and death, and the
wonderful things that would attend his passion; -- by his resurrection, and
ascension into heaven, whereby he would be fully demonstrated to be the Son of
God; and by the descent of the Holy Ghost, in consequence hereof, which would
confirm his doctrines by signs and wonders, -- that by these things, enough
would be done, to prevail with all men to believe in him: -- not that all men
would be actually drawn to him; for the event showed otherwise. But once more,
Thirdly, God may be considered as drawing such as come to Christ, by the agency
and influences of his holy Spirit, accompanying the external means of religion.

For although an irresistible operation or influence upon the soul, in the
business of religion, seems not to be a doctrine of the Gospel; and is
manifestly inconsistent with, or destructive of, moral agency in men (for so
far as our actions are the effect of a foreign cause, irresistibly urging, and
impelling us, so far these acts are necessary and unavoidable, and, as moral
agents, we have no concern in them: Nay, we are not agents, properly speaking,
in a moral sense, or in any other; but merely passive machines, acted upon, all
whose motions are necessary, like those of a clock or a watch, which are forced
by springs or weights.) But although, I say, an irresistible operation or
influence, be not supposed, in the business of religion, yet we have sufficient
reason from the word of God, to believe that he aids and assists persons by his
holy Spirit. We are directed to ask this of him, and are asssured by our
Savior, that Luke xi. 13.
he will give his holy Spirit to them that ask him. So persons are said 1 Pet.
i. 22.
to purify their souls, in obeying the truth through the Spirit. Some are spoken
of as 1 These. v. 19.
resisting the holy Ghost. And we are cautioned against Ephesians. iv. 30.
quenching, and grieving the holy Spirit of God. From all which it may be
justly concluded, that God accompanies the external means of religion, with the
influence of his Spirit; and is ready, thereby, to assist them in working out
their salvation.

How the Spirit of God acts, in this affair, may be difficult for us to
conceive, though, doubtless, God deals with men, in this, as in all other things,
in a manner agreeable to that nature he has given them: -- that the influences
of his Spirit do not suspend, or destroy the free use and exercise of their
intellectual and rational powers, but assist them in their proper operation; --
perhaps, by bringing things to remembrance, whereby they have a repeated and
fresh idea of them; -- by fixing their attention to subjects of a religious
nature and tendency, and causing these to appear before them, in a clear and
strong light; -- and by impressing things upon their minds, whereby they may be
more sensible of their just weight, and importance, and thereby, assisting them
in forming religious purposes, resolutions, and the like.

But, in whatever way, or manner God aids and assists persons, by his Spirit,
in the business of religion, so far as he does this, he may be properly
considered, as hereby, drawing such as come to Christ; or that believe in him,
and embrace his religion. His agency in this, concurs with the other
advantages, he has put into their hands, to convince and satisfy them, that
Jesus is the Christ -- the Son of God; and to persuade and prevail with them to
receive his doctrines, and to become his disciples and followers.

And now, upon what has been offered, we may easily see, and understand,
THIRDLY, How no man can come unto Christ, unless the Father draw him.

No man will, -- no man can, come unto Christ, in the sense of the text; i. e.
believe in him, -- receive him for his Savior, and become his disciple, unless
he be convinced, by the miracles which he wrought, or by other arguments, of
his divine mission; -- that he is the Son of God, and the Savior of Sinners.
No man will thus come unto him, unless taught, and instructed, by the Gospel,
who, and what he is; -- what is the nature of his religion; what the condition
of Salvation by him, and has the proper motives and encouragements, to become
a Christian, thereby set before him. Nor, may we suppose any will thus come to
Christ, without the aid and assistance of God's holy Spirit, whereby they may
be enabled to overcome the power of Sin; -- to resist temptation to it; -- to
subdue and mortify their Corruptions; -- cordially to receive and entertain the
doctrines and precepts of the Gospel; and to purify their Souls in obeying the
truth.

To be thus drawn of the Father, i. e. to be favored by God, with these
advantages for religion, it is obvious, is necessary to any man's coming to
Christ, i. e. to his believing in him, and becoming a real christian. Not that
we are to conclude from hence, that all who are thus drawn of the Father, or
thus favored with religious advantages, will, in a saving sense, come to
Christ. These advantages may be sufficient for that end, and yet they maybe
abused, and men may perish notwithstanding.

Some, through unreasonable prejudices, or other bad causes, may remain
unconvinced, as many of the Jews were, of our Savior's divine mission and
character; -- they may obstinately contradict and blaspheme the truth, as some
of them did; and like them, resist the holy Ghost; -- grieve the Spirit of God;
-- quench its influences; and go on, and perish in their sins. As Christ said,
if he were lifted up, he would draw all men unto him; intimating that his
passion, and resurrection from the dead, and other wonderful things, attending,
and consequent thereupon, would be sufficient to prove he was the Son of God;
and to induce all men to believe in him, as such; and yet multitudes were not
prevailed with, hereby, to come unto him; so these advantages for religion; --
persons being thus drawn of the Father, may be sufficient for their coming to
Christ, and yet many, through their own fault; -- through their own
non-improvement or abuse of these advantages, may, nevertheless, miss of
salvation.

Improvement.
UPON what has been offered upon the present subject, we may justly remark,
FIRST, The great favor and kindness of God to us, in the advantages for
religion we enjoy.

God says, in reference to his goodness to the children of Israel, in
delivering them from their Egyptian bondage, and in other benefits and
blessings conferred upon them, Hos. xi. 4.
I drew them with the cords of a man, and with the bands of love. i. e. He did
every thing for them, that was proper to work upon their ingenuity, as men, and
to draw them to himself; -- to engage them to love and serve him, though many
of them were rebellious and wicked. But how much greater things has God done
for us, to draw us to himself by Jesus Christ? He has now sent his own Son into
the world, to die as a sacrifice of atonement for our sins: -- He has sent him
to reveal to us the riches of his grace toward sinners; -- to teach us our
duty, and to show us the way to happiness. -- He has set before us sufficient
evidence, that Christ is the Savior of sinners; and placed, in our view, the
strongest motives, to induce us to believe in him, and to seek salvation by
him. And, in addition to all this, he is ready to assist us by his holy and
good Spirit, in the important work of religion; and in securing our future --
our highest, and everlasting happiness. Surely, we ought to consider, and to be
sensible, -- gratefully sensible, of the loving kindness of God to us in this,
and to be concerned, every one of us, that we receive not his grace in vain.

SECONDLY, We may infer -- the great and awful danger, of persons neglecting to
endeavor a religious life, from an imagination, that if ever they are
converted, and become real christians, this must be by an irresistible
operation upon their souls. How strange soever such a sentiment as this may
appear to any, yet it, not only has been, but, it may be feared, it is still
the opinion of some: And from hence, it may be supposed, they continue easy and
quiet, in a disobedient and wicked life. For (poor unhappy souls!) what should
they do? -- or to what purpose think of bestirring themselves? Conversion, they
believe, is not at all within their own power, or reach: -- They can neither
help it forward, nor hinder it: -- They had even as good, therefore, be easy
and quiet, as not. -- If they are to be saved, they shall be converted, after a
while, by an irresistible operation.

How dangerous may be the influence of such an opinion as this! How fatal the
consequence! How directly does it tend to sooth and quiet the sinner's soul,
and to lead him on to eternal ruin!

If this opinion is supposed to be the truth, how absurd must it be, for
ministers of the Gospel, to address themselves to sinners, and urge them to
repentance, and an holy life? They might as well preach to the trees in the
forest, or to the stones in the street, and urge them to virtue and goodness.

Supposing this opinion to be the truth, with what reason or propriety could
Peter speak to the wicked Jews, as he did. Acts iii. 19.
Repent ye -- and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. If he
believed they could repent of their wickedness, and turn from it, his address
to them, was, indeed, perfectly rational: But, if he supposed this, not at all
in their power, could any thing, then, be more impertinent, and unreasonable,
than this exhortation? What was it, but to exhort and urge them to a thing,
which he supposed to be impossible to them?

And why did our Savior blame those Jews for not coming to him? John v. 40.
And ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life. Their not coming to
him, is certainly represented as their fault: but could they be to blame for
this, if they were wholly unable to come? What better excuse could be made for
their not coming, than their utter inability? No authority, -- I mean, no just
authority, human or divine, can require absolute impossibilities, and charge
blame for nonperformance. The very supposition is inconsistent with reason and
equity, and directly destroys itself.

The many exhortations therefore, to Sinners, we meet with in the word of God,
to repent; -- to turn from their evil ways; -- to come unto Jesus Christ, etc.
And their being reproved and blamed for their neglect hereof, plainly supposes,
that their complying with such exhortations, must be in their own power, all
things considered.

Suffer me, therefore, my friends, to caution you against such an opinion, as
that I have been taking notice of; -- an opinion so inconsistent with scripture
and reason, and so manifestly dangerous to the soul. And, FINALLY, Let all such
as have hitherto neglected a life of religion, be now persuaded, with a serious
concern for their everlasting welfare, diligently to improve their religious
advantages.

Consider often the worth of salvation, and let your minds dwell on the
important subject. Consider what a gracious God has done for you, to make you
happy. Attend to the evidence he has offered you, that Jesus is the Christ, the
Son of God; -- the appointed Savior of sinners, -- and as this evidence arises
particularly from his miraculous operations; think often what they were, and
that no man could do them, except God were with him.

Study much the holy Gospel; -- that divine revelation God has made to you by
this his Son: -- Consider its doctrines and precepts, as delivering to you the
mind of God. Consider what it requires of you as the way to pardon; -- to life,
and blessedness, and be concerned to comply with all its divine injunctions.

Often call to mind the great motives and encouragements to a religious life,
which are exhibited in the Gospel, and seriously reflect on the end and design
thereof, as to you: -- Consider, that by all these things, God is drawing of
you, as it were, with the cords of a man, and with the bands of love; -- that
they are all designed to persuade, and prevail with you to come to Christ; --
to (...) his doctrines: -- to embrace (...)

And fail not, with seriousness, and unremiting ardor of soul, to implore the
aid and assistance of God's holy Spirit. O! address yourselves to the business
of religion, as an affair of immediate, and of the greatest importance to you.

Let not this be still delayed, by any one of you, upon the dangerous
supposition, that God must still do something, more extraordinary, in you, and
for you, if you enter into the way of life. -- God has done, and is ready to
do, what is sufficient for this end, if you are not criminally wanting to
yourselves. -- He is now drawing of you by that divine testimony he has given
of his Son: -- He is drawing of you by that Gospel he sent him to publish to
the world: -- By its doctrines and precepts; -- by all its promises, and
threatenings, and by the offered aid and assistance of his holy and good Spirit.

What is wanting then, but your own concurrence, with these means of salvation?
-- What, but your own zealous and resolute endeavors, to forsake the ways of
sin -- to yield youselves the willing servants of Jesus Christ, and to walk
according to his Gospel?

O, see therefore, that you now exert yourselves, in a manner becoming the high
importance of the business before you; and give not the gracious and
compassionate Savior occasion to complain of any of you, as he once did of the
obstinate Jews, -- Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life.


